## 10. Failure and Forgiveness

Spiritual life naturally involves a lot of idealism. We create an image of how we should be, the best way to live and the most helpful and beautiful attitudes to have. Religious ideals are spelled out and illustrated, described many times in many different places: in Dhamma talks, books, our own minds and memories. We can create very clear and fixed ideals for ourselves. But to quote T. S. Eliot: ‘Between the idea and the reality falls the shadow.’ The ideal of ‘how I should be’, or ‘the perfect me’, or ‘what spiritual life should be like’ is just that, an ideal.

A statue of the Buddha has not had to adjust its posture since it was made. It has not wobbled once throughout its existence. The knees of a Buddha rūpa do not ache, the back doesn’t get tired, it doesn’t need to eat or breathe. It is an ideal. It is a fixed form. When the Buddha was alive he had to eat, breathe, walk around and be with people, and so he was subject to the limitations of the physical world and the laws of nature.

When we look at our lives it is good to have ideals. This is why a Buddha statue occupies a central place in a temple. When we look at it, it shows us how we should be – all sitting with utterly straight backs that are neither tense nor rigid nor bent over, utterly calm, serene, ‘radiating kindness over the entire world’, ‘like the sun awakening the lotus.’ Ideals are useful. We put them at the centre. We hold them up. We use the ideal as a guiding principle, in the same way as we use the statue as a reminder of the quality of awakened awareness. We need to be reminded of the capacity, potential and opportunity which we have as human beings to be fully liberated, to bring our lives to spiritual fulfilment. We can do that. This is what the ideal is suggesting to us; it reminds us of our potential and our capacities.

But we have to move, don’t we? We have the ideal, the Buddha-image at the centre, but we have to come and go, we have to eat and breathe and relate with other people. We have the karmic nuances in our lives to deal with. These nuances emerge from our family relations, our particular history, our education, memories of the events of our life, the responsibilities we have, the choices we have made and so on. We have to deal with many details of our lives. The Buddha statue doesn’t have to worry about how the Sangha is faring, or whether he has to establish any more rules, or what to say in the Dhamma talk this evening.

When we use ideals and those ideals are brought to bear on our life experience, we find we fail a great deal as human beings. We keep failing. We keep not meeting the ideal. We don’t have perfect concentration. Our attention wanders off; the mind gets carried away down various avenues of papañca, into different elaborations about the past and future, drifting off into ideas, fantasies and anxieties, rewriting the history of past conversations, scripting future conversations, and so on.

We cannot live an ideal. If we try to do so, we will find that we keep missing the goal. We have random emotions. We become swept up in feelings of anger, grief, excitement, greed, fear or jealousy. As human beings, this is the way we are. We can’t sustain the ideal form because we are not ideal. We are people. That doesn’t mean that the ideal is not useful; it just means that if we don’t relate to it in a skilful way, we can develop a negative perception, a brand of self-view based on negativity. If we believe that the ideal is how we really should be and we don’t meet that ideal, we may think that we are somehow bad or stupid, weak or hopeless. We mishandle the ideal. In a shrine room we have the Buddha-image as an ideal to guide our practice, but we recognize that sometimes we need to change our posture. We need to come and go. That is not a weakness or something wrong. It is the human condition; it is common sense. In fact, if somebody sat in the shrine room for a week as still as a Buddha rūpa, I think most of us would be a bit concerned. ‘She hasn’t breathed since August – I think there is something wrong here! Is there a doctor in the house?’

The Art of Failure

Thus it is important to learn how to fail well; to learn how to fail in a good way, to handle our tendency to get lost, be caught up and miss the point. It is important to learn how to work with that in a skilful way. I like to use the phrase: ‘We need to learn how to fail perfectly’ or ‘to know how to be perfect failures’. This doesn’t mean that we don’t try, or that we are casual or careless about what we do. It means that we work with things the way they are – we work with our efforts and our aspirations, and we work with our limitations.

When the Buddha established the monastic rule (the Vināya), he didn’t sit down, work out the whole code and then hand it over to the rest of the Sangha. Each rule was conjured into being for the needs of the community, and out of particular events, actions and behaviour by different members of the Sangha. Each rule came from a particular circumstance. When a rule was established, sometimes a bhikkhu would observe or enforce it in a destructive, hurtful or over-zealous way. The Buddha would criticize that person by saying, ‘Foolish man [or woman], how on earth could you do that?’ And the person who had misbehaved might recognize their fault and say, ‘Yes, I am very sorry. I was totally foolish. I thought it would be a good thing to punish that novice by cutting off his ears. I thought that would be a good way to make sure he wouldn’t forget the lesson.’ The Buddha would reply, ‘This is not wise. Mutilating the novices for the sake of giving teachings is not to be done.’1

The transgressor would recognize the fault and the Buddha would say, ‘Well, it is good that you recognize your misconduct and that you see the fault.’ (That phrase is crucial). ‘To see your transgressions as such and then to endeavour to do better in the future, this is called furtherance in spiritual training, in the Dhamma and discipline of the Tathāgata.’

‘It is good that you recognize your misconduct and that you see the fault.’ That is a very helpful little phrase. It brings us into the best spirit with which to relate to our mistakes. When you do something stupid, your own equivalent of cutting someone’s ears off, you recognize your fault as a fault. You acknowledge the transgression. You don’t pretend that it hasn’t happened. You don’t make excuses for yourself. You recognize your transgression as a transgression and then endeavour to do better in the future. You recognize a shortcoming and take the cue from it to guide your future actions in a different way.

This has a lot to do with what is called hiri-ottappa or moral sensitivity. On the doors into the Temple at Amaravati there is a devata painted on each side. These devatas represent hiri and ottappa, the two elements of moral sensitivity. Hiri is a sense of conscience. When we do something that is harmful, when we tell a lie or act in some gross or indulgent way, or are selfish or cruel to somebody, and are aware of that action, hiri is the feeling of pain, that pang in our heart which recognizes that we have been cruel, selfish, greedy, inappropriate, indulgent. It is conscience, our sense of honour. If we tell a lie or are selfish, greedy, and destructive, that is felt as a blow to our honour, our sense of integrity.

And then there is ottappa. (You find different renderings of these words, but this is the best way I find to describe them). Ottappa is more to do with when you see somebody else acting harmfully. You see someone being cruel or unkind, say somebody clouting their child round the head in the supermarket; ottappa is that which causes you to recoil from what is unwholesome. This feeling can also arise when you read in the newspaper about unskilful activities such as suicide bombers blowing people up. The Buddha compared this kind of recoiling to an animal’s sinew being dropped into a fire (e.g. at A 4.76) – it will naturally curl up and withdraw from the heat. It will shrink back. In the same way, when the noble heart encounters unwholesomeness in the form of people who are lying, cheating or behaving unskilfully, ottappa is what prompts it to withdraw, saying: ‘No thanks, I don’t want to be involved’, or ‘How could people do that?’ or ‘It’s painful to know of that’.

In relating to our own conduct and our own failures we are aiming to develop these qualities of hiri and ottappa. In English we sometimes translate hiri as ‘shame’, and in certain Western psychological circles the word ‘shame’ is considered a definite ‘no-no’ – you don’t want to feel shame! But I would say, don’t be fooled by that attitude. Shame has its place. When we see that we have done something unwholesome – we have told a lie, or cheated, or acted in ways that are harmful, greedy or inappropriate – to feel bad is good! That shame is a good pain. There are Hiri and Ottappa standing by the door of the Temple. They are the guardians of the world. Their job is to protect. They guard the world and they guard your heart. The pain they can cause is what protects our heart from being pulled into unskilful action.

Physical pain protects our body. If you were completely numb, with no pain at all, it would be much easier for you to cut or damage yourself. There is a very rare medical condition in which people are born without the ability to feel pain at all. As I understand it, people who have that condition rarely live beyond their mid-twenties because they do so much damage to themselves, breaking bones and having infections and such like; the body has so much harm done to it that it cannot survive for long. So even though physical pain is unpleasant, it is useful because it protects us. That unpleasantness is good, it is useful, because it is what protects our bodies. Hiri and ottappa protect the heart.

So when your actions and conduct fall short of your ideals and you feel a sense of failure, don’t be afraid of that feeling of regret or sorrow. It is a useful, helpful thing. When it becomes problematic is when self-view grabs hold of it and it turns into a guilt trip. So whereas honour or moral sensitivity is a wholesome thing, when the ego gets hold of it and self-view invests that quality, it turns into something toxic and problematic. We make the mistake of amplifying those feelings and latching onto them; we look at ourselves and create a lot of negativity and self-criticism, saying, ‘I’m a bad, stupid person. I’m an awful person.’ This then becomes a real burden on the heart. We become oppressed by feelings of guilt and self-hatred. And once we have descended into guilt and self-loathing, we can indulge in various unwholesome behaviours. We may justify ourselves and become shameless, qualifying our actions through bloody-minded self-centredness and saying to ourselves: ‘Get over it! It’s their problem! They had it coming to them!’ Or we can go around hating ourselves. Or we can go numb and drink ourselves stupid to try to forget the whole thing.

I would not recommend any of those strategies because they don’t really work. It is more helpful to learn how to relate to that sense of regret, remorse and pain in the heart. Learn to relate to it in the way the Buddha described; see transgressions as transgressions and then let the pain be an inspiration to do better in the future. Pain teaches us; it can become a guide and a resource. Even with regard to everyday things – our effectiveness as a parent or a student, or whether or not we are good at our job – it is important to be able to recognize our shortcomings without veering towards self-justification or self-hatred. It is important to be able to look at our imperfections without deluding ourselves into believing they are beautiful, or convincing ourselves it is okay to do work of poor quality after having done a lousy job with something.

As we practise the Dhamma we learn to be able to recognize our weaknesses, rather than convincing ourselves that we don’t really need to concentrate or develop insight in order to be happy. This happens often – because you feel you aren’t very good at a particular aspect of practice, you attempt to rewrite the script of the natural order to fit your preferences. Instead we avoid the delusion and self-justification, and recognize simply and clearly: ‘I’m not very good at concentrating’; or ‘I don’t have a lot of insight, but I can see it would be helpful if that could be developed. Now, how can I go about it?’ or ‘I feel a sense of having fallen short because I get distracted and caught up, so what can I do in order to work with that? What can I do to guide my mind to be more composed and develop a more profound and solidly-based quality of concentration? What can I do to develop more wisdom in my life?’ Do not veer towards self-justification or self-hatred. Take that shortcoming, that failing or that imperfection as a cue to see how you can do better, to see what skilful means you can develop in order to bring more wholesome and helpful qualities into your life, and be more of a blessing to yourself and others.

The Art of Forgiveness

In many respects we are learning how to forgive ourselves for not being the Buddha or not being perfect, and also learning how to forgive others for not being perfect. In Buddhist practice, particularly on the social side, living in community, forgiveness is a big part of how we relate to each other. In a monastery there is the custom of asking forgiveness when a person has been residing at that monastery for a few months. When a community member departs there is a formal ceremony in which the member says, ‘Whatever I have done through the three doors of body, speech and mind that has been hurtful or inappropriate, and has caused discomfort or suffering for you [the teacher or whoever it might be], I ask for your forgiveness.’

Whatever has been done intentionally or unintentionally that has been hurtful, through body, speech or mind, we ask forgiveness for that. Even if you can’t think of anything that you might have done, it is a way of clearing the slate. Or maybe you are aware of something harmful you have done – for instance, perhaps you have been sitting radiating irritation, blame and criticism at the teacher for the last three months. But even if you have not knowingly done anything harmful or negative, it is a way of humbling yourself and recognizing that when we live together with other people in the same place and work situation, wherever it might be, we affect each other. We cause offence to each other, we hurt each other, often without even having a clue that we are doing it.

‘Whatever I might have done that has been hurtful to you, please forgive me.’ And then the teacher or the elder, the one who is being asked for forgiveness, responds, ‘I forgive you, and please forgive me also.’ In this they are recognizing that even if they are in a role of seniority as a teacher or an authority figure, they too can easily cause pain, offence or difficulty for others. This is a very beautiful and important part of the ceremony. The teacher and others with seniority recognize that even without any kind of negative intention, they too are very likely to cause pain or difficulty to others around them. Even if this is someone who is regarded as a totally enlightened being or has been ordained for fifty years, and the other people involved in the ceremony are laypeople or newly-ordained monastics, he will still say, ‘I forgive you, please forgive me also.’ Even the Buddha recognized that some things he said were unpleasant or painful to others and were not always easy to bear. So this is a very beautiful and skilful way of recognizing how we can all cause pain and difficulty to each other and how, when we are parting company, it is good to clear the slate and not carry anything away.

Now, this is a formalized exchange, so it can be just an empty recitation of words. But it is also a very good opportunity to watch your own mind. As you are bowing and reciting these words, if there is something you do not want to forgive – perhaps you have a resentment, a grudge you have been nursing about ‘that guy’ – that resentment will be illuminated as you recite the words ‘I forgive you, please forgive me for any of my shortcomings.’ Even if you can’t quite drop that resentment, you will at least realize, ‘Oh, right, I still have a stone in my shoe. There is still something being carried around.’

This stylized ritual of forgiveness is a form, but it also points to an ongoing practice of focusing on how we relate to each other – the people you work with, the people in your families, the people we encounter every day. Many of us carry around grudges against our neighbours or the people in the country next door, that lot across the border. We each have our national tendencies. In our own neighbourhoods we might bear a grudge against that person in the house next door who just cut the hedge down without asking. We can carry around a lot of resentment, whether on a national, family or neighbourly basis, or against the people we work with.

A few years ago I read a story in the San Francisco Chronicle about two different sets of astronomers who were trying to establish different measurements of various astronomical activities, in order to finally pin down the exact rate at which the universe was expanding. One group of astronomers set up in the Pacific and the other group in South America. These two groups were vying with one another. They were trying to get their experiments done and their data published first, so that they would be the first to detail the ‘true’ nature of the Big Bang and the expansion of the universe. In the article one of these scientists made a wonderful comment which has stuck with me over the years. He said, ‘They say that gravity is supposed to be the most powerful force  in the universe, but I disagree. It is professional jealousy that possesses that distinction.’ I thought that was very insightful. He deserved to win.

We carry with us polarized feelings of ‘that lot’, ‘that company’ or ‘that family’; we carry grudges, negativity and pain. And we constantly tell ourselves stories, continually reiterating and reviving negativity and resentment. That is why developing forgiveness is critical. Learning forgiveness is learning how to drop all that pain, how not to carry around resentments and grudges. That can be difficult, because our negativities can be very precious to us. We hold very tightly to our unsatisfied resentment or a grudge we have been bearing for years and years, blaming the other, blaming a member of our family, or our bosses, the government or the country next door. But if we want to grow up spiritually, we need to learn how to let go, to forgive and to put things down.

Years ago when Mr. Gorbachev was in power in the former Soviet Union, as he was decommissioning the Communist influence, he was also trying to convince the world that he was sincere. The Americans were extremely suspicious about this glasnost and perestroika and wondered what the Russians really had planned, because up to that point the US-Soviet relationship was primarily defined by the nuclear arms race and the strategy of Mutually Assured Destruction. Gorbachev, with great vision, had realized this was totally ridiculous, a pointless waste of national resources on both sides. But the Americans did not trust that. They thought the Russians had something up their sleeve. At one particular meeting in Washington DC, the Soviet Foreign Minister Mr. Shevardnadze addressed a roomful of American officials. He took the microphone, looked around the table with a certain degree of theatricality and said ponderously, ‘We are going to do something terrible to you.’ The American officials thought to themselves, ‘Okay, here it comes now. They’ve got a secret weapon that they’re going to unveil. They’ve got us cornered.’ The Soviet Minister left a pregnant pause to get to the right dramatic effect, then said, ‘We are going to deprive you of an enemy.’

‘We are going to deprive you of an enemy.’ This was not what the Americans were expecting.

What the minister said was delivered very skilfully. It was true that the Americans derived a lot of national identity from living in opposition to the communist threat. I know this is a sweeping statement, but have you noticed that ‘communism’ is not a big problem anymore, but ‘terrorism’ is? The Radical Muslim Threat has become the dreaded ‘them’ which threatens our lives since communism no longer fulfils that role. I won’t get into politics here, but just look at how we easily develop a sense of identity on both a national and personal level by carrying around those kinds of pet hatreds – hatred for ‘the system’, for our bosses, for family members or whoever it might be, our pet peeve.

Take a good look at your pet hate: ‘them’, ‘her’, ‘him’ or ‘it’. How cramped and painful it is to carry those things around. How much more beautiful it is to let go, how much more helpful to forgive and not to nurse those hatreds, even though they give us a sense of identity. That identity is only the comfort of a preferred self-view. Instead we are learning to let go of self-view. We are learning to let go of that habit of self-identification. We don’t need some specific hatred to make us feel more alive or give us a sense of identity. We are moving away from that dimension, letting go of all that. So to forgive, to let go and drop our hatreds and resentments is a great blessing to ourselves, a freedom for our own heart and also a blessing for the people around us.

In Thai the word for forgiveness is a-pai, which comes from the Pali word abhaya, meaning ‘fearless’. I used to live in Abhayagiri Monastery in California; in fact, I even gave it its name. Many Thai people would think the name of the monastery was ‘Forgiveness Mountain’ rather than ‘Fearless Mountain’. They would see ‘Abhayagiri’ and think it must mean ‘Forgiveness Mountain’, but the name was intended to be ‘Fearless Mountain’.

Now you might be wondering what the relationship between forgiveness and fearlessness could be. The Buddha talked about various different kinds of generosity. Āmisadāna is the giving of material gifts, but abhayadāna is the giving of fearlessness. You give the gift of fearlessness when you stop being a threat to others. You offer others the opportunity to be free from fear by not being aggressive towards them, not acting in a way that is going to harm them, or threaten their property or well-being in any way. By forgiving others, by not bearing resentment towards them, you give them a tremendous amount of space. They don’t have to be afraid of you because you are not carrying around anything negative about them. Does that make sense? This is how fearlessness and forgiveness are unified – if I am not carrying around any grudges or negativity towards you, you don’t have to be afraid of me. You won’t be thinking: ‘He doesn’t like me. He’s got it in for me. He’s got that look about him. He’s really resentful. He doesn’t like my kind of a person.’ There is no grudge, no bias, no prejudice. When you come into contact with a person who is not carrying that kind of thing around, how do you feel? You’re glad to see such a person. You are content. You feel fearless. You don’t have to be protecting yourself or arming yourself in any way.

This aspect of the Buddha’s teachings is not talked about very much. Abhayadāna, that giving of fearlessness, is a very beautiful way of operating in the world, so that you send out signals to the people in your family, the people you work with, the people in the street, telling them that they don’t need to be afraid of you. They don’t need to be concerned about what you are carrying around. You are offering them the opportunity to live free from fear, free from negativity and harm coming from you. And the Buddha said this abhayadāna is a superior kind of giving. It is a more noble and beneficial giving than the giving of material gifts. To give others the blessing of security, safety and freedom from fear is a greater blessing than any kind of material offering you can give.

Forgiving others and not carrying grudges around might seem like a lot of work. It is difficult to let go of negativity, opinions, judgements and the typecasting of those who have different political persuasions or nationalities, or whatever biases our mind moves towards. But of course, often the most difficult person to forgive is yourself. I’ve been talking a lot about forgiving others and letting go, but forgiving ourselves for not being perfect, forgiving ourselves our own failings, forgiving ourselves for not being as wise, good, noble and good-looking as the Buddha – that is harder, particularly with our cultural conditioning in the West, which can be viciously self-critical.

In a strange way, learning how to forgive ourselves is more important than learning how to forgive others, because it is harder to forgive ourselves. We are constantly accusing ourselves of not being perfect, not being the ideal father or mother, the perfect meditator, the perfect monk or nun. We can be really hard on ourselves. You probably think self-critical thoughts, blame yourself, criticize yourself for being lazy or stupid, or selfish or greedy, guilty of all kinds of varieties of shortcomings. It is important to look at that hard-heartedness, that fierce, almost vicious self-criticism. And it is important to offer that quality of forgiveness and lack of a grudge or negativity towards ourselves.

I’ll teach you a little exercise you can use if you do have a habit of self-criticism; if you blame yourself, criticize and hate yourself, or feel guilty for not being a good father, a good mother, a good child, a good friend, a good student, a good teacher. Imagine you have a friend who comes to you and says, ‘I’ve got this terrible problem with self-hatred. I feel I’m so awful. I’m so bad. I’m so useless and such a lazy, selfish, greedy, angry, jealous, cruel, horrible person. I really hate myself.’ If a friend came to you and said that, how would you respond? Imagine what you would feel in relationship to a friend who came to you and said how bad and awful he was. What would your heart do immediately? In my experience, the heart would immediately move towards forgiveness and compassion. You would say, ‘Don’t worry, you’re not that bad. You are a nice person. How could you carry that idea around and create such negativity and hatred? Don’t worry about it. Here, we’ll have a cup of tea. Put the kettle on’. (In England the primary way of handling suffering is putting the kettle on to make tea. There is dukkha; put the kettle on).

This little exercise is very simple, but it is astonishingly effective. Imagine yourself in that situation and notice how immediately the mind moves towards compassion. There is no question about it. If a friend came to you and poured out their heart, revealing the depths of their self-loathing: would you say, ‘That’s terrible! How could you be like that! I don’t think I want to be your friend anymore!’ How many of us would do that? If somebody reacted in that way you would feel they were deranged. How could anyone even think like that? And yet we think that way about ourselves. But when we’re thinking about someone else, notice how automatically our mind goes instantly to forgiveness. ‘Don’t make a big thing out of it. You’re fine. You’re a lovely person. You are very kind and unselfish. Don’t worry about it. Drop it. Leave it alone.’

The Art of Listening

I feel this is an important lesson for us all. Learn to be able to listen to those inner voices, the voices of the inner critic. Be very patient and respectful towards the inner critic. The inner critic works very hard, puts in a lot of hours during the course of the day, categorizing all our faults. The inner critic is very active. Listen politely and respectfully, and then say, ‘Thank you for sharing’ (as they do in California) and politely leave the criticism to one side. In that way we do not allow our actions or speech be dominated by the inner critic and feelings of self-hatred. We learn to act from a place of mindfulness and wisdom, attuned to the present situation. We let go of self-concern and are no longer guided by what ‘they’ think – ‘they’ being the external partners of the inner critic, its outside representatives, the mysterious ‘them’: what will ‘they’ think about me as a monk, or as a teacher, a mother, father, or child? Gradually we learn to be unconcerned about what ‘they’ think or ‘they’ will say, because they don’t really exist. Just like the inner critic, these are phantom creations of the mind. Gradually we learn not to feel we have to justify ourselves, explain ourselves or be driven about anxiety, blame or negativity caused by others.

At the same time as I was putting a lot of effort into working with my anxiety habits, I realized I was completely addicted to approval and pleasing people. I always wanted to make everybody happy. I wanted to please people all the time. It used to be that if I said or did something people didn’t like, I would be completely shattered. We had a morning meeting every day in the sālā, and Ajahn Sumedho would extemporize on some Dhamma theme for half an hour or forty minutes while our tea got cold. They were glorious times. The whole community would gather round. I began to notice during this period that if I said something that was wise and witty and on the mark, everyone would laugh and smile, and I would feel this incredible glow: ‘Oh yes! The cat got the cream! Amaro scored a point! Ding! Good! Happy day!’ But if I said something which was supposed to be wise or witty, and it went totally flat and everyone started looking at the carpet or picked up their tea and looked away, I would feel as if I was breaking into a million pieces. So I realized that I was very dependent on approval and terrified of disapproval. Having seen that, I recognized that I had made a complex structure in my mind based on worrying about what ‘they’ thought, how ‘they’ felt.

Part of letting go of self-view is letting go of other’s views as well. And so in that development of freeing the heart from anxiety, I worked very deliberately on letting go of the opinions of others. Obviously I tried to be wise and mindful and live in an honourable way, but I would say to myself: ‘Just do what you do and let the world make of it what it will. Don’t worry about how you will be judged. Don’t be so pushed around by people’s imagined opinions and views of approval or disapproval.’

This is all part of allowing ourselves to be misunderstood. It is a very profound practice, to let yourself be misunderstood or misrepresented so you are not always jumping in and explaining yourself or trying to ‘fix’ things, but letting people have a negative opinion of you and not feeling as though you have to leap in and correct it. If there is a signal that someone doesn’t like or approve of you, or is not totally happy about something you have done or said, you don’t have to anxiously jump in and try to make it all right. It was a tremendous effort for me to leave things alone and reflect: ‘Well, that’s their opinion. Fine.’ There was a part of me that was very uneasy, but I kept with it: ‘If they want to believe that, it’s fine. Maybe their opinion will change, maybe it won’t, but I don’t have to carry it around.’

That is a kind of giving. You are giving yourself space, and you are giving others space. There is a tremendous freedom in that. It needs a lot of effort, a lot of work, but it takes us somewhere very spacious and peaceful. A quality of contentment is realized. So I would encourage you to forgive your shortcomings. There is no need to create a whole image of what others think of you in the mind. Learn to trust, have faith and confidence in your own good-heartedness. Do the best you can to be mindful and wise, and then leave it be. Do what you do and let the world make of it what it will. This is not a form of callousness or indifference. You are not being dismissive. You are just not carrying the opinion of the whole world around. You are giving yourself more space and giving others space to have their own opinions. People are totally at liberty not to like you. Quite a lot of people didn’t like the Buddha. There were strong objections to the Buddha and his teachings during his lifetime. Statistically, it is impossible to be liked by every single person on the planet. Nobody has ever achieved that, so why do you think you should be the first? It’s crazy, isn’t it? There will always be a few people who don’t like us, and a lot who are totally indifferent, but we don’t have to carry that around. If people don’t want to like us, fine. That is their business.

1 In fact, curiously, it is only a very minor offence to cut the ears off a novice, even though you would certainly be jailed for doing that nowadays.