## 8. The Practice of Dhamma in Daily Life

During this retreat  we have formed a little community, a Dhamma collective, and been on the journey together for this time. Conversation in the various group interviews during the last few days has naturally turned toward the possibilities of life after the retreat has come to an end. As we know, all things are impermanent; you’ve heard about anicca.

It is natural enough for the mind to consider a meditation retreat situation delightful. The mind can be so peaceful. Every morning I find myself thinking, ‘Another day in paradise.’ This time together is very beautiful, very benign, with perfect supportive conditions for meditation – noble company, everyone working very hard, being very disciplined, quiet, contained, a wonderful support team, everybody pulling together in a harmonious and experienced way to support our time together, so the ship runs perfectly smoothly. But though this is very delightful, the downside, the liability, is that we become deeply attached. Some of you might be thinking, ‘Oh, no – he’s talking about the end already!’ You can almost smell the city as it swallows you up. You feel that list of things to do, that huge pile of emails stacking up in the in-tray. And so there is that feeling of attachment: ‘I want this to go on forever.’ ‘Oh, no, it’s time to go back to that horrible world out there.’ But that would imply an unskilful use of this time and this situation, understandable enough but also not very helpful. We don’t create these retreat environments in order to compound our attachments and create more causes for suffering; that’s not the point. That might be an unexpected side-effect, but it’s not the point.

I see these retreat situations as like learning a musical instrument; sitting in the music room with a piano doing your five-finger exercises, playing your scales. The room is contained, there is nothing else going on, it’s just you and the piano; ideal conditions for teaching your fingers where to go. You learn the lessons you need to learn in order to master the instrument. But the real creation of music and the engagement with musical skill take place outside the music room. We don’t sit in the little enclosed chamber in order to be there forever, or to make it the only environment in which we can play. Though in a way retreat situations are also like an operating theatre. We create special sterilized conditions in order to carry out a particular kind of task, develop a particular skill. But the usefulness of this is how we use that skill outside. It’s like coming out of the operating theatre and going about your everyday life as a healthy being once again.

Luang Por Chah would often say that in practising formal meditation you are learning skills you can take with you into the home, into the school-yard, to the farm, to the office, on the road. When we learn to meditate, the lessons we learn manifest themselves in how we live with our fellow human beings. They are embodied in how we get along with our family, with husband, wife, kids, parents, siblings. I feel it is most important not to try to create meditation as an isolation chamber which we can inhabit, keeping out the cruel world and holding life at bay. Dhamma practice is not a little bubble where we can hide, nice and safe in our tiny box. When we learn to meditate, when we attend retreats and deepen our practice, we are learning skills we can apply in the rough and tumble of our everyday life – living in the working world and with the family, negotiating with our fellow beings on the motorway, spreading loving-kindness on the train, going through airports, sitting in business meetings. We are learning how to carry the practice of Dhamma into those situations.

In a way it should not be a surprise to hear that Dhamma practice needs to be carried over into the world. As I’ve been saying over and over again, the world is in the mind. It’s not just ‘the world of the monastery’, ‘the world of the shrine room’ or ‘the world of the meadow’ that is in your mind – the world of your business is in your mind, the focus group meetings are in your mind, the train is in your mind. All the various aspects of our world are here in the same place. Our bodies might be travelling back to Germany, Ireland, Thailand, Sri Lanka or other places, but this is just the perception changing. It’s not as if Amaravati is the truly real place and the staff room at your school is somehow an inferior reality. The Dhamma can be found in your school. Dhamma can be found on the motorway and in Germany and Thailand – none of this is outside the scope of mindfulness and wisdom, because it’s all just perception, it’s all happening in the same place.

No One Going Anywhere

One of the teachings I have encouraged you to develop is the contemplation of the body. This is definitely something you can continue with as you travel from the monastery back into your everyday life. The perception of the body moving outside the boundaries of the monastery is experienced. We perceive our bodies getting into cars, planes and trains, and going to other places. As you are pulling out of the driveway of the monastery, recognize that it’s not as if anybody is really going anywhere; there are just perceptions of mind which are changing.

In 1983 I asked Ajahn Sumedho for permission to go on a long walk through England. I was living at Chithurst Monastery and we had just started the practice of tudong, long distance walks, in Britain – camping in the countryside, living on alms food – so I asked if I could make a long walk between Chithurst and Harnham in Northumberland. Ajahn Sumedho kindly granted me permission to go. There were a number of months of preparation. I got my gear together. I made a pair of leather sandals with the help of another monk who had been a shoemaker before he was ordained. My travelling companion Nick Scott and I roughly worked out the route we would take through the country. We had about half a dozen people who had extended invitations for hospitality. We resolved to include them all, so this made a very long winding route through England. Chithurst and Harnham are about four hundred miles apart as the crow flies, but the route we took ended up being about eight hundred and thirty.

So it was to be a long journey, and my mind was filled with preparations and hoping it would all go well, and figuring out what gear we should have with us. The mind was very much fixed on the idea of this big journey up ahead and the prospect of setting forth. On the morning when Nick Scott and I departed from Chithurst Monastery in May 1983, one comment of Luang Por Sumedho’s really stuck with me – he said, ‘Actually, there’s nobody going anywhere, there are just conditions of mind that are changing.’ It was one of those moments when you think, ‘Oh yes! Of course!’ Even though I’d heard those kinds of words many times before, that morning there was a wonderful contrast between that clear wisdom teaching and the strong, deluded feeling that I was actually going somewhere, with all the becoming that goes along with that feeling. It held up a mirror. So as we made the journey I kept bringing that same recollection to mind. There is a perception of the feet moving along, blisters arising and passing away, different experiences of sun, rain and so forth – but no one is going anywhere, there are just conditions of mind that are changing.

When you begin to notice and reflect in this way, wherever you go, every place you visit, is always ‘here’. When we are practising walking meditation we perceive the body walking up and down on the meditation path. You start at one end of the path and you are ‘here’. There is a perception of the body walking for twenty-five yards, and when you reach the other end of the path you are ‘here’. You turn around and walk again; and even as you are walking, you are ‘here’.

We Are Always Here

Maybe you think this is the ultimate Dhamma nonsense. You think to yourself, ‘Be reasonable, Ajahn – I won’t always be here. In the real world I have a plane to catch and borders to cross, places to go and things to do.’ That is true, but although we are respecting those practical necessities – yes, there are bags to check in and schedules to meet – still, even standing in the queue to check in at the airport, where are you? You are here. On a plane, you are here. When you get off the plane in Germany, Thailand or Ireland, or wherever it might be – where are you? Here. Always here.

The world happens in our mind. There is the perception of the body moving around, going about its different activities. Regardless of the complexity of the things which are being perceived, you can recollect that it is all happening in the mind – no matter how comfortable or uncomfortable the situation, how familiar or unfamiliar, there is always that quality of presence. The actuality of the world happening in our minds brings the attention to this moment. Bringing all our experience into this context is a direct and radical way of cutting the stream of becoming, stopping the stream of becoming ‘me going somewhere’. There’s a letting go of that, and in that letting go and recognizing that quality of presence and timelessness, there’s that intuition in the heart: ‘Oh, right. Nibbāna is the cessation of becoming.’ ‘Me going somewhere’ is let go of and right here is peace.

Micro-Meditations

We can develop that practice while there are the perceptions of the body in motion, and we can also make use of just being physically still. So many of us have a sense of our life being very busy, just one thing after another. From the moment we get up we are racing to the next thing, throwing down some breakfast and getting into the car or on the bus or the train, going to work and following a schedule, and one thing after another after another. This even happens when we are retired – people almost invariably say that after they retired their days became even more full and busy than in their working life.

So one of the simple practices that I like to encourage, particularly if you have that sense of busyness and non-stopness in your days, is to develop stopping points, what I like to call micro-meditations. These are very simple and they really are micro. For example, when you get up in the morning and go into the kitchen to get your breakfast together, before you touch the tap or the toaster or the kettle, just stop and stand in the middle of your kitchen. You might be wondering, ‘What are my family going to think about this?’ Don’t worry about that for the time being. When you come into the kitchen, stop before you do anything, before you touch anything. If you want to have a clear sense of peacefulness and support for this kind of breaking of the stream of becoming, just stop, stand there and don’t move. Just stand there for five seconds. It’s very striking how, if you just stop when you are in the middle of something, five seconds is a long time. Just stop – and then put the kettle on and get the toaster going.

Throughout the day we can stop at different times and be still. When we take a moment to unplug the momentum of the thing we believe we are doing, and instead attend to the present, the effect is striking. When you get into the car and sit down in the driver’s seat, there is no law which says you have to turn on the ignition as soon as you’ve fitted your seatbelt on or closed the door. That is not required by any government anywhere on the planet. Again, you might be worried about what your friends and neighbours might think of you, but don’t worry about what ‘they’ will think. We spend a lot of our life energy worrying about what ‘they’ might think, but have you ever met ‘them’, the ones whose job it is to make judgements about your life? I have never met them. But we worry a lot about what ‘they’ will think. For the time being, don’t. When you get in your car and are sitting in the driver’s seat, before you touch the wheel, turn the key or push the button, whatever you do to start a car nowadays, just let yourself sit there and don’t do anything. Think of the driver’s seat as your meditation cushion; just sit there, just be still – one, two, three, four, five. Then turn the key or whatever.

You can be creative with ways to develop this during the day. You may feel you’ve no space in your day or that life is just one thing after another, one continuous rush, but when you take the trouble to develop these micro-meditations it is astonishing how much space there really is in the day. It’s like this retreat room; you might think it’s really crowded, but actually there is much more space than people in this room. We don’t notice the space because the people catch our attention. Similarly, there is a lot more space in the day than we realize, and all of us can afford to take five extra seconds half a dozen times a day. Whatever the pattern of your life might be, I would really encourage this. Some of you may be thinking that it is a total waste of time, absolutely ridiculous. ‘Five seconds? What difference is that going to make?’ Well, I encourage you to try it out and see. Rather than listen to that inner critic, that intelligent cynic who knows best, invite her to sit to one side for the time being. Say to your inner cynic, ‘Thank you very much for sharing – you can sit over there for now.’ And try this kind of thing out.

I lived at Amaravati from 1985-95. That was about the first ten years of Amaravati’s existence, and there was a huge amount of building work and activity. It was a very dynamic place to be living. There was a constant flow of work projects. None of these buildings were insulated when we first came here, they were just scout huts. Originally they were built as a summer camp, so nothing was insulated, nothing was heated. We took the wooden cladding off the outside of all these buildings, increased the thickness of the wall by two inches by putting wooden batons on all the uprights, and then filled the wall with six inches of insulation. We planed off the timber cladding and then nailed it all back up again on the outside, and we did this for pretty much all the monastery buildings.

There was a lot of work going on and it was very inspiring and enjoyable time.

During the course of the day as we were working, I used to stop, take short pauses and practice these micro-meditations. In the same spirit, I would go to the worksite when the work wasn’t happening, for instance immediately after the morning pūjā had finished. At six-thirty I would go over to the building we were working on; the whole hall ripped apart, the place filled with bales of insulator and piles of lumber. There would be no one else around, just saw-horses and nails and hammers. I would sit down on the floor on a bale of insulation in the middle of the worksite, and just take in the silence and the stillness. All the shapes and the smells and all the perceptions of the work scene were there, but no busyness, no people, no ‘thing’ going on. Work began after breakfast. At eight-fifteen everyone would show up. We would all be wearing our work gear and dust-masks, and the whole place would soon be filled with activity and noise, and people and movement. In the midst of this activity, something in the back of the mind remembered the stillness that was here before it all began. In the course of the busyness and activity of the day there was that residual memory.

At the end of the day, at maybe nine-thirty or ten at night, I would come into the area where the work had been going on, and again sit down and just perceive, take in the workplace – the moonlight coming through the windows, nobody else around; just seeing the saw-horses and the hammers and the moonlight shining on them, perfectly silent, still, the smell of insulation dust in the air. And again feeling the silence, the space, the stillness.

Something in the heart recollects the space within which everything is happening, the stillness which lies behind it – that is the effect of this practice. We are reconfiguring the way we relate to familiar places. You can do this in  your home. Stand quietly in your kitchen or sit quietly in your living room and do nothing; don’t read a book, don’t turn on the television, don’t put your earphones in. Go and sit in an unusual spot, on the window-sill, on the carpet; just be there with no one else around and let yourself take in the nature of that space when nothing is happening. Then, when the rest of the family is around or something is going on and there is activity, something in the mind remembers the still space in which it’s all happening.

I would do the same thing with business meetings. If there was an English Sangha Trust meeting, with all sorts of decisions needing to be made and people showing up wearing suits and ties, I would arrive beforehand at the place where we were going to have the meeting, and just sit on a chair and take in the table, the notepads, the agenda and the minutes. I might add a few little verbal cues, like saying to myself: ‘English Sangha Trust’ as I sat in the silence beforehand, or I might just remind myself during the meeting with the word ‘silence’. And when the meeting was over and everyone had gone, I would again just take note of the silence afterwards.

There is also the exercise in which we notice the space before a thought, then the thought and then the space after the thought, and this keeps the whole thought in context. We can do this in relationship to our whole world too. If you work in a school, go into a classroom when there are no kids in it, and take in the blackboard, the desks, the smell of the chalk or the white-board marker; become aware of the feeling of the space in the room.

Again, you can develop this and fill in the gaps for yourself, work it into your own living situation, whether you are in a school or a Buddhist centre, between jobs, or whatever it might be. This is the practice of shaking up and reworking our habitual perceptions. What creates that sense of endlessly going from one thing to another, caught in relentless becoming, is our habituation; the mind becoming complacent, becoming conditioned and following habits, caught in a rut. We can use these exercises to help shake up our perceptions and avoid being caught in automatic activity, to see familiar things in a different way.

The Value Of Sīla

Another reason why our hearts and minds become peaceful in a retreat situation is because we are not doing anything to disturb ourselves, we are living by the Precepts. I often wonder what it would be like to hold a retreat where we don’t actually do any meditation, but just keep silence and live on the Eight Precepts together for a week. My pet theory is that it would be really very enjoyable, because one of the blessings of a retreat situation is that for its duration no one does anything that is really regrettable. Maybe somebody among you took an extra slice of dessert, but that’s probably the worst any of us have done during this retreat. So the mind isn’t troubled by having to remember hurtful, selfish, unkind or greedy things we have done. We haven’t told any lies. We haven’t engaged in any kind of sexual misconduct. We haven’t killed anyone…

There is a beautiful quality in living according to the Precepts, and the standard of living by the Five Precepts is encouraged outside the retreat situation. That in itself is not a small thing, because in terms of Buddhist psychology the basis for self-respect and the quality of well-being is the practices of generosity and virtue, dāna and sīla. They are the basis for what is called in Western terms a ‘positive self-image’ or a sense of well-being and self-respect. The basis of contentment and happiness in terms of Buddhist psychology is generosity and morality, that is to say, virtue; living in a way that is gentle, respectful and honest. This is how we create the causes for ease, contentment and self-respect. I know people might think this is a very simplistic way to relate to psychology; you might not think there is anything psycho-therapeutic about it. But if you don’t do things that are regrettable, you don’t have to regret them. If I haven’t done anything harmful, selfish or cruel, I don’t have to remember having done it, so I’m not feeding the causes of self-criticism. I don’t have to remember having done something selfish or harmful because it hasn’t been done.

Now, you might be thinking, ‘So what?’ But it is no small thing. When we are developing generosity as a basic relationship to the world, when we are learning to be unselfish, when we are ready to give our material aid, time and attention to others, when we are living in a way which is honest and virtuous, which is noble, this creates the causes of a great deal of ease and contentment. We don’t have to remember anything we have done that is really harmful, dishonest or destructive. We don’t have to be worried about that lie being found out about, or that imaginative treatment of our finances if we have been economical with the truth in filling out our tax returns. If we have been honest we don’t need to worry about ‘them’ finding out. We have nothing to hide, so no anxiety is created.

I met a Thai woman in San Francisco who was a single mother, and she told me this story about herself three or four years ago. Her son was about nine years old at that time and the two of them lived in a small apartment. She worked for an estate agent in San Francisco. One day somebody came into the office who needed to sell their property really, really fast. The client said to her, ‘I don’t care what you sell it for, I have to sell it as soon as possible. Whatever money you can get for it, that’s fine.’ They accepted the property for USD 400,000, but she managed to turn it around and sell it on for USD 650,000 on the same day. Because of the client’s urgency the property was heavily undervalued, so she was able to sell it on very quickly. At about four o’clock that afternoon, after she had made this sale for USD 650,000 and was feeling very proud of herself, she suddenly realized, ‘Hang on a minute, I am the only person who knows about this. No one else is aware that the client got USD 400,000 for it but we sold it for USD 650,000. If I play my cards right, that could be USD 250,000 in my pocket.’

She said she thought seriously about this, but she realized, ‘No, I can’t do that.’ She told her boss the real price she had paid, and also the real amount for which she had sold it. Then she went home and told her son what had happened. Although the boy was only nine, he was pretty good at mathematics. She would help him with his homework and he would help her with the book-keeping for the estate agency. She would go through the books with him and show him what she was doing, and he liked to help adding up the numbers and doing all the calculations. So she said, ‘I have to tell you what happened today.’ She described the incident; how the deal had come in and how she had been tempted, and she also showed him in the books how she could have re-jigged the numbers. ‘Look, see? All I would have to do would be to change this number here, and no one else would have known. It’s not recorded anywhere else’.

The boy remembered that they had been talking about wanting to move into a larger apartment, and a new bicycle would have been nice, so he asked his mum, ‘Why didn’t you do it?’

‘Because I care about you. Because even though we can look at this and say no one would know, the fact is that I would know and I would be worried that someone was going to find out. Then if the truth came out, I would be in jail, and not only would you not have a dad, but you wouldn’t have a mum either, and then we’d really be in trouble. But I also wanted you to know because I felt it was important that I’m not keeping any secrets from you. I’m acting in an honest way, and even though we might have less and we might have to live in this little apartment for a bit longer, still it is far better that we can live without any kind of anxiety, without fear of losing what we have or of me being taken away by the authorities. Far better that we live in a smaller situation and have no anxiety, than we have more of what we want but there is a shadow hanging over me. Do you understand?’

The woman telling me this story imitated her son – the funny expression on his face and the way he answered with a long, drawn out, ‘Yeeeeah…I get it’ as if he were reluctantly agreeing.

‘Do you understand why I did that?’

‘Yeah, that’s cool, don’t worry about it.’

He really did appreciate it. And I think this was the most wonderful gift the mother could have given to her son. I think the owner of the estate agency was pretty impressed with her too. He probably gave her a bonus for being so honest. I was also impressed that she admitted she was seriously tempted – a quarter of a million dollars – so that was tremendously wise on her part. It is the kindest gift because the young man will remember it for the rest of his life. He will have it as a wonderful example of his mother’s integrity and how much she cares for him; that she was prepared to live in a state of privation and difficulty rather than live in a state of anxiety, risking their well-being, living with a lack of self-respect, knowing that she had stolen the money, cheated and lied.

Also, no matter how sure she might have felt that no one could ever find out, kamma tends to work in unpredictable ways. You could see a scenario where two people meet at a party and start chatting together; they discover that one of them lives in the house on Sutter where the other used to live:

‘Gee, it was a real shame I had to sell it in a rush, I only got pennies for it.’

‘Oh, really, how much did you get for it?’

‘Only USD 400,000 – it was worth way more than that.’

‘Really? When did you sell it?’

And the next thing you know, the deception is discovered. That’s how life steers things sometimes.

We can carry the spirit of the retreat environment with us in this way, by sustaining a quality of integrity, honesty and harmlessness. Even if the people around you are scamming left and right, swearing, lying and cheating each other, you don’t have to do the same. Without being uptight and moralistic, we can choose not to join in; we can choose to just keep our own counsel, to sustain our own way of being. It is extraordinary how the qualities of straightforwardness, honesty, gentleness and respect create a basis of calm, a basis of contentment and a real ease within us which are a direct support for concentration. If you haven’t done anything regrettable during the day you don’t have to forget it. You don’t have to let go of disturbing memories at the end of the day when you sit down to meditate. This is a direct and very powerful support for concentration, samādhi.

Mindfulness of the Body; Going Through Doors

Also, as you are going about your daily life you can pay attention to the different postures, sitting, standing, walking and lying down. You may be walking along a pavement or a train platform, through a corridor in your office or your school, or across your living room carpet, but it is still completely legal to have your attention on your feet. You don’t have to be fixated on the meeting you have to attend or the bus you are aiming to catch. You can keep your feet and your mind in unison. Setting that intention at the beginning of the day can be very helpful. This is a kind of practice I’ve done a lot. As you begin your day in the early morning, set that resolution: ‘Whenever I am walking anywhere, whatever the situation during the day, it is my intention to bring my attention to my feet – to feel the feet touching the ground as I walk along.’ Though you may forget and be lost and distracted, mostly you’ll remember. Use that as a way of grounding the attention, bringing the attention into the present.

Ajahn Sumedho would sometimes develop quite surprising meditation themes. One winter retreat he spent some three weeks talking about going through doors. For three weeks he talked about nothing except mindfulness of going through doors. You would be amazed how much there is to say about this. You may think I can talk a lot, but Ajahn Sumedho can be even more expansive. He asked us to begin every day by setting the intention that we would be mindful of doors. As we approached a door we would be aware of approaching the door; we would bring attention to the sense of not knowing what was on the other side of the door, the sense of arriving at the door, the feeling of taking hold of the door handle, the sense of anticipation as we opened the door and then the sense of revelation as we found out what was on the other side; and the feeling of accomplishment, of moving on, as we went through the door and closed it behind us. The delights of the door are many and varied. You may think, ‘It’s just a door, it’s no big deal’, but like anything in life, when we bring attention to it there is a lot that can be learned from it. So pay attention every time you go through a door, into a car, out of a car, into a building, out of a building, into a lift, out of a lift – notice going through doorways.

Developing the Perception of Anicca

A meditation theme doesn’t have to be anything very complicated. You needn’t try to make an intricate intellectual analysis of your life. You can focus on a very simple theme and these are often the most useful. For one retreat in the forest at Chithurst, during my tenth Rains as a monk, I made a resolution to focus on anicca, impermanence, and to make that a theme for my meditation. At the beginning of a day I set the intention: ‘Throughout today I will make the effort to notice the quality of change, whether it is a changing thought, a changing sensation, a changing cloud or a changing mood in other people. I will notice the quality of anicca. I will bring attention to the quality of change.’

It is not a complicated programme. It is very simple. You might think, ‘What difference is that going to make?’ or ‘I already know everything is impermanent.’ As a kind of theory it is easy to understand, but Dhamma practice isn’t just about theory. The practice is the moment to moment recognition of change: ‘There’s a mood changing. There is a traffic light changing. Traffic is starting. Traffic is stopping. There is a sensation changing. There is a sound changing, a word changing.’ We sustain the simple recognition of that quality of change in all experience. Notice that the world is happening in the mind, and recognize the quality of constant change. This has a profoundly unifying and integrating effect upon the mind. It brings together our thoughts, our memories, the perceptions of the things around us. We keep recollecting, ‘It all has the nature to change. Everything is functioning according to the same patterns, the same laws.’

Luang Por Chah taught us to see anicca in two ways: firstly, as the quality of change in the mental and material world. Objects change; if it is a ‘thing’, it is in a state of transformation. Secondly, looking at it from the other side, from the subject side of experience, the felt sense of change is the feeling of uncertainty; we don’t know what anything is going to change into, so we feel uncertainty. Therefore Luang Por Chah would often render the word anicca as ‘uncertainty’, my naeh in Thai – it is not certain, it is not a sure thing. That is the felt sense of change. When the heart meets with the experience of things in a state of transformation, you don’t know exactly what is happening. You don’t know what they are going to change into. You don’t know what the whole story is, so the feeling is one of uncertainty.

This is the most common way in which Luang Por Chah would talk about developing the perception of anicca – consciously reminding yourself that everything is uncertain, particularly around judgements. The mind says: ‘Oh, that’s great.’ But then you say, ‘It’s not a sure thing.’

‘That’s terrible.’‘It’s not a sure thing.’

‘I’m on my way to a meeting.’‘It’s not a sure thing.’

‘Things are going really well.’‘It’s not a sure thing.’

‘Things are falling apart.’‘It’s not a sure thing.’

‘Not a sure thing’ is applicable to an astonishing range of experiences during the course of a day. Our opinions, our judgements, our memories, our likes and dislikes; calling something good, calling it bad; what shape the world is taking or what things are; we just keep reminding ourselves they are not a sure thing. Luang Por Chah would often say that this is the gateway to wisdom, this is the standard of the noble ones, because if we always recollect that everything is uncertain, this unplugs our habits of attachment. So when you are trying to keep something, the recollection of uncertainty reminds you that it is not keepable. If we are afraid of being affected by something or dreading that something is going to impose on us,  recollecting ‘it’s not a sure thing’ reminds us that it is not going to be so unbearable; it can’t be a permanent difficulty.

When you build a dam you need to have a sluice or a spillway to relieve the pressure if the lake becomes overfull. Luang Por Chah used to compare the recollection of anicca to such a spillway. When our hearts become overexcited about what we like or dread, the recollection of anicca is the safety valve which keeps the feelings of attraction and aversion in balance; it is the spillway that relieves the pressure so that the passions are kept from getting out of control.

Everything changes. It might not seem like very much, but it is extraordinary how much this recollection helps when we apply it. The recollection of change brings our world into balance and sustains the environment of Dhamma, whatever the situation in which we find ourselves. Of course, you have to remember to bring this to mind. It can be helpful just to set the intention at the beginning of the day. Say to yourself: ‘Throughout the day, whenever I see anything, hear anything, smell, taste, touch anything, whenever there is an opinion, a judgement, a plan, a like or a dislike, I’ll make the effort to remember it is uncertain, it is not a sure thing.’

Another phrase Luang Por would use and, which we too can use whenever the mind makes a statement or conceives an idea about anything, is to ask ourselves, ‘Is that so?’

‘Well I’m going to be leaving the retreat on Wednesday.’‘Is that so?’

‘This has been the best retreat I’ve ever been on.’‘Is that so?’

‘This has really been a challenge.’‘Is that so?’

Our likes, our dislikes, the familiar, the unfamiliar, approval, disapproval: just keep asking, ‘Is that so? Is that a fact?’ It helps to keep things in context. Like the wonderfully strange and mysterious language of the Pirahã people, their conception of objects and things, form, colour and suchlike, which are totally different from ours. When we declare, ‘This is a microphone’, or ‘This is Saturday’, we can recall the question, ‘Is that so? Is that the whole story?’ It helps to remind us that this is just my version of reality, my perceived patterns; that this is the language that I use, the set of conventions I am using, but it is not the whole story. Bringing to mind that simple question touches the aspect of the heart which knows this can’t be the whole story.

So developing insight, developing wisdom, is not just for the silence and stillness of the shrine room, or walking up and down under the beautiful blue skies and wispy clouds of the English summer at Amaravati. The opportunity to develop wisdom is always here, no matter how busy or noisy the world might be. The nada sound does not stop at the borders of the monastery. Nada continues. Even on the London Underground or in an aeroplane it carries on.

The Buddha pointed out that when we are aware of the quality of anicca, when the heart opens and is attentive to the perception of impermanence, this directly supports the insight into not-self. When you see that everything is uncertain, that also includes the conception of who and what you are – this body, this personality. Insight into anicca directly challenges habits of identification, so that it directly supports the insight into anattā, not-self. And when the truth of not-self is recognized, it directly undermines and dissolves the delusion of self-view; it helps the quality of wisdom to see through self-view and the conceit of identity. As the Buddha says in his Discourse to Meghiya (Ud 4.1, A 9.3), ‘When the heart awakens to the truth of not-self, that leads to the dissolving, the dissolution of the conceit ‘I am’. And this is Nibbāna here and now.’ When ‘I am’ is seen through and is recognized as transparent, empty – when self is let go of – that is Nibbāna here and now. So you don’t think of Nibbāna as some glorious super-duper heaven off over the rainbow – Nibbāna is at breakfast with your family, on the train, in your Buddhist centre, pottering around in your garden or on the motorway. Nibbāna is that quality of clarity and peacefulness which is ever-present whenever the grasping stops, whenever the heart lets go of that urge to becoming. It is always accessible to us.

So I would encourage you to allow that intuition in, allow it to be truly known and acknowledged and given life, given strength. Then there is no reason why the retreat has to stop when you leave the monastery – it can carry on wherever you are.