## 1. A Foundation of Loving Kindness

It is a fact of nature that the future is intrinsically uncertain.

We don’t know what’s going to happen as we practise. Extremely challenging and difficult things may come up – perhaps some kind of illness or injury, an obstacle or challenge that you’ve never had to deal with before, which makes you feel you are out of your depth. On the other hand, your practice may unfold smoothly. You may have a grand time with delightful insights. But whatever happens, the projections or anticipations that the mind produces are not important – the crucial thing is to know right now, here, in this moment, ‘This is an anticipation. This is expectation. This is the mind trying to fill up the unknown with an image.’

The mind fills up with a hope, a fear, a belief, a projection – and that projection is happening here and now. It is something we can know directly, fully and completely, without any kind of delusion. We can pay attention to the fact that the mind is creating expectations, creating hopes, creating fears; and in bringing the attention to what’s present, what is actually arising, we are in that moment fulfilling the main purpose (and also the main method) of meditation.

The main effort we can make, the effort that will bring the greatest benefit, is simply to train the mind to pay attention to the present moment, to the reality of the here and now, and to see that this is where we can make a difference in our life.

We can’t change the past. It’s already happened, we can’t rearrange that.

The future hasn’t arrived yet, so it is beyond our scope. We can’t do anything about either of those, but we can have an effect on the present moment.

This is where reality happens – in the present. This is where we can make a difference.

Over and over again, in many different circumstances, the Buddha encouraged the development of mindfulness, attention to the present moment. He encouraged us to learn to see what is helpful and beneficial, leading towards clarity and understanding, towards peacefulness here in the present. And the Buddha encouraged us to look within, in the present moment, and see what is leading towards more confusion, difficulty or stress. It’s fairly obvious that by learning to see what brings benefit and what brings harm, we will incline towards development of the skills that lead to more clarity and peace, and we will incline away from those things that bring harm, bring obstruction and increase our confusion.

So one of the things I encourage very actively, whether you find practice easy at the beginning and later find it difficult, or you begin practice with difficulty and later find it easy, is to set the intention – a clear and conscious intention – to learn from whatever happens. Bring the mind to the present moment with an attitude of inquiring: what is this teaching me? What can I learn from this? Things can be very smooth and easy – our body comfortable and relaxed, the mind focused and peaceful and bubbling with interesting and liberating insights. Or the mind can be agonizing over painful memories, annoying anxieties or terrors about the future. Or your body contracts some horrible illness. It’s not uncommon. I’ve had this experience myself. But rather than getting drunk on the pleasant, easy feelings, or grumbling and complaining and begrudging the fact that we are in ill health, if we are wise we’ll ask ourselves, ‘What is this teaching me? What lesson is being learned from this particular experience? What has this got to show me?’ I find it’s very useful and important at the beginning of each day to re-establish, re-affirm this intention: ‘Whatever happens today, whatever happens during sitting meditation or walking meditation, it’s my intention to learn from that – whether it is pleasant or painful, expected or unexpected, familiar or unfamiliar, it has something to teach me. There are lessons that it can bring.’

Whether it’s a horrible illness, a runny nose or a wrenched knee – I’ve even known one man who suddenly needed heart surgery during a retreat; he went off for surgery on the Tuesday, came back on the Friday, and finished the retreat. That focused everybody’s attention. Suddenly there was an empty cushion where this fellow had been. We were all conscious of the fact that he was under the knife in the hospital, having his heart operated. It was right there – a huge teaching on the dependent and fragile nature of the body. Right there we had a teaching on unpredictability.

I am not making any predictions as to whether things will become physically dangerous for any of us as we practise, but I hope you will be able to take that in and see that even being taken off to hospital during the course of a retreat is not an obstacle to insight, it’s not an obstacle to practising Dhamma. As that fellow said afterwards, ‘There I was in the hospital and I was thinking of the fifty of you sitting in the retreat centre, so I was continuing the retreat sitting in my hospital bed.’

When we are able to establish this fundamental right attitude towards our experience, we see where the mind creates tension, where the mind creates dukkha or suffering. The Pali word dukkha literally means ‘that which is hard to bear’ or ‘that which is unsatisfactory’. The definition ‘suffering’ is deceptive because happiness and good fortune too can be dukkha, in that although things may be very sweet and delightful, and exactly as we wish them, they can’t stay that way and so they become a cause for discontent.

You might think that’s a really sour attitude towards life. ‘How can happiness be unsatisfactory? How can happiness be suffering?’ But it’s quite simply the case. Perhaps in your meditation you’ve had some sort of wonderful blissful experience; the mind drops into a clear, balanced, bright, radiant state and you think: ‘Ah, this is great! This is marvellous! This is what I’ve been waiting for all these years! My mind is so peaceful and clear, and just utterly content and radiant!’ Then at the next sitting you’re eager to get back to that wonderful state, and you sit down and think, ‘Now how did I get there? What was it that I did? Let’s replicate what I did before, because I really want to get back to that state.’ You find yourself manoeuvring and manipulating and trying to recreate that experience. The very fact that it was so delicious, so wonderful, so perfect makes it even more tantalising that you can’t get back to it. ‘Well, I think there was a patch of sunlight coming through the window, so maybe I can move over so I can get a bit more sun on my face. And I had the cushions arranged just so…’ and on and on and on.

There is a story about Leo Tolstoy – I’m not sure if it’s apocryphal or if it really happened, but it’s a worthy story. Tolstoy, in addition to being an author, was a wealthy Russian landowner, and he used to enjoy going into the fields and harvesting the corn along with the labourers. On one particular occasion he was out with his scythe, slicing and cutting down the corn, and his mind became absorbed into the most wonderful and blissful state as he was rhythmically scything the corn. It was the most extraordinary and beautiful thing he had ever experienced, and by the end of the day he had cut acres and acres of corn. He thought, ‘That was wonderful! That was marvellous!’– or the Russian equivalent of those words. The story goes that he spent the next twenty years cutting dozens of acres of corn, trying to get into the same rhythm, trying to get the same wonderful experience back again, and never quite managed it because his whole attitude was: ‘I want to get it, I’ve got to have it. It’s just over there. Any minute now I’ll get there and won’t that be wonderful!’ This shows how even a pleasant, beautiful and wholesome state can be the cause of dissatisfaction and discontent, how it can cause the qualities of attachment and possessiveness.

I would encourage you to consciously develop the intention to learn what every experience can teach you. Bring that intention to mind at the beginning of each day – whether you’re formally meditating, walking from room to room, eating your breakfast or drinking a cup of tea, bring that quality of inquiry and reflection into being. Thus we develop the tendency to examine our life. We notice the mind states that we are experiencing, and whenever the mind moves towards the creation of dukkha, the creation of discontent, which is usually built out of complaining, worrying or thinking that life ‘shouldn’t be this way’ and happiness is just out of reach, we notice that if the mind is doing that, it is creating a complaint. It’s creating the idea that happiness is somewhere else, that peace and fulfilment are somewhere else, somewhere off in the future, over there, next week.

When you’ve noticed that thought, things become a lot easier. You can simply say to yourself, ‘Well, okay, maybe things will be more peaceful and clear in a few days’ time, but right now, it’s this moment, it’s here – this is it. This is the big moment. ‘ ‘Now’ is where the Dhamma is to be realized, and this is when we can see how the mind creates anticipation, how it creates complaint, and how it comes to feel that the world is out of balance or shouldn’t be this way. We can see the mind creating that tension and stress, all that imbalance. Then we can let go. We train ourselves to let go rather than feed that sense of imbalance. Once we’ve let go we see things clearly and say to ourselves, ‘Of course! How could anything be out of order? How could the laws of the universe not be operating properly in this particular moment? Everything is functioning according to its own natural law. There is nothing going wrong in this moment.’

I’d like to share another reflection on the word ‘dukkha’. The word is made up of two parts: ‘du’, which means ‘wrong’ or ‘imbalanced’, ‘out of order’ or ‘incorrect’; and ‘akha’ which is related to the English word ‘axle’. The akha is the hole at the centre of the wheel through which the axle goes. So the word ‘dukkha’ is derived from the image of a wheel that’s out of balance.

Some of you may have tried to ride a bicycle whose wheel is out of alignment, or had the more common experience of the luggage trolley or supermarket trolley with a bent wheel – your trolley is always slamming into the carousel, or careering towards the rack of fruit juice or into the person next to you. This is dukkha. This is the wheel not spinning truly on its axle, the wheel being out of kilter. This is the epitome of dukkha – things out of balance. So we train ourselves to be able to notice that imbalance – the mind moving towards complaining, towards longing for the past or longing for the future, regretting the past, resenting the past or fearing the future. We train ourselves to notice what attitude the mind is bringing to the moment, and we train ourselves to let go.

When we are setting our intention to work with the mind, we should also set the intention to maintain an attitude of kindness. We usually think of mettā or mettā bhāvanā as being a specific meditation or a visualization. But I prefer, and feel it’s more helpful, to establish the attitude of loving-kindness as the basic mode in which we work. Rather than mettā being a five-minute practice at the end of the day, like an after-dinner mint, it needs to be the very way that we are working with the mind. Whether we are doing walking meditation or sitting meditation, or just trying to carry out a chore or eating our food in a mindful way, mettā is the very fabric, the very substance of the attitude that we need to bring to each moment – the attitude of loving kindness.

In his talks over the years, Luang Por Sumedho would often point out that the English term ‘loving-kindness’ tends to imply the necessity to make ourselves like and enjoy everything. We talk about having loving-kindness toward all beings, and Luang Por would explain that we misunderstand what that means and try to find a way to like everything. But ‘loving’ is not the same as ‘liking’, for some things are impossible to like. If you have a headache for three days, or pulled muscles, or agonizing strained tendons in your knee, you can’t like that. It’s not likeable. To assume or presume that to have mettā is to try and force yourself to like the pain in your knee or the three-day headache, or to like some person who has done you great harm, is asking too much of yourself. And you are also asking the wrong thing.

Loving-kindness does not mean trying to like the unlikeable. That’s the same as trying to taste something bitter and pretend that it’s actually sweet. We need to be realistic and say: ‘This is a bitter taste. That’s a painful memory. This is a painful sensation in the body.’ That’s what it is. Mettā is not making ourselves like the unlikeable, but rather radically and totally accepting what is here. If there’s a bitter taste, recognize it as bitter – this is something that can be experienced. We have a tongue and it’s able to perceive flavours. There are sweet flavours, there are sour flavours, there are bitter flavours. This is a bitter flavour. That’s what it is. Nothing has gone wrong. It’s not ‘bad’. It’s just a flavour that we can experience. Here it is. It’s like this.

So this is the quality of mettā – a radical acceptance, a wholehearted acknowledgement and recognition. This is what’s here. This is a pain in the body or a feeling of regret, or a sense of grief at the loss of a loved one, or the great variety of different painful experiences that we can have, psychological or physical. It’s just being able to recognize, ‘Here it is, this is what’s happening in this moment. It’s not pleasant, it’s not delicious, but here it is. This is what’s happening, this is what’s being experienced. There’s nothing whatsoever wrong with it. It just is what it is.’ It’s just a taste, it’s just a flavour, it’s just a mood, it’s just an emotion. You are not trying to sugar it over and pretend that the bitter is sweet, but you are simply recognizing it. It’s bitter, but it’s all right. It’s sad, but it’s all right. There’s grief, but that’s all right. This is a painful memory or a deep regret, or a feeling of loss or of pain, but we can be patient with it. We can be kind towards it insofar as we don’t start a fight against it, develop negativity towards it or resent its presence. We can be at peace with it. We can be open to it. We can recognize that it’s just a part of the natural order. Fundamentally, it belongs. So even though there may be some painful emotion or painful sensation, we are not creating dukkha around it, and thus there’s pain but no suffering. No ‘wrongness’ is being ascribed to it.

Dukkha is an attitude of, ‘It shouldn’t be this way. This is not fair. This is not right. The universe is out of order at this moment.’ When we let go of that attitude, we establish the attitude of mettā. So our practice is to support that letting go, to establish that quality of acceptance: ‘Well, it’s not pleasant, I wouldn’t ask for this, but here it is.’ Our friend in America who had the angioplasty during the retreat; it’s not what he would have wished for. He didn’t think to himself, ‘How can I make my retreat more interesting? I know! I’ll have a massive angina attack and get a trip to the hospital! That’ll brighten things up a bit!’ We are not looking for more trouble, more pain or more difficulty, but we realize that if we establish an attitude of loving-kindness and radical acceptance, we are able to bring our attitude into alignment with the reality of the way things are. We bring our heart into accord with Dhamma. This is how it is. If we have that attitude of acceptance as a basis for the way we are working, that becomes a very strong foundation for concentration and insight. In my experience you can’t really develop any kind of concentration or insight unless there is a foundation of loving-kindness.

So rather than mettā being a sort of optional extra, added on as a secondary practice, it’s more accurate to see it as the bedrock of our practice. It is the attitude needed in order to truly develop concentration and insight. If we don’t have that quality of acceptance, when we try to concentrate the mind we find ourselves fighting against our thoughts, fighting against our memories or fighting against our planning mind. Our thoughts become the enemy. Thoughts become things that are resented and rejected. So rather than contending against the chattering, thinking mind, against memories or expectations, develop an attitude of kindness and acceptance towards them. Then you will be able to know that a thought is just a thought. You don’t have to follow it – you can just notice it’s there and let it go. You can steer away from it. It’s not the ‘enemy’, it’s not an intruder, it’s not an infection, it’s not wrong.

There is the aphorism often used in the world that says that ‘the end justifies the means’, but in Buddhism we recognize that the end and the means are unified. The Buddha recognized that it’s impossible to develop peace of mind by using an aggressive and contentious method. If you want peace, peace has to be your method. If you want clarity, then clarity has to be your method. If you want to arrive at a quality of focus and calm, the effort has to embody calm as well as the other wholesome qualities that we bring to it. If you try to arrive at calm by attacking your thoughts, if you turn your thoughts and emotions into the enemy, the mind becomes a battleground. If you want a peaceful end, you must use a peaceful means. If you want to have a mind that abides in loving-kindness, you need to use loving-kindness as the way of working.