## 3. The Breakthrough

Today is my birthday.  At mealtime some visitors came up and somebody wished me many happy returns. Then they asked, ‘What do we actually mean when we say that?’ I suggested that perhaps Buddhists should wish people ‘no more than seven unhappy returns’, since according to the Buddha a being who has realized stream-entry will be reborn no more than seven times and cannot be reborn in any of the lower realms of existence; it can’t be reborn in the animal world, the ghost realm or the hell realms.

When considering the efforts that we are making in our practice, it’s useful to reflect on what we are aiming towards. Why did the Buddha put such stress on the quality of stream-entry? It is considered so important because he referred to it as the breakthrough or the turning point in the development of the practice. It’s a point of no return, so it’s given a lot of strength and importance in this tradition and practice. Once that level of insight and understanding has been reached, you can’t un-reach it. It’s like having once learned to ride a bicycle; you can’t unlearn it. Similarly, stream-entry is a learning that can’t be unlearned. It is a change in the way of seeing and perceiving, in terms of attitude towards life, and once something has been seen in that way it can’t be unseen.

There is a famous visual puzzle, a pattern of black and white splotches in a picture. If you look at it long enough you suddenly realize it is a black and white Dalmatian dog moving through patches of sunlight and shadow. Suddenly you can see the outline of the black and white dog against the background of black and white patches of light and shade. Once you’ve seen the Dalmatian amongst the black and white patterns, you can’t un-see it. Every time you see that picture, that recognition will be there. You know that the dog is there. You can’t undo that.

These examples – a visual puzzle or riding a bicycle – are mundane; obviously, entering the stream and reaching the breakthrough is something far more substantial. The examples are just to give you a sense of that quality of irreversibility, so that once this point has been passed, it can’t be lost again.

In the Saṃyutta Nikāya,  the Connected Discourses, there is a whole chapter called ‘The Breakthrough’ which contains some very telling images. In comprises thirteen suttas, all quite short, but they all have the same kind of flavour. In the first one the Buddha is addressing a gathering of monks, and he reaches down and scratches the earth. He says, ‘What do you think monks, what is greater: the amount of dirt under my fingernail, or the great Earth itself?’ And in the wonderfully understated manner of the Pali Canon, the bhikkhus reply, ‘Oh, Venerable Sir, the amount of earth under your fingernail is very small and the great Earth itself is very large. There’s no comparison, there’s no way you can put the two together. One is incomparably greater and vaster than the other.’ Then the Buddha says, ‘Even so: the amount of suffering which the being who hasn’t made the breakthrough can expect to experience over subsequent lifetimes is comparable to the great Earth, whereas the suffering that a being who has made the breakthrough can expect to experience is comparable to the dirt under my fingernail. There’s no comparison, there’s no way to put the two together. One is infinitely vaster, greater than the other’

That sutta is called The Fingernail. The sequence of suttas then goes through a series of images; each one employs a different simile, but it’s the same fundamental theme.

‘What is greater – five grains of sand from the River Ganges, or the Himalayan mountain range?’ ‘Venerable Sir, five grains of sand is a very small, a very tiny amount of matter, but the great Himalayas are vast, incomparably large. They are the king of mountains, a vast range.’ ‘Similarly, the amount of suffering that one who has reached the breakthrough can expect to experience is comparable to five grains of sand, whereas that which can be expected by one who has not made the breakthrough is comparable to the great Himalayan mountain range.’

By the time you get to the thirteenth of those images, you have got the point – yes, this is really worth doing, really worth considering, really worth aiming for.

A number of years ago, when Ajahn Pasanno and I were putting together a book of teachings from the Suttas and the Forest Ajahns about the Buddha’s words on Nibbāna and ultimate reality, Ajahn Pasanno chose to devote a whole large section to stream-entry. He said this was because when people in the West talk about the goal of enlightenment, they tend to focus their attention on arahantship as being the pinnacle or consummation of spiritual life. But when they consider arahantship in detail, they say to themselves, ‘That’s way beyond my reach. I’m just an ordinary person – a lay person with a husband or a wife, with a job and a mortgage to pay and kids to educate. I can’t possibly have the time or give the attention necessary to achieve this level – it is way beyond my scope, beyond my capacity.’

And so they place the spiritual life or the fulfilment of the spiritual life as something beyond their grasp, because they are idealistically attracted to the supreme, the best, the ultimate. Total enlightenment is really appealing in that way, but if you look at what is actually involved, you can feel; ‘I want to go back to the beach. This is too much for me. I can’t do it. It’s way beyond me. This is too far outside my range of possibilities.’ Ajahn Pasanno saw that people overlook the importance of stream-entry, which is stressed over and over again in the Suttas. In the stories from the time of the Buddha it’s pointed out that many people with families and jobs were reaching stream-entry – it was happening left, right and centre. A lot of people managed to realize stream-entry even in the midst of a busy family life – vast numbers, great numbers.

Ajahn Pasanno pointed out that there’s an ironic disparity at work here, for when we aspire to the highest goal we may become daunted and demotivated, but if we set our sights on something that is a bit more practical it will serve us extremely well. Once stream-entry has been realized there are no more than seven lifetimes before reaching total enlightenment, and there is no longer any possibility of falling into the lower realms. And the Buddha says this over and over again. It’s not just one statement here and there – over and over again he says that if stream-entry has been realized, total enlightenment is inevitable, if not in this lifetime, within seven lifetimes – absolutely guaranteed. Total enlightenment is necessarily going to be realized.

The important point to make here is that if you set your goals at a more practical level, you can very reasonably aim for stream-entry. And if that’s realized, you know you are guaranteed to realize full and complete enlightenment; an irreversible level of insight has been established. You’ve seen through the puzzle. You’ve seen that the body is not self – feelings are not self – perceptions are not self – personality is not self. That has been seen and known and recognized, and can’t be unseen. This is a very wise and significant point and a point I very much support – stream-entry is a goal, an aim, that can be realized by many people.

Those who have entered the stream reach enlightenment in no more than seven lifetimes, but they are nevertheless still subject to desire and aversion. They still have a propensity to attachment and suchlike, but there’s a clearer degree of understanding, a clearer mindfulness. So even as you are becoming caught up in anger, aversion or desire, your inner wisdom, your intuition says, ‘This is going to really hurt. You know where this is going, don’t you?’ – ‘Yes, but just once more for old time’s sake...!’ We are able to see that quality of attachment, but we can’t quite let go. Ajahn Chah used to say: ‘50 to 75 percent of practising Dhamma is knowing that you should let go but you are not quite able to.’ You say to yourself, ‘This is really stupid. I know where this is going and if I had any wisdom I’d just drop it right now, but even though I’m saying that to myself, I’m not dropping it, am I?’ It’s like being stuck going the wrong direction on the motorway – you know where you’re heading but there are no exits, so you have to keep going until you finally find an exit, and then you can turn round and go back.

The Buddha talks about stream-entry in different ways. Sometimes he talks about it simply in terms of faith – one who has unwavering faith in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, and whose virtue is well-established and is committed to wholesomeness, will realize stream-entry. There is also the structure of what are called the Ten Fetters (saṃyojana). Fetters are things which constrict or confine us. In this instance they are the ten obstructions to enlightenment and they are listed in a graduated sequence.

The first three are those which obstruct stream-entry, which obstruct the heart from seeing the truth in a clear and irreversible way.

The first of the Ten Fetters is sakkāya-ditthi, sometimes translated as ‘personality view’ or ‘self-view’. If you break the word down, the syllable ‘sa’ means true or real; ‘kaya’ is the body; ‘ditthi’ means view. So if you put it all together this term means ‘the view of the real body’, or ‘the view of the person being real’. In ordinary everyday language this is the belief that ‘I am the body; I am the personality; I am a man; I am English; I am this personality; I was born in 1956, on the second of September’ – it is the mind which believes that as an absolute truth. That is self-view: ‘This is what I am; this is me. These thoughts are mine. These feelings are mine. This is my memory, my emotions, my opinions, my experience – it’s me doing this stuff, me choosing these words, me who is hearing them.’ That solid sense of ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’ associated with feeling, with memory, with sight, sound, smell, taste and touch; that’s all the fabric of sakkāya-ditthi.

If you think, ‘Of course I am my body; of course I am my thoughts and my feelings. They don’t belong to anybody else, so how could they not be me?’ – if that’s taken as something that is unarguably true – then you need to do some more work. However, most of us who have been involved in Buddhist meditation and come into contact with Buddhist teachings on emptiness and not-self are familiar with how not to look at these things in a habitual way. Instead we cultivate a different manner of looking at the body, the personality, and the feeling of self.

It is recognized that in the ordinary conversations of everyday life we have a name, we have an address, we have a personal history. Conventionally speaking, that is indeed who and what we are, but there is also a wider view. There’s a perspective where we can recognize that the conventional world is not the whole story. Yes, there is a body. Yes, there are stories about ourselves that we remember and tell others. But when we develop the quality of insight, when there is a true seeing, we look into that feeling of self, that feeling of ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’, and begin to intuit that this is not really who and what we are. And in time and with application, we see directly that this is indeed not really who and what we are. This body and this personality don’t really have an owner.

When we look for the thing that is the ‘me’, the ‘do-er’, the ‘owner’, the ‘experiencer’, we can’t find it. It’s like when Winnie the Pooh is searching for his friend Piglet in The House at Pooh Corner – A.A. Milne writes, ‘The more he looked inside the more Piglet wasn’t there.’ The more the self is looked for, the more clear it is that there isn’t one to be found. It’s absent. We’ve taken it for granted that a self is present, real and substantial, but in fact it’s like an optical illusion or a sleight-of-hand trick by a conjurer. It really looks as if there is a ‘me’, an ‘I’, a ‘mine’ that is a separate independent entity. That has all the appearance of being true, but it’s like when you watch how the conjurer did the trick and realize, ‘Oh, there really wasn’t a rabbit in the hat! It was all a trick, just an illusion. It was just an impression that I was misreading, misperceiving, misunderstanding.’ When we practise insight meditation we are looking very closely at those habits of identification. When the mind insists that ‘I’ am this body, we pick that up, dismantle it and take a look. What is it that we’re referring to when we say, ‘This body is mine’? What is the thing that’s doing the owning? What is it? Where is it? What shape is it?

The second of the Ten Fetters is sīlabbata-parāmāsa, which literally means ‘the incorrect or the unskilful holding of virtue’. In the Buddha’s time this would have particularly referred to things like the belief that bathing in the River Ganges would wash away all your bad karma, or that sacrificing animals on the new moon would bring you special magical powers or help you find the right spouse. It was to do particularly with the rights and rituals which, in the Buddha’s time, had huge currency.

Luang Por Chah would always talk about sīlabbata-parāmāsa as not just referring to attachment to religious rites and rituals, but in terms of attachment to conventions of society generally. For example, for a Thai person it would be unthinkable to sit on the floor and point the feet towards a monk – that would be considered extremely insulting and unthinkably gross. But Luang Por Chah met Westerners who were very devoted and very polite, and yet they would quite happily sit in front of him and stretch their legs out, point their feet towards him and not have a clue that this could be insulting. Because Luang Por was a very reflective and wise person, rather than taking offence, his mind would move towards reflecting, ‘That’s really interesting. Look what my mind is doing with that! My mind says, ‘That’s wrong, you shouldn’t do that!’ But in England this is quite acceptable – why shouldn’t they stretch out their legs?’ One time when he was going through London, Ajahn Chah saw people standing in a queue at a bus stop. So he asked, ‘What are they doing there?’, and the monks explained, ‘They are queuing for the bus.’

‘Queuing for the bus – what do you mean?’

‘Well, when the bus comes and, say, there’s room on it for six people, the first six people in the queue will get on the bus and the rest will wait there at the stop.’

He said, ‘Really? You mean they won’t crowd in, or push in front and pile onto the bus anyway?’

‘Oh, no, that would be unthinkable. In Britain queue-jumping is worse than pointing your feet at the Buddha – somebody who jumps the queue would be a social outcast!’

‘Ooh, that’s not the same as in Thailand!’

The ability to see this attachment to conventions is the ability to see the things to which we give value, and how those things are given a quality of importance or meaning. If we think that it’s absolutely wrong to point the feet at a monk, not just a convention but inherently wrong, that’s sīlabbata-parāmāsa, attachment to rites and rituals. The ability to see our attachment to conventions as what it is constitutes a form of insight into self view. It is the ability to see through this attachment to the conventions and value systems by which we live – what we call right and wrong, beautiful and ugly – and to realize that these values are based solely on perspective and conditioning. The heart recognizes, ‘Oh, that’s just what I’m familiar with. That’s just what I’m used to’, and can thus respond to situations with equanimity.

Leaving Britain to live in America for fifteen years was a very interesting experience for me. I had always felt that I was a fairly liberal and open kind of Brit. But when I moved to the San Francisco Bay Area I suddenly discovered all my English home-counties uptightness. The customs and the way that people related in California made me realize I was a lot more English than I thought I was. Somebody would come up and say, ‘Hi, my name is Steve’, and within five minutes he would be talking about what it’s like to grow up as a gay man in Idaho with alcoholic parents. ‘Erm...and your name was what?’ In Britain you could live next door to someone or work in the same office for twenty years, and they’d never let on about that kind of thing. You just don’t talk about those things, at least in the part of England where I grew up. Home Counties England is the epicentre of the stiff upper lip, a society brimful of things you don’t talk about. It was quite wonderful to be in a completely different environment with a different set of customs. It was as if a mirror were held up to show me my own conditioning and the conditioning of those around me. I would think to myself, ‘They don’t realize that what they’re doing is to my perception very strange. I’m looking at what they’re doing as something that’s wrong or surprising.’ Or, I might have said something I felt to be a completely innocent remark, only to then pick up a collective intake of breath from those around me – ‘What did I just say?’ If you don’t know what the customs and conventions are, you can inadvertently say or do things that are really offensive.

In the early days of Chithurst Monastery it was a very ramshackle existence. The house was a crumbling Dickensian mansion, an old Victorian house that was filled with dry rot. Everything was a bit rough and ready – the tea mugs didn’t match and they had chips in them or broken handles, and the carpets were leftovers from other people’s homes.

However, somebody had given Luang Por Sumedho a very nice blue and white classic Thai porcelain spittoon; it was the nicest piece of crockery in the whole house. So we filled up this beautiful blue and white porcelain bowl with sand and used it as the incense burner on the main shrine. Then one day a senior monk from Thailand made a special trip from London to see Chithurst Monastery. We greeted him at the door and brought him in. He knelt down in front of the shrine, and was just about to bow when he saw the spittoon on the shrine. He froze. You could see he was shocked, and he very politely said, ‘Perhaps you would like to find something else, a different bowl to be an incense burner?’ For us, the spittoon was the most beautiful dish in the house, but to him it was a vessel you put your rubbish in or urinated into. We had no idea that it could be anything offensive, but to him it was like having a chamber pot there.

Sometimes the things we do or say are upsetting to others. Rather than dismissing this as their problem or something they should get over, non-attachment to convention means that we are respectful, that we take an interest in the dynamics of convention, that we’re mindful, attentive and ready to adapt to others’ conventions and standards.

The third fetter is vicikicchā, which means ‘doubt’. This is not a trivial kind of doubt like not being sure what to have for breakfast. Specifically, it’s doubt about what is the Path and what is not the Path. The challenge is to go beyond doubt, to see through doubt and find clear recognition of what constitutes the practice of Dhamma. What is the path out of suffering and what is not? What is the path to recognizing the Dhamma and what is not? When that has been seen through, when the way is really recognized, when there’s no further doubt about the path to follow, the fetter of doubt has been broken.

When these three fetters, self-view, attachment to conventions and doubt have all been fully recognized, understood and eradicated, when they have been seen through and there’s no doubt about what is the Path and what is not the Path, then stream-entry has been realized.

The Suttas often describe a practitioner’s insight by saying that he has seen the Deathless – this is a description of the realization of stream-entry. That person has broken through. The realization of this insight is also described by the Pali words ‘Yankiñci samudaya dhammaṃ sabbantaṃ nirodha dhamman’ti’ – ‘Whatever is subject to arising is subject to cessation.’ In a sense, that is the key insight and recognition – that everything is impermanent. To be able to see that all things are impermanent, to be ready to apply that in all circumstances; that is the root insight and the fundamental factor for making the breakthrough into stream-entry.

Now, you might think that’s too simple, that it’s nothing special, nothing new, quite easy to understand. Well, we may understand it as a concept, but the problem is that we are not yet applying it in our lives; we are not seeing the implications of that insight. We may understand conceptually that whatever begins ends, but we are still attached to pleasant, beautiful things that we think  of as ‘mine’. In fact, we even cling to misery because we think of it as ‘my misery’, part of what constitutes our ‘self’. We don’t wish to see it as something that will change, something that will end, something that is not ownable.

There are still degrees of identification and grasping, so we are not seeing that all conditions are intrinsically impermanent. When we are trying to hang on to the pleasant and the beautiful, it is because we are dreading or resenting the painful or the difficult. In that moment we are not seeing the fundamentally transient nature of reality.

The reality is that all things are fluid, uncertain. That is their nature. When right understanding is applied, the mind says, ‘Oh, hang on! – I’ve been making the mistake of thinking that this problem is ‘mine’ and that it’s going to be here forever. Ah ha!’ That ‘Ah ha!’ is the recognition that there is no way this ‘problem’ could be anything other than impermanent and uncertain. And how could it belong to a ‘self’? Ah ha! That recognition, that application of insight – that is the way; that is the Path. There is no more doubt. We know that things always change. And we know what we always need to do in terms of relating to that – the insight into transiency is applied. This approach becomes the way in which every situation is experienced; and when this is effected, it changes our heart and it opens the door to liberation. When there’s no more doubt, that’s the point at which the breakthrough has been made.

It’s not enough, though, just to read these words – you have to pick up these themes and explore them, investigate them for yourself. Words are just patterns that we perceive, sounds that we hear or ideas that we ponder – but the Dhamma is something that we need to pick up and explore.

For example, we can understand conventions – it makes sense to queue for a bus or not use a spittoon for a shrine – but we can sometimes become attached to them without even being aware that they are conventions. Which of your thoughts are conventions? What are you used to believing in? What do you build your hopes and fears around? Where are your attachments? There are probably some things to which I’m deeply attached without realizing that I’m attached to them. There may be things I value, which I consider good, beautiful or wonderful, but it is just my conditioning which creates that impression. So I ask myself, what do I relate to in that way? What am I attached to in that way? Let’s have a look. This is the way we explore our experience.

Ajahn Chah used to use money as an example. He would say, ‘Money is just a convention. You have a piece of paper and you print on it ‘ten baht’, and so you say it’s worth ten baht, or you add an extra zero on it and you say it’s worth a hundred baht, or another zero and then it’s worth a thousand baht. All these pieces of paper are the same size. It’s not as if you’ve got a special paper for a thousand baht note. It’s all just pieces of paper. There’s nothing special there. You just put an extra zero on it – and zero is nothing anyway.’

Banknotes just represent human agreements. We just agree to call them ‘currency’. We say one piece of paper is worth a thousand, another is worth ten, another a hundred; but if we were to change the agreement the value would go away. The government might say, ‘We are printing new currency. After such-and-such a date, the old notes will have no value.’ So you think, ‘Hang on a minute – last week that note was worth a thousand baht, but now it’s just good for lighting fires or lining the bottom of a bird-cage? Where did the value go?’ Ajahn Chah used to say that perhaps in the future people would agree to use chicken shit as their currency. A person might collect a big pile of chicken shit and be rich, while everyone else would be fighting and arguing about how to get a bigger pile of chicken shit. By comparing the size of their heaps, they would decide which person had the most value and who was the most important.

This is what we do all the time; we create things and give them value. What things do you value in your lives? If you’re in the academic world, value is often about getting published: how many papers have you had published? Perhaps it doesn’t even matter if nobody ever reads them; all that matters is how many you have had published. Or if you are into wealth and appearances, how big is your house?

Or if you are into social climbing, what are your children doing? Are they going to university? Are they lawyers or doctors or engineers? Or are your children unemployed and an embarrassment?

Or if social networks are your thing, how many Facebook ‘friends’ do you have? Even in the monastic life we can have these value systems. How many years have you been a monk? How many retreats have you done? How many ascetic practices do you do?

There are countless different ways in which we can create value systems, and invest in them and judge each other. This is why it’s important to be able to see clearly and say to ourselves, ‘Look – it’s just an empty system that’s been ascribed a value; really there’s no ‘thing’ there.

What we call beautiful in one country is ugly in another. As a Westerner in Thailand, I was interested to discover that Thais have a very different way of talking about the body. In the West we might be very sensitive about particular attributes of our body, but in Thailand they’re very straightforward. They would come up and say to you, ‘You’re really fat, aren’t you? Wow, I never saw anyone as fat as you before!’ And they wouldn’t mean to be insulting. Or they would say to Ajahn Sumedho, ‘Your skin is very white, it’s really kind of horrible’; or ‘Your nose is really big. What a huge nose you’ve got!’ Whereas here in the West we would take these as deeply personal remarks, in Thailand they’re not considered insulting at all. Conditioning can be strong, so we must understand that and free the heart from it.

Now, with all this talking about stream-entry and realization, some of you who are familiar with Luang Por Sumedho’s teachings may also be aware that he would very, very rarely talk about or use the language of aiming for attainment. Just as we can become competitive about who has the biggest house or published the most papers, we can also become competitive or acquisitive about realization. So Luang Por Sumedho would very often point to the absurdity of ‘trying to become’ a stream-enterer or ‘trying to get’ enlightened. That very way of phrasing the issue displays an acquisitive or becoming tendency; we have let bhava-tanhā, the desire to become, take hold of our spiritual efforts.

So, in talking about all of this I’m very conscious of the fact that there’s a danger in creating a substantial desire to ‘become’ something special. It’s therefore important to notice how, when you set yourself a goal, you start to think: ‘I’m not a stream-enterer yet but I want to become one, so what can I do now to become that in the future?’ In Luang Por Sumedho’s teachings, over and over and over again he would say that one of the root delusions about meditation practice is to think, ‘I’m an unenlightened person who’s got to do something now to become enlightened in the future.’ He saw that he had been setting that up as a paradigm in himself, and he realized that he was creating a false framework.

If we do this, even though we might feel its a good intention, we are unwittingly building our practice on a basis of bhava-tanhā. We can be unconsciously strengthening the sense of self, strengthening self-view: ‘I am an unenlightened person and I’ve got to do something to become an enlightened person in the future.’

What he would always encourage instead is to let go of that whole structure; to let go of conceiving ourselves as a person and simply be awake now, be enlightened now, be awake to this moment. So it’s not a matter of starting a stream-entry programme, but rather of being awake in this moment to the feelings of the body, to perceptions, the sounds that you hear, the things that you see. Sight, sound, smell, taste, touch; knowing this is all arising and passing away here and now. If we see that, if we recognize that, then we are being awake right now. Right now there is the quality of wisdom. It’s being actualized.

A number of years ago, the last time Luang Por Sumedho gave a retreat in California at Spirit Rock Meditation Centre, I was helping out with the event and I noticed that every single Dhamma talk was about self-view, about attachment to conventions and about getting beyond doubt – every single talk for the whole ten days. But he never mentioned stream-entry once. He never talked about the idea of a realization or an attainment or getting something. It was really striking how he was giving everybody the tools, but not creating a framework that was liable to cause people to be caught up in the gaining mind, or that self-creating habit of, ‘I’ve got to get something that I haven’t got yet.’ His approach was rather to say, ‘This is how you work with self-view. This is how you work with attachment to conventions. This is how you work with doubt. This is how it all operates. This is what you do. This is the set of tools. This is how they work. This is what you do with them. This is what you don’t do with them. I was really struck by the wisdom of that. He was giving a full-on teaching to help people acquire the tools needed to support that quality of realization. But he was also working hard to prevent people from becoming stuck in the gaining, the achieving or the comparing mind.

That said, I also feel that it can be helpful to speak about the spiritual framework – not to go against Luang Por Sumedho’s way of doing things, but simply in order to have the roadmap that’s there in the Buddha’s teachings. In this way we can be clearer about the nature of the task at hand – then it’s up to us, having that framework, to be careful not to get entangled and end up grasping at attainment. Be aware if the mind is conceiving, ‘I am a person who is not enlightened yet and I’ve got to do something now to get enlightened in the future’; and as soon as you see your mind doing that, just say, ‘Whoah, hold it!’ Then, rather than buying into and solidifying that view, take Luang Por Sumedho’s advice and step back from it, saying, ‘Here is the wisdom mind seeing the way things are, here and now. Here’s the Buddha seeing the Dhamma, here and now.’ See that we can be enlightened right now, we can be awake in this moment. There can be wisdom, there can be wakefulness; and, in that moment of clear seeing, the Dhamma is recognized, is known, actualized.

I feel these are important themes, and it’s good to return to them throughout our practice, to familiarize ourselves with the framework of the spiritual landscape. We look at these areas of identification, where we get caught up, and hopefully we learn how to use these tools and understand this framework of awakening, without turning the framework into another obstacle. Instead of feeding the habits of self-view and the gaining and comparing mind, we learn to be able to see how it all works, to see what the potential is and what the obstacles are, and guide our lives towards what is really beneficial and truly liberating.