## 9. Possessive Love and Liberative Love

When we reflect  on the things which influence our minds and cause our hearts to get tangled up in states of stress and difficulty, for many of us the most potent or difficult area of our life is relationships and families. This may be the territory where we get lost most easily. You may have noticed how you might be working very hard to let go of self-view and have clearly seen through the illusion of identity, but your brothers and sisters haven’t. They have not seen your ‘enlightenment’, and will regularly remind you of all the stories of your weird and mischievous activities, crises, collapses or losses of temper. All the family tales get repeated with great regularity – at least, if your family is anything like mine. My eldest sister just had her sixtieth birthday; we all gathered together for a celebration, and sure enough many of the old tales got rolled out. No matter how hard you are working on letting go of self-view, the family – parents, spouses, ex-spouses, siblings, partners – can all be very active in helping self-view to be rebuilt, maintained and regenerated. So it’s useful and interesting to consider family members and how we relate to them.

The aspects of mind related to family, relationships, ex-relationships or would-be relationships are potent areas where the mind is easily snagged. Perhaps our feelings have been hurt, we have been rejected, we long for an unrequited love or we worry about an unfixable conflict. These feelings can be very stressful, difficult and burdensome for us. This is a knotty and tense area of self-view where it definitely feels like there’s a ‘me’, a ‘me’ who is regretting, a ‘me’ who is hoping, a ‘me’ who is wanting revenge.

‘May all beings be happy… except him!’ (or ‘her!’)

We can try to be spiritual people, live a wholesome life, seek to guide our actions in skilful ways. We can put a lot of energy, effort and work into trying to mend those painful broken relationships, or to work out how to live in skilful relationships with each other; with our siblings and co-workers, family and partners, children and parents. With great sincerity and effort we can try to get things right; we can try really hard to create good, wholesome and beneficial relationships in our lives. But the reality of our relationships can be very painful, frustrating or disappointing, because sometimes, no matter how hard we try, we can’t quite get it right; we can’t establish a quality of harmony and mutual benefit. This can be mysterious to us. We might think: ‘I’m doing the best I can. I’m trying really hard, but can’t quite seem to get it right. I can’t quite seem to be able to mend that broken bridge, be understood or understand them.’

Many years ago in the early days of Chithurst Monastery, before the Ten Precept Sīladharā ordination was established for the nuns, one of the sisters was planning to visit her parents. They were particularly averse to her being a nun and were very critical, angry and upset with her. They thought she was wasting her life and had made an appallingly wrong choice. They were so hostile to the whole thing that they wouldn’t allow her shaven head to be seen in their house, so when she would go to visit them she had to wear a woolly hat. It was a tense and somewhat anguished relationship.

On the day before she was to set off for a family visit, she asked Ajahn Sumedho for advice about how she could establish a quality of harmony between them all. It was a very sincere and heartful question. Ajahn Sumedho said something in reply that struck me very deeply at that time, and which has stayed with me ever since. He said: ‘The kindest thing you can do for your parents is not to create them.’

Now there’s a thought. ‘The kindest thing you can do for your parents is not to create them’ – it was a phrase I’d never heard him use before. I don’t think he had ever heard himself use it before. It came out of the void fully-formed, and he seemed to be surprised to hear it as well. But it was clearly on target. This Sister was trying very hard to get it right. She was very sincere and distressed about how bad things were at that time. And yet she was not seeing that the mind had created a ‘me’ here, a ‘them’ out there, and ‘I’m trying to get it right between us’. Ajahn Sumedho’s comment pointed right at the habit of self-view, creating self and other, and then trying to get the self and the other to work together harmoniously. But that dynamic can never really work, because self-view is based on that which is not real; it’s not actually in accord with Dhamma, with the natural order of things. So if we mistakenly believe that there is a solid ‘me’ here and a solid ‘you’ there, we can never get it right between us. It is only when there is a letting go of self-view, of self-centred thinking, and the mind no longer creates ‘you’ and ‘me’, that real communication can happen.

These are just thoughts to offer for consideration. You don’t have to take this to be true, but I would encourage you to pick it up and consider it. The kindest thing you can do for your loved ones is not to create them.

When you have a difficulty in your life with your parents or children, your siblings, partner or ex-partner, or would-be-ex-partner, allow yourself to become aware of how you fabricate yourself and others, how you create a mental image of yourself and the other.

Notice how you may say to yourself, ‘She’s thinking like this, and he’s like that, and when we talk he’s going to say this and I should say that to him, and when I say that to him he’s going to respond with this, and when he says that then I’m going to say…’ I certainly did this a lot with my parents through my teens, and then in my early years as a monk. I would spend a huge amount of time scripting dialogues with my parents that never actually happened.

You spend all this time writing the scripts, and then the other people don’t learn their lines! You are all prepared with what you are going to say and how you are going to respond, and then they follow a different script altogether.

You find that you are filled with anticipation or memory, fear or hope. You create a mental image of the ‘other’, so that when you meet you are not actually meeting the people themselves. You are not really with your father, your mother, your daughter, your son, your siblings; you are with your mental creations, you are talking to your projections. And the more you are talking to your own projections, the more you are abiding with your internal image of what they are going to be like, how they are going to attack you, or have a weird opinion you don’t know what to do with, or a difficult emotion, or that they are going to have another breakdown or they are going to blow up at you…

We pick up memories, projections, imaginations and we build a picture out of them. Then even when we are together in the same place, or talking on the phone or connecting in some other way, there is still a barrier, because there is a ‘me’ here and a projected image of ‘you’ out there. That is what Ajahn Sumedho meant by ‘not creating your parents’, or your children, your siblings or whoever. Notice those habits of creation and projection, admiration, inspiration and fear – notice whether there are love and attachment, fear of loss, irritation or anxiety, whatever it might be.

We feel a spectrum of emotions, but as they arise, see them with regard to both yourself and the ‘other’ as just patterns of emotion arising. It isn’t necessary to see ‘a person here’ and ‘a person there’. It isn’t necessary to create a ‘self’. All of this is not-self. This is all just feeling, perception, mental formation, consciousness; just patterns of the five khandhas arising and passing away.

Obviously, if you are having a deep conversation with your mother, it would be very unwise to say to her, ‘Actually, you are just the five khandhas arising and passing away.’ That would not go down very well. She’d scowl and say, ‘Don’t do that Buddhist thing on me, please!’ You are not trying to create an extra set of Buddhist projections. This practice is more a letting go and an attunement to the time, place and situation; talking the language that your children, parents or other loved ones understand, letting go of your preconceptions, preoccupations and preconditioning, and attuning to the time, place, and situation. Then you find you have real communication. There is actually a communion, a real meeting.

This is difficult to do. As I said, others will help maintain your self-view for you; people will project onto you. They will see you as the brother, the daughter, the sister, the father or the mother. You receive a pile of projections from others, maybe a pile of projections you don’t like or are uncomfortable with. But a part of the practice which is really very significant, and which is very advanced and deeply challenging, is learning how to be misunderstood and misrepresented without feeling you have to jump in and ‘fix’ it. When someone misunderstands you, misreads your actions and motivations, it is important not to jump in and try to explain: ‘No! No! It’s not like that!’ It can be of enormous benefit to allow yourself to be misunderstood. There’s a brief saying of Lao Tzu of which I’m fond: ‘Those who justify themselves do not convince.’ The very act of jumping in and saying ‘No! No! I’m really not thinking that way!’ – that very eagerness to jump in and fix it creates a sense of division and solidifies the lack of genuine communication. As Lao Tzu says, one is not convinced.

In this way of letting go of each other we are, ironically, finding a connection with one another. We are finding a communion with others through letting go of them. We are giving ourselves the space to be who we are, and also giving others the space to be the way they are. Sometimes we may recognize that there are things in our relationships which can’t be fixed, which just don’t work. There may be things we hold as an ideal or a hope: ‘I really want my parents to approve of my being a Buddhist monk.’ ‘I really want things to be okay between me and my ex-partner.’ ‘I really want to be able to understand my children, so we are good friends and have a beautiful collaborative relationship.’ Those are admirable ideals, but it is important to recognize that sometimes things are broken and can’t be fixed. That might sound a bit disappointing or depressing, but it is also realistic. And if this is so, the very effort of trying to jump in and make everything all right can serve to make things worse.

Obviously you have to be discerning and attentive, but consider that sometimes a situation is not workable in this lifetime. It is never going to come right, it is always going to be awkward.

There is always going to be a painful memory. There will always be a hurt feeling about some event in the past or some misunderstanding. Some people in our families are never going to get along with one another, and nothing you do is going to change that.

You might find that a negative or disheartening attitude, but if you look at it and work with it you will also notice a deep sense of relief: ‘Ahhhh. What an enormous amount of time I’ve spent trying to get things right, and yet it’s never going to be achievable!’ You can’t get it right. That rightness is not gettable. But when we let go and try to stop making everything right according to our expectations, when we stop trying to fix things, in a mysterious way they can sometimes fix themselves. We let things be more spacious and that very spaciousness does the fixing. We’ve been judging the whole picture according to our own perceptions, preferences or hopes, and when we stop trying to fix things but don’t ignore the situation (we don’t turn away, we are still attending), we encounter a strange righting at a deeper level.

In Japanese art there is the principle of wabi-sabi, the beauty of imperfection. In pottery, painting or calligraphy, wabi-sabi is the little bits that are wrong in just the right way. That wrongness makes perfect. It is the beauty of imperfection. You may have noticed that we can spend a huge amount of effort and energy, and create a lot of stress in ourselves, by always trying to get things right, to make things perfect. We become – not exactly a neurotic wreck, but we can certainly stress ourselves out with always trying to get it right, always trying to make things perfect, to fix things and make them good. But that very effort to get it right, to be perfect, to always be doing things in the very best possible way – that very anxiety can cause distortion, disharmony and difficulty. If we see that anxious, fretful attitude and then relax a notch, we can shift into overdrive, fifth gear – still going at the same speed but with fewer revs. Just relax a bit and open the mind to allow there to be imperfection. We allow there to be something not ideal, allow it not to be perfect and then we discover this strange quality of a deeper perfection.

In the Third Ch’an Patriarch’s verses on the faith mind, Hsin Hsin Ming, there is the beautiful line:

‘To live in this realization, [the realization of letting go of dualities] is to be without anxiety about non-perfection.’

I speak about this because I was one who could be extremely anxious about imperfection at all times. I was a very anxious and worried type of character. I was always trying to be perfect, always trying to get it right and always feeling that things were never quite good enough. I was aiming for one hundred percent perfection in all situations at all times. This line in Hsin Hsin Ming jumped out at me during the time when I was trying to work on my anxiety habits: ‘To live in this realization is to be without anxiety about non-perfection.’‘Oh, it shouldn’t be this way!’

‘Oh dear, she’s upset.’ ‘He’s angry again. I should… I must… what am I going to do?’

I must have read that line many, many times before it sank in. Then one day it just dawned on me; suddenly I knew what it meant to be without anxiety about non-perfection. Even though I’d read the line many times, the reality of being without anxiety about non-perfection had never really occurred to me, never dawned on me as a possibility. But when we are able to find the space around non-perfection, that changes the world in a radical way.

Seeing that imperfection, seeing things being not quite right, seeing things out of order, the mind leaps into the situation, the heart surges forward. Not just with relationships; this can happen even with the arrangement of furniture or someone chanting out of tune. ‘Oh dear, they’ve gone flat again. Oh no!’

Notice when the mind moves towards a situation and creates tension and stress. Recognize that movement. Reflect on it.

Be without anxiety about non-perfection.

This isn’t advocating laziness or carelessness in the way we relate to others. It is not an abrogation of all responsibility, where we excuse ourselves from engagement by saying, ‘Oh well, it’s imperfect. I don’t need to fix it. Tough luck. You’re on your own. Look after yourself.’ It’s not encouraging callousness, hard-heartedness or carelessness. It’s a loosening of that tension, that fretful, anxious tightness in the heart with regard to relationships and situations. See that tension clearly and give yourself permission to relax.

Two Kinds of Love

Consider relationships – why do they have such an impact upon us? It is important to understand that there are different ways in which we can love each other. In English the word ‘love’ has many shades of meaning. In Buddhist philosophy there are two very clear branches, two different ways of loving.

There are a couple of very significant suttas where the Buddha talks about relationships. One is called the Piyajātika Sutta, sutta 87 in the Middle Length Discourses. Piyajātika means ‘born from those who are dear’. It starts with this fellow who has lost his only son. His child has just died and he is in the local park weeping and wailing, very upset and anguished, very unhappy because of the death of his child. He encounters the Buddha and explains that he’s so miserable, sad and depressed because his child has died. The Buddha says, ‘Yes indeed, sorrow, pain and anguish are born from those who are dear to us.’ The man is taken aback and disagrees: ‘What are you talking about?! Happiness and joy are born from those who are dear to us. Our dear ones are the source of great happiness and all the blessings in our life. You are a fool. You don’t know what you are talking about!’

He goes off and encounters some people a short distance away playing dice and gambling. He says to them, ‘I just met this really stupid monk who said that sorrow, anguish and pain come from those who are dear. I don’t agree with that at all. I think happiness and joy come from those who are dear to us!’ The gamblers say ‘Yeah, of course you’re right. Everyone knows that the great joy in our life is from those who are dear to us.’ This difference of opinion then starts making its way around the city of Sāvatthi and eventually reaches the palace. There ensues a dialogue between King Pasenadi and Queen Mallikā about these two different points of view.

KING PASENADI: Well, to me it’s obvious that our children and loved ones, and you, Queen Mallikā, are a great source of happiness in our life. You are very dear to me. You’re a source of happiness and joy. I can’t see any other perspective making any sense at all.

QUEEN MALLIKĀ: Well, the Blessed One has said that sorrow, pain and anguish come from those who are dear, so I think he must be right.

KING PASENADI: Off with you, Mallikā, away with you! Whenever the Buddha says anything you always agree with him, even if it doesn’t make any sense. Away with you! I’ve had enough, get out of here!

He throws her out of the room in the usual kingly sort of way – so marital relations haven’t changed a lot in a couple of thousand years with minor disputes over perspectives on things.

QUEEN MALLIKĀ: You are entitled to your opinion, Great King, but you know the Blessed One is usually right in these things and you do have faith in him as a teacher. There might be more to this than meets the eye.

KING PASENADI: Grrrr!

King Pasenadi grudgingly agrees that when they next meet the Buddha they’ll ask him about it. They invite him to the palace, he comes along and they put this question to him.

KING PASENADI: Venerable Sir, I heard what must have been a misreporting of what you have said. I heard you said that sorrow, pain and anguish come from those who are dear to us. And yet that can’t be right, because the other opinion is that happiness and joy come from those who are dear to us. That seems obvious to me. Surely you’ve been misreported, and this idiot queen of mine has misunderstood what you actually said.

BUDDHA: No, Great King, Queen Mallikā has reported it exactly as I said. I did indeed say that sorrow, pain and anguish come from those that are dear to us.

KING PASENADI: How can that be so?

BUDDHA: Well, Great King, is the Princess Vajirā dear to you?

KING PASENADI: Yes, she is my most beloved child. She is very special to me. I love her very much.

BUDDHA: So, Great King, if something happened to Princess Vajirā, if she fell ill or was injured or killed, how would you feel?

KING PASENADI: I’d be very upset. I’d be very angry. I’d be very miserable...aaah!

He gets it, first of all with the Princess, and the Buddha, being the Buddha, presses the point home…

BUDDHA: What if something happened to Queen Mallikā? What if she was injured or hurt? What if she died?

KING PASENADI: I would be very upset. I would be very sad.

BUDDHA: What about the Prince, and the Minister, and the city of Sāvatthi and the Kingdom of Kosala?

The Buddha goes through a long list of people and things, one after the other, hammering home the point. Each time King Pasenadi admits that he would feel unhappy, distressed and sad.

Finally, after about a dozen of these examples, the Buddha says, ‘This, Great King, is why I said sorrow, pain and anguish are born from those that are dear.’

On another occasion the Buddha was staying at the Monastery of the Eastern Park. Visākhā, who was a great lay disciple of his, was known as ‘the great mother of the city of Savatthi’. It was said she had twenty children, ten daughters and ten sons, and each of them had ten daughters and ten sons. So do the sums on that – twenty times twenty is four hundred grandchildren. One day she came to the monastery in the middle of the day, and the Buddha saw that her hair and clothes were wet from ritual bathing.

BUDDHA: What brings you to the monastery in the middle of the day, Visākhā? Your hair and your clothes are all wet – you must have been involved in some religious ritual.

VISĀKHĀ: Yes indeed, Venerable Sir. I have come straight from the funeral of my dearest granddaughter. She has just died, only a little girl, and so I am very upset and unhappy. I came here to see you because I was so distressed about my granddaughter passing away.

BUDDHA: What do you think, Visākhā, would you like to have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Sāvatthi?

VISĀKHĀ: Well, yes, of course. The more the merrier.

BUDDHA: So you’d like to have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Sāvatthi – but Visākhā, every day at least ten people in Sāvatthi pass away. If not ten, nine. If not nine, eight. If not eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two or one. Not a day goes by without somebody dying in Sāvatthi. So, Visākhā, not a day would go by without your hair and clothes being wet from the funeral ceremonies.

She was quicker on the uptake than King Pasenadi.

VISĀKHĀ: Enough of having so many children and grandchildren! It’s true – if I had that many, I would always be going to funerals.

BUDDHA: Indeed, if you have a hundred dear ones you have a hundred pains. If you have fifty dear ones you have fifty pains. If you have twenty dear ones, twenty pains, ten dear ones, ten pains – nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. If you have one dear one, you have one pain. If you have no dear ones, you have no pains.

Now, again, this might sound depressing – you can have no pain, but only if you have no dear ones. But the Buddha is using the Pali word ‘piyāyati’ which translates as ‘to hold dear’. The word denotes a possessive kind of love. In this kind of love there is a ‘me’ here and a ‘you’ there. ‘I’ love ‘you’. You belong to me and I belong to you. I depend on having you around and you depend on having me around. We own each other. Possessiveness intrinsically brings with it the anguish of losing that which is felt to be possessed. That is part of the chemistry to which the Buddha is pointing. When you have ten dear ones, you have ten pains. Five dear ones equal five pains. The mathematics are brutal. It is blunt, but that is the law of it. If we tie ourselves to another human being, if we love in a possessive way, that is the chemistry we are creating. There is a feeling of loss intrinsically embedded in that dynamic.

Many years ago, in the village of Stedham near Chithurst, there was a very dear old couple and sometimes we used to visit them on the alms-round. They had been married for sixty years and had never had an argument. Pause for consideration – sixty years of marriage and no arguments. Strange but true. They loved each other very dearly. She had terrible arthritis and so she was in excruciating pain a lot of the time. She would make remarks like, ‘Oh, I’ve had enough. I’m ready for the end. When is it going to be over? This is so painful, so awful.’ Whenever she spoke like that her husband would say, ‘Don’t say that. Please, dear. You shouldn’t be wishing to die. It’s terrible bad luck.’ He was very anguished by that. She was simply tired of having so much pain all the time.

Eventually she did pass away and he was left by himself. We would go and see him regularly at that time. He was very miserable. One day when we went to visit and were chatting with him, we asked him how he was doing. He said, ‘Well, I am so unhappy I went to the doctor a few days ago, and I asked him to give me something to make me feel all right. The doctor was a young chap and he said, ‘I’m not going to give you anything. You know what your problem is? Your marriage was too good.’ Cheeky young puppy!’ But he was smiling and chuckling to himself when he said that. ‘‘Your problem is that your marriage was too good. You loved each other so much, you depended on each other so much – of course, when your wife died it was going to feel like you’d lost an arm and a leg. What did you expect? It’s completely natural that you should feel this kind of grief. Nothing is wrong with you. You don’t need medicine. What you’re experiencing is natural grief’.’

So don’t think that the Buddha is trying to turn us into a bunch of cold fish, that we are supposed to have no feelings and just watch sankhāras in an numb, emotionless manner. When your spouse of sixty years passes away, the Buddha doesn’t expect you to just shrug and say, ‘Oh, well. All sankhāras arise and pass away, there goes another one. I suppose I’d better call the monastery, they can do some chanting.’ We’re not trying to freeze our hearts.

We are changing the perspective.

Piyāyati refers to the quality of ‘dearness’; it always brings an element of pain with it because there is possessiveness. It is a relationship of separateness; there is a ‘me’ here and a ‘you’ there. ‘I’ need ‘you’ to make me feel whole. And when there is the inevitable separation, we feel there is a bit missing, like the old man feeling as if he’d lost an arm and a leg.

By way of contrast, the Buddha points to a different kind of love, a love described as the brahma vihāras (the divine abidings). These are mettā (loving-kindness), karunā (compassion), muditā (sympathetic joy) and upekkhā (equanimity). This kind of love, particularly the loving-kindness of mettā, is abundant, exalted, immeasurable, brilliant and radiant, but it is not possessive. It is not a love that is dependent on another. You can love another person with mettā, but when they are not there you do not miss anything. Your love is not a possessive love or a love that is based on a sense of separation, but a relationship of wholeness. When there is mettā between a parent and a child, or between siblings or partners, or even in a monastery between monks and nuns, anagārika and anagārikā, and the lay community, that is a love which is free and independent. It is a relationship of wholeness. The presence of the other reminds you of your own wholeness. You love being around others, you enjoy the presence of others, but you don’t need the others to make you whole. The presence of the other helps to remind you of your own wholeness, and your presence reminds the other of their own wholeness.

Many years ago I was at a wedding blessing where a Thai monk gave a very good piece of advice. He pointed his two fingers at each other () and said that if the two of them spend all their time looking at each other, and if the husband thinks it is the wife’s job to make him happy, or the wife thinks it is the husband’s job to make her happy, then the couple will be miserable, because no one can make you happy. You make yourself happy. Instead of fixating on each other, if you are side by side – and here he put the two fingers parallel () – looking at that which is beyond both of you, you can really work together. Then you are not just fixating on your own personality, your own individual needs or perspectives; you are looking towards that which is beyond both of you, that which is deeper, more real and profound. This reality within each of you is beyond your personalities, beyond your bodies, beyond your personal histories. You are looking towards the spiritual nature within yourself and within the other. In essence, you are looking beyond self-view. You are looking beyond self-centred habits. When you assist each other in doing that, there is a sense of mutual support and collaboration, but not a dependency.

When you recognize these qualities and develop such relationships of wholeness, you enjoy the presence of others, but the absence of others is something you can enjoy too. You don’t need to have others around to make you feel complete. This transformation of the way we relate to others is really borne out in the brahma vihāras. As we develop these higher forms of love the emotional nature is purified. Emotions take the form of loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity. Loving-kindness is the overarching relationship of ourselves to all other beings and to all things, so there is that quality of acceptance and benevolence. Within that, if beings are suffering, what arises is compassion (karunā); if beings are enjoying themselves, doing well or meeting with success, you generate muditā, sympathetic joy; and equanimity is that stability of heart, that steadiness and unshakeability which are aroused in relationship to agitation, busyness or disturbance in others.

Developing the heart in this way, developing our emotional relationships based on the brahma vihāras, is not a clinical procedure: ‘I need four units of mettā, five and a half karunā, no muditā necessary. He’s crying, he’s not happy, so no muditā – I’m thinking about seven measures of upekkhā.’ It is not a calculation. It is the natural responsiveness of the heart to a situation. When others meet with success, the unattached and unentangled heart moves quite naturally in the direction of muditā. When another car pulls into the parking-spot you were aiming for, does muditā immediately leap forth? ‘Oh how wonderful! They must be so happy to have got that parking space, I feel so glad for them.’ Muditā is a very rare quality in the world. But when somebody is upset or injured you don’t have to think, ‘Should I be compassionate here or should I just tell them to get over it?’ It is not a calculation. The heart just moves towards that sense of caring and concern for the suffering of another. Similarly with upekkhā; if there is a sense of busyness, agitation or disturbance, there is that in the heart which naturally moves towards stillness and being cool; it is caring but is undisturbed in the middle of disturbance.

So this is a natural responsiveness, a sense of our emotional nature brought fully into balance with Dhamma, with the way things are. When we transform the way in which we relate to others, when we let go of the separative, divisive and possessive way of relating to others and cultivate the brahma vihāras, there is a natural attunement. There is a natural arising of compassion, kindness or muditā according to time and place.

There is a lot more that could be said about relationships, but I also fully acknowledge that I have never practised as a lay Buddhist. My encounter with Buddhism occurred inside a monastery, so I have never tried to live on the Five Precepts. I walked into a monastery in Thailand looking for a cheap place to stay, and didn’t realize I was going to be in the monastery for the rest of my life. So I fully admit I have no direct experience that I can draw upon when it comes to giving laypeople advice about relationships, marriages and partnerships. I’ve had parents, but I haven’t had any children. But I have lived in a community for more than thirty years, so in that sense I have a family of parents, sisters and brothers, children to whom I have given the Precepts, and so on. I therefore offer these themes for you to consider. Explore your own experience of relationship and observe where the stress points are. Reflect on that. Notice how much that stress changes when self-view is let go of, when we recognize those relationships of separateness and partiality, and how they create the causes of tension. When possessiveness is let go of we can know a relationship of wholeness. When we let go of each other, when we stop creating each other, what naturally arises is the flow of loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity, serenity.