## Preface

This book is based upon the talks and meditation instructions offered during a thirteen-day retreat at Amaravati, in the summer of 2012. It was the suggestion of one of the participants in that event that the material be transcribed, with the intention of translating it into Thai and publishing it as a book in that country.

‘The best laid plans of mice and men…’, as is so often the case, did not work out in the way intended; this particularly since an effective translation into Thai was discovered to be far more and specialized work than at first envisaged. So it goes.

The transcription effort was by no means wasted, however, as there was still interest to make these reflections available; an English language volume was thus prepared and then published, through various Thai web-sites, in 2015. For example, at: http://www.ebooks.in.th/ebook/29835/Purity_Radiance_Peace/

This present book is intended to be something of a follow up to Finding the Missing Peace, which was published in 2011 and presented as ‘a primer of Buddhist meditation’. The Breakthrough is intended to be a somewhat more specialized toolkit, describing the path of Buddhist meditation in an in-depth way, specifically highlighting the role of wisdom and reflective investigation in the development of insight and thereby psychological freedom.

The title The Breakthrough comes from the Pali word ‘abhisamaya’. The word, as used by the Buddha, is synonymous with the first level of liberation, known as ‘stream-entry’ – the ‘stream’ in question being the Eightfold Path, which leads to full emancipation, enlightenment. As is described in these pages, this breakthrough is considered to be a spiritual turning point of great significance. It marks the point on the spiritual journey beyond which enlightenment is assured and freedom guaranteed.

May the words contained within these pages serve to aid you, dear reader, in making the journey to freedom, for your own benefit and for the welfare and happiness of all beings.

Amaro Bhikkhu

Amaravati Buddhist Monastery, October 2016