## 11. The Ending of Becoming

Notice how it feels  to be gathered together for this final time as a group. The sound of a plane overhead is no longer just a noise emerging from the airport. Notice how it can trigger a string of associations: ‘Oh yes, I’ll be getting on one of those later today – travel.’ All of a sudden the sound of the plane has a story to tell. Instead of just being a sound that has come to participate in the meditation, it is a signal of travel and change, of crossing distances, even if the distance we have to travel is only over to the other side of the monastery or to a home nearby. Notice this feeling of our final time together – the resonances of yesterday evening, listening to each other, hearing each other’s poems, stories, experiences. Notice how that has changed us, how differently we see each other. Notice the feelings of eager excitement, anticipation of return to the world of talking, eating supper, seeing the news; doing something, going somewhere, engaging, and the excitement about or dread of that prospect. In the words of Bob Dylan, ‘How does it feeeel?’

This is the ‘end of the retreat’ feeling. The great vessel approaches the harbour, the passengers and crew prepare to disembark. You can see the shoreline, people gathered on the dock; we have our bags organized and our passports checked. A feeling of ending, closing, completing. Not a good or bad feeling, not pleasant or unpleasant; in and of itself it is just like this. Keep opening the heart to this present reality, to this suchness

Practising the way of Dhamma is attuning the heart to its own present reality, letting it be awake, open; not pushing things away, but not grasping at them either. Letting the flow of changes come through, we allow our responses to arise from that attunement. In this way, what makes our decisions is not the habit of self-view, usurping centrality of control; rather, the source of our choice is sati-paññā, mindfulness and wisdom guiding what to do in each moment.

This is a self-adjusting universe. If you get out of the way, the ‘universe’, also known as your citta, your own mind, adjusts accordingly. Self-view and conceit are dropped and our life, our actions, our words naturally attune themselves to what is appropriate and beneficial in the present moment.

It’s important in this respect to recollect that your intentions, actions and choices are all part of the way things are. As T.S. Eliot put it, we don’t disturb the universe by the choices that we make. Our choices are part of the universe, part of the way things are. The more often those choices and decisions come from mindfulness and wisdom, from attunement to the present reality, the more often they will lead to clarity, peacefulness, fearlessness; to a heart which is free of anxiety and compulsions, a heart which understands like and dislike, sweetness and bitterness. That achievement is most complete when there is no adherence to the patterns of the changing world, the changing mind. When there is no grasping at that which is arising and passing away, there is peacefulness. But when the attention is caught on that which is born and dying, coming and going, naturally  we are ‘born’; the mind is dragged along, carried along on by that cycle, just like a burr from the grass becoming caught in our socks. We become snagged and tangled.

The wisdom of open awareness provides no traction, no footing, no source of adherence to sights and sounds, smells and tastes, sweet or bitter, nor to approval and disapproval, gain and loss. This is the great peace. This is the great beauty of life, the establishing of that heart which is free of compulsions, free of reactions. Rather than being pulled by wanting, hating and fearing, it understands the nature of like and dislike. It is not fooled by the stories and lies which it is told. This is a heart which truly understands that when you get what you want, you don’t want it any more. Just as Marilyn Monroe sang, ‘If I gave you the moon, you’d get bored with it soon.’

Something in our heart knows with absolute certainty that when we get what we want, we won’t want it anymore.

This understanding is the bedrock of our being. How simple, how straightforward that realization. Once we’ve allowed it to penetrate, it is the gateway to liberation. Desire is lying. Tanhā (craving) says, ‘If you get this, you’ll be happy forever. You will be truly satisfied.’ But the wise heart, which is to be trusted, recognizes that when we get what we want, it changes. This is recognition of anicca. Satisfaction cannot be substantial. It cannot last. We grasp at an object of desire and then we just want something else, then something else, then something else... This is the bhavacakka, the cycle of becoming.

When the heart knows that fundamental quality of uncertainty, transiency, there is a radical letting go, a non-attachment, a non-entanglement. The heart sees through the illusion; it sees through the lie, it sees through the false promise. Without aversion, without complaint, the heart sees through the trick. And those moments when this is truly seen, when there is that clarity, allow that certainty, that obviousness to sink in.

Let it be fully known. The sheer obviousness of it: ‘Of course! It changes! How could that be kept or owned?’ It is like writing your name on a waterfall with the beam of a torch – there is nothing for it to stick to. It is all in a state of motion. ‘What did I think was there in the first place? Ah, it’s totally obvious.’

When we let that obviousness, that simplicity sink into the heart and fully inform it, our habits of distraction come into sharp relief. Being caught up in schedules, family, people, praise and criticism, gain and loss, sweet and bitter – underneath it the heart recognizes that this is all just froth, smoke and mirrors, foam on the water, nothing to get excited or upset about. This is a simple, direct recognition of anicca, uncertainty. This is the gateway to wisdom, to the great truth. This is the spiritual turning point.

Let that realization sink into the heart, be truly known, acknowledged and understood, and the world will be different. Everything will be different. You will see the world, yourself, and others in a whole new way, held with spaciousness and ease. That freedom is incomparable, completely delightful and always accessible to us. If we remember to apply that insight and see in that way, that possibility, that freedom, is always here, completely independent of circumstance.

It is always here.