## 2. Make Wisdom the Chairperson

What is the Buddha?What is the Dhamma?What is the Sangha?

Buddhaṃ saranaṃ gacchāmiDhammaṃ saranaṃ gacchāmiSanghaṃ saranaṃ gacchāmi(I pay my respects to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha)

Every pūjā that we do, every morning and evening, every ceremony, is built around this gesture of respect and reverence to the Triple Gem: the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. So it’s helpful to consider what it is that we are making so pivotal in our lives. Why do we give these qualities such an obvious and dramatic central position? The Buddha image is the highest thing in the room, right in the middle – we all face it, and bow and direct our chanting and our devotional attitudes toward the shrine. On one level this is a set of customs and forms that are used in the Buddhist world, and they reflect our participation in the Theravadan Buddhist tradition. But since over and over again we pay our respects and in this way and remember to use the Triple Gem as the centrepiece of our attention, it’s also helpful to consider: what is the Buddha? What is the Dhamma? What is the Sangha? Why are they given such central places in our lives? Why do we give them such emphasis?

Many of us have been around Buddhist teachings and Buddhist practice for a long time, so these are familiar reflections; it’s rather like the breathing process – same old inhalation, same old exhalation. But we’re quite glad to make use of the cycle of the breath, even though it’s the same old oxygen having its same old effect on the body. Yes, it is the same old thing, but it’s also our lifeline, our life source. When we bring attention to these words, when we explore and investigate what ‘Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha’ mean, it can open up whole new layers of insight. It can reveal the deadening habits of attachment and clinging which we didn’t even realize were there, and help to awaken the mind to true life and a greater freedom.

Luang Por Sumedho often makes comments like, ‘You know, I would just like to spend the rest of my life chanting namo tassa. I can’t think of anything more pleasant to do than just to sit all day and just chant namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.’ The rational mind might think that once you’ve chanted this a couple of times you know what it says, so why would you keep repeating it? But this is not a matter of reason or logic; rather it’s an expression of faith and devotion, and freedom from complications.

The Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha work together as a single unit. In the English version of our chanting we recite:

For me there is no other refuge, The Buddha is my excellent refuge …

For me there is no other refuge, The Dhamma is my excellent refuge …

For me there is no other refuge,The Sangha is my excellent refuge …

The words ‘there is no other refuge’ are applied to each facet. This might seem illogical, as the words say ‘there is no other refuge’ but apparently refer to three different ones; but this formulation really points to the fact that they are three facets of the same jewel. We call them the Three Jewels, but in a way ‘Triple Gem’ is a more precise term, since it points to how they share the same fundamental unifying quality. ‘Dhamma’ means the Buddha’s teaching. The Buddha’s words as found in the Tipitaka are the Sutta teachings, the monastic rules of the Vināya and the Abhidhamma – these are all the words to which the term ‘Dhamma’ refers. But ‘Dhamma’ also means ‘reality’ or (more literally) ‘truth’. The root of the word is ‘dhṛ‘ which means to uphold or to support, so Dhamma is that which upholds, that which supports, that which is the basis, that which is the fabric of reality, that which is the support for our life and all existence.

So taking refuge in Dhamma is, on one level, choosing to be guided by the Buddha’s teachings, accepting the framework of the Buddha’s teachings as the template for understanding our life, our mind, our world.

However, merely remembering some words is not true security. Even if you can recite the whole Tipitaka, the words themselves are not a refuge – rather, it is the reality itself, the truth of the way things are, that fundamental fabric of existence, which is the true refuge. The term ‘refuge’ refers to that which is a safe place, and only the actuality of Dhamma, meaning this fundamental reality, provides the genuine quality of security.

When we talk about Dhamma the descriptions can seem a little vague, because we have to use terms that point to it but don’t exactly explain it. When the Buddha describes the qualities of the Dhamma he uses terms like sanditthiko, akāliko and ehipassiko, meaning respectively ‘apparent here and now’, ‘timeless’ and ‘encouraging investigation’. That doesn’t give us a lot to chew on, does it? The thinking mind wonders what Dhamma is, but it’s intrinsically hard to define because the ultimate nature of things is beyond the sense world. How can you imagine what is unborn, unconditioned, uncreated and unformed? In trying to form a definition of Dhamma, the thinking mind and the imagination stumble over their own feet and the jaw drops open. It’s hard for the imagination to come up with an image other than empty space – although, that said, Ajahn Chah often used the alliterative Thai expression ‘sawang, sa-aht, sangoop’ (Bright, clean, peaceful) to describe the nature of Dhamma – purity, radiance and peacefulness – which sums it up quite perfectly.

The Dhamma is the fundamental nature of mind, of the physical and mental world of all things. The Dhamma is that which upholds, that which is the organic, integrating principle of the universe and the very substance of mind, the very substance of life. And the Buddha arises from the Dhamma.

The Buddha was born into the world – he was born as a Bodhisatta named Siddhattha Gotama and became awakened. Taking refuge in the Buddha is therefore the act of looking towards Gotama Buddha as our teacher, as the guide, the one who is the exemplar and the establisher of this tradition. So taking refuge in the Buddha is looking to this individual, this Great Being who was extraordinarily wise, kind and compassionate, and extraordinarily skilled as a teacher, able to communicate and convey subtle and useful qualities to an extraordinary range of people over an extraordinary range of topics – the most accomplished of teachers, clarifier of spiritual principles.

Thus on one level, taking refuge in the Buddha is paying respect to Gotama Buddha; we are honouring the example of his life, his liberation, his total enlightenment and attunement to Dhamma. The Buddha, being fully enlightened, had brought his life, his mind and his being so completely into accordance with Dhamma that in a sense he is the Dhamma made manifest. Indeed, there are one or two places in the suttas where people say of the Buddha ‘he is the Dhamma’ (for example at M 18.12 and D 27.9) and the Buddha himself famously once said, ‘One who sees the Dhamma sees me; one who sees me sees the Dhamma’ (S 22.87).

Taking refuge in Buddha is respecting the individual, the great teacher, the establisher of this tradition, as the noblest of human beings. But just as the words of the Tipitaka are not a refuge in and of themselves, refuge in the Buddha is more than just paying respect to the person who lived 2,500 years ago.

Luang Por Chah would often say that the Buddha who lived 2,500 years ago is gone, he’s not around anymore. You can have the memory or the idea of him, but a memory or an idea is not really a refuge. The root of the word ‘buddha’ is ‘budh’ which means to be awake. This was a theme that Luang Por Chah would stress very often. Taking refuge in Buddha is not just bowing to the shrine or revering Gotama Buddha as a teacher. Refuge in the Buddha means that we find safety in the quality of awareness, the capacity of our heart, our mind to be awake. When the heart is awake and in accordance with Dhamma, when it’s in tune with reality and there is a clear awareness of the way things are, we experience a fundamental harmony, an absence of dukkha. In this we find security.

Luang Por Chah would also say, ‘The Buddha arises from Dhamma.’ The quality of ‘knowing’ is an attribute of the fundamental nature of reality, so you can say that the Buddha arises from the Dhamma. The Dhamma is the substance, the Buddha is the function. Or to put it another way, the primary attribute of Dhamma is wakefulness. When the heart is awake and in tune with the reality of its own nature, when there is clear and total awareness of how things are, then there are the qualities of harmony, integration, security and stability. There is purity, radiance and peacefulness.

There is safety when there is firmly established awareness within us.

Once this awareness is present and stable, then whether there is happiness or unhappiness, pleasure or pain, praise or criticism, that awareness remains unconfused. This is the essence of vipassanā (insight) meditation; it is geared to developing a stability of knowing, a stability of awareness whereby we can experience a pleasant feeling and know it simply as something sweet that arises and passes away. We can experience an unpleasant feeling, a painful memory or an aching sensation in the body, but simply know it as a painful quality arising and passing away, just like images appearing and disappearing in a mirror. The patterns that appear in the mirror may be beautiful, ugly, novel or familiar, but the mirror itself is utterly undisturbed by those images. The images may be colourful or bland, but the mirror just reflects without any disturbance or any kind of confusion. The mirror is utterly untroubled or unexcited by what it reflects. Similarly, when the heart has truly taken refuge in Buddha, then whatever arises – whether it’s pleasant or painful, whether it’s familiar or unfamiliar, whether it has qualities of happiness or unhappiness – there is pure equanimity, serenity and the heart is completely undisturbed. The effects of praise or criticism, the experiences of happiness or unhappiness, gain and loss, pleasure and pain are still known, the feelings are still there, but the heart is balanced and untroubled, unconfused by the presence of those qualities. So refuge in Buddha refers to the stability of awareness – that wonderful, clear openness within which the heart can receive all experiences without trouble, without difficulty.

Luang Por Sumedho used to describe what it was like to live with Luang Por Chah and how impressive he was as a teacher. It felt as though even if a bomb went off in the room, Luang Por Chah wouldn’t be bothered. He would obviously know that a bomb had gone off but it wouldn’t disturb him. He wouldn’t blink. He would be utterly untroubled. I know that might seem extreme, but when Luang Por Sumedho spoke of his teacher you could tell he was speaking the truth and from his heart.

Once Luang Por Chah was going to visit a branch monastery down near the Cambodian border. The road through the hills down to the borderlands was very twisting and precipitous. Luang Por Chah was in the front of the little pick-up truck with a young Western monk and the driver, while there were a few other monks on the benches in the back.

The Western monk soon realized that the driver was extremely reckless, and he became convinced the driver had a death wish. They were haring around the steep mountain roads, with enormous drops and blind corners, screeching around one bend after another. The monk sat there the whole time thinking, ‘We’re gonna die! We’re gonna die! We’re gonna die!’ and he kept looking over to Ajahn Chah to see if he was reacting, and whether he was going to ask the driver to slow down. Instead Ajahn Chah sat there quite calmly looking out of the windscreen and didn’t say a thing.

To the young monk’s amazement they got through the hills safely and arrived at their destination. When they got there Ajahn Chah turned around to him with a big grin and said, ‘Scary ride, huh?’

Substance, Function and Manifestation

I like comparing the Triple Gem to water. Water is a substance formed by the bonding of two hydrogen atoms to one oxygen atom, joining together to form H2O. Dhamma can also be considered a substance, the fundamental fabric or substance of reality.

If we use water as an analogy, ‘Dhamma’ represents the substance of reality, and would be comparable to the hydrogen and oxygen bound together in their unique form. The quality of ‘Buddha‘ represents the function of that fundamental reality. In the case of water this is talking about how water works: how it freezes, the temperature it boils, the mechanics of how it forms clouds and snowflakes, its surface tension and how it flows – so in this analogy it means that the function, the primary attribute of Dhamma is wakeful awareness.

What, then, is the refuge of ‘Sangha’?

When we recite the verses on taking refuge in the Sangha, we use this somewhat mysterious phrase: ‘the four pairs, the eight kinds of noble beings’. Who are these four pairs, these eight kinds of noble beings? It’s not that mysterious really. The words refer to the different levels of enlightenment. The first level of enlightenment is called ‘stream-entry’, the next is ‘once-returner’, then ‘non-returner’ and the fourth level is the arahant, the fully enlightened.

The ‘pairs’ refer to those being ‘on the path’ to each stage and those who have ‘arrived’ at it. So the first pair is those on the path to stream-entry and those having arrived at stream-entry. The second pair is those on the path to being a once-returner, and then having arrived at being a once-returner, and so forth.

On the human plane, therefore, the refuge of Sangha refers to the beings who have reached those levels of realization – trustworthy spiritual companions, those to whom we can look as a good example, as helpful and good spiritual friends, those who can aid us and be our guides, and those who can teach and support us in our spiritual efforts with great reliability.

But of course, having such people around as a refuge isn’t always possible. You may be practising on your own and thinking, ‘I haven’t got any non-returners or stream-enterers here with me, so where is my refuge?’

Well, just as Buddha and Dhamma have an internal quality that is in a sense the real, immanent refuge, the internal quality of Sangha is the capacity that we have to be unselfish; our capacity to harmonize with others; the capacity in us to recognize the wholesome and to live virtuously, to bring our actions and our speech into accord with reality.

If Dhamma is the substance and Buddha is the function, then Sangha is the manifestation. When the Buddha sees the Dhamma, what results is the Sangha. This means that when the mind which is aware sees the way things are, this manifests as action and speech that are skilful, wholesome, unselfish, harmonious and appropriate to time, place and situation.

The refuge of Sangha internally is the capacity to recognize goodness and let go of self-concern and the habits of identification and attachment. Once we have let go of them, we are able to attune to the situation, attune to the people we are with, attune to the other beings who are around, and to live unselfishly in harmony with others. This is the quality of manifestation, how the Triple Gem is embodied in the world. This is the immanent refuge of Sangha.

The root of the word ‘Sangha’ is ‘saṃ’, which means ‘together’ or ‘joined’. The Sangha is the unified assembly, different parts joined together in an integrated and harmonious way. The internal refuge of Sangha is always here, always available to us, just as the quality of wisdom is always available and the fundamental nature of reality is always present. The capacity to see the good and to be unselfish is always here. The capacity to let go of self-concern and self-centred attitudes is always here as a refuge, as a place of safety and it is that very unselfishness and virtue which enable beings to live as a unified whole.

This internal refuge of Sangha brings protection, inviolability and stability. When the heart is grounded in unselfishness, we can’t lose anything. If we are not thinking in self-centred terms, then spiritually we can’t be harmed. We can’t be diminished, because the mind is not deluded into thinking that it is the possessor of anything. There is no delusion of being the owner or the controller, or identifying with the material world. ‘When you got nothing, you got nothing to lose’, as Bob Dylan memorably put it.

If the mind lets go of possessiveness, of ‘I’ and ‘me’ and ‘mine’, then who is there to lose anything? Who is there to get anything? Can you own the Dhamma? That would be like saying, ‘The sky belongs to me’, which is a meaningless statement. When we take refuge in Sangha, we are letting go of a habitual way of thinking. We can’t own anything, we can’t keep anything, so we can’t lose anything. It’s a different way of seeing our lives.

When we choose to let go of self-concern, to be awake and to bring our life into accord with reality, then there is a security, a stability, a steadiness, which is why it is called a refuge. It is a safe place. It has the quality of strength and durability, and it is always here. This is why we refer to these principles over and over again in our chanting. We constantly pay respect to these three qualities, establishing them as the focus of our attention.

In our delusion, we identify with personal characteristics and mistakenly think those characteristics are who and what we are – a woman, a man, young, old etc. But that’s just one version of the story, one particular set of conventional realities. We don’t have to hold on to that, we don’t have to cling to it as being something absolute. Taking refuge in Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha is a reconfiguring of how we see what we are, a reconfiguring of what we take to be fundamentally real, and what is trustworthy and of true value. ‘The Three Refuges’, ‘The Triple Gem’ and ‘The Three Jewels’ are interchangeable terms for a good reason. Aldous Huxley once rhetorically asked in a famous lecture, ‘Why are precious stones precious?’ I’d say it is because a jewel has strength and a quality of symmetry. It’s something that is durable. Its purity of colour is attractive to the eye. It is rare. When all these qualities are gathered together they make a jewel something that is supremely precious. Remember these qualities as you take refuge. The more we remember to be awake, to see things as they are, and the more we remember to let go of self-concern, the more we are able to appreciate the value and the beauty, the reliability of the Triple Gem, like a beautiful lustrous diamond.

In a sense, we are re-writing our life, reconfiguring who we think we are. This name, this personality, this address, this life story are just a part of the picture. As we bow, as we chant, as we take refuge in the moment to moment spiritual training, we are expanding our view. We are broadening our perception of who and what we are. We are letting go of the habits of self-view (sakkāya-ditthi). Our vision is widened and becomes more expansive and encompassing, and we see that Dhamma, not our individual personality, is the fundamental reality.

Dhamma Itself is Our Source, Our Origin

Stream-entry, the first level of enlightenment, is described as ‘the change of lineage’ or gotrabhū in Pali. Certainly, without our parents we wouldn’t be here in physical form. But when we look with insight at this body and mind, and reflect, ‘The body is not self, feelings are not self, perceptions are not self, mental formations are not self, consciousness is not self’ – in other words, if the body is not self, if that’s not fundamentally who and what we are – that puts our physical parents into a slightly different perspective, doesn’t it?

The change of lineage is a shift in view – we realize that although our body came from our parents, the source of reality is actually the Dhamma itself. Our physical form comes from our physical parents, grandparents, great-grandparents and so on. But in a more real, complete and profound way, our source, our origin, is the Dhamma itself.

Change of lineage isn’t just a nice idea or something to help us gloss over a difficult relationship with our parents – stream-entry is a recognition that Dhamma is our source and that this has always been the case. It’s not that your physical parents were your real parents, but now they have been demoted. All along our real source, our real origin, the real fabric of our being, our life, our mind, the essence of mind itself, the essence of life has always been the Dhamma. We were just taken in by superficialities and common misunderstandings. We mistakenly accepted conventional reality as being the whole story. But stream-entry is called the change of lineage because it’s a radical change of vision. We suddenly realize, ‘Oh, that’s not what’s been happening at all. This changes everything.’

So to complete the analogy with water; Dhamma is the substance, Buddha is the function, Sangha is the manifestation. Water is a physical substance made of hydrogen and oxygen; it has particular properties and functions in certain ways, and manifests in the world in various forms – shaped as clouds, liquid water, ice, snow, steam... That is how the Three Refuges all fit together: Dhamma is the substance, Buddha is the function, Sangha is the manifestation – when ‘the mind that is aware’ sees ‘the way things are’, this manifests in the world as Sangha, it comes forth as harmonious and noble action and speech.

How Many Universes in a Day?

How many universes have we passed through in the last twenty-four hours? How many different moods have we experienced? How many different feelings and perceptions have we witnessed? How much do we change, how radically, and how repeatedly during the course of the day? One moment we’re the enthusiastic meditator, the next moment we’re a whimpering heap, a miserable lump of failure, and so on…

Through the phases of the day – sitting down for meditation, enjoying our food, going for a walk – as we observe our minds we see different kinds of characters appear: the excited three-year-old, the critical rationalist, the useless failed lump of misery, the ardent meditator... we can all fill in the blanks, we know our own minds, we’ve seen these different moods and forms take shape during the course of the day.

It’s very important to establish the quality of wisdom, the quality of watchful awareness, so that the heart receives, knows and participates in all these different moods and modes of being, these different forms and characters. As Dhamma practitioners we’re not trying to grasp any one identity and reject the rest. We’re not trying to be the ardent meditator and push away the cranky three-year-old or the critical cynic. Rather, we are allowing the heart to fully know and be aware of those patterns – to receive and know them as they take shape, to listen to them so that the heart is attending to the flow of mood. There is a quality of openness, of receptivity. There is participation in all the different aspects of experience – inspiration, desperation, excitement and criticism, fear and contentment – it’s all taking shape and crystallizing within the mind. Allow it to take shape and dissolve without entanglement, without getting caught up, without identifying with the changing forms within the mind.

I like to call this process ‘unentangled participating’ rather than ‘watching the mind’ or ‘being the witness’ and suchlike, as it reflects how we need to accept completely what is being experienced, yet without confusion or identification. When we talk of ‘observing the mind’, this can lead to a false sense of abstraction and dislocation, so I prefer to use ‘unentangled participating’ to describe what it is we are all doing.

Customarily we think of ourselves as being one person. We’ve got a name and one body, and we tend to think of ourselves as a single entity. But internally it would be far more accurate to describe ourselves as a committee. Around the table we have various different members; the grumpy three-year-old, the bored cynic, the inspired ardent meditator – that whole crowd of personalities we have seen passing through our minds today. The committee is all there, sitting around a table together. The meeting works best if Wisdom is given the role of being the chair. If Wisdom is the chairperson it will be a great meeting, but often it’s the grumpy three-year-old or the critical cynic who grabs the microphone and tries to take over the meeting. But as long as Wisdom is given the role of the chairperson, with Mindfulness as the co-chair, we are able to listen to all those different voices.

This is the human dance. All these different identities belong. We are not trying to identify with some and reject others. They’re all here and they are all aspects of nature, they all belong, just like the varied members of any committee, and we experience all these different characters in our minds. I’m not promoting the development of a multiple personality disorder, I’m simply encouraging you to see how we function as human beings.

In the course of a day, sometimes we are parents, sometimes we are children, sometimes we are experts, sometimes we are novices. These different roles are used by all of us at different times. In our practice we are developing the ability to recognize those different roles and identities as they rise up and take shape, without buying into any of them. We recognize, ‘This is the voice of the grumpy three-year-old. This is voice of the wise and kind spiritual being. This is the voice of the complaining cynic. Here it is…’ That which knows those voices and that which can listen to them is the quality of Buddha wisdom – that is the refuge in Buddha.

We get to know the sound of a particular voice, we become familiar with the contribution of that character to the committee meeting, it has its own quality – this flavour, this texture. When there’s refuge in the Buddha, that’s when Mindfulness and Wisdom are in the chair – and when they are chairing the meeting, all the different voices can be integrated. Each can say its piece, and the whole array, the whole variety of experiences and attitudes, can be held in a clear and balanced way.