Introduction to

insight Meditation

Ajahn Sucitto

Can you take 10-15 minutes to refresh your heart and mind?

What’s offered below may help you with that…

We call it ‘meditation’, but bear in mind that:

meditation

is

not

about

• Trying to concentrate.

• Stopping thinking.

• Sitting cross-legged for hours.

Instead, meditation is about:

• Calming and steadying the mind.

• Restoring emotional balance.

• Understanding where compulsive habits begin and supporting a reset.

• is covering inner depths.

Although meditation is about cultivating mind (and heart), it uses the body as a frame of reference. For this, you place your attention on the felt experience of your body and sense, or ‘listen to’ it. This is mindfulness, a non-reactive attentiveness that can steady the energies, moods and thought processes that arise in your everyday life. Through this support, you can learn to feel these and let them pass, rather than get tangled up in them. This creates a ‘no-stress’ zone in your heart. So, although normally we might follow, add to, or otherwise react to mental content, in meditation the aim is to let that be, and instead open and clean the mind’s operating system.

This

system

has

three

aspects:

Intention: The ‘do it, get it’ directive aspect that sends the

mind

off

in

a

particular

direction.

Attention: The selective aspect. It’s what you place

when

you

form

a

focus

on

anything.

Awareness: The receptive aspect of heart. This begins with ‘sensing’, an inner listening that, as it deepens,

offers a fresh open space from which responses (rather than reactions) can arise.

The key feature in this meditative process is mindfulness – the ability to bear feelings, moods and appearances in mind without reacting to them. Because of this, mindfulness steadies your attention so that the ‘do-it’ reflex calms down and awareness comes to the fore. This allows you to notice and respond to what you feel, and think more carefully.

Because this is rewarding, it encourages the mind to firm up, get to the point and operate more clearly.