Problems and Tips

1

Physical

discomfort.

Your

posture

has

to

be

such that your attention doesn’t shrink, get tense or keep fidgeting. It’s OK to move and change posture while sitting, or to go from sitting to standing. When walking, do

so

in

a

natural,

unhurried

and

easeful

way.

In general, sustain awareness of the body as a connected whole, rather than focus on local discomforts. Support this

by

bringing

a

balanced

attitude

to

the

practice.

2

Thinking, emotions and mental states will arise. This experience is the basis for insightful understanding, if attended with mindfulness and inquiry.

For beginners, it’s a good idea to keep the eyes open, or half-open, with that arm’s-length focus. Also, bring your attention more fully to the spine while relaxing the face and hands. This will lessen the impact of thoughts and moods, while warding off sleepiness.

Another tip is to choose a word (such as ‘peace’, or ’gently’), or a syllable (such as ‘aah’), and silently interrupt

the

train

of

thoughts

with

it.

Sustain

that

‘support

word’

through

the

duration

of

a

few (5-10) exhalations, or a similar number of footsteps if you’re walking.

3

You may from time to time find your intention jumps

to

switch

something

on,

or

drink

or

nibble

on something. You might feel a need to attend to business, or tidy or fix something. Allow any of these to happen but make an effort to hold off on following those impulses for the ten to fifteen minutes of the meditation period. Anchor your attention in the body.

The overall advice is to not engage with or reject the

flow

of

mind;

don’t

think

about

it.

Instead

contemplate

it. This means stepping back from the details (imagine stepping back from a painting to get a better perspective) while still bearing it in mind.

You could imagine the mind-flow to be a flock of birds, or a river, or a downpour. The main point is to experience it as a flow of changing energy.

This gives you the opportunity to contemplate impulses and attitudes that may have acquired the force of habit. They may be well-intentioned or non-problematic – but do they have to be compulsive? If you don’t get involved in them, they arise and subside. Maybe you could look into your mind in that light, and give yourself a chance to moderate or reset some habits.

4      Through any and all of this, there’s an opportunity to tune in to the qualities of spacious attention and non-reactive awareness. These provide a peaceful template within which to settle the heart.