Shift the perspective

The first step in that change of view is the contemplative shift of attention that I described previously. That is, you lift your attention from the process that you’re in

to one of monitoring it. Notice that you can do that – it’s like shifting your attention from cooking food to assessing it in terms of outward appearance, texture

and flavour. In the case of the heart and mind, this

shift allows you to disengage from your thoughts and feelings and contemplate them. There is ‘knowing’: you’re aware and you’re conscious that you’re aware.

You can sustain that balanced knowing by first silently asking ‘Who (or what) is aware of my mind?’ and then lingering in the awareness that comes to the fore.

Explore and inquire

As

this

viewpoint

gets

established,

explore

the

flow of mental and emotional phenomena. What are the underlying moods? Restless...? Anxious…? Eager…? Irritated…? Can you be with them, rather than be involved in them?

Notice any aversion and fascination; contemplate any uncertainty, happiness, complaining, or exuberance as it arises. By sustaining the frame of attention, you can let these arise and pass.

Let go of what you don’t need: including the future, and even of coming to a conclusion. Instead acknowledge any underlying assumptions that get you engaged and stressed, such as ‘I shouldn’t be this way’, or, ‘this shouldn’t be happening’, or, ‘the event or the person that I’m being affected by shouldn’t be the way it is.’ The same attitude brings ‘I should be, I have to do, I hould have.’ How do these assumptions affect your mind and heart? How do they feel in your body?

How much of this process of interpretation supports a balanced knowing? And what ideas tip you over into complexity and agitation?

Without trying to get rid of them, consider the effects of your attitudes and interpretations, and whether you need to keep them running right now.

Imagine: what would it feel like if the ideas about what you are and should be (and do) weren’t there? Let that impression be felt and help to reset your perspectives.

Feel, steady and respond

By disengaging from assumptions and attitudes, a response can arise from steady clear awareness. To know just this is wisdom! In simple terms, wisdom is about waiting for the reactions to pass and then finding the most direct and whole-hearted way to relate to yourself and your current situation.

This comes when you avoid all ‘shoulds’, ideologies and assumptions and meet the flow of internal and external phenomena without bias. Follow this with an inquiry into what in all this drives or stresses you. Step back from that push and attune to where you’re steady (your body can provide that). Realizations that release you from stress arise from that balanced openness.