Goodwill

The

first

of

these

resources

lifts

our

motivation and attitude towards a friendly, or at least tolerant, perspective. Especially in a society where competition, worrying news and hard deadlines dominate our day, we

need

to

not

create

more

stress

through

finding fault with ourselves and others. Even more intimately, coming to terms with physical discomfort, irritable moods and an anxious or despondent heart requires a steady attitude of goodwill – or at least, non-aversion. So let’s trace the development of that.

1  As you did with pause and reflect, begin with recollection. Recollect that what your mind and heart are experiencing arises due to causes and conditions, such as the pressure of work or the lack of fellow-feeling in your environment. The only way to bring this to an end is by introducing a cause for goodwill.

2  Bring to mind any occasion, far in the past or recent, where someone has related to you with kindness or sympathy. Whether it was just a few kind words or an expression of concern, pick up the effect in your heart and hold it there while you let three long breaths move through.

3  This may create an opening to recollecting the acts of service and care, or even of small courtesies, that are common in the human world. Small or great, their effect, if lingered on, touches the heart. ‘They didn’t have to do that, that was a freewill gesture of kindness.’ This helps dispel the gloom of cynicism. Again, let some breaths move through the state of uplift; they help to steady the impression and let its energies spread.

4  You can pick any number of these events until the heart feels uplifted enough to not be weighed down, defensive, or prickly. Then linger in the gentle energy and perspective of a heart that has (even temporarily) released the effects of ill-will. And if you feel the heart movement to offer gratitude or goodwill to another person, sustain that. (Yes, breathe it!)

5  As it brightens, the heart can in this way meet such stuck impressions as ‘I’m not good enough’, ‘I am to blame’, I’m not welcome.’ Feel, don’t think about any of these, and don’t try to dismiss them. Instead, keeping your whole-body frame of reference, allow them to speak; don’t go into their narrative, but feel the mind- (or heart-) state. It’s like holding your fingers on a throbbing pulse.

The quality of steady presence will form you into a compassionate listener. Recognizing that the psychology of self-criticism is a common one in a competitive world, bring others to mind and also offer them some compassion. Stay with that state for a few breaths.

6  Spend some time quietly appreciating the skills of others and of any time when others have expressed appreciation of yourself. Stay with that for a few breaths.

7  In situations that you’d like to be different but feel powerless to change, return to the steady presence of your body, and, recognizing that all things change, let your emotions arise and pass through. This shift from gloom and despair towards equanimity is also a huge support for the heart. Breathe that too!

Breathing

It follows on that, if you want your mind to be firm but not rigid, and if you want your heart to be comfortable without sinking into daydreams or media, then mindfulness of breathing is a good theme to cultivate.

It’s a matter of using the whole-body reference and sensing the energy associated with the rhythmic flow

of breathing.

Start by placing attention. Use the simple question: ‘How do I directly know I’m breathing?’ Then linger and sense any impressions of breathing that arrive. If you find you’re trying to control your breathing, widen your attention and imagine breathing to be like a breeze. You don’t have to ‘get it right’, or make it clearer than it is.

As you get any sense of breathing, mindfully linger in that impression. Be with it as it changes through the process of a) an out-breath b) an in-breath and c) an entire cycle of breathing out and in.

You may find this is easier if you a) find an area of your body (such as the abdomen) that comfortably experiences breathing and b) you firm up your

attention at the end of the inhalation, and the end of

the exhalation. Keep bringing your mindfulness to those points when your attention goes elsewhere.

In this way, you pause from mentally drifting or driving off somewhere and instead get your awareness to hover over the bodily process of breathing. Notice that you don’t have to do breathing, it happens independently of your mind. However ... if you expand your awareness of what breathing feels like, you will sense a gentle and fluid vitality that calms the mind and lifts the heart.

The inhalation has a brightening effect and the exhalation

has

a

calming

effect.

And

by

generating these

effects,

the

vital

energy

of

breathing

attracts the

heart

and

encourages

you

to

linger

and

savour the

experience

more

deeply.

It’s

like

sitting

by

a

fire in the evening.

Use

this

meditation

to

break

compulsive

trains

of thought or surges of emotion without aversion or

struggle.

It’s

like

popping

soap

bubbles

by

breathing into them.

Over time, your heart’s interest and ability to stay with the breathing will increase and give rise to a comfortable firmness. This provides both the inner replenishment that cancels the need for outgoing energies, and the firmness to resist the push of mind-stuff. Then you can review drives, habits, attitudes and assumptions with insightful

wisdom,

rather

than

complicate

matters with judgement or fascination. Admittedly, this meditative

composure

does

take

time

to

develop,

but if you get comfortable and settled in the practice, you

may find the occasion and the interest to extend your meditation period.