Ajahn Jayasaro: 
‘The Real Practice’ 
(Three talks to the monastic 
community of Wat Pah Nanachat)

2 
Ajahn Jayasaro: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1) Giving Yourself up to Things 
 
Dhamma-Talk to the monks of Wat Pah Nanachat,  
Nov. 12 
th , 2551 (2008). 
 
2) Khanti  – Patient Endurance  
 
Dhamma-Talk to the monks of Wat Pah Nanachat,  
Aug. 27 
th , 2551(2008). 
 
3) The Real Practice  
 
Dhamma-Talk given at the ‘Change of AbbotMeeting’, Wat Pah Nanachat, 
Nov 25 
th , 2550 (2007).

3 
 
1. Giving Yourself up to Things 
 
Like many of you I would imagine I understood that 
becoming a monk would mean, in effect, becoming a 
professional meditator. I believed that I would be able to spend 
many hours every day meditating, without having to make any 
compromises with the world around me, and without t he 
pressures of having to support myself financially. But when I 
came to Wat Nong Pah Pong, I discovered a whole dim ension 
of monastic life that I hadn’t really conceived of before. 
Although I’d spent some time with the Sangha in England, as a 
pa-kow 
1  it was really coming here into the heart of a Budd hist 
culture that allowed me to see the richness of the lifestyle, a 
way of life that had an unexpected beauty and nobility to it. 
 
I spent my adolescence in a small town of some 15,0 00 
people in the east of England. It was a very provin cial 
environment in which I often felt the odd one out a nd 
developed a strong desire to find a peer group, a g roup of 
people that I could identify with and associate wit h. The group 
that seemed most in line with my ideas, my values a nd my 
personality seemed to be that of the hippies, or th e freaks as 
they sometimes called themselves. And so my interes t in 
Buddhism, eastern thought, Yoga, and my fascination  and pull 
towards the hippy movement all led me on the overla nd trail to 
India. It didn’t take me long to become disillusion ed with my 
chosen peer group. I think the last straw occurred as I was 
sitting in a little cafe on a beach in Goa a month or so after my 
arrival in India. A French guy walked into the rest aurant. He 
                                                
 
1 pa-kow:  Thai word for anagarika (homeless one), i.e. a white robed 
practitiner training in the eight precepts, mostly as preparation for 
becoming a monk.

4 
was a ‘costume hippy’, complete with very long hair  and 
hennaed eyes, and a white waist coat, a short dhoti , and a large 
string of beads around his neck. He held a knobbly walking 
stick, and he carried with him a carved chillum fro m Karnataka 
and hashish from Manali. He had the whole thing dow n 
perfectly. He looked rather like I wanted to look. He sat down 
on the other side of the restaurant and after some time I 
remember him, obviously irritated, shouting at the little boy 
who was running from table to table, rushed off his  feet,  ‘Hey 
baba, I ordered my chips twenty minutes ago! Where are they!’  
 
It occurred to me at that moment, I’m not seeing 
anything different here than I’ve seen anywhere els e, in any 
other group of people. 
 Different clothes, same mindset. I 
became even more of a loner,  and gave up on the peer group 
idea. 
 
So initially in Oakenholt, and especially at Wat No ng 
Pah Pong I was surprised to discover the peer group  that I had 
been looking for. The feeling arose that: Yes, this  is a group of 
people, this is a form, this is a structure, this i s a way of life 
that I want to be part of. Here is a kind of commun ity that will 
bring out the best in me, and one in which I can ve ry easily see 
myself spending the rest of my life. 
 
I immediately stopped looking at entrance into 
monastic life as simply taking advantage of an exce llent 
vehicle for personal growth, and saw it much more a s an 
opportunity to surrender myself to a form that I fo und truly 
uplifting. I can remember so vividly the first time  that I put on 
my robe as a novice, the first time I went on alms round – these 
are memories of an incredible sense of pride and ac hievement. 
It felt so good simply to be part of all this. I ca n remember 
thinking that whatever would happens in my life in future,

5 
good or bad, nobody could take this away from me. I ’d worn 
this robe at least once. Even if I was to have a he art attack on 
my way to the village or be bitten by a poisonous s nake or fall 
into an elephant trap or whatever, my life hadn’t b een in vain. 
Just getting this far was a wonderful achievement. I felt the 
most intense sense of good fortune. And that feelin g has never 
left me. It might not always be so strong, it waxes  and wanes, 
but it’s always there in the background of my mind.  And for 
me it’s such an inspiring reflection that I’m wearing robes that 
don’t differ significantly from the robes worn by t he Buddha 
himself, by Venerable Sariputta, by Venerable Mogga lana and 
all the great disciples. And the way which all of u s live our 
lives does not depart significantly from the way th at Buddhist 
monks have lived for the past two thousand years. Y es, there 
are modern developments, and in certain ways life i s more 
comfortable and convenient these days, but in the e ssentials 
there is a very strong sense of connection and lineage.  
 
The reason why this sense of lineage is so strong i s, I 
think, more than anything else founded on our devot ion to the 
Vinaya 
2. It is the Vinaya which distinguishes this communi ty 
and monastic communities of this tradition from the  lay world 
and from communities of lay meditators. Giving ours elves up 
to the Vinaya, devoting ourselves to this life, we tap into the 
incredible parami 3 that has been accumulated by Buddhist 
monastics since the time of the Buddha. And living the 
                                                 
2 Vinaya : discipline; the Buddhist monastic code, the monk’s rules. 
3 parami : the spiritual potential accumulated through practicing 
specifically the ten perfections that the Bodhisatta achieved on his 
path to Buddhahood: dana  (generosity, giving), sila  (morality, 
virtuous conduct), nekkhamma , (renunciation), pañña  (wisdom), 
viriya  (energy, effort), khanti  (patient endurance), sacca  
(truthfulness), adhitthana  (resolution, determination), metta  (loving 
friendliness), upekkha  (equanimity).

6 
monastic life is not just a matter of a number of i ndividuals 
wearing yellow robes and applying themselves to the  
development of sila , samadhi  and pañña  (morality, meditation 
and wisdom) in the same physical space. As Sangha, we’re 
more than the sum of our parts. At least we can  be more than 
the sum of our parts, and I think that’s an importa nt ideal in 
monastic communities – to try to bring about that k ind of 
situation where we feel that something bigger is ha ppening 
here than simply us coming together as individuals with our 
imperfections, with our faults, our weaknesses, our  strong 
points and our blind spots. Being together in this through the 
sincerity of our effort we are creating something m arvellous. It 
may not seem that way on a daily basis – and there can be 
many disappointments and difficulties, that’s true – but I think, 
whenever we step back a little from what we’re doin g in this 
monastery here – perhaps through spending time with  
laypeople or visiting monasteries in which the stan dard of 
Vinaya is not so high –we can really see the value of the form 
that we have inherited from Ajahn Chah.  
 
Remember that the way we do things here is not just  
something that we’ve come up with ourselves; we con duct 
ourselves and follow practices which were taught, e ncouraged 
and modelled by Ajahn Chah. I have a very strong fa ith that 
Ajahn Chah was an arahant 
4 and to me, that gives many of the 
korwats5 and the minor rules he emphasized a weight and a 
significance that perhaps they might not have other wise. Sure, 
some of the observances and some of the minor Vinay a rules 
can, in isolation, seem eccentric; I remember one l ayman who 
came to visit saying parts of it seemed straight ou t of Monty 
                                                 
4 arahant : the final stage of the four attainments of liberation or 
enlightenment. 
5 korwats : the regulations, etiquettes and routines of a specific 
monastery.

7 
Python – and you can see what he means. But taking on the 
whole package, with that faith in our teachers and the tradition 
and the sense that we grow through that, you start to see some 
long-term results.  
 
I’ve seen so many times over the years how a specia l 
kind of dignity and integrity and composure gradual ly blooms 
in monks who give themselves up to this training. A nd it’s 
been built up brick by brick out of very small thin gs. Each 
observance, as I say, looked at in isolation may no t seem 
particularly important; it may seem a distraction f rom the so 
called ‘real practice’. But the Buddha made very cl ear that 
these teachings are just one  training, which is to say that every 
section of the path bears within it the other sections. During the 
practice of sila , the practice of samadhi  and pañña  is implied 
or is necessarily present, if in a subordinate role . Similarly in 
samadhi , sila  and pañña are present in a subordinate role and 
in pañña , sila  and samadhi  are present in the background. In 
the simile given by the Buddha himself sila  and pañña  are 
mutually cleansing just like two hands washing each other. 
 
So our attitude to Vinaya and our relationship to i t is 
integral, is at the heart of our life as monastics.  Now some of 
us may have an instinctive feel for it, it may just  come like, as 
they say, second nature. But for many others it may  not be that 
way and it may seem strange, artificial and somethi ng which 
you just put up with: just part of what you encount er when 
you’re here and you just go along with it basically as long as it 
doesn’t interfere with what you really want to do too much. But 
I would suggest that that’s not a helpful, creative , wholesome 
attitude, and thinking like that you will miss out on an awful 
lot. Much of the joy of this life is experienced th rough 
surrendering yourself to it in its entirety.

8 
You can safely and profitably give yourself up to t his 
life and this form for a number of good reasons. On e of them is 
that the Vinaya applies equally to every member of the 
community. In Theravada Buddhism we don’t have the idea 
that senior monks – even fully enlightened monks – are exempt 
from the Vinaya. I’ve been a monk for twenty nine r ainy 
seasons now and I dress exactly the same way as som eone who 
has been a monk for a single day or a week, and if someone 
sees me together with a newly ordained monk he woul dn’t see 
the difference. The monk that is presently my upatthak 6, is 
about the same age as me, and probably many people seeing us 
together might think that he was the senior monk an d I was the 
upatthak . Looking at us externally, there are no clues. I d on’t 
wear a special hat or anything, and actually, his t orch is much 
nicer than mine… The things that you see don’t give  any 
indication. In the Vinaya we’re the same. Even grea t monks 
such as Ajahn Chah keep all the rules. Why do they do that? 
Out of compassion for their disciples and for the b enefit of 
later generations. They don’t need to keep those ru les – they 
don’t have the defilements that need to be kept in check by 
them – but they do so as an example. If a monk over estimates 
his attainments and starts to tell himself or other s, ‘I don’t 
really need to do this anymore’, ‘I don’t really need this kind of 
restraint now’, or, ‘I don’t see any real defilement arising when 
I don’t keep this rule, so why should I keep it?’ –  he has to 
confront the example of all his teachers. Ajahn Mun , Ajahn 
Chah, all the great teachers who most definitely di dn’t need to 
keep those rules did so anyway. Unless you are delu ded 
enough to think that you are superior to them, you have to 
                                                 
6 upatthak : a junior monk that helps a senior monk as his attendant or 
servant. He performs duties of a disciple towards the teacher, like 
washing his bowl, his feet, cleaning his dwelling, carrying his bags 
and looks after him in all kinds of ways.

9 
accept the logic that ‘Yes, I should keep the rules out of respect 
for my teachers, out of respect for the Vinaya.’ 
 
Forest monks have the reputation of being “very str ict” 
with the Vinaya. But I don’t see the way we live as  a matter of 
strictness at all. I would compare us to obedient c hildren. 
Nobody praises a child who does what his parents te ll him to 
do, for being a very “strict” child, do they? It’s the norm, it’s 
how children are expected to be. Similarly, as bhik khus, we 
look at the Buddha ultimately as a father and out o f respect and 
devotion to him, we keep his Vinaya. Why wouldn’t w e? At 
the end of his life, the Buddha said that he wouldn ’t establish 
any particular monk as his successor, or Dhamma-hei r, but that 
the Dhamma and the Vinaya teachings would take his place as 
the sasada 
7. This gives an indication of just how important th e 
Vinaya is. The Buddha established it as one of the twin pillars 
of the Buddhist religion for future generations.  
 
We have all entered the Sangha voluntarily, and sur ely 
that demonstrates a wish to commit ourselves to liv ing within 
the boundaries of the Vinaya. If we wanted to live a more free 
and independent kind of Buddhist life, we wouldn’t need to 
adopt this form. But having voluntarily entered the  Sangha, we 
surrender to it. We accept the form with humility. I am 
reminded of a lady who used to come to Wat Pah Nana chat 
regularly. She was a retired school mistress – the fire-breathing 
dragon type – and she could be very fierce. Sometim es you 
could see the self-righteousness blazing out of her. This woman 
had had a lot of pain and suffering in her life. On  one occasion 
her son took temporary ordination in a monastery so mewhere 
in Ubon. He was a very intelligent, well educated y oung man 
and his mother had invested all her worldly hopes i n him. At 
                                                
 
7 sasada : the leader of a religion

10  
the end of the rainy season he didn’t want to disro be, and his 
mother was absolutely outraged: ‘Come on, enough is  enough. 
The Middle way! Three months is sufficient. Don’t go over the 
top. You’ve got a bright future ahead of you’ – tha t kind of 
attitude. But he wouldn’t listen. So she ended up s tanding 
outside the abbot’s hut, shouting and abusing him, screaming – 
I suspect as a deliberate ploy – knowing that it wo uld create a 
major embarrassment for everyone involved. And her son, 
mortified, disrobed. After he disrobed, I don’t thi nk he ever 
talked with his mother again. He applied for a posi tion 
overseas, moved to America, and I don’t believe that she’s seen 
him ever since. So anyway this woman had had a lot of pain in 
her life, much of which was self-inflicted. One of the first 
times she came here, after listening to a Dhamma ta lk, she was 
filled with a lot of piti 8, and she bowed to me in a very slow, 
mannered self-conscious way, and she said, ‘It’s ju st so 
wonderful to be able to find a monk that I can bow to 
wholeheartedly.’  
 
I had heard that kind of phrase before, and didn’t much 
care for it. I said to her, ‘Your bow must be very valuable, that 
you can only give it to some special monks. My bow is very 
cheap. I bow to anybody who has got more rainy seas ons than 
me, anybody who was ordained even a day before me. I don’t 
care who they are, I really like bowing.’  
 
She wasn’t used to being spoken to in that way, but  she 
took it well and became a regular supporter of the monastery 
after that. 
 
But the attitude that the woman showed when she cam e 
to bow, can be found amongst monks as well, ‘I’ll bow only to 
                                                
 
8 piti: rapture and abundant joy

11  
senior monks who I admire and do this service only for them. 
Who is this other monk anyway; who does he think he  is.’  
 
I’ve seen that kind of attitude in a number of plac es 
over the years. And where does it come from? It com es from 
thinking that my bow and my service, my offering is  so 
valuable, that I’m only willing to give it to someo ne very 
special. Ask yourself whether that sort of thinking  comes from 
the kind of mental state that you would like to cul tivate within 
yourself.  
 
When I was a young pa-kow  and novice in Wat Nong 
Pah Pong we upatthaked  9 any monk with five rainy seasons. In 
the early days everyone around here was so much mor e junior 
anyway. It’s hard for all of you to appreciate what  five rainy 
seasons meant in those days. For one thing, there w as this kind 
of superstition that once you reached five rainy se asons, you 
were safe, you were in for good, you weren’t going to disrobe. 
If you could just get through those first five year s you’d be 
okay. And once you had five years, as a formal reco gnition, a 
triangular pillow was put at your seat. That was a big thing. I 
remember being the storeroom-keeper, getting out on e of these 
pillows for a monk that I liked who had just comple ted his fifth 
rainy season. It made me so happy to be the one to honour him 
in this way. He was a very humble monk and as I put  it out I 
remember looking forward to his reaction.  
 
And then we had monks of five rainy seasons, of six  
rainy seasons and so on disrobing, so we started th inking, well 
maybe it takes a little bit longer... And then ther e was a monk 
                                                
 
9 This is a monastery idiom frequently used in the Ajahn Chah 
Sangha. The Pali noun upatthak  is made into the English verb 
upatthaking i.e. giving upatthak-service.

12  
of eight rainy seasons, and then one of ten, and one of fifteen… 
Eventually you were forced to realize that you’re n ever safe, 
unless, of course, you’re safe in your mind. But an yway we 
novices and young monks did upatthak monks of five rainy 
seasons. Now, think of monks of five rainy seasons that you 
know and think of how uninspiring they can be somet imes. We 
just didn’t think about it. This is what you did: when you are an 
upatthak  you are not upatthaking for them, you are upatthak ing 
for you. It’s a really good thing to do, and it is part of your 
training. I remember upatthaking for one western Aj ahn, and I 
just found him so uninspiring, but I thought, this is surely why 
Ajahn Chah wants me to do this, because of all that  it was 
bringing up in my mind. 
 
In the cold season following my first rainy season I was 
selected to be one of Ajahn Chah’s attendants. We were sent to 
Pah Gut Wai, a little monastery down on the Moon Ri ver, 
where Ajahn Chah would go to rest during the cold s eason. I 
was blissed out. I had wanted to do this so much si nce I first 
arrived. There can be a lot of competition and jeal ousy around 
big teachers like Ajahn Chah. Everyone wanted to be  close, 
and to get this opportunity to upatthak was wonderf ul. What 
made it especially meaningful was that being away f rom Wat 
Nong Pah Pong at a small monastery made the situati on 
particularly relaxed and intimate. I was, as they s ay, living the 
dream. The abbot of this monastery was as different  a kind of 
monk from Ajahn Chah, as might be imagined. He woul d 
probably have walked away with the prize for the mo st 
uninspiring senior monk in the whole Wat Nong Pah P ong 
empire (but to be frank, it sometimes felt like he had some stiff 
competition…). He was a luang da
10 , as he ordained in middle 
age after a long married life. He was originally fr om Thailand 
                                                 
10  luang da: a monk ordained in old age, who oftentimes still carries 
a few odd habits from his lay life with him.

13  
but had spent some twenty years as a farmer in Laos . Ajahn 
Chah had given him this monastery to look after and  really 
tried to give him some gamlang jai 11 .  
 
Upatthaking Ajahn Chah, in the morning, you’d go up  
to his room, and you’d compete for this job of empt ying his 
spittoon. It was one of these big spittoons, and it  was full – full 
of urine and betel nut juice and other bodily fluid s. And 
everybody wanted to be the one who could empty this  spittoon 
on the ‘betel nut-bush’ behind the meditation hall. I found this 
a great job. And one day I was walking to the medit ation hall, 
and this car was out in front, and Ajahn Chah was p utting on 
his robes, and the novice that had come along had h is robes on 
already, so I thought: ‘Oh, I’ve lost it. They’re leaving. I’ve got 
to get my bowl and everything’, and I was very emba rrassed 
that I hadn’t been on the ball, and so I said somet hing like, 
‘Luang Por, krap, I need just two or three minutes to get my 
bowl.’ But he said, ‘You don’t need to. You’re staying here.’  
 
And so from being in this classic kind of heaven-re alm, 
living in a small monastery helping to serve Ajahn Chah, I 
suddenly found myself in what felt like a hell-like  situation: 
there was just me and this monk who famous for the fact that 
no monk that I knew had ever been able to live with  him for 
more than a month or two. Everybody had run away. H e was 
notorious. And he spoke this really thick Lao, whic h was made 
even more incomprehensible by the betel nut that wa s always 
in his mouth. He was bad tempered and grumpy and mi serable. 
But then I thought, well, I’m not going to suffer about this. I’m 
not going to make this worse than it is, and if Aja hn Chah left 
me here, I’m going to give him the benefit of the d oubt that he 
wants me to be here and to make something out of th is. I’m 
                                                
 
11  gamlang jai: encouragement, friendly support

14  
going to do it. And so I started. In the morning – same spittoon. 
I’d look at it: urine, betel nut juice, phlegm, and  so on. But, it 
was really tough taking care of that, even though i t was exactly 
the same stuff as in Ajahn Chah’s spittoon. It wasn ’t as if 
Ajahn Chah’s urine had this wonderful kind of mysti c smell to 
it – but still it was difficult. I forced myself. 
 
 In the evening I’d go to his kuti 
12 , massage him, make 
him cocoa, and listen to his rants and endless anec dotes about 
Laos which I couldn’t understand at all. I had just  learned this 
Lao-word ‘kah noi ’, and at every pause I’d say ‘doy kah noi ’13 , 
and he was really pleased. I was a captive audience … The 
other thing I remember is that he told me the whole  story of 
Venerable Ratthapala from the Ratthapala-sutta 14  in great 
detail. But because in Thai‚ “Ratthapala” is pronou nced 
“ratthabahn” (government), I thought he was talking  about 
politics. He was telling me the whole story mumblin g the 
words “rattabahn, rattabahn”, and I though, no, thi s is just 
really the pits, you know, expecting to be with Aja hn Chah and 
having to listen to this old monk talking about pol itics and the 
government. Well, I spent six months with him, so I  got the 
record, and a great deal of respect from my fellow monks for 
doing this, and I feel I became quite good friends with that old 
monk, became fond of him in a way, and I don’t regret the time 
that I spent with him. I certainly learned about up atthaking and 
performing duties without discrimination.  
 
One of the most important points to be made about t he 
observances is their role in the practice of mindfu lness. As 
                                                
 
12  kuti:  a monk’s hut 
13  kah noi and doy kah noi : very polite form for replying with ‘yes’, 
just as ‘krap’ in Thai. 
14  One of the suttas (discourses) of the Buddha in the “Middle 
Length Sayings”

15  
forest monks, we uphold the development of mindfuln ess in 
daily life, but how do we go about it, practically speaking? 
What are you mindful of? There is no kind of floati ng quality 
of mindfulness or awareness – mindfulness is always  of 
something. So what are you mindful of? The basic an swer to 
that question in our daily life as monastics is the  Vinaya rules 
and the korwat  observances. These are our ‘pegs for 
mindfulness’. Another analogy: visualize a radar sc reen and a 
moving object – a missile perhaps – moving across t he screen. 
A radar operator is able to track the moving object  easily and 
accurately by means of a grid. The object moves, sa y, from 
square A4 to B6, or whatever. Similarly, the Vinaya  rules and 
the observances give you a grid in which you can co nstantly be 
returning to the present moment and keeping track o f what you 
are doing with your body, how you are speaking, how  you are 
acting. This is a meditation. It’s a mindfulness pr actice. All 
these things: how you put your shoulder bag down, h ow you 
fold your sitting cloth – there is an incredible nu mber of 
observances that we keep. If you look at it in one way, it’s “so 
much stuff to learn” and it’s “such a hassle”, and it can feel like 
people are always getting on your back because you’ re not 
doing things the right way. And then you change the  way 
you’re doing it, and then someone else tells you of f because 
you’re not doing it the way that you’ve just stoppe d doing it. 
Then it turns out the person who has admonished you  had 
trained in another monastery and had been taught so mething 
else, and so on and so on, until maybe you just wan t to bellow 
in frustration. But if you can be patient, approach the Vinaya in 
the right way and consciously try to develop a wise  attitude 
towards it, then you will gradually learn how to us e these 
training rules as tools for awareness. Then you wil l find that 
keeping them can sharpen and noticeably increase yo ur 
mindfulness.

16  
Faith plays an important role. In the Visuddhimagga 15 , 
some of the teachings, and some of the lists and ca tegories in 
particular, seem to me rather contrived, but there are some that 
I find very useful. Going through the section on th e four 
‘parisuddhisila ’, I particularly like Venerable Buddhagosa’s 
list of the particular virtues or kusala dhammas 16  that you need 
to develop those four kinds of sila. What would you think – of 
all the kusala dhammas  that are taught by the Buddha – which 
is the one, which is singled out as the most import ant in 
keeping the Vinaya? The answer is saddha , faith. Because the 
Vinaya is not something that you can prove in a cer tain way. It 
is something that you take on trust. You need the f aith that 
living within this form, following the procedures a nd 
surrendering yourself to this is, in the long term,  is preventing 
the arising or the growth of unwholesome dhammas an d at the 
same time stimulating the creation and sustenance o f many 
wholesome dhammas.  
 
Another central plank of our development of sila  is the 
practice of samana-sañña 
17 , the recollection of ourselves as a 
samana . As bhikkhus, reflecting on our conventional ident ity 
as samanas , the implications and the responsibilities that it  
entails in this way, far from detracting from the investigation of 
anicca , dukkha , anatta 18  actively supports it, by keeping us on 
track. There are certain ways that a samana  acts, certain ways a 
samana  speaks, which are not the ways laypeople act, are not 
                                                 
15  Visuddhimagga : A standard commentarial work in Pali written by 
Achariya Buddhagosa in Sri Lanka around a thousand years after the 
time of the Buddha 
16  kusala Dhammas : wholesome qualities or factors 
17  samana-sañña : the perception of yourself as a samana (monastic, 
renunciant, literally: a practitioner of peace) 
18  anicca , dukkha , anatta : the principles of impermanence, suffering 
and non-self, as an expression of the highest insights into Dhamma

17  
the ways that laypeople speak. We frequently recoll ect this. 
I’m not advocating a sense of arrogance here, saying that we’re 
special, or, we’re better than laypeople, but we are a small part 
of, a noble lineage of samanas. The support that we get from 
the lay community is one of the advantages of being  
recognized as a samana , but it also entails certain 
responsibilities, not least of which is keeping the  Vinaya. We 
don’t have a Sangha police force, (even if some mon ks go 
through a period when they can be rather officious about the 
training…), but the idea is rather that Vinaya has to come from 
within us. It is an ‘honour system’. The sila  that leads to 
samadhi  has to come from our full consent. And it’s throug h 
taking on these boundaries voluntarily and being ab le to live 
our lives and conduct ourselves within these bounda ries 
consistently that that kind of self-respect, self-e steem, and 
sense of well being which are absolutely imperative  for further 
development on the path, starts to manifest. 
 
You may remember that when Ajahn Chah went to see 
Luang Puh Mun and told him how discouraged he felt by the 
huge number of minor rules and regulations laid out  in the 
Pubbasikkha ’ Vinaya commentary Luang Puh Mun reminded 
him that, yes, all these things are there and to be  learned, but 
that the crucial point is to have hiri  and otappa 
19 . Now, we all 
possess these qualities of hiri  and otappa  to a certain extent, 
but we can’t take them for granted, they need to be  cultivated. 
How do you do that? How do you cultivate hiri  otappa ? Hiri  is 
the sense of shame. It arises through wise contempl ation of 
conventional responsibilities, roles and positions.  For instance 
you may reflect on your monkhood. What is appropria te 
conduct and what is inappropriate conduct for a monk? What is 
beautiful behaviour, what is unseemly? What is the correct and 
                                                 
19  hiri : a sense of moral shame; otappa:  the fearful shying away from 
anything immoral

18  
beautiful and appropriate conduct for a samana , for a leader of 
a community, for an elder, majjhima 20 , or a new monk, for a 
novice, and so on. Now if you can clarify to yourse lf what is 
the right, the wise, the beautiful, and noble kind of behaviour, 
if you reflect on it a lot, and contemplate it, the n, when you’re 
about to act or speak in a way that conflicts with that, there is 
this sense of conflict, of inconsistency. What you’ re about to 
do is not consistent with what you believe to be ri ght. It is in 
fact, to be blunt, a betrayal of your goals and asp irations and 
what you believe to be correct. The feeling that ar ises then is 
hiri , the sense of shame. Shame is not the same thing a s guilt. 
There is no sense of being a bad person. Shame is s imply the 
emotional counterpart to this recognition of incons istency. 
Venerable Buddhaghosa explained it with a vivid sim ile. He 
said you feel the same way about an action as you w ould about 
excreting in the middle of a market place. 
 
 Otappa , fear, is not an emotion that arises from trying 
to persuade yourself that you’re about to do someth ing that is 
really bad or evil. This can easily become the clas sic kind of 
Puritan repression, where you feel twisted inside f rom being 
attracted to things you’re supposed to reject. Otappa  comes 
through intelligent reflection on the consequences of our 
actions. This starts from a basic level of: “If I d o this, if I say 
this, and it’s found out, (which in almost all the cases it is), 
how would that affect my standing in the community,  how 
would it affect my relationship to the people that I love and 
respect and look up to, how will it affect my own s ense of self 
respect, how will it affect my practice, my develop ment of the 
path?”  
So in reflecting on the consequences of the action – not 
the action itself – in very many different aspects,  you’re not 
                                                
 
20  majjhima  monk:  a “middle-aged” monk between five and ten years 
in the robes

19  
trying to brainwash yourself that something is awfu l, when you 
don’t yet see it that way. You may have to admit th at the 
pleasurable feelings that arise from that kind of c onduct are 
still attractive to you, but through seeing the con sequences, 
they fade in significance. They just don’t seem worth it. And so 
you wisely refrain. Gradually, over time, the need for wise 
reflection diminishes. Hiri  and otappa  arise spontaneously. 
This is why the Buddha called them the guardians, a nd why 
they provide the most important foundations for sila  practice. 
 
So these are some examples of dhammas that promote 
the development of sila . They become strong and prominent, 
they become refuges through reflection ( yoniso manasikara ), 
through knowing how to look at things, knowing how to look 
at Vinaya– and korwat-practice in the most construc tive way, 
in the way that’s going to have both beneficial sho rt term and 
long term results for you in your monastic life. To  quote Ajahn 
Chah, you care for your sila  and your sila  cares for you.

20  
2. Khanti  – Patient Endurance  
 
 
One of my favourite very short stories is of a seek er of 
some kind, coming across a wise man (that in some v ersions it 
is a wise woman, is not important), and engaging hi m in 
conversation. At the end of their conversation the sage reveals 
from within a carefully folded piece of cloth a mos t incredible 
jewel. The young man, the young traveller or seeker , is 
absolutely dazzled by the jewel, and says, ‘Can I h ave this 
jewel? Would you give it to me? It would make so mu ch 
difference to my life’.  
And the old man says, ‘Sure’, and gives it to him. 
The young man is very excited and afraid that the o ld 
wise man is going to change his mind, so he hastily  says 
goodbye and sets off on his travels. But then an ho ur or two 
later the young man reappears, approaches the old s age with 
great humility and respect, lays the jewel down in front of him 
on the ground and says, ‘Excuse me, but I’d like to  make a 
trade. I’d like to exchange this jewel.’  
And the sage says, ‘What for?’  
‘I would like to exchange this jewel for knowledge of 
how to gain the sort of mind that could give up a jewel like that 
without a second thought.’ 
 
I think, it’s the kind of awakening wisdom that we see 
in that young man’s mind, which has lead all of us towards the 
holy life. To see that jewels and worldly wealth an d fame and 
fortune and comfort and relationships and so on and  so forth 
are not worth (in the Pali idiom) ‘one sixteenth’ of the value of 
the kind of mind that can experience that deep and lasting 
contentment without them. I feel that it’s very imp ortant that 
we return again and again to refresh ourselves with  the 
inspiration that led us to give up the worldly life  in order to

21  
follow this path. And to allow that to nourish our minds 
particularly in those times when we begin to feel a  bit overburdened or as if we are not really getting anywhere in the holy 
life, or that things are not quite working out the way that we 
hoped that they would, or expected that they would.  I agree 
with the teaching – and I know this wouldn’t go down with lay 
Buddhists so well, that “it is better to be a miserable monk than 
a happy layperson.” 
 
The reason is, because the misery of a monk is mise ry 
with an end. The misery is not inherent in the livi ng of the holy 
life, but it is a phase or one part of the journey for most of us. 
Having such confidence in the process, in the overa ll journey 
and the goal and the value of sticking with it, is absolutely 
essential. 
 
When I was first here in Northeast Thailand in late  
1978, living at Wat Nong Pah Pong, I couldn’t speak  the 
language, of course. These days the monks that go t o Wat 
Nong Pah Pong are blessed with patient and skilful translators. 
I didn’t have that at all. I remember my first thre e hour 
Dhamma talk sitting pappiap 
21  (which is a weird awkward kind 
of posture when you’re not used to it) and being ab solutely 
fascinated by Ajahn Chah’s gestures and his tone of  voice, and 
what was obviously a deeply sincere effort to trans mit the 
Dhamma to his listeners. So I asked a junior wester n monk 
who spoke quite good Thai to give me a summary of t hese 
three hours. And he said, ‘Oh, just the same old st uff: talking 
about patient endurance.’  
 
                                                 
21  pappiap : A common semi-cross-legged posture in Thailand, with 
one leg pointing to the back and one folded in front of one.

22  
In fact I had heard this word “ od ton, od ton ”22  before. 
It’s about the first Thai word that I learnt. The y oung monk’s 
dismissive summary said as much about his understan ding and 
general level of faith as anything else, but as a s ummary of a 
three hour talk it wasn’t at all satisfying to me, as you can 
imagine (it did, however, have one positive effect:  it made me 
particularly diligent in learning the Thai language ). 
Nevertheless, it was true and as I learnt the langu age it became 
more and more obvious to me, that the vast majority  of the 
teachings were not the so-called “high Dhamma”, but  were 
firmly founded on the practise of the monastic obse rvances. 
Ajahn Chah talked a lot about living together in ha rmony, 
being scrupulous with the Vinaya. When the profound  
Dhamma did come, there was a great sense of joy and  
enjoyment. You didn’t hear it so often that you too k it for 
granted. But those monks who felt that the real  Dhamma is the 
high  Dhamma and that everything else is just padding an d 
filler, which is not really worth it because it was  “just about 
korwat” or just about patient endurance – they miss ed the boat. 
They didn’t catch on to what the teaching was about. 
 
Patient endurance – “ khanti ”, in Pali, “ kwam od ton ” 
(or simply “ od ton ”) in Thai – is a singular kind of wholesome 
dhamma in that it holds no obvious or immediate cha rm. It’s 
not the kind of dhamma that inspires your heart to feel uplifted 
and enthusiastic, the moment you hear its name. But  yet as we 
know from the Ovada Patimokkha 
23 , the Buddha gave central 
importance to this virtue. In the Ovada Patimokkha,  khanti  is 
                                                 
22  kwam od ton  or simply od ton  : Thai for patient endurance and 
bearing with things, or to be able to stand them. 
23 Ovada Patimokkha : A famous summary by the Buddha of his 
essential teachings, that contains the quote: khanti paramam tapo 
tithikkha (patient endurance is the highest practice burning up 
defilements).

23  
called “the supreme incinerator of defilements”. So, if we were 
completely logical, rational beings (which we are n ot, 
obviously), we would be incredibly interested in th is quality. 
Given that we have ordained with the intention to r ealize 
Nibbana, when the Buddha tells us as plainly as he possibly 
can, that the main causal factor for the realization of Nibbana is 
khanti , you would think that khanti  would be a major plank of 
everybody’s Dhamma practice, the main strategy and the thing 
that one devoted the most time attention to developing. But that 
is rarely the case, is it? For instance, when we are asked, ‘Well, 
how was your tudon g24 , or, ‘What was it like doing this kind of 
practice and that kind of practice’, we may answer,  ‘Well, I 
didn’t get much out of it apart from a bit of od ton , a bit of 
khanti .’ It’s as if khanti  is the consolation price, what you 
comfort yourself with having developed when you don ’t get 
what you really want from a particular practice. 
 
That’s why I think that revising, looking again at the 
whole topic of patient endurance is very helpful, p articularly as 
to this day with Luang Por Liem being such a fine a nd 
consistent disciple of Luang Por Chah that patient endurance 
still is the backbone of the training of Wat Nong P ah Pong. It 
always has been and always will be, I’m sure. 
 
One point I would like to make right away is that t he 
Dhamma-Vinaya is a vast and complex organic whole, and that 
we seriously misunderstand it when we start to abst ract 
particular practices, particular dhammas, from the whole and 
look at them in isolation. The most obvious example  of this, 
one which is quite famous in having given rise to a  great deal 
of debate in Thailand, is ‘ santutthi ’ ( sandoht  in Thai), 
contentment. There was a period when monks were bei ng 
                                                
 
24  tudon g: Thai expression for walking and wandering through 
forests and wilderness areas, as a practice for forest monks

24  
actively dissuaded from teaching contentment becaus e it was 
considered by the authorities to be an obstacle to national 
development. The idea was that if people were conte nt they 
would be very bad capitalists and the material prog ress of the 
country would suffer. This foolish idea arose from a laziness or 
unwillingness to look at the primary sources of the  Buddha’s 
teachings on the subject of contentment, the Buddha ’s 
discourses ( suttas ). Because when you look at the discourses, 
you find that wherever the word contentment arises, it’s always 
coupled with a dhamma such as viriya (effort), or heedfulness 
and non-laziness. The Buddha always makes it very c lear that 
contentment does not mean laziness and complacency.  Quite 
the opposite. And then of course there is the quite  startling 
dhamma of discontent, discontentment with regards t o 
wholesome dhammas which have already been developed . The 
Buddha said that that particular quality was one of  the most 
immediate causes of his enlightenment. So in lookin g at the 
texts we see a more complex picture: contentment is  always to 
be seen in conjunction with other dhammas which str ess effort 
and application, and it is also emphasized that it is in 
relationship to material things rather than wholeso me mental 
states. 
 
I am giving you this particular rather well known 
example of contentment to demonstrate how individua l 
dhammas can be explained and defined point by point , but that 
is not enough. Regarding the whole structure of pra ctice we 
have to be able to see what a particular dhamma doe s, what it’s 
role is, what it’s relationship to other dhammas is . If we 
compare it to the simile of the chariots, it’s to a sk, where does 
this dhamma begin, and where does it end. 
 
With patient endurance, one of the important things  to 
remember, of course, is that the wisdom faculty has  a very

25  
important role to play; it’s not always the case th at we should 
be patient, endure, put up with things. There are o ther 
dhammas and other criteria to bear in mind, too. Yo u shouldn’t 
just bear with lustful or aggressive thoughts. You need to deal 
with them immediately. Let me give another example,  the case 
of physical pain arising in meditation. This is a c ommon 
concern for practitioners and meditators: to what e xtent should 
you bear with physical pain, and when should you ch ange 
posture. Should you just stick with the pain? My an swer to this 
would be: it depends. What does it depend upon? Wel l, a 
number of factors. First of all, if you have some p hysical 
illness, or some problem with your knees for instan ce. In that 
case, sitting without moving might well make your c ondition 
worse. You might end up having to have an operation . 
Patiently enduring the pain would not be such a goo d idea. 
Another example would be in the case where you expe rience a 
lot of physical pain while sitting, almost as soon as you begin 
to meditate. Although there are benefits to just be aring with 
that pain as long as you can, the danger is that yo u begin to 
associate sitting meditation with physical pain. Si tting 
meditation comes to seem like an unpleasant activit y, a sort of 
bitter medicine that you force yourself to do. In t hat case too 
much patient endurance can defeat its own purpose. You can 
lose all your zest for meditation. 
 
The point I’d like to stress here is that progress and 
long term success in meditation, is very much dependent on the 
fact that you enjoy meditation, you love to meditat e and that 
it’s the most important thing in your life. That is  not only 
possible for someone who can enter jhana 
25  or someone with 
easy access to piti  and sukha 26  in meditation. I am suggesting 
                                                 
25  jhana : absolutely one-pointed and still states of meditation  
26 sukha : bliss and happiness

26  
that you may develop a very positive regard towards  
meditation practice even if samadhi 27  is not yet so strong. Faith 
in the value of what you’re doing, wise reflection can go a long 
way. But to be able to sustain this very positive a ttitude, you 
should not be sitting with pain too much. If medita tion 
becomes associated in your mind with physical pain,  then even 
if you can deal with it, the accompanying tension a nd worry 
can be depressing. A bias against meditation can gr ow. So, in 
summary, I would say that sometimes changing your p osture 
can be part of a good overall strategy.  
  
Yet , every now and again, bearing with physical pain is 
a good thing to do and there are some really import ant gains to 
be made from it. One is that if you are able to sit  through pain 
to the extent that you come out of the tunnel on th e other side 
of pain, you may experience a rush of piti  and sukha  which can 
propel the mind into deep meditation. That is a won derful 
experience in itself. But it is also important on t he level of 
sañña  (memory). Proving to yourself that pain has an end , and 
doesn’t, as might seem to be common sense, escalate  until it 
reaches a completely intolerable level, is liberati ng. You now 
know for a fact that it is possible for pain to rea ch a crescendo 
and then quite miraculously fall away. If you have had that 
kind of experience in meditation, your whole relati onship to 
physical pain shifts, and interestingly, in many ca ses, your 
relationship to the idea of death and your own mort ality also 
shifts. 
  
The experience of dealing with, bearing with and be ing 
patient with physical pain leads us to many insight s into our 
whole relationship to life at large. We become awar e to what 
extent there is an unconscious or semi-conscious te nsing 
                                                
 
27 samadhi: still focus of mind, concentration

27  
around unpleasant situations, and a fear of pain. It’s sobering to 
realize how often the reasons that we give ourselves for turning 
away from things are rationalizations after the act . Often our 
decisions that are made are basically on the pain-p leasure 
polarity, we’re simply moving away from pain and to wards 
pleasure. This fear and anxiety about pain is in it self an 
important area of study, because fear of pain is bo und up with 
fear of losing control. When you are in pain you ar e in a 
situation that you can’t get away from, so more tha n anything 
else it exposes just how severely limited your reso urces in 
dealing with dukkha 28  are. The natural tendency of the 
unenlightened mind is to try to avoid that kind of situation 
altogether. The meditator is interested in going ag ainst the 
grain and looking into the way our mind works in ev ery 
situation. 
 
So to summarize, I would say, that there are occasi ons 
where it’s not a good idea to bear with physical pa in, if it’s 
going to have long term physical consequences for e xample, 
or, if you are just getting really depressed with h aving to sit 
through pain every time you meditate. You want to b e able to 
maintain a sense of buoyancy and interest and enjoy ment of 
meditation. But having said that, bearing with a ce rtain amount 
of physical pain in meditation – just a certain amo unt, not just 
changing posture immediately when you feel discomfo rt, 
bearing with it for a while before you change, even  on this 
level, you are developing, vaccinating yourself, gr adually 
developing an ability to be with the uncomfortable and the 
unpleasant, in an unruffled and natural kind of way  which 
expands naturally into an ability to deal with the unpleasant in 
daily life. 
 
                                                
 
28  dukkha : suffering, unsatisfactoriness, stress

28  
Physical pain is the grossest kind of discomfort, t he 
most tormenting, but there are also valuable lessons to be learnt 
from bearing with mental and emotional pain. The re ward or 
value of it is the enhanced ability to see through pain, proving 
to yourself that pain has an end. To see that one c an come out 
of pain like emerging from a tunnel, affects your a ttitude to 
pain in general, and even to death. Most importantly, it helps us 
in our investigation of the nature of dukkha. The t exts say that 
the reason why the characteristic of dukkha is not obvious, is 
concealed from us, is because of change of posture.  Being still, 
being patient with the natural phenomena arising in  the body 
and the mind means allowing for the appearance of d ukkha. By 
doing so we can understand more clearly its all-per vading 
nature. On this level it’s very clear that the cons tant small 
movements and adjustments that we make to our medit ation 
posture are a reaction, a response to dukkha. I’m n ot saying 
that we shouldn’t ever do this; that we never scrat ch an itch or 
never move when we feel uncomfortable, but whenever  we do, 
we should recognize again and again, exactly why we  are 
doing so: this is dukkha. Every time we move, or we  see 
somebody else move, we can remind ourselves: this i s dukkha; 
this is the manifestation of dukkha in the various postures of 
the five khandas 29  Wisdom can arise right here.  
 
Now before going on to one or two other areas in which 
khanti , patience, is exercised, it might be a good idea t o give a 
definition. What exactly is patience? One of the definitions that 
I like and use myself was given by Luang Por Sumedh o. It is: 
“peaceful coexistence with the unpleasant”. I think that this is a 
very skilful definition, in that it prevents us fro m looking at 
patience as just gritting our teeth and just bearin g with 
something until the bell goes, or there is no longe r a need. If 
                                                
 
29  khandas : the five impersonal factors that make up a being: form, 
feeling, perception, mental formations and sense consciousness.

29  
that is the case, and there is at lack of acceptanc e and stillness 
around the unpleasant, then it doesn’t really fulfi l the 
characteristics of khanti  – at least in its role of an incinerator of 
defilements. If your eyes are still on the clock, y our ears on the 
bell, there is the sense of time and wanting to get  away from 
something, but not doing it yet, trying to prevent oneself from 
doing what you really want for as long as possible.  I don’t 
think that that’s really what khanti  is all about. Khanti  is more 
about being able to develop a way of dwelling with 
unpleasantness in a way that the mind feels normal and 
unruffled and at peace.  
 
This is the paradox and the challenge: Can you be a t 
peace with something which is agitating, which is a nnoying, 
which is calling out for you to be averse to it? If  you can, the 
wonder of it is that suddenly you see that you just don’t have to 
react to things. There is no hard and fast causal process here. In 
the physical world there are certain fixed laws. If  you were to 
put your hand into a fire your hand would burn. If an arahant  
put his hand into a fire the arahant’s hand would burn. 
Irrespective of the amount of wisdom and calm and t he 
wholesome dhammas in your mind, this basic process will take 
place, completely uninterested and unaffected by an y kind of 
training and education that you might undertake. Bu t in the 
mental realm that’s not the case at all. We can see  that by 
simply looking at the fluctuations in our emotional  reactions to 
things. There might be somebody or something which really 
“rubs us up the wrong way”, something that irritate s us quite 
out of all proportion to what might be reasonably e xpected to 
be the case. But our level of irritation and upset is not stable in 
the way the amount of burning of the skin would alw ays be the 
same if you were to put that same hand into the fla me for the 
same amount of time. Under all the same conditions you would 
expect the same amount of tissue damage to take pla ce. But yet

30  
with the mind, you can see fluctuations. Perhaps in the morning 
you’re really in a good mood, you had a good medita tion and 
you see somebody behaving in a certain way, or some thing 
happens and – yes – it doesn’t really affect you. I n the 
afternoon you are a little bit tired, you’re a litt le bit fed up, 
something has gone wrong, you see the same thing an d you 
have a much stronger reaction. The intensity of the  reaction is 
not solely the function of the irritant. It is a du al production. 
One part – and it is the important part – is coming  from within 
us. It’s affected by our own mental state. This is our great 
opportunity. 
 
So we try to develop that patience and patient 
endurance, that steadfastness, that groundedness of mind which 
is not jumping around with delight at things that w e like, or 
pulling away and shrinking from, or flaring up with  anger at 
things we don’t like, having a sense of just being there, very 
calmly being present to our experience. Then we beg in to see 
that there is nothing out there which can force a p articular 
emotion to arise in our mind. At most we may be sub ject to a 
very compelling invitation. We can feel that someon e is giving 
us a very strong invitation to be angry, or someone  or 
something is giving us a very strong invitation to feel greedy or 
lustful, but it’s not compulsion. This is where the  opportunity 
for freedom becomes very apparent. We see that if w e keep 
doing this work and we keep plugging away very pati ently, 
very methodically, and calmly, our ability to not r eceive the 
invitation, to not react blindly tot that impingeme nt becomes 
stronger and stronger. And our sense of self relian ce, the sense 
of being our own refuge, become more and more real. 
 
Our meditation practice gains immeasurably from the  
intention to develop khanti . Without it insights don’t take root. 
With it they do. So we learn to cherish this qualit y of khanti ,

31  
this steadfastness and willingness to be with the u npleasant 
without pushing it away, without rushing towards it , just being 
there with things, not giving too much importance t o the 
emotional tone of the experience, but more the whol e structure, 
the flow of experience. With pleasant and unpleasan t 
experiences you can almost feel like one simile is:  surfing the 
unpleasantness, rather than fighting against it. Th is is 
particularly in the case of unpleasant physical sensations. 
 
So we are taking khanti as a spiritual ideal as something 
that we really want to develop in our practice, and  seeing the 
value of khanti  has significant results. In terms of the areas tha t 
we exercise this quality, I have spoken already abo ut 
unpleasant physical sensation ( dukkha vedana ), and I’ve 
spoken a little bit about the reaction to external stimuli, and of 
course there is the dealing with mental states aris ing in the 
mind, irrespective of externally stimulating things  that arise 
within meditation. Generally speaking, we need to h ave the 
ability to be solid, present and peacefully with th ings that are 
irritating, annoying, and unresolved and bitty. You  know, often 
things are in an unformed state that we can’t reall y work 
without yet and there is that very strong tendency to want to 
have an answer for things straight away. We want ev erything 
to be worked out, to be neat and tidy, and the abil ity just to 
leave something; to say, “Yes, I don’t have the wis dom, the 
ability to come to any firm decision about this, I’ m not quite 
able to deal with this effectively, I’ll just leave  it there for the 
time being.” This is an aspect of khanti  which I think is often 
overlooked. 
 
You may remember the practice of Luang Por 
Sumedho, in his first year here at Wat Pah Nanachat . When 
this meditation hall was first built, there was no Ajahn’s kuti . 
He lived in a little room at the back of the medita tion hall. You

32  
can imagine how little privacy he would have had. A nybody 
could just knock on this door, including any laypeo ple coming 
into the hall. So Luang Por Sumedho was living in t hat room, 
and it wasn’t as extensive as it is now, and he had  a project of 
making a bowl stand. Of course with the entrance in to the rains 
retreat all kinds of projects, including ones like this were halted 
for three months. So he was determined to get his b owl stand 
completed before entering the rains, and he was get ting more 
and more frustrated, and was making more and more m istakes 
because he was rushing, wanting to get it finished.  He had just 
got to get this done. So he relates how he stopped,  realised the 
state his mind was in, and made a deliberate determ ination to 
put the whole thing down – an eighty percent or wha tever 
finished bowl stand – and what’s more, to put it in full view by 
the side of his shrine, so that he could see it eve ry day and be 
forced to develop the ability just to be with somet hing which is 
not quite finished. I have always admired that as a  practice. It 
may not be in one of the lists of the special ascet ic practices 
(dhutangas ), but it really is a tough one to do. When there’s  
something that’s not quite finished, that sense of unresolved 
business is annoying, isn’t it? You want it over an d done with, 
you want the tidiness and resolution, and everythin g be as it 
should be. It’s important not to believe in that, but to see it as a 
defilement of mind, as something that leads you to be sloppy, 
take shortcuts and to be impatient and lacking in p recision and 
care. It is the practice of khanti  that can expose, illuminate this 
kind of movement of mind. Through not following thi s craving 
for ‘closure’ we see how it conditions dukkha. 
 
Keep noticing that it is not that we’re bad or that  there 
is anything wrong with this tendency; it’s complete ly normal 
and natural for the mind to shy away from the unple asant and 
to move towards the pleasant. But as long as we’re doing that,

33  
we’re stuck in the realm of samsara 30 . The definition of 
“bhikkhu” which Luang Por Chah liked to quote and e xpound 
upon is that the bhikkhu is “one who sees the dange r in 
samsara ”. He was not advocating we practice discursive 
meditation on the danger of birth into different re alm, or a 
contemplation of Buddhist cosmology, as much as tal king 
about samsara  as we experience it moment by moment. In our 
daily practice, samsara  as that simple conditioned and 
undiscerned movement towards the pleasant and movem ent 
away from the unpleasant. A bhikkhu is one who goes  against 
the stream of that habit. 
 
There is another beautiful traditional story about khanti  
that I’d like to relate. The story begins with a ce rtain arahant  
who loved solitude and didn’t fulfil certain obliga tions to the 
Sangha. He was, as I remember, living in a cave and  refused to 
attend an important meeting. As a consequence, he w as called 
before the elders and given a punishment. He was to ld that he 
should start going on almsround to the house of a c ertain 
brahmin who had wrong view, great anger against, an d 
contempt for Buddhist monks. The monk asked, ‘And h ow 
long shall I do this for?’  
The elders said, ‘Just keep doing it, just be patient.’  
 
So every day the monk would go to this brahmin’s 
house and stand in front of the house. When the bra hmin saw 
this Buddhist monk he got very angry and shut up al l the doors 
and windows and told all his family members under n o 
circumstances should they ever give food to Buddhis t monks 
and to this Buddhist monk in particular. So the mon k stood 
there in front of the shut-up house for a reasonabl e length of 
time and then returned to the monastery. He went th e second 
                                                
 
30  samsara : the round of repeated birth in different lives

34  
day and it was the same. And the third day it was the same. But 
because he had been given this practice by the Sang ha elders 
he was very patient and he kept going day after day  after day. 
One year, two years, three years, four years, five years, six 
years. Then in the seventh year the old servant in the brahmin’s 
house died and a new cook was hired. The brahmin sa id to her, 
‘There is a Buddhist monk who comes and stands outs ide the 
door every day. Don’t whatever you do give him any food. We 
in this house have nothing to do with him.’ 
 
Early the next morning the brahmin set off on his 
business. The monk arrived in front of the house an d stood 
there quietly as usual. The new cook peered out thr ough a 
window slat, and felt very uncomfortable. She walke d out and 
started to shout at the monk, ‘Be off with you, you  shiny 
headed fool!’ and other such coarse words. 
 
That day as the monk walked back to the monastery, 
who should he pass on the road but the brahmin. The  brahmin 
noticed that the monk had a smile on his face, and he 
immediately started to worry that the new cook had gone 
against his wishes and given the monk something to eat. So he 
said to him, ‘Hey you, monk, did you get anything at the house 
today?’ 
‘Yes, I did.’ 
 
The brahmin was furious. As soon as he got home he 
called the new cook into see him. ‘I thought I told  you, you 
were not supposed to give anything at all to that m onk. Why 
did you disobey me?’  
‘I didn’t. I didn’t do anything.’  
‘Well, so what happened? Did you just stay quietly 
behind the closed windows?’  
‘No, I did more than that. I went out and told him off.’

35  
The brahmin got back on his horse and rode back the  
way he came until he caught up with the monk. ‘You lied. You 
told me that you got something in my house and you didn’t. 
You’re not only a stupid Buddhist monk, but you’re a lying 
Buddhist monk as well.’  
 
He was very angry. The monk answered him calmly, 
‘No, I didn’t lie. I have been on alms round to you r house for 
seven years and received nothing at all. Today, for  the first 
time I received something from its inhabitants: som e words of 
abuse. It’s a start. While considering that I smiled.’  
 
At these words, something shifted in the mind of th e 
brahmin. He suddenly became inspired by the monk, a s he 
reflected on how the monk had been patiently coming  to his 
house every day for seven years without once being given any 
food for his daily meal, and now on being abused ra ther than 
getting angry, felt grateful. The Brahmin got down off his 
horse bows and asked for forgiveness. Then he said,  
‘Venerable Sir, tomorrow, would you please accept food at my 
house?’  
 
The brahmin went home and told his wife that 
tomorrow morning together with their seven-year old  son, she 
should put food in the monk’s bowl. It became a daily practice. 
The young boy put food in the bowl every day, and f illed with 
faith took ordination as a novice, became a monk, b ecame an 
arahant , and became Venerable Nagasena, one of the pillars  of 
Indian Buddhism. 
 
It seems that the elders who gave the monk the 
punishment knew that a baby with great parami  had been born 
to a hostile brahmin family, and this was their mea ns of 
creating a connection between the child and the San gha. This

36  
monk was willing to do this practice out of faith, and faith is an 
important cause and condition for khanti .  
 
 Have you ever noticed in your mind, or asked yours elf: 
why is it, that in certain areas of our life, our m onastic life, or 
at certain times we can be incredibly patient, and we are able to 
deal with discomfort and things that we don’t like, and at other 
times it is very difficult, and we are very unwilli ng to be 
patient. Have you looked at the causes and conditio ns why that 
should be? I suggest that one of the most important  factors is: 
whether we see something as worthwhile, whether we perceive 
it as meaningful. As soon as you start thinking to yourself: 
‘Why bother, it’s not going to make any difference in the long 
run’, so why put yourself through this? The moment you have 
that “Really, what’s the point” – kind of attitude,  you lose all 
your endurance. But if you see the value of somethi ng very 
clearly, you can be quite remarkably patient. We ca n see this 
with parents and their children. There are incredib le accounts 
of the endurance of mothers trying to protect the l ives of their 
children. When there is something that is really me aningful to 
us, a really strong motivating force, we can bring up immense 
amounts of patience. But if your mind slips into un wholesome 
thinking, or ayoniso manasikara  (unskilful thought), it can 
completely undermine our whole capacity for patient  
endurance. 
  
Patient endurance is, in other words, not only 
conditioned by how tough you are, or how good your samadhi  
is or whatever, but by your ability to reflect on e xperience, the 
ability to think about things in an intelligent and  useful way 
and to create a sense of purpose and meaning. And t o invest 
faith and confidence in that process and in that go al is what 
will support and sustain khanti , patient endurance, more than 
anything else.

37  
 
So these have been a few somewhat rambling thoughts  
and reflections on this subject of ‘ khanti  – Patient Endurance’ 
that I would like to share with you this evening.

38  
3. The Real Practice  
 
 
It was quite a revelation to me that the vast major ity of 
Ajahn Chah’s Dhamma-talks were not about meditation , or 
jhanas  and ñanas 
31  and how to be a sotapanna 32  and what it is 
like to be an arahant . They were very much more down to 
earth. They were about things like korwat  and od ton .  
 
What those words mean: ‘ korwat ’ means the monastic 
regulations, conventions, the guidelines how we liv e our lives 
together in a community. ‘ Od ton ’ means patient endurance. 
Those were major themes in the way that Ajahn Chah set up 
his monastery and in the way that he taught his dis ciples. And 
they were founding principles on which Wat Pah Nana chat 
itself was established. In fact from the very begin ning of Wat 
Pah Nanachat attitudes to that kind of training and  that kind of 
emphasis have varied in their appreciation of the u se of korwat  
as a means of training, or the relative importance of the use of 
od ton  in spiritual development of patient endurance. And  for 
all the western monks particularly this has very mu ch been 
bound up with the question:  
 
“What is practice really all about? What’s the real 
practice?”  
 
There have always been a number of monks that say, ‘I 
don’t want to stay at Nanachat. It’s a good place when you start 
out, but it’s not where you can do the real practice. The real  
practice is over there…, the real practice is in a cave in Chiang 
                                                
 
31  ñanas : special knowledges  
32  sotapanna : stream enterer, the first of four stages of enlightenment

39  
Mai or whatever... The real practice is in this or that place…  – 
not at Wat Nanachat.’ 
 
This has been a constant point of discussion over t he 
years and, I think, often the very real benefits of  training here 
have been overlooked or have been underestimated. W e can 
often develop a hierarchy of wholesome qualities in  our minds. 
We can be led to romanticize and idealize aspects o f the life. 
Of course, formal practice should always form the h eart of our 
life as forest monks, and states of deep meditation  are certainly 
to be aspired to, but the problem that can arise is  that we can 
downplay foundational virtues that, in the long run , are 
absolutely essential. Patient endurance is a good e xample. 
People say, ‘…well, I didn’t get anything from that  at all, 
except for patient endurance.’ It’s like ‘I didn’t get anything 
really worthwhile, but anyway, I guess a bit of pat ience is 
better than nothing.’ The Buddha himself, on the ot her hand, 
taught that patient endurance is the supreme incine rator of 
defilements. This is a phrase that we perhaps don’t  give as 
much importance to as we might. 
 
Years ago when I was researching for Upalamani , the 
Thai biography of Ajahn Chah, I interviewed many mo nks, 
including, of course Luang Por Sumedho. He, as you know, 
was the first Western monk to train at Wat Nong Pah  Pong and 
the first abbot of Wat Pah Nanachat. Discussing the  training he 
had received, I clearly remember him saying that, essentially, it 
was that Ajahn Chah provided the most conducive environment 
for development. I remember that particularly becau se it’s not 
the kind of answer that you’d expect from a discipl e of such a 
great teacher – emphasizing his ability to create t he most 
conducive conditions, rather than saying things lik e: ‘Oh, once 
we were walking along on alms round and he said thi s and 
suddenly I looked at the world in a different way’,  or: ‘One

40  
time I did something and he turned around and smile d and 
said….’ – like in the books we read. It was much mo re the 
ongoing life as a bhikkhu over a number of years th at he 
stressed, not so much these high-points or the spec ial teachings 
or profound words of wisdom, but more his ability t o create a 
system, a way for monks to live together which was of most 
benefit to them in the gradual reduction and elimin ation of the 
unwholesome dhammas, the development of wholesome 
dhammas, and the purification of mind. 
 
In many ways living together as a community is not a 
comfortable experience. We used to say in the old d ays, ‘The 
catholic monks, they have hair-shirts and those thi ngs they tie 
around their legs that cut into them and cause them  pain. We 
don’t have all that. For us, just living together as bhikkhus, has 
the same kind of effects.’ But the fact that it’s n ot comfortable 
is actually the point of it. After a long monastic career I’ve 
experienced many different types of training enviro nments, 
and, as you know, the last few years I have been li ving in 
solitude. I think I have quite a good grasp of the contrasts and 
the advantages and disadvantages of different ways of living 
this life. As regards a more solitary style, or the kind of life that 
many of us might characterize as ‘the real kind of practice’, I 
can see that, yes, the continuity, the lack of demands upon ones 
time, the lack of tension, the lack of stress and c onflict and so 
on, are very conducive in a way. But I also noticed  that there 
are certain very important aspects of practice that  are more 
difficult living alone and which can be developed m uch more 
easily in this kind of communal environment. For example: just 
yesterday, when the senior monks had a little meeti ng I made a 
certain statement. Another monk very skilfully said  to me, 
‘Well, no, that’s not right.’ So I adapted and refo rmulated my 
statement, and the monk smiled a bit and said, ‘Well, no, that’s 
not right either.’ He was definitely correct, and I was incorrect,

41  
so I shut up. And then all of a sudden I thought, ‘ Wow, this is 
what I’m missing: living alone these days I never h ave that 
experience when somebody tells me I’m wrong or some body 
points it out when I make a mistake, when I’m looki ng at 
things in the wrong way or I’m lacking the necessar y 
information or working from the wrong information. This is a 
clear benefit of living in a community of good friends.’  
 
The kind of things which are difficult to see livin g 
alone in the forest are one’s own ditthi  and mana  – views and 
opinions, the conceit, the ideas about who you are.  Whereas 
you may have quite a clear and subtle awareness of the arising 
and passing away of moods and thoughts in conscious ness, 
ditthi mana  are more subtle; they can provide the ground in 
which these are perceived. You might compare it wit h a 
painting: the ditthi  and the mana  are more like the canvas or 
the particular mode of expression – whether it’s an oil painting 
or a water-colour. They do not draw the eye in the same way as 
the particular forms that constitute the painting. 
 
One of the major maturing factors of living in a 
community like this that is so mundane and obvious that we 
tend to overlook it, is the daily schedule. In many  ways this is 
one of the most important teachers. This is what Aj ahn Chah 
emphasized, and has been passed down in this monast ery – 
through Luang Por Sumedho, Ajahn Pabhakaro, Ajahn J agaro, 
Ajahn Pasanno, myself, and Ajahn Ñanadhammo. Look at your 
mind, look at your body, and see what comes up when  you 
have a steady, stable kind of environment, where ev eryday is 
more or less the same. Repetition is not the same a s monotony, 
because there are always subtle differences. What h appens, 
when the bell goes at three in the morning? How do you feel 
about that? How easy is it to get up in the morning ? How 
difficult? Is it the same every day, does it change ? Why does it

42  
change? What’s the difference, what are the causes,  what are 
the conditions? How does it feel, going to the medi tation hall 
every morning? What is your attitude to morning cha nting? Do 
you like it? Do you dislike it? Do you feel indiffe rent? Do you 
like it when some people lead the chanting? Do you not like it 
when other people lead the chanting? Do you like th is chant? 
Do you like that chant? How do you feel about going  on alms 
round? How do you feel about this route rather than  that route? 
All these kinds of likes and dislikes are coming up  and 
becoming very clear to you because you have a stabl e 
background of korwat . You’re not just doing things the way 
you want to do them.  
 
When you first have an opportunity to live alone, y ou 
think, ‘Ah, this is what I want.’ You can sit as lo ng as you 
want, you can walk as long as you want. There are s o many 
things you can do in the way you’ve always wanted to do them, 
and that feels good – no question about that. But t hat feeling of 
relaxation and enjoyment that you can do the things  the way 
you want to do them, is not necessarily a wholesome  thing in 
the long run. There’s also a lot to be said for for feiting that 
kind of control Of course you have the control in t he sense that 
you’ve volunteered to come here. Nobody forced you to enter 
this monastery, to take on the training. You committed yourself 
to it, you took dependence from the Ajahn, and that  means it is 
like a contract. ‘Okay, I signed up for this now. A nd I’m 
willing to give up a certain amount of my freedom o ut of 
confidence and faith that this is a training that w ill have a 
beneficial effect upon me.’ And then, when we’re in  that safe 
environment, in which everyone’s conduct is grounde d in 
Vinaya, and where we all have that sense of spiritu al 
friendship, and we’re all following the same path t owards the 
same goal, where we can feel that confidence that p eople are 
living within the boundaries of the Vinaya and no o ne is going

43  
to hurt us and harm us – then we give ourselves up to the daily 
schedule. And we learn to look at what happens.  
 
Some of the stuff that comes up in the daily life i n the 
monastery may seem a little bit ridiculous. Tan Aja hn Pasanno 
gave the example of getting very irritated about so meone who 
had spilled some water and doesn’t wipe it off their seat. If you 
were to explain this to someone outside the monaste ry they 
would probably be surprised: ‘I got so angry becaus e someone 
did not wipe some water off a seat.’ Or: ‘Someone w alks into 
the meditation hall and makes such a loud noise.’ O r: 
‘Somebody else is always sneezing’ … I could go on – you 
know all those little tiny things that rub you up t he wrong way. 
These kind of things are going on all the time and it’s rare that 
the things that disturb us are major issues. Most o f the time, 
their so petty, you’d be embarrassed to tell anybod y else about 
them. But, nevertheless, they are things that bring  up emotions 
in your mind. In fact, the trigger itself is not the point, it’s what 
it symbolizes to you.  
 
Sometimes when someone takes something that you 
think you had a right to it, say another monk is gr eedy and 
takes nearly all the remaining sweets at the mealti me for 
example. Normally one part of you’d say, ‘Don’t be so stupid. 
It’s a little thing.’ But it’s not the thing itself , is it? Doing 
without that particular sweet is not difficult as s uch. You may 
not even be that fond of it. No, what really rankle s is the sense 
that “it shouldn’t be like that, it’s not right, it ’s not fair.” 
Seeing a monk act in a selfish indulgent way can seem to shake 
the whole foundation of our life together as a mona stic 
community.  
 
Each of our experiences is filtered through a certa in 
lens, a framework. This framing process lies for th e most part

44  
within the realm of ditthi.  And in the early years of monastic 
life, what we were really concerned about more than  anything 
else (apart from developing sense restraint, and sk ills in using 
the Vinaya and korwat  to firmly ground ourselves in the 
present moment), is to straighten our ditthi ; to create correct 
and beneficial frames. Even in a monastery there ar e so many 
things that can bring up unwholesome dhammas merely  
because of the frames through which we perceive the m: frames 
conditioned by our expectations, fears and desires. 
 
Ajahn Chah’s teachings come back again and again to  
the Four Noble Truths. The Four Noble Truths are th e 
foundation of all of our practice. First noble trut h: dukkha , 
suffering. Second Noble Truth: samudaya , the cause is craving. 
This tells us that the suffering we are experiencin g in our daily 
life comes though wanting things and not getting th em. Not 
liking people, not liking things, but for one reaso n or another, 
having to put up with them. Liking things, wanting things, and 
not being able to be with them. And this is the nit ty-gritty of 
monastic life in a community. You look at a person next to you 
and perhaps you think, ‘I became a monk to get away  from 
people like that. I never thought I would meet some one like 
that here, let alone have to spend my life sitting next to them.’ 
(Some of these monks can actually later become grea t friends, 
by the way. But that’s another story…) 
 
So this is what it’s about: we can be looking at th e five 
khandas  for example, or developing the four foundations of  
mindfulness and so on, through conforming to the mo nastic 
schedule. And being given periodic reflections that enable us to 
develop some kind of perspective we are able to see  all kind of 
stuff coming up in us, as simply that. Conditions a rising and 
passing away.

45  
I think it is very common for bhikkhus to develop b lind 
spots in their practice, or even blind areas (of co urse I don’t 
have any myself, or at least I’ve never seen any... .) Those 
things become more and more imbedded and more and m ore 
difficult to get rid of to the extent that you shy away from 
community. This is why to spend a long period of tr aining in 
community life before going on extended periods of meditation 
alone is a basic principle in our monastic life: pa ssing a five 
year period of apprenticeship first (although withi n this there 
are always shorter periods of solitude, too). For e xample, it is 
in community life where you can sort out right spee ch. 
Obviously, you cannot develop right speech living a lone. Well, 
you can talk with yourself – and I sometimes do – b ut that’s 
not the best way. We all have to deal with the unwh olesome 
speech habits we carry into monastic life. Some mon ks say, ‘In 
Wat Nanachat there are so many people, so much interaction. It 
stirs me up. It’s not peaceful.’ That’s a particular frame, a way 
of looking at things. But we can change that frame and 
consider that this monastery provides an excellent opportunity 
for developing right speech. Right speech is not a minor 
consideration. It’s one factor of the Eightfold Pat h. It’s oneeighth of the Eightfold Path. 
  
There is conceit, there are views. Often – particul arly 
here in Wat Pah Nanachat, less so in Thai monasteri es – you 
get confronted when you come up with ridiculous thi ngs, or 
you act in obnoxious ways. Somebody takes you up on  it. In 
Thai monasteries people usually just turn away. They just don’t 
want any kind of hassle, but here you often get pul led up for it. 
This is why a lot of monks can become averse to this place. 
  
There is a real value in the korwat -training that I saw 
very clearly through the period that I was running the 
monastery. I don’t have the psychic powers to just sit and see

46  
who is doing what in their kuti  or who is practicing well and 
then give Dhamma talks where people say, ‘Wow, he c an read 
my mind’ (I can’t do that, and – to tell you the tr uth – most 
abbots can’t...). But one of the ways we can as lea ders of 
communities have a very good idea of who is going o ff the 
rails, who is going a little bit strange, is practi ce of the korwat. 
Who is coming out for morning chanting? Who misses 
almsround or comes out late for this and that? Who doesn’t 
sweep in the afternoons? All these things, these as pects of the 
daily schedule, are very clear indicators of where people’s 
minds are at.  
 
This whole relationship between the inner and the o uter 
is a very interesting one. Sila and the way we live together is 
something that is constantly modifying us and chang ing the 
way we look at ourselves, our self-image. So, a maj or task for 
us, particularly as young monks, is to try to devel op samanasaññ a (the perception of being a samana ). I’ll give you a nonmonastic example concerning this change of attitude  that is 
quite interesting. An experiment was conducted in A merica in 
which they took some really big ugly signs, promoti ng road 
safety, knocked on people’s houses in suburbia and said, ‘We’d 
like to ask permission to put this in your front ga rden.’, 
knowing that it would obscure the houses, and look totally 
awful. Eighty percent of people in suburb number on e said, 
‘No way’. Then they went to suburb number two and s ixty 
percent of the people said, ‘Yes, fine.’ What was t he 
difference? Well, in suburb number two, three weeks  
previously, people had gone around people’s houses and given 
them a tiny little sign promoting road safety. Thre e inches by 
three inches saying, ‘Could you stick that on your front door?’ 
Most people had no objections. And that was just en ough to 
change their perception of themselves. Now that they had made 
this very small commitment by having a little sign on their

47  
front door, their sense of themselves had changed. Now they 
were people with a concern for road safety. So, thr ee weeks 
later, when they were asked to put that big sign in  their front 
garden, they had this sense that they should be con sistent with 
this new idea of who they are. And so many people, sixty 
percent said yes to these big ugly signs. Now, the comparison 
with monastic life is this: to keep the Vinaya, to be restrained, 
to follow the korwat – these are not merely external things that 
have nothing to do with the real practice. They hav e a very 
subtle effect on our sense of who we are. The samana -saññ a, 
things are contributing. In the famous simile of Suzuki Roshi, it 
is not like going out in the rainstorm and getting wet; it is like 
going out in the fog and you are gradually and grad ually 
getting more wet. This is one of the ideas underlyi ng this 
training.  
 
I believe this training works and is effective, pro vided 
that you’re able to look at it and clearly see its value, and give 
yourself to it. Wat Pah Nanachat, as you know, is n ot an 
isolated western or non-Thai enclave in the Thai mo nastic 
world. We’re part of something much bigger; we’re one branch 
of more than two hundred branches, we’re part of a lineage 
with wonderful teachers. One of the greatest was he re this 
morning, the upajjhaya 
33  of many of you sitting here today, 
Luang Por Liem. And so, our understanding of what W at Pah 
Nanachat-monks are, is not of being part of an isol ated entity, 
but that we are part of the Ajahn Chah tradition. T he training 
here is not one which is restricted to this one pla ce; there are 
the branch monasteries Poo Jom Gom and Dtao Dum, an d all 
the other branch monasteries where over a period of  time you 
will have the opportunity to spend time in. You’ll also have the 
opportunity to live away from the other Western monks in Thai 
                                                 
33 upajjhaya : the preceptor in the ordination ceremony

48  
monasteries, where you can learn the language and t he culture 
more easily. Wat Pah Nanachat is blessed with two o f its own 
branches, Jom Gom and Dtao Dum, where we can live i n more 
solitude. The vision is of a rounded training. 
 
As regards living with a new young abbot, please be ar 
in mind that even the greatest teachers are not alw ays 
competent in every area. There is a case, quite rec ently, where 
one of the most respected of our teachers had a rea l problem 
with a ghost in this monastery. He wasn’t able to d eal with it 
and had to go to invite another monk who is an exor cist to 
come and help. Every monk has his strong points and  his weak 
points. Nobody is completely brilliant in everythin g. The idea 
of living with a great enlightened teacher is very attractive to 
all of us, I think. And fortunately in our monastic  life most of 
us will probably have that opportunity at some poin t, But it is 
not a shortcut to spiritual progress. Often around great teachers 
there is a lot of politics, a lot of jealousy, and monks who are 
close to great teachers can easily become heedless and 
conceited. So there are a whole bunch of different kinds of 
challenges. There is always something else to learn  from 
monastic life. In whatever monastery we are living in, whoever 
we are training with, it is the attitude of humblen ess and 
sincerity that counts. 
 
I have spent many years in this monastery and I fee l a 
great affection for it and an enduring sense of con nection. I 
think that all of us previous abbots still feel a p art of Wat Pah 
Nanachat and want very much to support it. So I encourage you 
all to live together as kalyana-mittas  (good friends in the 
Dhamma), which means trying to help each other to o vercome 
unwholesome dhammas and to develop wholesome dhamma s. 
Every one of us here is in training and we are all learning about 
Buddha-Dhamma and developing slowly and gradually or even

49  
rapidly. It looks to me as if the framework here is  solid and the 
community has a lot of potential. I would like to w ish Ajahn 
Kevali, the new abbot, every success in fulfilling his 
responsibilities. I wish you all the true happiness  and inner 
freedom that can come from commitment to the Dhamma  
Vinaya.