# Excerpts from a short speech written by Luang Por Liem to be read out opening the conference of the Australian Sangha Association, the umbrella organi-zation of all traditions of monastics that have settled down in Australia, including Mahayana and Vajrayana besides Theravada, in June 2006 (2549).

Following the Footsteps  
of the Enlightened Beings 
 
 
Excerpts from a short speech written by Luang Por 
Liem to be read out opening the conference of the 
Australian Sangha Association, the umbrella organization of all traditions of monastics that have settled 
down in Australia, including Mahayana and Vajrayana 
besides Theravada, in June 2006 (2549).  
 
 
Siam, or Thailand, is highly renowned all over the world for 
being one of the countries where Buddhism is thriving and 
flourishing. This is in part due to  our ruler, His Majesty the King, 
giving Royal patronage to the national religion. As a result, 
Buddhism has flourished, especially in the areas of the study of 
theoretical knowledge and Dhamma education. 
 
Still, our country has not yet been able to present to the 
world an acceptable example of  somebody who has gained the 
highest spiritual fruits of Buddhism. Having emphasized the 
spreading of theoretical knowledge, we have yet to take the next 
step to spreading the practice of  Dhamma. If we have succeeded 
in this, we will be truly following the footsteps of the 
ariapuggalas, the Noble Enlightened Beings, who we have 
learned and studied about so much. We have yet to send one of 
those who have received the full fruits of practice to prove to the 
world that the path of Buddhism is capable of extinguishing the 
suffering in the hearts of beings – just in the same way as modern 
science is able to relieve the physical pain of the body.

Day by day our lives come closer to ending. Therefore we 
must strive to follow the footsteps of the Enlightened Beings , and 
incline towards the high est fruits of Buddhist practice. Thus we 
will fulfill our duty as monastics:  the obligation to abandon all 
things that are obstacles to the ending of suffering. To cast them 
off completely. In contrast to this , is the lifestyle of settling down 
in huge, big residences – the lif e of a householder who needs to 
take care of all kinds of posse ssions, and has many worries and 
lots of responsibilities.  
 
Actually, being a householder or  a monastic is not defined 
by the type of cloth worn, be it that of a layperson or a monastic. 
The way we lead our lives defines us and the spiritual qualities we 
have. This is independent of the external form or our special 
status as monastics. Anyone w ho lives without a house, who does 
not possess anything apart from th e clothes he needs for covering 
his body, only has a single vessel for taking his meals, and is 
solely intent on a life free from suffering, can rightly be called an 
anagarika, a “Homeless One” – irrespective of whether he wears 
lay or monastic clothing. Coming fr om the heart, the principles of 
the Dhamma are not aiming at taking status or anything external 
as essential. We need to main tain the Dhamma in our hearts, 
develop an internal resource of  refined thinking and have the 
dedication to act accordingly. This  means to follow the footsteps 
of the Enlightened Beings in our actions. 
     
If we keep following the footsteps of the Enlightened 
Beings, we will eventually discover a “science of the mind”– 
spiritual knowledge that can be of great benefit for the world. We 
will be able to maintain this lifestyle with dignity in its original 
form, bring it to the West and create something useful for the 
world. In fact, the world has tr emendous thirst for truth and

happiness. Are we going to lie down, waiting for our habits to 
change by themselves, or are we going to try and do what can be 
done by human strength and effort, the way the Buddha taught us 
to?  
 
If studying Buddhism by the books was all we needed to do, 
leading the Holy Life of a B uddhist monastic wouldn’t be 
anything very profound. Nevertheless, to study the books with the 
motivation to find a way out of suffering seems worthwhile. But if 
our primary motivation to study is based on ambitions for gain 
and fame, we begin the Holy Life  in a wrong way and are likely 
to go astray. So, can we see the danger in this? Isn’t it obvious, 
which path leads towards the world, and which one leads beyond? 
How can we hope to be able to pick up the fruits of the “noble 
science of spiritual qualities” if we only study the books? 
 
Our teacher, the Lord Buddha, was born on the bare earth 
under a Sala-tree in Lumbini. He was enlightened sitting on the 
bare earth with just a thin cush ion of grass, under the Bodhi-tree 
in Bodhgaya. He entered final nibbana lying down on the bare 
earth, under a Sala-tree, with me rely his outer robe underneath. 
Nothing more than that. His whole life the Buddha spent on the 
earth and under trees. This tells  us how withdrawn the Buddha’s 
life was. He didn’t get involved with using extravagant dwellings. 
That he was able to realize the truth about the world of the mind is 
due to just this dwelling in seclusion. If we have never given it an 
honest try to live in places of s eclusion, we shouldn’t just assume 
that we lack the opportunity to cultivate the wonderful qualities 
that the Buddha taught about. We s hould cut off the fetters in our 
hearts that bind us to seeking company, entertainment and a life of 
pleasure. We should maintain that it is an honour to  frequent the 
kind of places of retreat that the Buddha himself used with great

results and recommended to all of us. And we should hold our 
being Samanas of the Sakyan clan in honour, through our 
wholehearted determination to act with honesty towards ourselves 
and towards other people. Then we will reach the fruits of this 
noble science of the mind, an unchanging truth. Our hearts will be 
liberated, free from slavery to anything in this world. We will 
experience a power mightier than the sciences of the physical 
world – a power that is capable of  bringing the world to lasting 
peace and coolness. Isn’t the constant lack, hunger and thirst of 
the world aroused by the temptations and stimulations that 
modern science constantly k eeps inventing anew and anew? 
Modern science constantly causes people to suffer in all kinds of 
ways because it keeps stimulating the wish for more and more 
without knowing an end. Just like when somebody is actually full 
after he has eaten, but still some thing that he likes even more 
comes and tempts him. Taking it, he experiences suffering 
burning him up inside. The wealth y and poor suffer all the same 
in this matter, until they eventu ally get a taste of this noble 
science, a taste of the way of life of the Enlightened Beings. 
 
Why is it that people don’t take this wonderful medicine that 
can ward off all those diseases which arise in the mind? The 
suffering of the mind is really lik e a disease. Desire, never being 
satisfied, never knowing enough, is the virus which causes it. And 
peace and seclusion is the medicine which cures the illness. Those 
who lead their lives according to the practices of the Enlightened 
Beings are the ones who provide  others with the medicine, 
helping them, after they have cured themselves.  
 
So let us learn this noble scie nce, the science of truth, and 
help each other for the highest benefit and happiness of the world, 
ourselves included. To do this, we need to live our lives in a truly

fresh and soothing, cooling way, both externally and internally, 
deeply bright and radiant, repres enting a symbol of coolness and 
tranquility for others. We will be an example for those human 
beings who experience suffering weighing heavily on their hearts, 
whose eyes are dull and dark due to internal consumption by the 
fires of greed, anger and the frus tration of their wishes. Only 
externally representing the form of a Samana, but internally being 
full of thoughts of lust and cravi ng just like laypeople, we won’t 
be capable of giving the world an  example. We will be like the 
blind leading the blind.  
 
  We should create as much benefit for others as possible 
with our exemplary conduct, even though there won’t be any 
reward for it. By the power of  our kindness other people will 
develop friendship towards one an other as well. We should teach 
the world by sacrificing our own happiness, giving an example of 
how one can live well using only the bare necessities. We can 
collect what we have saved by refraining from luxury and use it 
for the benefit and happiness of those other people that are still 
suffering.   
 
All through history, in any day and age, a fully enlightened 
being, an arahant , would never spend his life in laziness or take 
advantage of other people by hiding away from society in order to 
search for merely his own happi ness. In truth, the arahant  merely 
waits for opportunities to give others the example of a truly happy 
person. All the time, all his life, the arahant  is a model of patient 
endurance, resolute strength and d iligent effort, even for people 
that aspire only to worldly success.  
 
Take a look at the process of becoming an arahant. It starts 
with making the same resolution the Buddha himself made:

“Bhikkhus, all of you should bring forth effort by determining 
in your minds: “Even if my blood and flesh al l dries up and 
only bones and sinews remain, if I have not yet attained the 
fruits that are attainable by stre ngth end exertion of energy by 
human beings, I won’t stop this effort of mine.” 
 
This resolution shows that people should be taught to be 
able to bear with and endure things, firmly, relentlessly and 
continuously. Those who have attained to arahantship will always 
continue to put forth effort for the benefit of others. They continue 
to be an example and teach to patiently endure what nature brings, 
hot or cold weather for example. They aim at perfecting what is 
beneficial, supporting only the essential. For an arahant it is 
normal to be an example of somebody who is able to sustain his 
smile in the midst of all the flames of a fire spreading out and 
burning him relentlessly.     
 
To let other people see the exam ple of one’s actions, to live 
so they can see, is much better than to teach using merely words. 
Therefore let all of us follow the footsteps of the Enlightened 
Beings together. True benefit, happiness and peace will then arise 
for all of us and for society as well, for our country, and for the 
world. 
 
***

Since we are living the life of one who 
 sees the danger in the round of rebirth and 
we are in a position where we have the duty 
to pass on the principles and practices of the 
Dhamma, it is necessary that we take this 
obligation seriously.

“Practise  
Within Ones Duties”

Practise Within Ones Duties 
 
Parts of a talk given on Jan 12 th 2007 (2550) in the 
ordination hall (uposatha hall) of Wat Nong Pah Pong, 
addressing the yearly monastic assembly commemorating Luang Pu Chahs passing away, where 
almost a thousand monks gather to express their faith 
towards their teacher and his specific way of training.    
 
This uposatha hall was built by Luang Pu Chah in 2519 
(1976), and was ready for use in 2520 (1977). One can say that it 
is quite a durable structure, as it has served its purpose now for 
already as long as thir ty years. An ordinatio n hall is a religious 
site, a place that specifically belongs to the Sa ngha. The Sangha 
has received permission (from the s overeign of the nation) to use 
this site for performi ng its religious tasks within Buddhism. In a 
way we can see such a ceremonial site as a fundamental feature of 
the Buddhist religion. This refers to the physical presence of a 
religion, in the sense of  material objects ( sasanavatthu) being a 
testimony and representation of th e religion. Religious objects of 
this kind are called senasana, the dwelling places (of the Sangha). 
For this dwelling place we have  received permission from the 
authorities governing society. We  have ownership over it, and 
have the right to perform what benefits the Dhamma-Vinaya in 
whatever way we wish. This means particularly to be able to 
accept new people into our religious  community (in this hall), 
which is called the ceremony of Going Forth and Bhikkhu 
ordination.  
 
The ordination ceremony is meant to ensure that there is 
enough human potential for doing the work of passing on the 
heritage of the Buddhist religion. Whenever people go forth into 
monkhood and ordain we gain streng th for the continuation of the

religion. This, in fact, relies on nothing else but the human 
resources in our community of monks. 
 
So the individual Buddhist, a member of the religion 
(sasanapuggala) plays a very important role, as it depends on the 
people within the religion to turn the religious teachings, the 
sasanadhamma, the dispensation of the Buddha, into something 
that is of benefit. That is why, when the individual followers of a 
religion take up the obligation to transmit and pass on the 
teachings, they need to be po ssessed with certain spiritual 
qualities, namely, as we understand it, some of the aspects of the 
spiritual realizations that are characteristic for the Sangha
1. Still, 
this doesn’t mean that the people forming the human resources of 
a religion are already perfect in th ese spiritual qualities from the 
start. But it is necessary to gradually develop such knowledge by 
means of following the principles of the Dhamma-Vinaya.  
 
If a person doesn’t have spiritu al values that are in line 
with the Dhamma-Vinaya, this will give rise to things that are 
incorrect and will further contradict  some of those teachings that 
form the noble qualities of the Sangha. For this reason we need to 
give knowledge and advice to thos e persons that we call monks 
and novices, those who fulfill the role of continuing Buddhism. 
We need to instruct them, so they acquire good standards and 
practise what is correct and in line with the guiding principles and 
values of the Sangha. This is what is called “sikkha”, training.  
 
 
1  This refers to the Nine Qualities of the ariya-sangha, the Noble Disciples 
that have attained one of the stages of liberation. The Nine Qualities are for 
example: to practise well (supatipanno) or to practice directly (ujupatipanno).

Sikkha means to educate onese lf through being aware of 
one’s conduct when performing the duties of a well-practised 
person, namely, keeping sila2 and Vinaya. We have to give this 
great importance, as sila an d Vinaya are considered the 
fundamental roots of our religion. If people have some education 
in the Vinaya, they will practis e and conduct themselves in a way 
that gives rise to neither conflict, nor decline, nor degeneration. 
  
Since we are living the life of one who sees the danger in 
the round of rebirth and we are in  a position where we have the 
duty to pass on the principles and practices of the Dhamma, it is 
necessary that we take this obligation seriously.  
 
To train and educate oneself is actually not very difficult, 
because the teachings of the Buddha, including the Vinaya with 
all its connections to th e principle teachings, do  in fact relate to 
our own behaviour and actions in  all their variety. Whatever 
behaviour is inappropriate or not right, the Buddha forbids, 
teaching us so we know how to refrain from it and give it up. In 
our interactions with other people, we need to be aware of the fact 
that our actions will have an effect on them. This is something to 
keep in mind very clearly.  
 
As one of the individual monks living in a certain place, 
doing his duties as part of the human potential (of Buddhism), one 
shouldn’t give way to thinking narrow-mindedly in terms of 
“atta”, one’s own person. One shoul d think in terms of the 
communal aspects of this religi on, considering the results and 
effects that occur on the communa l level. Anything that is not 
 
2 sila (Pali): virtue, morality, ethical conduct, or specifically: keeping the 
precepts of a monk, novice or layperson.

correct may cause division an d arguments in unskilful and 
unbeautiful ways.  
 
These days we hear a lot about the world being full of 
conflicts. Maybe you know the Jataka-tale 3, in which the Buddha 
gives the comparison of a Sangha that used to live together for a 
long time being like the wooden go ng of the people of Dasaraka. 
A gong is an instrument for callin g people together. If such a 
gong becomes old, its wood will start developing cracks, and the 
person that has the task of maintaining the gong in its original 
condition will have to insert a wedge or a peg into the gong in a 
way that the gong keeps the shape of a gong. There is actually not 
much about all those things that are inserted (into our lifestyle as 
Samanas) as long as we don’t become infatuated with what is not 
appropriate for a Samana. But this is exactly what happens when 
wealth and fame develop. Such a development creeps in the 
corners and bit by bit makes us fo rget who and what we are. One 
has to be very careful about that. All of us need to be aware of this 
and should not get carried away with  things. After all, we are not 
doing these things for ourselves . We are doing them for the 
benefit of the community, and act based on the principles of the 
Buddha’s teaching, the Dhamma-Vinaya. This is a point we need 
to take into consideration. If we refer to such principles, we most 
probably won’t become heedless, and we are likely to maintain a 
life with a heart of loyalty toward s practices and ways of conduct, 
which won’t lead to self-destruction.  
 
There is nothing that can destr oy us other than negligence. 
Negligence comes from not s earching and inquiring to find 
                                     
3 The Jatakas are the stories of the Buddha’s past lives as a Bodhisatta in the 
Pali Canon. 
7

knowledge about ways of improving things so that they become 
beneficial. This is what we need  to try, and each individual, being 
a part of the religion’s human potential, plays a role in 
maintaining it, both on the mate rial and the human side of the 
religion.  
 
Now, being in a position to do things and to  take over 
responsibilities, we should be aw are of the importance of having 
such a chance. We have the chance,  so we try to protect it for our 
own sake. We need to make the most of our opportunities. As 
concerns the support of the laypeople: they are ready. Even if they 
aren’t able to give material suppor t, they will still encourage us 
mentally. In any case they will give their appreciation. So we try 
to do our duty. Don’t be somebody who is weak.  
 
So I’d like to express my appreciation for all of you living 
in different places doing their duty in line with the teachings of 
our venerated teachers, and the Dhamma-Vinaya. Don’t merely 
do the things you do following your wishes. This isn’t good. One 
should counsel others. We ha ve many many friends in the 
Dhamma living together with us. At least, we shouldn’t do things 
in a rush, but rather act in a way that is reasonable. Then things 
won’t go to ruin and we will be pleased with what we have done. 
What we have done will be Dhamma and Vinaya. Our 
monasteries, once they are built up completely, will be conducive 
for practice, and we won’t have  problems, or be frustrated, 
burdened with a lot of worries. Everything will feel cool and 
tranquil, and we’ll be in a position where we are accepted by 
society. 
 
So all of you that are to fulfill these duties, be well 
motivated to do so, even if you are living alone – then there

shouldn’t be many problems, nothing to spoil. Plea se always do 
your duties according to our funda mental, essential principles. 
Always keep to the ideals and ha ve personal standards of practice 
in the way you lead your lives. Th ese standards will serve as our 
reinforcements, bolstering and warding off (problems). They will 
be a refuge for us to rely on. If we possess such standards of 
practice as our basic principles, our actions will give us strength 
and a feeling of being at ease. 
 
What I have just spoken about are things which are not too 
profound, but are the underlying prin ciples that I have practised 
with in this monastery. Having come together (to this meeting) 
here, you probably realize that this  monastery is a place that we 
should protect and keep functioning in every aspect: the material 
objects, the human resources, and ev en all the different religious 
ceremonies within the monastery. Le t us keep them in line with 
the fundamental principles of the Dhamma-Vinaya, within the 
Buddhist religion. 
 
***

Being a true human being means being 
somebody who possesses a mind that goes 
beyond the nature of the world.

“Ordination:      
Going Forth”

Ordination:  
Going Forth 
 
Going Forth is the translation of the Pali term pabbajja 
that is used for the samanera ordination (novice 
ordination). It means to go forth from the household life 
to the life of a Samana, a contemplative. This teaching 
was given by Luang Por Liem during a ceremony of 
Going Forth of Western monks at Wat Nong Pah Pong 
on Feb. 19th 2003 (2546). 
 
Now at this time, your presenta tion of these yellow robes – 
sewn and dyed according to the most  excellent allowances of the 
Buddha – and your utterance of the words requesting the Going 
Forth is well done by all of you. 
 
Apart from that, the Going Fo rth requires that – from the 
beginning onwards – you plant and cultivate your faith and 
inspiration within the field of  the Triple Gem. Because the 
Buddha, the founder of this religi on, has allowed the Going Forth 
only if one initially studies and knows what the qualities of the 
Lord Buddha actually are. 
 
The Buddha is endowed with goodness in the following 
ways: 
 
He possesses wisdom, sharpness  of mind and discernment, 
applying it to those things that  ought to be known and seen, 
knowing their advantages and di sadvantages, whether they are 
beneficial or not, all the way to each of th e Four Noble Truths – 
and he does so without anyone teaching him. This aspect points in 
the direction of the Buddha’s Quality of Wisdom.

The Buddha has left behind all unwholesome states of 
mind, the defilements and desires, the habits and modes of being 
that have been incited by these defilements over a vast stretch of 
time. He possesses the most excellent traits of character, and is 
composed of qualities of Dhamma that are essential. This aspect 
is the Buddha’s Quality of Purity. 
 
The Buddha is endowed with loving kindness and 
compassion for the crowd of beings heated up by the fires of 
defilement and dukkha. He advises and teaches so that these 
beings, having listened, may follo w and practise after him – for 
the complete extinguishing of the fires of dukkha – and he does so 
regardless of the troubles, hardships and difficulties arising for 
him. This aspect is the Buddha’s Quality of Great Compassion. 
 
The noble being that dwells in these three qualities is called 
“Buddha” – the one who knows well and perfectly. When, 
knowing well and perfectly  in this way, a Buddha points out and 
teaches, these doctrines and teach ings are called the “Dhamma”. 
Further, those people that have heard the Dhamma and behave 
and practise accordingly – following its disciplinary code, the 
Vinaya – are called the “Sangha”. 
 
These three, the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, are 
thus the three objects that we will have to give the highest 
importance. When we possess the feeling that we are completely 
respecting the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, it is 
appropriate to receive the Going Forth. 
 
Now I will tell you the basic meditation objects, as a means 
for you to train for liberation from the defilements. They are given 
in Pali, just in the same way as the teachers of old have been

passing them down for many genera tions. Please repeat after me: 
   
“Kesa, loma, nakha, danta, taco, 
 taco, danta, nakha, loma, kesa.”4
 
These meditation objects the Buddha called the mulakammatthana (the root meditation objects). They provide a way 
for us to experience mind states where the desires staining our 
hearts cease.  
 
It is normal that the ordinary unenlightened being identifies 
himself with his desires. But the Buddha wanted us to see desires 
as non-self, as non-personal, and to  realize that there is no being 
there, just the existence of elements – material form that behaves 
according to the laws of nature and relies on its environment 
being in balance. It is only then that a state like this can come to 
be. Still, once existing, it doesn’t mean that it is stable. It exists in 
such a way that there is change and alteration all the time. It is not 
in a condition that permanently st ays the same. Ther e needs to be 
arising, existing and ceasing. This way of being is what we call 
existence according to the laws of nature. 
 
Investigating these root meditation objects leads us to 
seeing instability, non-sustainabil ity and non-self, a way of being 
that is born, exists and ceases. This weakens our desires, our 
grasping onto and giving importance to the self.  
 
 
4  Meaning: hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin (repeated in 
reverse order), the first five outwardly visible of the 32 components of the body 
that the Buddha taught to reflect on.

Once we have weakened our assumption of a self, the 
mental states that come from having to interact with the worldly 
society will also be weakened – regardless of the kind of situation 
that we relate to. If it is one where we are accepted and receive 
praise, we won’t feel happy about it , and if it is a situation where 
we are blamed, we won’t feel hurt.  Not having feelings of either 
liking or disliking will allow us  to understand ourselves better. 
These feelings are Worldly Dhammas, lokadhamma
5, the qualities 
that rule over those people who s till have dust in their eyes – the 
average unenlightened beings that exist on a low level. They will 
see these mind states as somethi ng worth wishing for, but as we 
are practitioners who aspire to di minish the desires staining our 
minds, we take up the reflection of  seeing such states of mind as 
merely an experience of feelings that are born, stay for a while 
and then cease – both sukhavedana and dukkhavedana  (pleasant 
and unpleasant feelings). Happiness, the Buddha called 
somanassa, which is considered a mode of sukhavedana, and 
sadness he called domanassa, which is a mode of dukkhavedana. 
Dukkha and sukha are expressions of  reality that cause emotions 
to arise, so the Buddha taught us  to focus our minds on them and 
know any feeling as simply bein g a feeling. The emotions of 
liking or disliking we also know as simply feelings. There is 
nothing that could be firmly established and enduring, lasting or 
permanent. All these are just states (of mind) that, after having 
arisen, will naturally have to cease. 
 
Understanding our experiences lik e this, we won’t get lost 
and go astray, thinking in terms of “this is good” or “this is bad”. 
These kinds of thoughts are just attributes of delusion and wrong 
 
5  The eight Worldly Dhammas are:  praise and blame, fame and disrepute, 
gain and loss, happiness and suffering.

view – nothing else, so the Buddha taught us to focus and reflect 
on seeing them as modes of namadhamma6, being born, existing 
and passing away. There is no need for one to be a slave of these 
processes, a slave of the world, a slave of the defilements of 
sukha- and dukkhavedana. One should see that these processes 
always have an element in them that makes one feel that they are 
lacking something. They are of the kind that one can say is never 
full, that doesn’t know the point when there’s enough – just like a 
flame never gets enough fuel. 
 
So, focusing on these processe s as simply being born, 
existing and passing away, we are able to turn ourselves away and 
get out of the situati on of having feelings lik e this, not becoming 
slaves of desires or what is called tanha (craving). Generally, 
tanha is a feeling that is coupled with dukkha, a feeling that is 
difficult to bear with, a feeli ng of non-freedom. We need to 
investigate these feelings, and this will bring us to experience 
peace of mind – peace from sukha- and dukkhavedana. We can 
live like Samanas then, like “peaceful ones”. This is what we need 
to rely on. 
 
So, let us take these meditation objects and develop them, 
apply them and bring them to lif e, so that we know this world. 
Knowing the world, we know this reality, and what our human 
birth is about. Being a true human being means being somebody 
who possesses a mind that goes beyond the nature of the world. 
Let us take this as our attitude in  meditation, so that we can work 
on helping ourselves with the liberation from the powers of 
delusion, wrong views and unwholesom e mind states, so that we 
 
6  namadhamma: mental phenomena, as opposed to rupadhamma, the 
phenomena of the physical world (literally: form).

can attain a state of mind that is pure and clean, so that we 
experience the arising of the benefits of the practice of Dhamma, 
so that we will see the benefit of relating to ourselves in the 
correct and appropriate way. 
 
Now, I will hand over the yellow robes to you, to wrap 
around you. Then you can come in again and take on the precepts, 
so that the ceremony of Going Fo rth will come to completion. 
“…come here…!” ( Luang Por says in English) 
 
*** 
After the postulants have put on the yellow robes and 
taken the ten precepts of a novice, the talk continues: 
 
From now on, it is your duty as samaneras to correct and 
develop yourselves. You need to constantly recollect that now you 
are of a different species than the householders and the common 
people in the world. Here, we lead  our lives like ones that see the 
danger and disadvantages of the round of samsara
7. So it 
becomes necessary for us to do our duties in developing our being 
Samanas – or samaneras – in the sense of being somebody whose 
ways of life are peaceful.   
 
We develop peaceful bodily conduct. Our body, with all its 
parts and organs, shouldn’t be used  in the manner of fools. We’ll 
conduct it wisely. That means in  a humble way. Humility means 
to have an attitude of respect, to live in a subordinate way, not 
getting carried away with oneself . Manners like these are ways of 
guarding one’s body, as it is called. One also needs to guard one’s 
speech, as speech is the source of good and bad (actions). One 
 
7  samsara (Pali): the (endless) round of birth and death.

needs to know how to use speech well. Our speech should be 
grounded in humility, then it won’t give rise to troubles and 
dangers. So we need to observe ou rselves in our practice in order 
to protect ourselves, both in every form of our bodily conduct and 
in our verbal conduct. It is necessary to guard oneself, keeping 
within the principle of applying mindfulness and within the 
standards of the training. In this way we won’t fall under the sway 
of ignoble and confused mind stat es. Ignoble mind states are the 
mind states of worldly beings that  don’t behave well or behave in 
degenerate ways. They are following the ways of the 
unwholesome, the mind states of  anger, desire, greed and 
delusion. All of these are considered forms of ignorance. 
 
Our becoming Samanas should gradually give rise to 
changes in a good direction. Having taken up the training we will 
have to practise the lifestyle of one who sees how life can be 
beneficial. We will have to give great attention to ourselves, in the 
sense that we develop the quali ties of honesty and straightforwardness in our minds. We should maintain good ethical 
conduct, and possess hiri, a sense of shame towards doing bad. 
When one possesses a sense of shame towards bad actions, one 
will also show fear and be cautious, because one sees that bad 
deeds won’t lead to freedom (which is called ottappa). 
 
So we will have to consider th ings in this way and start the 
training in leading our life following the intention to keep sila and 
develop purity. Sila in fact means purity. Sila is the intention of 
loving kindness, friendliness, ( metta), or the intention to respect 
the rights of other people. What ever we do, we need to be 
considerate. And we should start to  relate (to our environment) in 
a way that examines and investigates it, for the sake of seeking 
the truth of reality, saccadhamma. These are some aspects that

you need to develop an understanding of and educate yourselves 
in.  
 
Another aspect is how we use our facilities for communicating and relating to the world. We have got eyes, ears, a nose, 
a tongue, a sense of touch and a mind. Having eyes, we need to 
know how to guard them. These eyes  we have can give rise to 
both good and evil. The same is true for the ears, etc. If there is 
both good and evil, we need the skills to organize and choose the 
good aspects. For example, if the eye sees something that gives 
rise to feelings of getting carried  away by the power of emotions 
like desire or sensuality, we need to know how to control 
ourselves. If this comes up, we need to use meditation. Having 
been given these objects for meditation we should apply them.  
 
So we start to investigate, taking the body as our object. 
We analyze it in terms of vedana, and watch out for manifestations of the Worldly Dhammas
8. We see these phenomena 
arising and ceasing. They are mere ly states of existence, and 
durability and stability cannot be found in them. This is why the 
Buddha wants us to be cautious and restrained whenever the eye 
sees a form, the ear hears a s ound, the nose smells an odour, the 
tongue tastes a flavour, the body sens es something touching it, or 
there are mind states arising in the mind. Then the Buddha wanted 
us to have mindfulness and no t be careless, not allowing 
experiences to come up that we didn’t filter (through wisdom). 
We always need to keep filtering. This is another aspect in which 
you will have to train in as Samanas. 
 
8  Here meaning the two categories of the eight  Worldly Dhammas: agreeable 
and disagreeable phenomena (ittharammana and anittharammana).

Furthermore, there is the topic of how to relate to the 
requisites9 and necessities of life. We live as somebody who is 
content and has few wishes. In this we follow the Noble 
Enlightened Beings. We follow the safe path of those who dwell 
in mind states that are beyond the world. The way we practise 
towards our requisites is: knowing what is enough. If we get little, 
that’s enough. If we get much, that’s enough. Even if we don’t get 
anything at all – that’s enough. We develop to become somebody 
who always has enough. That means, somebody who is happy 
with whatever comes. In this way our Samana life will be free 
from obstructions and worries. If  we don’t have to worry about 
our requisites, we have the chance to continue our studies, 
educating and observing ourselv es on and on, relying simply on 
tranquility and seclusion. We rely on all the opportunities given to 
us in this lifestyle. We really  don’t have to bother about anything 
else. As far as society out in the world is concerned: we aren’t 
living in conflict with anybody. We are living for the sake of 
creating benefits for ourselves and others. When we are not in 
conflict with others, a quality ar ises in our mind that makes us 
become accepted by others. This is our duty. 
 
The term “diligent effort” is another expression for making 
the experience of perfection arise in ourselves all by ourselves. 
Perfection means to be completely prepared and mature 10. This 
complete preparedness means that there won’t be any problems. 
This is the case with somebody wh ose spirit is completely radiant 
 
9  The four requisites of monks and novices are: the robes, almsfood, a 
dwelling place, and medicines. 
10  In Thai: prohm, a word colloquially meaning “ready” or together and used 
by Luang Por oftentimes in the sense of attainment, perfection, fulfillment etc., 
but it also carries the connotations of maturity, being ripe, or being fully 
prepared.

or enlightened, somebody who has already passed their “shining 
night of prosperity”11 where there is no more darkness, and there 
are no more feelings of being oppr essed and irritate d. A state of 
being at ease arises in one’s mi nd, with one’s heart feeling fresh 
and cool.  
 
So we need to apply ourselves to our tasks. We need to 
practise and investigate, very  much giving importance to 
ourselves. A chance like this is ve ry rare, and our lives are really 
short. We don’t have that much time. The Buddha compared us to 
dewdrops (being dried out by the sun), or to cattle being pulled to 
slaughter. It really  is like this. Time keep s passing, but it doesn’t 
just merely pass. The fact of na ture that our bodily formations 
keep deteriorating makes itself  known accordingly with every 
period of time that has passed. It is  possible that the hair on top of 
our head starts falling out, or our teeth that had once been strong 
start to become loose. Our eyesig ht that used to be clear and 
bright may become feeble, and our ears that had once been able to 
hear well and clearly may not be able to locate where the sounds 
come from any more. Sometimes a noise comes from the north, 
but we turn our head to the s outh. We will be making more and 
more mistakes. Our behaviour will undergo changes, so we need 
to understand these processes (of lif e). We have to be aware that 
time passes and see the value of changing ourselves towards 
living in the experience of pure and peaceful mind states, 
unconfused and with a heart at ease. 
 
 
11  An expression from th e Thai translation of the Bhaddekaratta Sutta that is 
frequently chanted in Wat Nong Pah Pong, here referring to the night of 
enlightenment.

Living without confusion is all we need for being at ease. 
We can’t be well when there is chaos. When the powers of 
defilements and desires are burni ng us up, we become completely 
heated up and there is no peace at all. We are forced to become 
slaves of our desires. We keep thinking on and on that this or that 
is good or brings happiness, or is  the best. There is no end in 
sight.  This is why the Buddha taught us to see the disadvantages 
in these processes. Don’t go tying yourselv es up with thinking 
that desires are something pos itive. They are poison. If we 
swallow a poisonous substance, it will poison us and we won’t 
feel well. We’ll be in troubl e and panic, burnt up by dukkha. 
Following our desires will bring us to fall deeply instead of giving 
us the chance to experience the supreme. We sink into an inferior 
position, into states of calamity. This is the opposite of the path of 
progress in our development. It isn’t good. 
 
So, now that you have the oppor tunity, bring up motivation 
for the training. Continually. Walk on the path that the Buddha 
pointed out. This path is called samma-patipada (right practice). 
Within this path lies full perf ection: the training in sila, the 
training of the mind and the traini ng of wisdom. Don’t lead your 
life like they do out in the world. Their lives keep following the 
stream of delusion. If pleasant feelings arise, they are happy about 
it. If unpleasant feelings arise, they become sad, so they eagerly 
pursue the pleasant feelings and ha te the unpleasant ones or try to 
destroy them. This seems unworthy. Just think about it. We 
human beings shouldn’t lose ourselves in our ignorance to such an 
extent. We should know things better. Then things will be to our 
advantage.

So, be determined and motivat ed – all of you – to take up 
these duties of ours that carry the name “Samana”. Do this, as if 
your being a Samana was a chedi 12 or a place of reverence and 
devotion that is worthy of respect and worship. Keep on fulfilling 
your duties in this way. Taking this  chance to fulfill our tasks, we 
will be an example and guide to  others, somebody who gives rise 
to benefit and usefulness in the future. So let all of us be 
motivated and determined in our hearts and minds. May every one 
of us fulfill these duties of a Sa mana in a complete and perfect 
way.      
 
*** 
 
12  A circular monument of veneration, also called a stupa in Pali.

Living at the foot of a tree we won’t develop  the 
tendency to hold on to things, such as thoughts that 
something is ours or belongs to us.

“Ordination: 
 The Announcements”

Ordination:  
The Announcements 
 
After the Going Forth – sometimes in the same ceremony – Bhikkhu ordination  (upasampada) is given. In 
the ceremony of upasampada, a certain canonical 
teaching called anusasana (announcements) needs to 
be recited. The teacher announces the  nissaya, the 
four dependences on which a Bhikkhu’s life is founded 
(almsfood, robes made out  of cloth wrapping up 
corpses, the dwelling at t he foot of a tree and fermented urine as medicine), and the akaraniyakicca, the 
four things never to be done by a Bhikkhu (sexual 
intercourse, stealing, killing a human being and falsely 
claiming superhuman qualities). The anusasana needs 
to be recited in Pali. In the ordination ceremony on 
Dec. 15
th, 2005 (2548) Luang Por gave the following 
brief summary of the anusasana in his own words. 
 
 
The procedure of ordina tion into monkhood becomes 
complete by the chanting of a fo rmal act of the Sangha, which we 
have just finished chanting. So, now you are Bhikkhus in this 
Dhamma-Vinaya.  
 
In the lifestyle of a monk it is necessary to have rules for 
proper conduct and practice. We consider it our duty to follow 
these guidelines, and we have to fulfill this duty correctly, making 
sure that our conduct and practice is in line with the principles 
handed down to us by the Buddha. This requires that we do some 
study and develop understanding.

What the Buddha called “the Announcements” states the 
points of conduct that  are the duties of a monk. The Announcements can be divided into two parts:  
 
The first one is what the Buddha called the nissaya (the 
things to depend on), and the second one is what the Buddha 
called the akaraniyakicca (the things that shouldn’t be done). The 
nissayas point out the way of leadin g one’s life that is simple and 
easy. There are four nissayas: 
 
For sustaining our lives as a member of the Sangha, we rely 
on wandering for almsfood in village s. It is up to others how 
much they support us. We do our duty of going on almsround in a 
way where we don’t demand or ask for anything. This is in 
accordance with the tasks and du ties of a Samana, somebody who 
aims at peace. The Buddha called this “the dependence of going 
on almsround”. 
 
Then there is the “dependence on wearing pamsukula 
cloth”13. This is meant to create a feeling of dispassion in us, 
since pamsukula cloth is used to wrap up something loathsome 
and disgusting (i.e. a corpse). Our body is in many ways 
loathsome and disgusting and show s signs that are not desirable. 
If what we use to cover our body gets in touch with this dirty 
thing, it becomes just as disgusting as the body itself. This is “the 
dependence of pamsukula cloth”. 
 
For our dwelling, the place we live in, the Buddha wants us 
to resort to tranquil and secluded locations. That means to live in 
                                     
13  Discarded cloth, rags, or specifica lly cloth that is taken from a corpse 
before the cremation. 
7

a situation where we naturally have to rely on a simple and 
uncomplicated lifestyle. The Buddha said to live at the foot of a 
tree. Living at the foot  of a tree – a place where there is silence 
and seclusion – we won’t develop upadana, the tendency to hold 
on to things, such as thoughts that something is ours or belongs to 
us, and similar attitudes. So it is  for the reduction of mind states 
of attachment to our desires that we need to practise this duty. 
 
The fourth dependence concerns the practice towards one’s 
health, when our body is in an abnormal condition – for example 
when it can’t adapt to changes of weather. Then we use something 
that everybody possesses without exception: we drink fermented 
urine, following the Buddha’s advice. The Buddha called it “to 
adjust one’s elements”, meaning, to bring our body back to a state 
where it has sufficient resistance towards change of external 
conditions.   
 
This is the part dealing with the four nissayas, things that 
we are supposed to do. The othe r part of the Announcements is 
about actions that we should never do.  
 
The things never to be done are:  
 
– sexual activities (namely, sexual intercourse), 
 
– taking objects that weren’t given  to us by others (or that 
others don’t consent to us taking), 
 
– practices that lack metta, friendliness and helpfulness 
(that is explicitly: not to kill , destroy or create conflicts and 
similar activities).

The fourth point is: The Buddha didn’t allow us to 
carelessly claim and boast (about superhuman qualities) out of 
self-importance and delusion about oneself. When we come to 
live in the status of a monk we shouldn’t misconceive ourselves to 
be better than anybody. All of us are in the same situation, 
determined by the laws of nature that we all have to experience. 
There is no exception. To see ourselves like this is for the sake of 
reducing feelings of self-importance that may arise. 
 
So these four factors are called the akaraniyakicca, the 
actions that shouldn’t be done. No w I will announce them to you 
in their original language, the la nguage that we use generally for 
the preservation of the original teach ings, so that we will be able 
to apply and use them as points of practice. We practise in order 
to fulfill the tasks and duties of a Samana. 
 
***

To ordain is not a 
matter of external things.

“Contentment”

Contentment 
During his visit to Malaysia in May 2005 (2548) 
Luang Por Liem was asked the following questions 
about monastic life: 
 
Question: We’d like to know about  your experiences living 
together with Luang Pu Chah. 
 
Answer:  Generally, Luang Pu Chah taught us to conduct 
ourselves practicing contentmen t and being of few wishes. 
Contentment and fewness of wishes, these are words that describe 
a lifestyle where one isn’t prone to obstructions. It is also called 
the lifestyle of the “ariyavamsa”14, to live without ties and fetters. 
Contentment and fewness of wishes is a factor of perfection, as it 
is one of the qualities of Dhamma  that the ariy apuggalas possess. 
Now, if one isn’t an ariyapuggala but just an ordinary person, one 
still trains according to the gu idelines of behaviour of the 
ariyapuggalas. One takes their ways of practicing and makes them 
become one’s habits. The ariyapug galas teach us not to become 
angry, so even though we still want  to follow our anger, we make 
a point of refraining from it. Doing so for long periods of time, 
becoming angry ceases to be one of  our habits, and eventually we 
don’t want to become angry any more. This is the process. 
Following this kind of model is aiming at a state where certain 
ways of acting become natural. We then understand that this is the 
way of living of someone who isn’t in conflict with anyone and is 
free from dangers. This is the way I have practised with Luang Pu 
Chah. 
 
 
14  ariyavamsa (Pali): noble lineage – the lineage of enlightened beings; 
specifically defined by the Buddha as those who possess the qualities of 
contentment and fewness of wishes.

Question: Luang Por, this layperson is planning to ordain and 
would like to ask for some pers onal advice about leaving behind 
the household-life and becomi ng an anagarika – a homeless one, 
one who has Gone Forth. Do you have some recommendations? 
 
Answer:  To set out and ordain mean s to go against the stream, 
and for going against the stream one needs patience and 
endurance. One needs to build up patience and endurance to the 
utmost. This means to the level where one gets used to it and 
becomes proficient in it. Just li ke fish go against the stream. Any 
fish that has life will go against the stream all the time. Only the 
dead fish float along with the cu rrent. We need to be like the 
living fish in our training, build ing up patience and endurance, 
making these qualities our habit and getting used to holding 
ourselves back. Because actually, this life isn’t about much. It 
always has its good and bad sides. This is something we all have 
the capability to understand – so renunciation means renouncing 
what we seek for and wish to have in the world.  
 
People in the world are like flie s that go for filthy and dirty 
things. If we see things like this , there is nothing difficult about 
ordaining. Feeling that we don’t want to get involved with things 
any more makes things easier. Then  one actually doesn’t have to 
bear with and endure much at all, it all depends on one’s 
disposition.   
 
 But as we all know, it is really  true that this practice goes 
against one’s biological instincts. Usually, the instincts of human 
beings are designed to have us create partnerships. Sexual feelings 
are definitely present. As all t hose feelings around love and hate 
are still present we need to know  how to apply patient endurance 
and effort.

Don’t go and follow the thoughts of wanting to have it easy 
and be comfortable. You need to keep in mind that the source of 
peace and the attainment to perf ection is to be found exactly 
where dukkha is. It comes from dukkha. That we can experience 
comfort stems from nothing else than dukkha. So, actually, 
dukkha is part of what enables human beings to experience the 
sense of perfection – by having mindfulness and wisdom.  
 
The external dukkha is something that all of us are able to 
observe with one another, but in  order to recognize internal 
dukkha – the dukkha that concerns one’s state of mind – one 
needs to know for oneself. So to ordain is not a matter of external 
things. I myself have also passed these experiences and know 
them well, having ordained when I was still in my youth, in the 
period of life in which one like s to lose oneself in fun and 
pleasure, easily forgetting oneself. But I upheld that being a boy 
or a young man, one has to st udy and learn from these 
experiences, even though they are painful, hard and difficult. One 
needs to understand them as a part of life.  
 
Problems are part of life and are meant to be learned from, 
so I undertook this, resisting and going against the stream, not 
taking much pleasure in things that are pleasurable and 
comfortable.  
 
Also, in our livelihood, one should live like somebody who 
doesn’t possess much. Even with clothing, we only have a single 
set, just that. When I’m in Thailand I have just this set of robes, 
coming here (to Malaysia) I have ju st this set of robes. We don’t 
have many possessions as householders or worldly people do. We 
have just this, and one can say that  just this is enough to alleviate 
suffering. It is enough to ward o ff sun, wind, cold or heat. We

maintain these possessions merely for living our lives. In the end 
everything deteriorates and di sintegrates anyway. Who would 
have strong feelings other than this about possessing things? This 
attitude creates a sense of bei ng satisfied and pleased in one’s 
heart.  
 
When one is satisfied in every respect, things fall into place. 
Feeling satisfied, we are happy and at ease wherever we are, 
simply that. We are happy whethe r we live by ourselves or in 
society, whether we have little or much. Just when we have eaten 
enough of our meal – whoever may come to fill up our plate 
again, we simply don’t want it.  
 
So we eventually develop into being somebody who doesn’t 
have any obstructions, doesn’t have any worries about anything 
any more, living like “sugato”
15. This is the way the development 
leads.  
 
***
 
15  literally: “well-gone” – an epithet of the Buddha.

When relating to the various things that 
are necessary for our daily living, we follow the 
example of the Samana, who leads a life of 
restraint and composure.

“Restraint”

Restraint 
 
 
Luang Por Liem gave the following advice when replying 
to questions of the monks and novices at BuddhaBodhivana Monastery, Melbourne, in May 2006 (2549).
 
 
 
To practise Dhamma means pr otection. It makes us strong 
and creates a feeling of solidity and stability. This relies on 
conducting ourselves with restrain t, as it is mentioned in a 
principle we are using, called patimokkhasamvara, to practise 
restraint within the training rules of a monk (the Patimokkha).  
 
We can also look closer at th e akaraniyakicca (the things 
never to be done by a monk 16), which are about actions in which 
our conduct needs to be different from that of the people in the 
world, householders, or average unenlightened beings who are 
dominated by the powers of desire, sensuality and lustful feelings. 
 
It is in the first one of the “t hings never to be done”, that 
the Buddha spoke about inter actions with the opposite sex, 
namely (forbidding) sexual interc ourse. This goes against the 
grain. It feels like this really goes against our nature, but we resist 
following it in order to change our habits of acting like people in 
the world. We don’t give sexual ac tivities much importance, as 
they are all about dirty things. A nd one can say that they bring us 
into situations where it becomes impossible for us to experience 
freedom. Seeing it from this angle helps us understand (this point) 
better. 
 
16  see previous chapter.

What is called “restraint” is all about changing one’s 
habits, coming from darkness and se eking the light – or the white 
and the pure, as one might call it. Maybe we don’t yet see and 
understand what this brightness and purity is actually like. We 
don’t know yet. But this is merely because we are s till in a state, 
where such experiences are still unfamiliar to us. 
 
In this situation, we have to pay special attention to the way 
we relate and communicate (with the opposite sex), as we will 
always need to inte ract in some way. But the Buddha did give 
some definite guidelines of pract ice here, directed to Venerable 
Ananda. In fact, at first the Buddha  spoke in terms of completely 
objecting to any contact at all.  When Venerable Ananda asked 
him, “How should I practise towards members of the opposite 
sex?” the Buddha said, “It is best not to look at them at all.” So 
the Buddha is in a way against us getting to know and see the 
opposite sex at all. This is because the Buddha doesn’t want us to 
face unconducive situations which we can’t resist and where 
things might go to the ruin or fall apart completely. Nevertheless, 
Venerable Ananda questioned the Buddha further, “It is 
sometimes necessary to look at  women. How should we practise 
then?” The Buddha replied in a way to make us learn how to deal 
with our feelings responsibly. He said, “If you need to look at 
them, don’t speak to them.” This was the Buddha’s advice, but 
Venerable Ananda, who held a pos ition where he had to fulfil the 
Sangha’s duty of teaching the Dhamma-Vinaya (to the nuns), was 
still doubtful and asked further: “What about situations where one 
has to speak, for example, when they don’t know the way. How 
shall one practise then?” The Buddha further commented, “If you 
have to speak, you need to have mindfulness while speaking.”

So, let us think about this: “When you speak, be 
mindful…”  How is one mindful? This is something we need to 
discuss further. One is mindful in a way that goes against the 
stream of our emotions. Just like the fish that have the skill to 
resist the current. They never give  way to the stream or give up 
going against it. Even when they sleep they go against it. Their 
whole life they are in the stream , but they withstand it. That’s 
what the Buddha meant with bein g mindful when we meet the 
opposite sex. Of course, this is also a matter of training. This, the 
Buddha called restraint and composure.  
 
When relating to the various things that are necessary for 
our daily living, we follow the example of the Samana, who leads 
a life of restraint and composure. A Samana needs to live 
restrained, composed and cautious. This is similar to the way we 
need to ward off (impingements) when we are developing 
samadhi
17, building up a threshold of stability and firmness (of 
mind). The Buddha men tions this in the sammappadhana (the 
four right efforts) 18. Although this is one of the principles from 
theory, there are parts in it that  we can apply in our practice and 
conduct. The Buddha speaks of developing the effort to be 
cautious not to let bad things arise out of one’s inner tendencies. 
We all know well what these bad things mean. We just need to 
look closely and ask ourselves what lies in us that is bound to take 
us to situations where we drift off on paths that feel insecure and 
low.  
 
 
17    samadhi oftentimes means meditation in general, although it is the specific 
type of meditation that aims at one-pointed concentration of mind.  
18  The first of the four right efforts is samvara-padhana, the effort to prevent 
unwholesome dhammas that haven’t yet arisen from arising.

This is one of the principles that leads to the realization of 
the Dhamma. So we try to cultivate a sense of restraint and 
caution when using our sense faculties. But not to the level of 
being sceptical of everything. If we practise restraint so much that 
we don’t dare to trust any more, that’s also not right. Restraint 
should be practised in the way of a Samana. If it only leads to 
scepticism and insecurity, it has gone beyond what feels 
appropriate and beautiful.  
 
***

Anyone who behaves gently 
and humbly will always be well 
respected.

“Gentleness,       
Humbleness  
 and Patience”

Gentleness, 
Humbleness and Patience 
Advice given to monks from Wat Pah Nanachat asking 
for dependence on Luang Por at the beginning of their 
stay at Wat Nong Pah Pong on Jan 28th, 2006 (2549).   
 
You need to train to bring fort h an attitude of gentleness 
and humbleness. The words “gentle” and “humble” are about our 
good conduct as Sangha members – something that we need to 
practise by ourselves and deve lop in ourselves. With these 
qualities, the Sangha is well accepted by society. Anyone who 
behaves gently and humbly will always be well respected, even 
by the devas
19. The devas praise gentle and humble demeanour. 
Whatever it is, our prostrations, or  the way we raise our hands to 
greet20, all these are expressions of g ood manners that all of us in 
our Sangha should practise. 
 
This practice and tr aining is one of the embellishments of 
a Samana. It makes him beautiful  and enriches him. When a 
Samana relates to society, he will never provoke feelings of 
aversion, irrespective of the social status of the people he meets. 
A Samana is well accepted by soci ety. It is worth noticing that 
those leaders of society who take the ten Dhamma qualities for a 
ruler
21 seriously also need to develop the quality of gentleness 
 
19  deva (Pali): heavenly beings, angels, gods. 
20  añjali in Pali or wai  in Thai. 
21  The ten Raja-Dhamma (Jataka 378): dana (generosity), sila (virtue), 
pariccaga (selfless work and sacrifice), ajjava (honest work), maddava 
(deporting oneself with gentleness and congeniality), tapa (austerity), akkodha

and humbleness. The same was true for the Buddha himself. He 
gave these qualities importance becau se they bring up beauty in 
oneself and cause others to a ppreciate one. We should understand 
that gentleness and humbleness ar e very important qualities for a 
Samana. The expression “adikalyanam” (beautiful in the beginning) points to this: one becomes beautiful to look at right from 
the start. So we should train in being gentle and humble. It is 
normal that raw materials need to undergo processes of change 
and alteration until the outcome is a useful product that pleases 
people. With no changes and corrections the result would be 
displeasing. Similarly, if hu man beings don’t undergo training, 
exercise or practice, they are like raw products and other people 
won’t see them as useful. 
 
As Samanas we need to train to mellow down and weaken 
our worldly behaviour. For example, it is the style of laypeople to 
sit on chairs or around a table. Merely to change this habit to 
sitting “pappiab”22 on the floor is already incredibly difficult for 
us. It isn’t impossible, though. Afte r a bit of training one can sit 
pappiab on the floor quite easily. I myself never sat pappiab or in 
the meditation posture before, when I was a layman. So I was 
very stiff and reluctant with thes e postures and with all the ways 
of paying respect or bowing. It didn’t go smoothly. For me, too, 
these things were irritating. But if  one relies on a sense of patient 
endurance and keeps on doing these practices over and over, then 
one becomes used to them. One’s way of bowing and being 
 
(freedom from anger), avihimsa (non-violence), khanti (patient endurance) and 
avirodhana (not straying from righteousness). 
22  pappiab (Thai): a semi-cross-legged sitting posture on the floor with one 
foot pointing behind to the back. This is the posture that is considered most 
appropriate and polite for monks to asume when not meditating, especially 
when listening to the Dhamma.

respectful starts to feel smoother and smoother, and the sitting 
posture doesn’t make one feel that  one is straini ng the leash any 
more. One can do these things if one keeps training, exercising. 
 
 The training of all these external aspects is necessary. 
One needs to rely on the continuity of one’s efforts. In the end one 
is able to do things. The reason we do such practices is because, 
following our principles as monks , we want to take on a very 
simple life. To sit on the floor, for example, is plain and simple, 
because there is no need to arrange the place with objects to sit on 
or cushions to support one, just like in those places that the 
Buddha considered to be simple dwellings
23. The Buddha wanted 
us to live in a way where we develo p an attitude that is orientated 
towards nature. This is an important aspect.  
 
We need to train and deve lop when we practise. Any 
aspect of the practic e relies on this trai ning. It relies on doing 
things over and over. There are certain qualities in the life of an 
anagarika, one who isn’t bound to a home, that the Buddha called 
treasures. They are valuable goods. You probably know some of 
them. One of them has to do w ith our body – it is what the 
Buddha called kayasamvara, restraint of the body. It concerns our 
bodily behaviour. Possessing rest raint towards the body helps us 
to see things clearly, because our attention needs to be connected 
to our bodily movements, activitie s and the respective feelings in 
each posture. We need to directly know these things in time, and – 
for the sake of restraint – we also need to be able to tell straight 
away whether each bodily action or movement is appropriate for 
 
23  e.g. living at the foot of a tree, in the open, or in empty houses, as 
mentioned in the thirteen ascetic practices allowed by the Buddha.

an anagarika, someone who pract ices in order to realize the 
danger of samsara.  
 
We practise to observe our bodi ly conduct in terms of the 
good manners and etiquette of a Samana. To practice like this 
makes beauty arise. To maintain one’s bodily conduct is similar to 
looking after one’s requisites, like the dwelling, for example. One 
needs to maintain it well, so it is  of use and provides comfort. In 
our training, we also need to check whether what we do is 
appropriate for society or not. What do our friends in the monastic 
life think? Would they approve of our behaviou r? If not, we need 
to train further. These are external  things, of course, but still, we 
should see them as important fact ors that determine our lives as 
anagarikas, those who realize the dangers and drawbacks of 
samsara. They have to be alert and aware of themselves and keep 
good etiquette – or, as one might say in other words, keep sila.  
 
Sila can also be called an awareness of the dangers and 
drawbacks in one’s actions and th e intention, or feeling, that one 
doesn’t want to commit anything that is not good any more. 
Possessing such intentions – a sens e of concern regarding actions 
that cause enmity and danger – we need to develop and improve 
our capacity to resist. Bodily resistance depends on factors like 
food, the weather and our enviro nment. Being a monk, food is 
something that we aren’t able to control or choose by ourselves, 
as we depend on people’s free will to sacrifice by practicing dana 
(generosity). We need to realize that what we get is independent 
from what we would like to have . Actually, the things that we 
want are very much conditioned by the things we are used to. 
Being monks, we need to understand that our practice has to 
follow the principle of being happy with whatever we receive or 
have. An attitude like this will make us feel normal about things. 
7

As lay people we always did what we were used to. We’ve 
been practicing to call anything “g ood” if it was what we liked. 
Anything we disliked was “bad”.  We’ve been supporting such an 
attitude over a long, long time. Now we need to go against it. We 
have to train ourselves in going ag ainst what we are used to and 
what we like. An example of this is to sit meditation. If we have 
never sat in this posture before, the first time we sit, there are a lot 
of painful feelings. All one experiences are feelings of agitation 
and irritation, to put it simply: dukkha. This is the same whenever 
we don’t get what we like or what we were used to. Sometimes 
we struggle so much that we become worried and start to doubt 
everything. This is where we need to learn how to let things go, 
how to put things down. We need to realize that, as monks, we are 
not part of those people that can  arrange things according to our 
wishes or ask for things. Which kind of food we get, for example, 
is up to the donor’s wish. So we need to be able to adapt and step 
back from our own ideas. Not ge tting what one wishes, one needs 
the quality of upekkha (equanimity) or at least patient endurance.  
 
This entails what is called “ going against the stream” – to 
resist one’s moods, or going against what one was used to in lay 
life. So we train to go against the grain, even though it can be 
incredibly difficult. But it isn’t beyond anyone’s capabilities. To 
go against the grain is somethi ng that anybody can do. If we go 
against our preferences, we get th e chance to understand that they 
are merely sankharas, conditioned ph enomena, proliferations that 
we have been supporting all the time.  Giving the sankharas 
importance by identifying with them, saying we are like this or 
this is  ours , they became very powerful and are able to tie us 
down.

So the Buddha taught that we should learn to go against 
the grain and skilfully develop patient endurance, with 
mindfulness well established an d our minds well focused, 
especially in situations that we have never encountered before. 
The process is similar to catching animals in the jungle. Catching 
a wild animal is not easy. Until one can catch one, one needs to 
learn a lot about its behaviour an d approach it with gentleness. 
One needs to be sure that one knows the animal’s behaviour very 
well until one can approach it. 
 
So we need to observe ourselves. Look at the external 
side, the way we live our life. If you’ve studied it well, you will 
know what this lifesty le of a monk is like . Whenever you don’t 
get what you like, take it as a training in the Dhamma. At least 
you get some experience and training with the Dhamma of patient 
endurance. It is exactly when we get used to patiently enduring 
things that it makes us feel that everything is simply normal and 
not particularly difficult, or something to get agitated about. 
These situations become easy and they are conducive for a life 
that pursues liberation. 
 
So we need to conduct ourselves accordingly and train 
ourselves, being aware and cautious , practicing to be mindful – 
mindful not to get lost in worldly attitudes, mindful not to get lost 
in one’s moods.     
 
***

To live in competition, 
one supports low-mindedness 
and uses one’s intelligence in 
bad ways.

“Wealth and Fame”

Wealth and Fame 
 
Excerpt from Luang Por Liem’s reflections after the 
meal on July 3rd, 2006 (2549) 
 
Not many more days and it’s going to be Asalha Puja Day, 
the beginning of the rains retreat, the vassa24. Actually, the day 
when we enter the rains retreat is the first day of the waning moon 
of the 8 th month. This is when the B uddha said to determine the 
rains. So now, before entering the rains, we should start doing all 
the work that need s to be done before. These are communal 
duties, duties of the Sangha. They benefit the monastic 
community.  
 
The best way to spend the rain s is when one can carry out 
all the duties of the Dhamma-Vinay a. If there are at least four 
monks together we can ٛfulfil our basic oblig ation, the carrying 
out of the formal act of the Sangha in which we recollect our 
training rules – the recitation of the Patimokkha. 
 
The recitation of our rules is done to emphasise our 
obligations and tasks as monks. It he lps us not to lose direction in 
the way we lead our lives and not to give way to heedlessness. If 
we have strayed off the proper course in the way we live our 
monastic life, many negative thin gs will happen and things will 
go to ruin. 
 
 
24  The yearly monastic rains-retreat, that the monks determine to spend 
together in one place for three months. Traditionally this is a time of intensive 
training.

To do all the practices needed in daily life – our routines, 
duties and chores – is something th at we will always have to deal 
with. In fact, they are all pr actices towards our physical wellbeing. At the meal, don’t eat too much. Generally don’t take too 
much time for eating; try to be finished in 20 or 25 minutes. When 
we practise, we don’t give much importance to food. 
 
Luang Por Maha Amorn 25 wrote some very nice 
reflections on one of the Dhamma-signs put up on the trees, 
which, as he hopes, may stimulate a bit of shame and scruple in 
us, preventing negligence. He wrote: 
 
“Some ordain just for food. Having filled up their belly they 
lie down to sleep – no better than animals.  
 Some ordain wanting to have fun and play around – just like 
householders.  
 Some ordain lost in delusion – the longer they stay, the more 
stupid they become.    
If one hopes for magga-phala-nibbana, having ordained, one   
upholds the Dhamma.” 
 
This is what Luang Por Maha Amorn wrote. After I read 
it, I remembered it straight away. If we behave like animals in the 
way we consume things, that’s not good. Only animals compete 
and snatch away things from each other. For us, we practise 
observing our principles. If it comes to competition, that’s not 
good behaviour. Luang Por Maha Amorn also warned the 
villagers of snatching away hous es, food, land and their partners 
from each other, and fighting for power to control. 
 
25  Luang Por Maha Amorn or Tan Chaokhun Mongkonkittithada is a seniour 
disciple of Luang Pu Chah.

When I read those lines, it really stuck in my mind as a 
warning. But some people never th ink like that, because it is the 
nature of animals to live constantly competing. Animals lack a 
sense of shame and just go ahead and dare to do things. They do 
things without any wisdom. To live like that, one supports lowmindedness and uses one’s intelligence in bad ways. Whenever 
we start thinking in such ways, we need to correct ourselves. 
Don’t drift off into this direction; don’t fall prey to these things. If 
there are areas where we have gone  too far, we need to try to 
correct our course. 
 
Now that we are close to entering the vassa, especially this 
year, there are many requests to Wat Nong Pah Pong from 
(smaller) branch monasteries to send some monks for the vassa 
(so they fulfil the qualifications of the Vinaya for being allowed 
to receive offerings within a ‘Kathina-ceremony’ after the 
vassa
26). It’s simply that these people like making requests. 
What’s the point of requesting monks (to spend the rains in a 
monastery only for the sake of the Kathina-offerings)? We are 
practitioners. Mostly, those who ask for monks are not ready for 
training them, and don’t have the capabilities and knowledge 
needed to give support to young monks in their growth and 
development. They keep asking  and the training withers away. 
The monks that go don’t benefit from it at all – they don’t develop 
good, beautiful qualities, nor improve  their character traits and 
habits. 
 
All that happens is that things go to ruin. And the reason 
for this is that, mostly, the monks fall prey to the worship of 
 
26 If at least five monks have spent the vassa together in a monastery, they 
may receive these usually very generous ‘Kathina-offerings’.

external, material goods ( amisa-puja). They fall into what Ajahn 
Buddhadasa used to call ‘a heap of excrement’. He took this 
comparison from the discourses of the Buddha – Ajahn 
Buddhadasa doesn’t speak wit hout foundation – and he quotes 
from the Discourse of the Dungb eetle: a beetle that feeds on 
excrement. His belly is full and round because of all the 
excrement. 
 
Are we going to get lost and deluded with things like that? 
Material possessions and wealth, fame and praise – these are 
external things. If these things accrue to us, we need to at least 
keep things within the scope of  the supporters’ intentions. They 
want to enhance good and beautiful qualities. But if we lose 
ourselves in these things, we w on’t develop anyt hing like that. 
We’ll fall into dangerous pitfalls. That’s why the Buddha gave the 
example of Devadatta
27, who came under the sway of wealth, 
honour and praise. In the end it’s just this wealth, honour and 
praise that ruins everything completely. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27  Devadatta, deluded by the fame due to his psychic powers, tried to kill the 
Buddha and take over the Sangha without success. Eventually he split the 
Sangha, and was swallowed up by the earth for this heinous crime.

The Buddha wanted us to reflect on 
the use of our requisites… although 
they’re ‘clean’ they are actually not clean.

“Advice on  
Robe Washing Day”

Advice on Robe Washing Day 
 
From Luang Por’s daily reflections after the meal on 
May 5th, 2006 (2549).  
 
Today is Friday the 5 th of May, the 7 th day of the waning 
moon of the 6 th month. It is the day when we do the work of 
cleaning and washing the requisite s that we use for covering our 
bodies (i.e. the robes). These thin gs always need washing. They 
get soiled and stained by this loathsome and filthy thing called our 
body.  
 
Our body is a dirty and unclean  thing. It oozes and drips 
out of its openings, the ones in the upper parts of the body and the 
ones in the lower. It excretes filthy stuff even from its pores. All 
this transforms the cloth we us e to cover our body into a state 
where it smells stuffy and stinks. We all like to see the human 
body as something nice and beautiful, but the truth is that there is 
nothing at all about it that is desirable.  
 
The body is a dirty, filthy thing and smells. If we don’t 
bathe and wash it, it will develop quite a strong smell – similar to 
uncivilized people that haven’t yet developed in terms of looking 
after their bodies: hill tribes or  people living in the woods, for 
example. When one meets these tribes, a stuffy, stinking smell 
tells one that this is an area where there hasn’t yet been any 
development of hygiene and care for the body. They can live with 
it, though. They are used to it. 
 
The Buddha taught to take th e unattractiveness of the body 
as an object of meditation, pointin g out that its reality is not 
desirable. Simply the fact that  the body excretes and drives out

substances is already something that causes feelings of disgust in 
us. Nevertheless, we still experience feelings of sensual desire. 
But there are people, though,  who become weary and 
disenchanted with the body and see its unattractiveness, and that it 
is not something that can be considered beautiful in any way. 
 
The Buddha taught, with special emphasis, that we should 
see the body as an unbeautiful thin g. He even scolded one of his 
monks who gave it too much impor tance and was attracted to the 
Buddha’s physical appearance. He scolded him so he would start 
to reflect on what is so desira ble about such a foul and filthy 
object. The Buddha pushed him towa rds realizing the truth about 
himself. One shouldn’t be enamoured and infatuated with mind 
states of desire. These are worldly mind states. If we want peace 
and seclusion from sensual desires,  we need to pay attention to 
our states of mind.  
 
So, living in society, we wash  and dye our robes because 
we want them to be in a condition that isn’t indecent and 
intolerable for society. That’s why we need to wash them.  
 
We wash our robes with an astringent liquid – the juice 
from jackfruit wood, and we have a well set-up place for that 
(called the dyeing shed). Using this method for washing our robes 
is uncomplicated and there s houldn’t be any difficulties in 
maintaining them. Also, we only have a limited number of pieces 
of cloth. All we have is a lower, upper and outer robe, a waistband, an angsa
28, and a bathing cloth.  
 
28  angsa (Thai): a small rectangular cloth th at covers the chest area that is 
used in Thailand whenever the main robes aren’t worn, e.g. in informal 
situations, out in nature or at work.

But still, the Buddha wanted us to reflect on the use of 
these requisites – although we keep them in a state which society 
acknowledges as ’clean’, the Buddha said that  they are actually 
not clean. In the same way we usually say that after we have had a 
bath we are now clean. But in fa ct, we’re not. Because the body 
itself is a dirty thing. Similarly, no matter how much we wash and 
dye – things are not clean
29. The dirt is right in them. It is like 
with our robes: In the beginning they are white pieces of cloth. 
Then we dye them with some dirt that is conventionally defined 
as colour, and stain the whole clot h. And our feelings of what we 
consider as clean suddenly flip. 
 
Thinking about these things, the Buddha wanted us to 
reflect on the ajjhatta- and the bahiddha-dhamma,  internal and 
external conditions: both internally  and externally, things are all 
just disgusting. He wanted us to see both as disgusting. This will 
make us experience mind states that are relieved from sexual 
desires – the cravings and desires that stain our hearts. 
 
So, washing and cleaning count s as one of our duties. 
Living under such circumstances, we need to take care of our 
things. We need to look after them, use them and wash or dye 
them, maintain and clean them, an d also clean up the tools in an 
orderly fashion.  
 
The Buddha wanted us to keep our dwelling and everything 
in the monastery in an orderly state. This is the way that 
 
29  The traditional method of washing the robes with the yellow water of boiled 
jackfruit-wood chips is more of a re-dyeing than a washing, since the robes are 
not rinsed out, as one wants the wash water to remain in the robes because of 
its astringent properties.

somebody who keeps sila behaves. It is a way of life that has good 
standards and is tidy and well organised. 
 
“A monastery, though designed to endure, 
with temple halls of surpassing beauty, 
wealthy, with uncountable treasures, 
becomes ‘good’ in measure 
only when the monks do their duty, 
keeping the Vinaya pure.” 
 
We need to be aware of this. Vinaya means being orderly. 
 
So today, the rain overnight hasn’t brought much water and 
the sun has come out, so these ar e very conducive conditions for 
drying the robes; there shouldn’t be any problems. Our chores we 
can do after robe washing. Everyone does what he can. But don’t 
forget our obligation to behave properly, and keep up living in a 
way that doesn’t get carried away with fooling around. It is the 
fooling around that ties up all the beings in the world. 
 
***
