# Patimokkha Recitation”

“Reflections after the  
Patimokkha Recitation”

Reflections after the 
Patimokkha Recitation 
 
A teaching given after the fortnightly recitation of the 227 
training rules of the monks (the Patimokkha) at Wat 
Nong Pah Pong on June 26th, 2006 (2549). 
 
What we have just listened to are the sikkhapada, the 
training rules, prohibitions laid down by the Buddha. These 
training rules are all about actions that s houldn’t be committed. 
One can call them “akaraniyakic ca”, actions not to be done. 
Going ahead regardless, and acting against these rules won’t lead 
to good results, as the Buddha put it. We presently still use these 
rules as our basis and as our roots, although they are given in the 
original language, a language th at has lasted over two thousand 
years in history. When recollecti ng and reciting the rules together 
now, if we don’t understand the meaning, we should look it up in 
a language that we understand. We  need to give these things 
attention, as they concern our et hical standards (sila). There are 
things that we should refrain fr om as monks. Certain actions we 
should stop doing. We should st art leading our lives being 
equipped with Dhamma.  
 
To be equipped with Dhamma relies on a number of 
factors, just as new Bhikkhus in the Dhamma-Vinaya need to 
have certain qualities. The physical, material aspects of our bodily 
khandhas
30 are only external, so we need to have Dhamma in the 
 
30  khandha (Pali): aggregates; the five causally conditioned groups of 
existence  forming a human being: rupa or physical form, vedana or feeling,

way we lead our lives. We should fulfill our obligations toward 
ourselves, supported by our spiritual potential (parami ). Our 
character traits and habits surely will change, as the principles of 
practice that we keep applying ar e definitely capable of causing 
changes in us. 
 
When we practise, we hope and aspire to attain to purity 
and perfection. This relies on putting those teachings into practice 
which enable us to experience an understanding of Dhamma. The 
bodhipakkhiya-dhammas
31 are considered the group of teachings 
that is best for the training and practice. For example, the 
iddhipadas (ways to success) – chanda (zeal, aspiration), viriya 
(energy, diligent effort) , citta  (thoughtfulness, active thought, 
dedication) and vimamsa (investigation and examination) – are 
qualities that we need to arouse in ourselves. One of them is the 
“putting forth of effort”.  
 
In putting forth effort, there needs to be continuity. One 
needs to put one’s heart into the practice, maintaining an interest 
and motivation that doesn’t cease or expire. Then one needs to 
refine one’s experience by using dhamma-vicaya (reflection on 
Dhamma), investigation of the conditions that one is practicing 
with, not letting feelings of discouragement and loss of motivation 
take over. For all this, one need s the very quality of patient 
endurance. 
 
sañña or memory/perception, sankhara or mental formations and viññana or 
consciousness.  
31  bodhipakkhiya-dhammas (Pali: the wings to awakening): a group of 
qualities that the Buddha considered essential for realizing Nibbana, 
comprising the four satipatthanas, the four sammappadhanas, the four 
iddhipadas, the five indriyas and the five balas (saddha, viriya, sati, samadhi, 
pañña), the seven bojjhangas (sati, dhamma-vicaya, viriya, piti, passaddhi, 
samadhi, upekkha) and the Noble Eightfold Path.

The qualities expressed in the iddhipadas are all very close 
to the quality of diligently puttin g forth effort – viriya. As we 
probably know from our studies, the Buddha gave us some 
similies for the perfection of the spiritual potential of viriya in the 
Jatakas, in the Mahajanaka Jataka
32. Relying on effort one 
eventually succeeds. Just like when chanting the Patimokkha – a 
task that is beneficial for th e Sangha – one needs diligence. 
Relying on effort one succeeds in memorizing the Patimokkha. 
This relies merely on effort. This  is why the Buddha stated that 
diligent effort is a quality that gives rise to success. 
 
The conditions of our lives, which we should find methods 
to overcome and become free from , don’t refer to anything else 
than the categories of rupa (the physical world) and nama (the 
mental world). In the bodhi pakkhiya-dhammas the four 
satipatthanas, namely kayanupassana (mindfulness of the body), 
vedananupassana (mindfulness of feelings) , cittanupassana 
(mindfulness of the mind), and dhammanupassana (mindfulness 
of mind-objects) concern both rupa and nama. Kayanupassana 
deals with rupa. We take up contemplation of physical form so we 
can free ourselves from it and come to experiences that are not 
bound up with the kinds of delusions and wrong understandings 
caused by attachments and mistaken identities. We apply our 
practice to the body, or the rupa-khandha, in order to create a 
feeling of not being concerned and worried about the body. We 
practise according to the ideals that are appropriate for walking 
the ways of the peaceful.  
 
 
32 The Mahajanaka Jataka refers to one of  the ten last lives of the Bodhisatta, 
in which he perfected viriya-parami, swimming across the sea for seven days 
without knowing when he will reach the shore.

We apply ourselves to this pr actice again and again, so that 
feelings of self-importance and mind states based on the ego don’t 
arise. We contemplate seeing th e body in the body as merely a 
physical phenomenon that is pron e to arising, existence and 
cessation. We should see the body from the point of view of the 
Three Universal Characteristics. Due to them the body is the way 
it is, and not any other way. This is how we need to contemplate 
the rupa-khandha. The body can’t be  otherwise. We should see it 
as a particular manifestation of Dhamma. It is anicca, dukkha, 
anatta
33 – precisely that. Seeing things like this allows us to 
experience a way of being where feelings of delusion – or 
misperceptions where we forget who and what we actually are – 
don’t arise. 
 
Concerning vedana (feelings): feelings are symptoms 
created by the sense bases. The sense bases are where their origin 
lies and also their extinction. Feelings arise due to pleasant and 
agreeable things ( piyarupa satarupa), experiences that we 
encounter in one way or another. The eye seeing something or the 
ear hearing something can be the cause of both happiness and 
suffering – pleasant and unpleasant e xperiences that we can also 
call “Worldly Dhammas”. They are part of the modes of the mind. 
We observe them. To really say that they are pleasant or 
unpleasant doesn’t hold when we look at them closely. They are 
merely modes of experience that arise. Feelings are just like 
waves that build up, break in a nd roll towards the shore where 
they eventually disintegrate into nothing. They are just conditions 
of experience that arise within the realm of the Three Universal 
Characteristics. To say that they are happiness or suffering isn’t 
 
33  impermanence, suffering and not-self. These are the “Three Characteristics”, 
or “Three Universal Characteristics”.

true, so we neither agree nor disagree with them. These symptoms 
arise if a person’s mental immunity is still insufficient – it has 
weak spots. Agreeable feelings  (or happiness) and disagreeable 
feelings (or suffering) occur. 
 
This is why the Buddha wanted us  to stay in a state that is 
neither happiness nor suffering,  where feelings are simply 
feelings, with no-one who owns them. He encouraged us to see 
feelings from the perspective of emptiness. When one is empty of 
feelings, empty of happiness an d suffering, there is neither 
happiness nor suffering. There is what is called the “dhamma of 
equanimity”, upekkha-vedana (neutral feeling). This is indeed 
nature. 
 
So we try to observe ourselves in this way. Particularly as 
we need to constantly keep tr ack of ourselves, with focus and 
awareness, so as not to be overwhelmed by the power of 
sensuality, or the power  of our desires and defilements. This is 
how we practise regarding vedana. 
 
Concerning the mind things are similar: We need to watch 
the activity of the processes of our minds, whether they are kusala 
or akusala (wholesome and skilful, or unwholesome and 
unskilful). We watch the kusala- citta with its positive emotions 
and the akusala-citta that can ta ke our lives towards defilement, 
depression, aversion and enmity, when it comes under the sway of 
agati (biased views or wrong courses of perception). 
 
We need to focus on our mind and observe it. We need to 
refer to the facts of existence when we look at the mind, well

grounded in the vipassana-ñanas34 which, in fact, are all about 
the Three Characteristics. 
 
The Three Characteristics are like a bright light that enables 
us to see things in a way in wh ich we don’t need to get involved 
or attached or need to hold on to things. The mind is simply the 
mind, whether it is wholesome or  unwholesome. We should not 
approach it in a way that leads to attachment and grasping. 
 
In relation to the objects of the mind (dhammas) we need to 
be like “one who is possessed w ith wakefulness and insight” – 
free from the nivaranas35. We shouldn’t allow the hindrances to 
be present. As long as they are, one is still in a state of being 
incapable of growth and progress. The hindrances are a shield that 
restricts growth, just like a tree that is hindered by some structure 
is unable to sprout. We  shouldn’t allow ourselves to live with the 
hindrances. We ought to live a life free from the hindrances. 
 
We always need to see how we can live putting forth effort, 
with diligence and mindfulness – being one who is awake. This is 
a factor that creates Right View and a feeling of peace. When one 
has Right View there is no desire  and no suffering. Right View is 
like a light, dispelling darkness.  The Buddha mentioned this, 
saying the light of Right View removes the obstacles and destroys 
the barriers. The Buddha also said:  
 
“Natthi paññasama abha” 
(There is no light equal to wisdom) 
 
34  vipassana-ñanas (Pali): the nine insight-knowledges. 
35  the five hindrances ( nivarana) of sensual desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, 
restlessness and agitation, doubt and uncertainty.

We live our lives as one who is awake, who is radiant – 
like a Samana, like one who is  possessed with the SamanaDhamma. 
 
Living according to the Samana-Dhamma, one of the 
points to reflect on every day is this: As Samanas we now have a 
different status from householde rs. They act, following the 
influence of defilements and desi res. Under the power of craving 
they are always in need. But we, as Samanas, endeavour only for 
being at peace. Our relationship to  the requisites of a monk and 
the necessities of life is free from likes and dislikes. It isn’t based 
on desire. Our life isn’t ruled by the power of craving. We live 
through the power of knowing. This is of true benefit for 
ourselves, and that is why the Buddha pointed it out. 
 
Also, in the daily reflections of a Samana, the Buddha 
reminded us to reflect on the fact  that time keeps passing, so we 
see that there is nothing really sure and stable in life. It is not just 
that the time of our lives passes, but along with it, everything that 
is part of the material world will also reveal instability and 
uncertainty. In the end everything will have to transform into 
emptiness, a state where a being, a person, a self, or “us and 
them” can’t be found. We should reflect like this, and find support 
in heedfulness, as time keeps passing and passing. We should live 
with an attitude of practice, and sustain our life being possessed 
both of Dhamma and of Discipline (Vinaya). Having DhammaVinaya is called a great fortune. It creates a feeling of being on 
the right path – the path leading to maturity and perfection. The 
treasure of sila refers to ha ving a feeling for good manners, 
behaviour and conduct – with all the physical expressions, namely 
our actions by body and speech. But if  we attain to perfection in 
terms of the asankhata-dhamma (the unconditioned) in all our

behaviour, there is only kiriya – mere performance of activities, or 
functioning. There is nothi ng that has to do with kamma  
(purposeful action). If one’s actions are still on the level of 
kamma, they are going to create ne gative effects in some way or 
another. In the case of actions that are kiriya, experiences of peace 
will arise. This arising of peace is called “asankhata-dhamma”, a 
state where there are no prolifer ations as found in the world. 
Proliferations that create moods in the mind don’t exist.  
 
So, the principles of the four satipatthanas ar e really worth 
studying, applying, developing and bringing to perfection. All 
four are synonyms for each other. They are interdependent. 
Seeing the body, feelings, the mi nd and the mind-objects should 
in fact be done in a way sim ilar to how the Buddha reflected on 
the law of conditionality, or “dependent origination”. How did the 
Buddha reflect? He started with  reflecting on the sankharas. 
Ignorance being the cause for san kharas to arise, and sankharas 
causing viññana, viññana causing nama-rupa … and so on. This 
should lead us to focus on the round of existence ( vatta), which 
one might as well call the “round of  change”, with its phases of 
passing on and beginnin g again. Ignorance causing proliferations 
to arise is like darkness cau sing people to have doubts and 
uncertainty. It is like being in the dark, where all we can rely on is 
making assumptions and suspicions. Walking in the dark one is 
anxious about everything. One doubts that one will arrive at one’s 
destination, one fears all ki nds of threats and changes. Avijja 
(ignorance) has got these qualities.  This is why we should live 
with vijja (knowledge), or vijjacarana, both knowledge and 
appropriate conduct.  
 
*** 
7

So we undertake this study and practice together – now it is 
almost time for entering the rains retreat, which we are going to 
spend together with the study of Dhamma and Vinaya. Those 
monks who are still young and physically strong – please try to do 
your duties. In relation to this, we have just been informed that the 
Sangha authorities of Ubon would like to know how many 
Patimokkha chanters there are in each monastery in Ubon 
province. To keep the Patimokkha in memory is a quality that will 
lead to benefit in many ways. So they asked how many 
“Patimokkha-holders” each monastery has. If you are not 
physically disabled and your body is still in a state that allows you 
to learn the Patimokkha, you should  try. There’s nothing wrong 
about giving it a try. 
 
Chanting the Patimokkha is also a means to overcome the 
hindrances. If we experience obsta cles in the development of the 
qualities of a Samana, we can re vert to recitin g the Patimokkha. 
The Buddha once gave Venerable Maha-Moggallana this advice. 
While Maha-Moggallana was pract ising in Kallavalaputtagama 
and his progress was hindered by some obstacles, the Buddha told 
him to recite principles of the teachings that he had learned in 
order to dispel the hindrances. In this way the Patimokkha can be 
helpful to our practice.   
 
We should also try to do some further studies. One of the 
qualifications mentioned by the Buddha of a monk who fulfills 
the duties of a senior member in the Sangha is to know what is an 
offence and the method of resolving it.  
 
Further, the Buddha stated very  clearly that a senior monk 
needs to be one who is possessed with a sense of shame and fear 
of wrong-doing (hiri-ottappa). One can’t do without these

qualities – to be equipped with a sense of shame preventing one 
from proceeding with incorrect act ions, or from not fearing to 
transgress the rules. This is what we understand by “sense of 
shame”. 
 
So we continue educating ourselves. This occasion of 
chanting the Patimokkha is an op portunity to demonstrate our 
skills and show how much dedication we put into these duties. We 
don’t just let our lives pass devoid of sense. We have to rise up to 
our ideals. Once we have achieved our aim, it’s not going to be 
without benefit. There will be more opportunities to use what we 
have learned in the future. One can see it also as another way of 
warding off obstacles. So we should make an effort in this area. 
 
Now that the rains retreat will soon begin, there is also the 
opportunity for us to move to ot her monasteries that provide good 
facilities for the development of the Samana-Dhamma, and spend 
the rains retreat there. We change  places in order to experience 
some new possibilities for developing the practice, our studies and 
in fulfilling our obligations.  
 
For myself – in the first year after spending the rains at Wat 
Nong Pah Pong, I went to Wat Suan Gluay. Just a few days before 
entering the vassa, Luang Pu Chah wrote a letter of 
recommendation and told me to go  there. I thought, okay, that’s 
fine – no problem. So I travelled to Suan Gluay. By coincidence 
there was a cremation just when I entered the monastery. “That’s 
a good start,” I thought (Luang Por laughs). Wat Suan Gluay is an 
old cremation site. I didn’t want to leave the site, thinking that this 
is a good chance, because I wanted to challenge and test myself. 
In the old days the burning of a corp se wasn’t such a neat thing as 
today. As soon as the fire was lit, all the people would run away.

Nobody would stay. There is a saying that if one stays around, the 
fire won’t really burn. So ev erybody had disappeared. When the 
night came I took my chance to observe things. But there wasn’t 
anything. There was a tiny bit of f ear: I was afraid that some dogs 
would come searching for somethin g to eat. To go to these places 
is also a good way of getting to know and train oneself. That year 
we were 16 monks and novices spending the rains in Wat Suan 
Gluay. The kutis were more like little shacks. The food was good 
enough to stay alive from day to day. The stay at Suan Gluay was 
also good in that it brought the experience of getting to know 
some of my companions in the m onastic life. Before I had always 
depended on a teacher. Now, at Suan Gluay, I was a senior monk 
with quite a few rainy seasons. So I did my duty in that position. 
This is also one of the good aspects of life in an other monastery. 
We get the chance for further trai ning. In that rainy season I also 
gave the monks and novices instructions on how to memorize the 
Patimokkha. 
 
So, at this time, now that we are about to enter the rains 
retreat, we’ll be having plen ty of opportunities for the 
development of the Samana-Dhammas, the virtues of a monastic. 
 
***

“The Embellishments  
 of One Gone Forth”

To be somebody who conducts himself 
with a mind standing firm…not 
becoming overpowered.

The Embellishments  
 of One Gone Forth 
 
A teaching given to the monks of Wat Nong Pah Pong on 
the occasion of entering the rains retreat (vassa) on July 

nd, 2005 (2548), after Luang Por had just returned from 
a stay in hospital due to acute heart-weakness.   
 
In the period that we undertake to spend the vassa, a period 
of ninety days, we take up both aspects (of the Buddhas teaching): 
the side of study (pariyatti-dhamma), in which we have to get a 
bit of a foundation; and the side of practice (patipatti-dhamma), in 
which we should know what is wh at. We rely on this period for 
developing these two because now we don’t need to worry and 
make plans about what to do and where to go. This cuts off all the 
problems about the things that we think we need to do when we 
are following our desires. We rely on this period for doing our 
duty of changing from the state of  ordinariness to a state which 
has more valuable qualities.  
 
We can observe that the principles of life in society, the 
lay-system, and the principles of  One Gone Forth, are different. 
Coming from the lay-system, we are now Ones Gone Forth. The 
life Gone Forth has ideals, and th ere are standards of behaviour 
and practice. Since there are guidelines for behaviour and 
practice, we follow these ideals and standards of practice. If we 
were to use our former system of life, the way of life of a 
layperson, there wouldn’t be as much value as there should be. So 
we have to keep reminding ourse lves that now we are of a

different gender than laypeople or householders36, who do as they 
like and act according to their moods. But we have ideals, which 
means we have principles in the wa y we live; that is, we are those 
who see the disadvantages and dangers in the round of rebirth. 
 
We need to have principles in  our lives. At least we need 
sila. Keep in mind that sila is one part of the embellishments of 
One Gone Forth. We need to liv e with caution, carefulness and 
restraint in our manners, actions and ways of expression by body 
and speech, for the sake of not allowing our conduct of body and 
speech to become inappropriate. We  need to change them to a 
state of appropriateness. This is a state that needs to be cared for 
and maintained. We train ourselves in this way by taking the 
principle of living as one who goes against the stream of lay life 
and the stream of worldly attitude s. We all know what the stream 
of lay life, the stream of worldly attitudes is like. It is always 
under the power of delusion, under the power of desires and under 
the power of craving and defileme nts. It is always lacking and 
insatiable, like a fire that can ne ver have enough fuel. So now we 
go against the stream and don’t act in conformity with our likes 
and our moods. We have guidelines of practice, such as the 
ascetic practices, which are for di recting our life as someone who 
doesn’t follow the stream of the world. We all know that the 
stream of the world is the stream  of darkness and blindness. It’s a 
stream in which there is no freedom, in which one is not one’s 
own. For this reason we need to change our character and habits, 
change our feelings, not letting them be like those of laypeople. 
Worldly people follow their moods, the stream of desires, and the 
Worldly Dhammas. These things concern the beings of the world. 
 
36  In Thailand there is an idiom saying that the “third sex” besides male and 
female is “ordained”.

These are the dhammas of the worldling. They concern what is 
called worldly materialism, the nutri ment of beings of the world. 
We come and look at ourselves and search for skilful means that 
help to relieve and eradicate the desires that stain our minds and 
reduce the mind states of entertainment, amusement and 
diversion. We start seeing the wo rld from a perspective that 
brings relief from desires staining the heart. This is how we try to 
see it. The only question is, where exactly should we look? In fact 
we can look both towards material objects, for example the body, 
and towards the mind and its moods. The Buddha always 
emphasized that all of us should lo ok at our experiences as being 
like an ornamented royal chariot,  which only fools get carried 
away with, but those who understand won’t see anything there
37. 
We come together here seeing things in a way where we can 
experience a feeling of not getting overpowered by craving and 
grasping when we get involved with things. Just like the Buddha 
taught us to pay attention an d reflect whenever material 
possessions accrue to us. Even in terms of external matters, such 
as the clothes we wear, the food we eat and our dwellings, the 
Buddha wanted us to understand th at they are merely elements 
that simply follow their nature. They keep transforming in a way 
that we don’t want them to at all. This is something we 
contemplate. It helps to relieve our eagerness.  
 
The Buddha taught that the enj oyment of sensual pleasure 
and the cords of sensuality is one of the dangers for the Sangha, 
and so is the wish to have more  and more of these pleasures. 
That’s why we are determined to look, know and see – seeing in a 
way that doesn’t get involved w ith the fetters and bonds caused 
by the sense of self. We are dete rmined to contemplate, allowing 
 
37 Dhammapada 171.

the sense of self to abate and ev entually be dissolved into the 
universality of the Three Characteristics which, as we understand 
it, is “saccadhamma”. What we  mean by “saccadhamma” is the 
ultimate truths of nature: aniccata, the state of not being 
permanent; anattata, that which doesn’t make the burden of 
conceit arise since, ultimately, th ere isn’t anything that is in a 
state of true constancy or absolute certainty. Nothing can be called 
stable or permanent at all. Seeing this will truly give rise to the 
feeling of some relief from the mind states where we delight in 
things and become deluded. The mind state where we experience 
ignorance in its various ways will be slightly reduced. This feels 
like a reduction of heat, the pulli ng out of drunkenness, and relief 
from dukkha.  
 
When we find that we can relate to things in this way, it 
will make us change from the state of ordinariness experienced by 
worldly people and give rise to a state that has valuable qualities, 
a state which feels peaceful, cool and shady. The Buddha taught 
this way so that we remind our selves that we are now of a 
different status than laypeople. We have to know how to reflect 
on ourselves and the fact that we rely on others for supporting our 
lives. For this reason we need to develop ourselves into somebody 
who welcomes whatever he is given happily and does not have 
the feeling that he needs to ch ange and improve things according 
to the pulls of craving and ignorance. He puts down these feelings 
and abides in a state which is  light and grounded in peace – 
irrespective of whether what he re ceives is good or bad. Actually 
there isn’t anything good or bad. It  is only since we have desires 
and rely on desires, that good and bad come to be. We have to 
approach and reflect on things like this, which means lowering 
oneself down to becoming one who accepts the truth of nature. 
Whoever accepts the truth of nature will not get worked up too

much, will not experience many problems. This is for the sake of 
peace of mind, not for anything else. Peace from the mind states 
of kilesas
38 and tanha. Peace from desires and craving. 
 
We need to develop and recoll ect the attitude of applying 
effort, having mindfulness and cl ear comprehension. This means 
to get rid of the sense of grabbing as if one was out of one’s mind, 
always taking hold of as much as one can, like worldly people do. 
Rather we live like ones who ha ve mindfulness and recognize the 
right measure in the way we lead our lives. We live just 
appropriately and well. This way of acting reminds us of being 
somebody who recognizes what is enough. One won’t get worked 
up when one recognizes what is  enough. Having little is enough, 
having a lot is enough.  
 
These are some of the quali ties and treasures of somebody 
who practices changing his char acter and habits. He always 
reminds himself of what these qu alities which embellish one who 
has Gone Forth actually are. The embellishments of the body are 
something that we can all see, they  are the things we use to cover 
ourselves to protect us from heat and cold, but there also need to 
be embellishments in the qualities of Dhamma. At least we should 
give rise to the beauty that come s from having intentions that are 
based on a sense of shame. Having a sense of shame to a certain 
extent enables us to restrain ourselves from falling into what is 
evil or bad.  
 
The Buddha held that having a sense of shame is like a 
goad for forcing a cart to go towards its destination at the end of 
the road. Another expression for this  is: to have sila, to observe 
                                     
38  kilesas (Pali): defilements, stains, afflictions of the heart. 
7

virtuous conduct, or to possess guidelines of practice which are 
harmonious and cause beauty to arise. Walking – one is beautiful, 
standing – one is beautiful, sitti ng – one is beautiful, speaking – 
one knows the right amount. It makes one feel that the factors and 
embellishments of a Samana are present in every way. This 
requires living like somebody who bears in mind a sense of 
shame, like somebody who has got sila. We consider this to be 
one of the constituent factors of our Going Forth, of our practice.  
 
Concerning samadhi and sati: sati is necessary, as it is a 
dhamma that gives great support. We must know the flow of the 
wind, the flow of kilesas and tanha, the flow of the world, not 
making ourselves like a water hya cinth going up whenever the 
water level rises, and going dow n whenever it falls. If there’s 
delusion letting it be just delusion, if there is sati letting it be just 
sati. We need to know how to go ag ainst the stream, have sati and 
sampajañña (clear comprehension), not  to be deluded by the 
world, not to be deluded by moods such as praise, blame, gain, 
loss. We shouldn’t feel obliged to  go along with everything, but 
be aware and have dama, self-discipline. At least we need to have 
control of our minds and hearts. If  we get what we wish, we get 
what we wish. It’s just that. If we don’t get what we wish, it’s just 
that. We need to know how to put things down and how to 
abandon. 
 
This should be enough to create  the feeling of being one’s 
own refuge, of not being deluded by the world or by moods. To 
be somebody who conducts himself with samadhi, a firm standing 
– a mind standing firm, mind- objects standing firm – not 
becoming overpowered and obscured, emerging into a 
characteristic quality called reso luteness. We have got immunity 
and we have got firmness. To have immunity is something very

valuable, therefore we need to train and learn. These are factors of 
our being Samanas, being ones who have Gone Forth. 
 
Some of our views may give rise  to feelings that lead us 
into ways of thinking that aren’t right or appropriate, so we should 
remind ourselves of nature, seeing things in a way that gives rise 
to a sense that fits in with na ture. As the Buddha says, having 
“wisdom, all-around knowledge, of this heap of sankharas”. 
Sankharas are states of construc ting. Constructing needs to be 
understood on the basis of the experience of anicca, impermanence. Certainly, there is the st ate that is hard to endure, but 
there is also the state where there isn’t anything at all. We try to 
focus on seeing things in this way, letting our understanding be a 
factor that influences our way of living.  
 
Further we need to be aware of the conventions in the way 
we live together with other people. If that’s not the case, we won’t 
attain freedom. To like certain persons in one moment and later 
hate them is like a virus causing damage to us and keeping us 
from a state of peace. That’s why we need to know, watch and 
observe things that concern us. Bit by bit we have to put our 
hearts into those things that are relevant to us. 
 
When at times our behaviour and our actions aren’t good, 
our friends in the Dhamma might warn us or criticize us. Then we 
have to know how to accept it, not just taking our own feelings as 
a basis, or taking atta, self, as our principle. We need to know 
how to relax, whether the criticis m is right or wrong. We need to 
be humble and lower ourselves first. If the criticism is right, we 
really need to accept that there are still parts of ou rselves that we 
have to face with humbleness.

So our practice relies on following certain ways that uphold 
the training and our lifestyle needs to be supported by the 
activities of a Samana. Getting up  early we recognize straight 
away that we need to change our feelings, not allowing them to go 
in a direction where we give things too much importance and 
grasp onto them. We consider and remind ourselves that the days 
and nights are passing, passing. What  does this mean? It is a way 
to see that the passing of time ve ry clearly reveals the truth. It 
really speaks for itself: days a nd nights are passing, relentlessly. 
Even the parts of us that are considered rupa-khandha, the “formsankharas” (i.e. the physical worl d), still point to ending and 
deterioration, changing into a st ate where there is nothing that 
belongs to oneself. What shall we expect from them?  
 
So, taking up contemplations like this is done  for the sake 
of pulling out asmimana (the conceit “I am”), a view that seems 
to be controlling us all the time. We have to really pull it out 
through living as One Gone Forth who possesses guidelines for 
his behaviour and practice. The way we lead our lives has to be 
like this. 
 
We understand that this involves changing our character 
and habits towards seeing the disadvantages and dangers in the 
round of rebirth. All of us alread y know that this danger isn’t 
anything far away. It is in fact the danger of ignorant mind states 
that are associated with greed, hatred and delusion. Just this is the 
danger. And just this is what forces us to live in a state where we 
are tortured, with freedom unable to arise. That is why the 
application of effort is considered something very good, a 
valuable quality that we can receive benefits from. It eliminates 
the problem of going in a directi on in which we can get lost and 
are aiming at dukkha.

The meaning of applying effort amounts to living in a way 
that is not careless, just that. When we relate to external objects in 
our lives we relate to them as someone who has sati-pañña 
(mindfulness and wisdom). .In the same way we relate to 
conventions. It is better to do so, because this can give rise to 
peace and enables one to experience happiness. This happiness 
does not rely on worldly or materi al things, but on the application 
of energy and effort.   
 
Since we live as a society or group we do have to take on 
agreements and a variety of duties for our living together. 
Whatever is communal activity we  need to hurry to help each 
other with, especially concerning the application of effort (in 
meditation). Each day there should be an occasion of putting forth 
effort together in order to bu ild up strength and energy. We don’t 
always do meditation together, only from time to time. In the 
language of the Buddha, building up  strength and energy together 
like this is called sangha-anubhava (the power of the Sangha). If 
we do something we do it through  the power of the Sangha. The 
sitting meditation we do all together. In any activity which goes in 
the direction of samaggi (harmony) we try to do our part, but if 
the state of nature (i.e. Luang Por’s health) doesn’t support it, one 
has to accept that it  is too much, going be yond one’s range. An 
example of this is related in th e Vinaya. It concerns our practice 
with the requisites to cover ourselves (i.e. the robes). The Buddha 
forbade us to be without the thre e robes, even for one night, but 
he did allow us to be without  them if our body and our formelements are in a state of deteri oration. This is about nature and 
the fact that it is beyond the range of one’s control. But if one is 
still in a normal state, the Buddha  advised us not to be careless, 
and to live in a way where we put our hearts into looking after and 
protecting our requisites – for th e purpose of training our habits.

We should take it to be a part of our lives that we need to have 
things to cover ourselves. If we stay far away from these things 
they may disappear or get lost . Somebody who wants our robes 
might come and use the opportunity to take them away. We aren’t 
allowed to beg (for new robes) th en. This is something that we 
have to consider very well. If something like this happens, it 
might make us break our precepts. At least we’ll have to go and 
request replacement from somebody else, either from a relative or 
non-relative, or from the communal stores. As we are training to 
change our character and habits we don’t request or do anything 
based on craving.  
 
All the different tricks of d eceit and ways of acting based 
on craving: don’t go and use th em. We uphold that we should 
make our ways of acting as st raightforward as possible, not 
making excuses in this or that way. One can’t do that – finding 
excuses… we’ve been excusing ou rselves for a long time already 
and it just brings bad habits, th e habits of a fool. Now who’s 
going to do this? Our training has to have resoluteness. To be 
resolute means to possess strong determination of mind ( manopanidhana). This can cut off those pr oblems that give rise to 
degeneration and decay. This is what it relies on: it relies on the 
actions we do. Just that. 
 
Concerning our chanting now , during the time that we 
determine the vassa, we have to pay attention to the proper time 
and place (for coming together). This is something that is 
considered part of the traini ng of the new monks, but it also 
means maintaining our communal duties as a Sangha. This is 
another factor of the practice.

Something else that we also consider to be part of the 
season of vassa is that we will have to study that which is related 
to the pariyatti-dhamma, the Vinaya, the training rules, 
concerning the things that the B uddha forbade us to do – for the 
sake of support and increase of our knowledge on a deeper level. 
The Vinaya is all about our bod ily, verbal and mental actions. 
One can say it is something that affects our lives. The issues of 
the body, speech or mind are all about life in this way. 
 
*** 
 
Today we have come together to determine the vassa. In 
this period my health is a state th at can be called definitely “not 
sure”, it is in a state of degeneration, the degeneration of the 
mechanism of the pump, the motor in side the system of the heart. 
The condition of the heart isn’t good. The muscles of the heart are 
weak. One can say that they don’t have strength in their function 
and when they push and pump, the heart doesn’t contract as much 
as it should. So I had to rely on consulting those who have 
sufficient experience and knowledge. They said the system is not 
capable of ejecting all the fluid out of the heart. This then causes 
fluid to accumulate in the heart. This makes the heart weak and 
enlarged and there is the possibil ity of it stoppi ng to work, which 
in technical terms is called having a heart failure, suddenly and 
unexpectedly. All this, one can say,  is a matter of nature. I think 
of it like this. It’s about the process of dege neration in nature, but 
in a position of livi ng in society one can’t  just let go. So one 
needs to know how to cure, maintain and nurse as much as one is 
able to support it, only for that reason.  
 
These are some of the issues  concerning the body that I’m 
facing now, so I’m telling you this  to let you all know. It isn’t 
anything that’s far away. Concerni ng other inner organs, like the

liver, lungs and kidneys, they are still usable. But the system of 
the heart is damaged, simply that . There’s the chance of complete 
failure. This can happen, suddenly. There’s nothing difficult about 
it, it’s not hard, and it’s good in that there will be no dukkha 
vedana. With these symptoms there is no dukkha vedana, only the 
breathing becomes quicker, that’s all. We went to see the doctors 
and they said these will be the symptoms (preceding total heart 
failure). I have the feeling that the tests, checks and the things that 
they observe mean this. 
 
Regarding the fact that we are living together, we have 
come together now for determin ing vassa, in order to create 
feelings that give rise to concor d and unanimity in principles, the 
principles of Dhamma-Vinaya. So  today we have come together 
to do this act of determining the vassa with each other as 
witnesses. We understand that this  is a special occasion in this 
period.  
 
I don’t have much more, so I don’t want to say much 
more. It is appropriate. If I speak much it also uses a lot of energy, 
so I’d like to use this occasion to  express my appreciation for all 
of us who have come together for determining the vassa, doing 
the duty of changing our character s and habits and leading our 
lives as those who see the disadva ntages and dangers in the round 
of rebirth. Doing so, we can be a bit of a light for others, for the 
people in the world, so that they may open up their eyes and ears; 
because just as the external light is capable of giving support and 
convenience, the light inside is capable of making the hearts of 
people in society change. May yo u all have happiness that is 
without any dukkha. With your permission, may I end now. 
 
***

“Different from    
Ordinary People”

If one is able to change and leave behind 
the emotions of an ordinary person, that’s 
something amazingly strange.

Different from Ordinary People 
 
A teaching  given at Wat Nong Pah Pong after the 
Patimokkha on August 26th, 2003 (2546). 
 
Now we have already reached half of the vassa. The 
ceremony of entering the rains was 1½ months ago. Another 1½ 
months and the rains period is over.   If we all practise continually 
and make a habit of putting forth effort, this will be sufficient to 
change our behaviour in some ways . At least the practice with the 
conditioned physical form of our bodi es is well within the realm 
that is capable of change. But it takes time for us, who have just 
come here to this lifestyle, to follow the principles of the Buddha 
with all the methods of practice for leading this life. Even more, it 
takes time, if one has been closely linked to friends and relatives, 
to free oneself from worries. We  have become acquainted and 
used to places and people, so it takes time before we can change. 
It is only after a long time that we can see that we don’t need to 
worry about the situations that our old friends and relatives are in. 
It is very difficult to develop th is “unconcerned” feeling towards 
people we have been closely linked to. It is not easy. When we 
study how the Buddha trained himself in his practice, we see that 
it is something that takes a long time, to abandon these feelings of 
being bound up and fettered to ones  old life. So for us, it should 
be similar: it will take us some time until we can let go of the 
things that bind us to people and places that we used to relate to. 
 
So I’d like all of us to deve lop a mind that doesn’t follow 
wrong courses of perception (aga ti-dhamma). Normally we do 
have these mistaken perceptions . Our views are not the true 
Dhamma; we are prejudiced. If one sees things from an angle

without preconceptions, one can s ee the way things normally are. 
An example is our living together: if we look at the physical 
features (of people), or the conditions of their bodies, everybody 
is different. There are big and sma ll people, the colour of the skin 
is not the same, and there are differences all the way up to 
people’s voices and the languages they use for communication. In 
these aspects, each individual is special, but if we see things in the 
light of the facts of nature, in terms of form, elements and 
aggregates everybody is the same. We chant this in the “five 
subjects for frequent recollection” : we all age, become sick and 
become separated when we die – all the same for everyone.  
 
From this point of view, the feeling of being especially 
closely related to certain persons  won’t arise. We see everybody 
in the same way. Actually, everybody is our relative in terms of 
nature, or concerning our true situation, the saccadhamma, the 
truth of the reality of life. If we can manage to realise this aspect 
of nature, we will be possessed of a mind that isn’t prone to 
seeing others with perceptions of  being better, worse, or on the 
same level. The term for these biased perceptions is mana, 
conceit. The Buddha wanted us to  observe in what kind of forms 
mana occurs. Thinking “I’m not li ke this or that person” will 
eventually lead to seeing others as either good or bad. It will lead 
to accepting or resenting them. When such mind states arise, we 
need to put things in the right pe rspective, a perspective that is 
based on saccadhamma, the truth of reality in its universal scope. 
From this angle, states of mind that are free from aversion, where 
we neither denigrate nor praise others, will come about naturally. 
We see others as part of nature, as perfectly right and appropriate. 
The Buddha called this the attitude of so mebody who has Right 
View. It is the mind state of a person that is accomplished and 
pure in the qualities and virtues of a true Sangha member.

Talking about ‘Sangha’: it is  worth noticing that Sangha 
doesn’t have anything to do with  individual monks that can be 
specified. Speaking about the Sangha in its conventional sense 
(sammuti-sangha), the Buddha didn’t re fer to certain monks. 
Sammuti-sangha (merely) means a group of four monks or more, 
a sufficient number to be able to perform communal duties. This 
is one way the Buddha understood  ‘Sangha’. But in what the 
Buddha called the ‘ariya-sangha ’ (the group of the Noble 
Enlightened Beings) the word ‘Sangha’ is related to the 
realisation of Dhamma. There th e Buddha did refer to certain 
individuals: those that don’t fall under the power of the Worldly 
Dhammas, those that are not prone to agati and therefore progress 
with right practice ( samma-patipada) – namely: those who walk 
the Middle Way. The Middle Way doe sn’t follow the course of 
Worldly Dhammas. These are th e paths of householders and 
ordinary unenlightened beings. If our behaviour is not yet 
accomplished in the Dhamma, there will always be elements of 
agati. So in this matter of ch anging one’s behaviour, what we 
should do is have a look at ours elves and take our own feelings 
into account. Moving towards obser ving other people can take us 
very far from relating to ourselves in a way where we are able to 
see the Dhamma. 
 
Thinking about it, this is an aspect of Dhamma that is 
interesting: how is it possible that good and ba d feelings arise, or 
happiness and suffering? Happiness, according to our model of 
thinking, is positive, and for us wh o haven’t yet reached the level 
where one is content, anything th at is dukkha is undesirable. But 
those who are accomplished and free from the mind states of 
worldly, unenlightened people w ould uphold that even sukha is 
something negative. They would see neither sukha nor dukkha as 
something positive. The Buddha still considered feelings of

appreciation as dangerous. They are another aspect of dukkha. 
Only because we agree to this type of dukkha, we say it’s 
positive. There has to be peace from sukha and dukkha, peace 
from good and bad, peace from agreement and disagreement. This 
peace arises from seeing things in the light of the nature of reality. 
 
This is how we see things. On e needs to be well aware of 
the different kinds of angles from  which one looks at things. This 
is why the Buddha taught us to  live grounding ourselves in 
attention and heedfulness, looking at the world and all the mind 
states that arise in ourselves. If the things that arise in our mind 
arise in a peaceful way, without pr oliferating or fantasizing about 
the Worldly Dhammas, they are a potential that can provide peace 
and happiness for us. This is what is called “seclusion from the 
sankharas” in the Buddha’s word s – seclusion from the mind 
states of proliferation. 
 
This is also something that is hard to explain: if there is no 
mental proliferation, how is it possible for somebody to act at all? 
One can understand it in this way: those (who don’t have any 
activity of mental proliferation) carry out their actions in a mind 
state that is perfected with what the Buddha called kindness, 
friendship, and helpfulness, or me tta.  Metta means wanting to be 
useful to those people that are s till in a state of danger – wanting 
similar benefits to arise in them. You could call it the intention of 
a real grown-up person. It is th e way the Buddha acted. In that 
sense, when one pursues the peace  that arises from separation 
from the defilements ( upadhi-viveka), peace means peace from 
the mind states of a normal, unenlightened being – where the 
mind experiences greed, disagreement or all kinds of negligence 
and errors.

Peace from these defilements ar ises because of seeing their 
drawbacks, dangers and inapprop riateness. In this way the 
Buddha’s mind state was secluded from defilements. Still, looking 
at the way he lived, the Buddha seemed just like an ordinary 
person. He needed clothes to cover his body, ward off cold, heat, 
mosquitoes and gadflies. He ate food for sustaining the physical 
condition of his body, just so that it feels like neither too much 
nor too little, consuming it only for stilling the hunger that arises 
due to the work of the body’s digestive system (and not overcome 
by desire). His dwelling place can be considered ‘good’. It was 
merely a shelter from sun and rain, a place of relief from having 
to deal with insects. It can ’t be called ‘good’ by worldly 
standards. The Buddha was indifferent towards it. He lived just 
well enough to sustain his life an d to have some relief from the 
heat and cold that nature brings , from the sun and the rain. The 
same with medicines: the B uddha wouldn’t use medicines 
thinking of curing his illnesses – but only for the sake of a little 
relief, as the situation of having to experience the physical 
conditions of a body always has to  involve constant changes, 
according to causes and conditions . Eventually the physical body 
will have to reach its end, disintegrate and transform into its 
original state: earth goes to eart h, water to water,  wind to wind, 
and fire to fire. Seeing that th is is the way it goes, the Buddha 
didn’t think of his physical body bei ng a person or an entity in 
itself. The body is merely a mani festation of the elements and 
khandhas – arising, existing, and ceasing to be. With this 
perspective there is nothing that is to be assumed as a self – 
whether relating to the rupa- khandha, the vedana-khandha, or 
sankhara-khandha.  
 
The Buddha saw that the khandhas are a way of being that 
follows causes and conditions – arising, existing and ceasing –

which one can’t consider a being or a person at all. Because the 
Buddha saw things from this pe rspective, he was able to 
experience true peace. When we study aspects like this, we need 
to do it with an attitude that doesn’t allow mindfulness to slip. We 
need to possess mindfulness and clear comprehension, 
immediately understanding the wo rld and our states of mind, 
knowing them as they are. Knowing people, realizing the world. 
One who understands the world and knows the truth about it is 
able to still his feelings towards it. This means to look at things 
with an attitude of practice, following the ideal of heedfulness. 
We can also say it is a way of keeping track observingly, with 
comprehension and vision. Another expression (for an attitude 
like this) is to keep looking until  one has revealed it, to keep 
addressing it until it works, and keep using it until one can handle 
it: look, figure it out, try to articula te it, apply it, and carry it out. 
Practicing in this way, both benefi t for ourselves and benefit for 
others will arise together by itself. This all falls under the topic of 
guarding one’s faculties, so they’re beneficial – nothing more than 
that. 
 
So these are the principles that we practise and give 
importance to. If one is able to realize peace and liberation from 
suffering, one changes in a strange  way from being an ordinary 
person. In the ordination cerem ony, when a young man enters the 
new gender of being a celibate, he is required to be a ‘complete 
male human being’ ( purisa). But this only refers to the common 
features and conditions of an ordinary human. When one comes to 
completion of one’s person (in th e sense of complete freedom 
from dukkha), one actually goes against one’s biological nature as 
a male person. One doesn’t drift along the current of one’s natural 
conditioning. This is truly strange.

The same is true for the mi nd with its various moods. If 
one is able to change and l eave behind the emotions of an 
ordinary person, that’s someth ing amazingly strange. One can’t 
say one feels good, because one doesn’t see anything ‘good’ 
there. And instead of feeling bad, one sees that there isn’t 
anything ‘bad’ there either. One merely sees these feelings as 
modes of being, states that ar e neither good nor bad. One’s mind 
doesn’t behave in terms of approv al or disapproval. This is an 
effect of experiencing seclusion – seclusion from the world. 
 
This is also something strange: if one practises a lot to be 
continuously observant, then even wh ile one is asleep, one is able 
to remain watching. Those expe riences that concern the body, 
relate to the body. The experience s that the ‘one who knows’ 
makes, relate to the ‘one who knows’. One eventually needs to 
separate: what concerns the body is just a matter of the body, and 
what concerns the mind is just  a matter of the mind. Practising 
following the Buddha’s guidelines indeed leads one to very 
strange things.  This is the course  of the training. It leads all the 
way to becoming awake, to the arising of maturity and to 
fulfillment and completion. Therefore we try to develop an 
attitude of taking every opport unity, studying and observing. We 
study right at our six senses. The Buddha didn’t want us to study 
anywhere else, but to see what is happening at our sense bases. 
This is something that we ought to know very well and 
thoroughly. 
 
Again, there is something st range: when we have the 
experience of a very pure state of feeling and view, a ‘mysterious’ 
or strange phenomenon arises in the form of gladness and bliss. 
But it is not that we become obsessed with feelings of liking 
experiences like this. As I see it, su ch states of gladness and bliss

have to do with a person’s previous wholesome behaviour 
(upanissaya). Whatever it is that we have invested importance 
into will eventually manifest at the right opportunity. Such an 
experience the Buddha refers to as ‘ vasana’, a gift of merit from 
the past. One can see it like that . Not every monk is equally wellgifted. Even the noble disciples in the Buddha’s time weren’t all 
the same. 
 
Just look at Luang Pu Chah. When I was spending time 
with him he definitely had some very special gifts. From what I 
observed, it was very special th at the people who came to pay 
respects and visit never felt bo red or fed up with him – they 
wouldn’t even think of these feelings. This is one of the aspects of 
vasana. 
 
His special qualities also created good opportunities for 
him to be useful to others. Even though his activities mostly took 
place in the period of his life when  he wasn’t yet old, still they 
were of great and long-lasting benef it. It is a fact that we have 
received our style of practice from him, and even today, his 
principles (in the Dhamma) are st ill preserved by various means. 
Even his voice we can still hear. Or, in terms of the monastery 
regulations, standards an d routines that he guided us in, we still 
reap benefits. He really laid  good foundations. For example, our 
practices toward material gains or  fame and reputation that arise 
from offerings made, Luang Pu Chah wouldn’t let these fall to 
any individual. He always tried to designate them for communal 
purposes. 
 
Then we need to recollect his spiritual practice and the 
qualities of Dhamma that he realised. Even in the time when his 
conditioned physical body deterior ated, he never showed such

symptoms visibly, or displayed a state that gave rise to aversion. 
It is noticeable that those who were involved in looking after him 
and nursing him (during his illness) never experienced feelings of 
being weary or fed up with it. He  also never showed any extreme 
reactions. All this is part of vasana. 
 
Also, Luang Pu Chah possessed an aspect of the four 
patisambhida (analytic insights), that which is called patibhana 
(ready wit, initiative, creative a nd appliable insight), and he was 
skilled in using speech in all kinds of ways. This definitely 
enabled great benefits to arise. 
 
Then there was his relationship to his fellow monastics. All 
these are factors of vasana, the gi fts of an individual person. So 
when we train, things are similar. Sometimes we need to see that 
the practice also depends on each and everybody’s individual 
qualities. 
 
 
***
