# Excerpts of a Dhamma talk given to the monks, novices and nuns after the ceremony of asking forgiveness at the annual retreat of Luang Por’s disciples at Wat Nong Pah Pong on September 12th, 1996 (2539).

From the Darkness to the Light 
 
Excerpts of a Dhamma talk given to the monks, 
novices and nuns after the ceremony of asking 
forgiveness at the annual retreat of Luang Por’s 
disciples at Wat Nong Pah Pong on September 12 th, 
1996 (2539). 
 
In our practice we constantly have to remind ourselves that 
all of us need to begin like child ren. We can’t be like adults right 
from the start. At first we are not yet purified and keep falling into 
states of dirtiness. We live in the mud and mire like a lotus that 
hasn’t yet bloomed and still depe nds on the dirt for nourishment. 
We are the same – when we are born in the world we are not yet 
fully mature, ready and complete, but come with the burden of 
having to fight obstacles of all kinds. There is happiness and 
suffering, good and bad, right and wrong. To experience this is 
normal for an unenlightened person, who still has dust in his eyes. 
That someone who has dust in his eyes could experience the 
brightness and clarity of being unburdened with suffering and 
drawbacks cannot be. In the beginning there are always hardships, 
there always has to be suffering – this is just normal. 
 
It’s like we live in the dark. Living in the dark is not as 
pleasant as one might wish. There is always a certain feeling of 
discomfort and uneasiness. In this state we are still not free from 
dependence, are not yet wholly accomplished. We still experience 
a bit of happiness and a bit of suffering from time to time, some 
satisfaction and dissatisfaction. We  haven’t yet transcended the 
world of conditions and are not yet in a safe place. We are going 
back and forth in samsara, the round of birth and death. 
Sometimes the situations that arise are good, sometimes bad. In

our lives we are not going smoothly over all the ups and downs. 
Until we reach the aim of our practi ce this is just the natural way 
things are. 
 
Although we accept that anything th at is still in a stage of 
development is of course not ye t as good as it ideally should be, 
we still need to make change s and improvements. And for doing 
this we need to know what we are supposed to do, so we can try 
to direct the development toward s our aim. Whatever doesn’t fit 
in our plan, we seek to let go, keep away from, or not respond to.  
The things which aren’t alright will  come to an end in this way. 
They won’t be allowed to become part of our behaviour patterns 
or habitual attitudes. 
 
Everybody has goodness, everybody has perfection and 
purity right inside himself. Surely everyone of us possesses at 
least some personality traits  which could be brought to 
consciousness in a way that is useful for oneself. Make these 
complete and perfect them. It is lik e with the flames of a fire: in 
the places where the flames light up there wasn’t any fire before. 
But once they are ignited and kindled, the flames appear out of 
the darkness – and eventually the fire and flames are burning right 
there. With us it’s the same as with the flames: everyone of us has 
to come from dark places, come from being a child, being 
someone who has no strength, is not yet mature. Naturally, of 
course, this brings disorientation. That a state at this level could 
give rise to full confidence and clar ity just can’t be. To be able to 
experience purity straight from the start is impossible. One has to 
gradually develop oneself like this. 
 
Until the state of perfection is reached, we need to 
understand the situation we are i n, and that it is normal to

experience both happiness and sufferi ng. Still, we need to find 
means to improve ourselves. We can use the guidelines the 
Buddha established for us monks in order to correct the 
shortcomings and faults in our ac tions. Inabilities, negligence and 
thoughtlessness in our behavior can make us feel very 
inappropriate. But we have the chance to open ourselves up to the 
friends we live together with, to  let them know about our deeds. 
We can confess or speak up in a meeting, letting the others 
witnesses our actions, saying words like:  
 
“What I have done here wa s careless and wasn’t right. 
I have transgressed (a rule of conduct) here. That 
wasn’t good. What I have done  wasn’t appropriate for 
someone who lives by th e ways of a Samana, who 
practises for the sake of penetrating dukkha with clarity 
and insight.”  
 
By letting others know and be witnesses in this way, we 
implant our principles deeply in to our memory, building up our 
capacity to be aware of what we  are doing and gradually creating 
a sense of shame. If we are grounded in this sense of shame, 
shying away from things that could cause us problems becomes 
natural. Seeing dangers and disadvantages will keep us alert and 
attentive. This alertness is the way leading to the experience of 
freedom and safety. It leads to  the attainment of the “nonsuffering”, the “unburdened”. This is the way to fulfill our task in 
the practice and development of ourselves. 
 
In the beginning of the prac tice, we always do things 
according to the standards and rules,  similar to a fighter preparing 
to enter the fighting arena. First, he  trains strictly according to the 
rules and regulations. But when he  really faces the fight, he

sometimes goes beyond the rules. But in our case, everything still 
remains within our general princi ples – principles that aim at 
peace and cessation and lead us to freedom from danger and 
enmity. For determining these prin ciples, the Buddha gave us the 
criteria: 
 
Any Dhamma that reduces th e desires that stain our 
hearts won’t deviate from  the principles of the 
Buddhas teaching.  
 
There are many skilful means and tools in the Buddha’s 
teachings for correcting our actions, for destroying and 
abandoning confusion and unpeaceful, unhappy states in oneself. 
These tools are needed, and none of them transgress the general 
principles that the Buddha proc laimed. They are the Buddha’s 
recommendations, so we should put them into practice.  
 
Usually our mind likes to ge t carried away with having 
fun. If we find ourselves infatuat ed with amusement, take it as 
important and hold on to it, th e Buddha recommends to ground 
ourselves in an attitude of alertness. Hilarity is a tie. It can drag us 
onto the path of foolishness. When we are infatuated and crazy 
about something, we can go wrong  anywhere. Whether in the 
hidden or in the open, it’s all the same – it’s really like when one 
is drunk.  
 
People get drunk with their bodies through the illusion that 
the body doesn’t have illnesses, afflictions, pains and fevers 
threatening it. They think they won’t die, won’t degenerate and 
wear out. They don’t consider the possibility, but it happens. 
Because in reality our physical body is a conditioned 
phenomenon, it always will follow the nature of its material

constituents. Nevertheless we like to see the body as permanently 
powerful, tough and strong and not afflicted by disease and pain. 
We want to see it in this perspective, the way we are used to 
seeing it, just as if  the body was fit for al l circumstances. But the 
Buddha said, if there is light, there will be darkness. If there is hot, 
there will be cold. It has to be like this. So in this very way, any 
state of strength, agility or ease may degenerate in just a single 
day or just a single moment into a state of decline and ruin, 
becoming deteriorated and worn out, following its nature. But if 
we cultivate an attitude of seeing the disintegrati on of the body as 
natural, we won’t be upset by the decline. We won’t take the body 
as something important, keep holding on to it or attach feelings of 
self to it. 
 
The Buddha called the illusions we create around the body 
sakkayaditthi – the view that the body is  self, that we and other 
people are our bodies, that the body is our possession. The 
Buddha reminds us to keep recollecting that whatever thing there 
may be, it is not ours, not our self. Nothing really belongs to us. 
Thinking like this prevents wrong courses of perception (agatidhamma) from gaining power. One can easily get lost in these 
perceptions. They stimulate feelings  of self-importance in us. So 
the Buddha taught to remedy them by reflecting in one’s mind that 
there is nothing that really belongs to us. Through thinking like 
this we won’t start holding on to th ings. Attachment is the root of 
all self-importance. 
 
The more we take ourselves as important, the more we are 
prone to drifting away towards unwholesome feelings, towards 
suffering, until we finally follow the path into the realms of 
darkness. In this way we fl oat along the round of birth and 
becoming. The Buddha saw this as the source of all suffering.

States of anger, greed or delusion come to be. Desire, aversion and 
ignorance arise. All of these stat es of being entail suffering and 
unhappiness. 
 
Analyzing and observing our personality we see that it 
consists of what is called namadhamma. Mental phenomena, too, 
are not ours, not our self. Our pe rsonality is not “we” or “they”, 
but simply consists of certain stat es out of all the possible mental 
states. Don’t see it as “this is me” or “this is mine”. See it in the 
light of mental states which aris e naturally on their own and then 
cease on their own. Just like the da rkness comes to be naturally, it 
goes naturally as well. As brightness is born in its own natural 
way it likewise ceases. These states arise and vanish. 
 
Mental states arise and cease, whether they are states of 
happiness or suffering, ittharammana (agreeable states) or 
anittharammana (disagreeable states). These two are what we call 
the the Wordly Dhammas, attributes that dominate the hearts and 
minds of beings living in the world. Seeing the Worldly Dhammas 
simply as elements of Dhamma , we won’t make the assumption 
that we are happy whenever we fe el happiness, or that we are 
suffering whenever we feel su ffering. There is nothing like our 
goodness or our badness either. We see these attributes, but they 
are just aspects of Dhamma. Each one is just one of all the 
possible states of Dhamma. There is nothing special about it. 
 
Feelings are just feelings, happiness is just happiness, 
suffering is just suffering. Only that. Having arisen, it all ceases. 
We don’t have happiness and suffering. We don’t take interest in 
them. They are just attributes of the mental objects that come up – 
just that much. The Worldly Dhammas appear and vanish 
according to their own logic. Finally , if we don’t show interest in

them, don’t support and give importance to them, they lose their 
existence. 
 
The fantasies our mind spins, the sankharas, can be seen in 
a similar way. Sankharas are states  of proliferation. They come 
and disturb us all the time, because, by giving importance to them, 
we keep feeding them. So of cour se they continue to provoke and 
challenge us. Naturally, then, we ar e constantly subject to feelings 
of up and down and states of confusion. We don’t have freedom. 
We are not even refuge to ourselves for a second, only because we 
give importance to these states of mind. 
 
The Buddha teaches us to be aware that sankharas are 
states that aren’t permanent and endurable. We shouldn’t build up 
the perception that they last foreve r. It’s their characteristic that 
having arisen they cease. We should see sankharas as being 
nothing more than changing states  of the elemen ts, nothing but 
nature in the end. 
 
We aspire to experience full accomplishment in the 
Dhamma. At least, we’d like to have mindfulness and clear 
awareness of ourselves, so this is the place to start the training. 
Normally, people start off with th eir emotions and moods, letting 
them lead everything. The people out in the world think their 
moods are what counts. But emotions and moods are illusions that 
swindle. They are tricky. Sometimes they take us on a good path, 
sometimes on a bad one. Following our moods easily turns to our 
disadvantage. We should take superi or states of mind rather than 
moods and emotions as our guide . Why not let the one they call 
“Awakened” and “Blessed” lead us? Let “Buddha” walk in front 
of us. Let “Buddha” be the leading principle. Let “Buddha” be our 
guideline. Whatever we do, there will always be moods, so we

should see through them by being in a state of awareness.  In this 
way eventually there is no danger. There are no drawbacks. We 
are on the watch.  
 
Let the various moods and emotions that come up simply 
be as they are. In this way we train really to be with ourselves. We 
train this very self to sit and really be there, to stand and really be 
there, to walk and really be there, until always, in whatever 
changing posture, we can be called fully aware. We are fully there 
through our peace. It’s different from being on top of our 
experience through getting carrie d away with pleasures and 
having fun. Instead, being fully present with life comes from 
peace of heart. If there is peace, we are in a state where we can 
adjust to anything that comes up, so we can always be in the 
appropriate mode. That people at tain to Right View and right 
understanding is because the sankharas are quiet. They don’t have 
mental proliferations. Therefore they experience peace. With all 
the kinds of opinions that could come up, they won’t start arguing.  
 
When relating to the world and society, those who are 
intelligent, understanding and have  a feeling of peacefulness will 
praise us. But should they prai se us, we don’t get happy because 
of it. We don’t get infatuated with  it. Ultimately, the praise of 
someone is just a product of the delusion of the one who expresses 
it. Just that much. We don’t have  feelings of like and dislike. 
Praise is just what it is. We don’t feel that we need to foolishly run 
after it. We don’t want to get on th e track of being a slave. If we 
maintain peace, there is nothing that can do harm to us. Even if 
others should blame, criticize or condemn us, making us subject to 
suspicions out of enmity, we nevertheless have peace. We have 
peace towards the anittharammana, the mental states we don’t 
wish to have, which don’t go acco rding to our likes. Even they

can’t cause us harm and hurt us. Should someone criticize us, it’s 
just that much. Eventually it all dissolves by itself. It flows away 
in its own specific way. This is where the Worldly Dhammas can’t 
dominate us, since we have nothing but peace in our hearts. 
 
 When standing, when walk ing, when sitting, when 
sleeping and when getting up, this is it. If we deal with society, 
and with things in the world around us, we can relate in a way that 
is of benefit for all. We don’t go astray and drift away. We behave 
like one who can let things be . We behave like Samanas or 
anagarikas, those  who are not bound up. This is the way we train. 
Training ourselves like this is really peaceful. We make peace 
arise all the time. Whenever we are in society, we will always 
have smoothness and tranquility. 
 
We might not have succeeded yet in our aim to experience 
the feeling of peace. If  we don’t yet succeed, we can at least try 
and practise to recall the state of peace. Practicing to write all the 
letters of the alphabet is similar: First of all, we need to follow the 
method given to us. The lines we draw sometimes turn out 
straight, and sometimes not. Sometimes the result is good, 
sometimes it’s not good, but it’s enough to make sense, it is 
usable. In our training and practice, even if we get lost in our 
moods from time to time, we notic e it immediately. So what... If 
we get lost in our moods, we just  “reset” to start anew. Be up to 
knowing your state of mind. Don’t lose yourself. Only observe the 
emotions, observe the mind, observe and watch out for the 
sankharas. If we have the determin ation to observe ourselves in 
this way, we allow correct knowledge and vision to arise, 
according to the reality of existence.

Seeing it like this, I would say, gives us  an understanding 
of the way to let things be Dhamma – it gives us a sense for the 
state where we are Dhamma. If we truly are  Dhamma, external 
things, the realm of forms and conditions (rupa-khanda-sankhara), 
our living in society, and objects around us are no problem – they 
won’t make us struggle. There is  no confusion, no happiness, no 
suffering, no delight, no sorrow. There is nothing which can give 
rise to feelings of opposition or aversion. Everything flows 
naturally following the force this state of peace has. Everything 
dissolves through the power of peacefulness. Nothing really 
matters, there is nothing to gain. It’s not essential, it’s 
uninteresting. We don’ t find all those things that we were 
interested in when we were child ren attractive anymore. There is 
nothing about the world that can overwhelm us, there is nothing 
that can make us go wrong. Not to fail is really a good thing. This 
is indeed something we could rightly accept praise for – but there 
is no one to praise. It just praise s itself, just like the name and the 
qualities of the Buddha that we recite together in the chant on the 
Nine Qualities of the Buddha. The praise is intrinsically there 
through itself.  
 
People who have no problems, who don’t have dukkha can 
be said to be free from having kilesas, but actually they live 
together with them, only that ther e’s nothing to them. This has to 
do with one’s delusion. The attention one gives to the kilesas  
comes from delusion. If one isn’ t deluded, one couldn’t care less 
about the kilesas. Kilesas  are just what they are. This doesn’t 
mean that one doesn’t have to relate to the world or society or use 
language in order to speak. One sti ll has to relate to others. But 
one doesn’t let dangers and drawbacks arise, since one’s whole 
attitude isn’t one that would allow anger to come up.

There is no anger, just like water that doesn’t have any 
dirty particles in it. The water is free from dirty particles until we 
agitate it by mixing something in  to make it muddy. Even though 
we may be challenged or provoked, we don’t feel stirred up, since 
the water of our heart is clear. Th ere aren’t any particles of dirt 
inside us which could be agitated. We keep the goodness of our 
heart. Praise can’t provoke it, criticism can’t. There is always the 
feeling of purity in it. That this  purity exists, we can only know 
individually by ourselves. 
 
We sometimes wonder and ask ourselves where this purity 
actually comes from. Well, purity comes from impurity. This is 
exactly where it comes from, ju st like peacefulness comes from 
agitation and happiness comes from suffering. If there is suffering, 
then there must also be happiness. Darkness can only come to be 
because there is brightness. Br ightness can arise because of 
darkness. This is the way we see it. 
 
Seeing things in this way, we live our lives with 
knowledge and awareness, with a feeling of being ready and 
prepared, possessing perfection in a pure way, free from 
provocation. 
 
Unluckily for most of us, what can easily arise is the 
feeling that we are still at a stage where we haven’t yet 
established these new qualities. Well, if they aren’t habitually 
there yet, we can make them become habitual. It’s not that this is 
something difficult, it’s not much of a problem to get a foundation 
in order to get started. 
 
For example in relating to social problems around us, we 
build up an attitude that is read y to tolerate, or at least we

maintain an attitude of relinquishment ( caga) and generosity 
(dana). Maintaining generosity, giving and tolerance supports our 
mindfulness, since whenever discontent arises, we think: “Well, 
living together has just got to be this way!” You can compare it to 
my tongue here. It’s normal that it sometimes gets hit by the teeth. 
We just admit that being togeth er sometimes doesn’t go hand in 
hand. 
 
Of course there are always c onflicts in life. But we know 
how to forgive, we know how to give up, we know how to open 
up and invite constructive critic ism from others. When we live 
together in a community, we have to find ways of expressing 
ourselves to others, so that our living together leads to 
peacefulness and goes into the di rection of harmony. We call this 
pavarana
39. Pavarana means to give those with whom we live 
together the chance to criticize us, granting them the freedom of 
speech, as we say in modern terms.  This cultivates the ability to 
open oneself up. It also involves th e ability to listen in an open 
way, to accept the opinions and feelings of other people. Whether 
their views are right or wrong, we can always see them as 
something to learn from. If we can contribute this openness of 
pavarana to our living together, we won’t have anything that 
stimulates self-importance or holding on tightly to ourselves. 
When we have these qualities it is possible to go one’s own way 
and nevertheless create a community feeling of living together in 
peace and happiness. 
 
When we live in society and with the objects in the world 
around us, of course there is unevenness. There is unevenness, but 
 
39  pavarana (Pali): literally means “invitation”, i.e. the invitation to 
admonishment by other bhikkhus in this case.

we can still live together in ha rmony. Because of this unevenness 
we have to live with the attitude  of not taking anything for sure. 
We have to live in accordance w ith the underlying principles of 
reality. We live in uncertainty but we create a feeling of certainty. 
There is change (aniccam), but in this there is stability (niccam). 
There is suffering, but there is non-suffering in there as well. We 
have a feeling of not-self (anatta), but right in there we have a 
feeling of self (atta). The deathless (amata), the Dhamma that 
doesn’t die, lies right here as well. When we start to look at 
impermanence (aniccam) and view  it through an experience of 
maturity and perfection, we will see permanence (niccam) coming 
up as a reality. This is similar to contemplating our mental 
proliferations, the sankharas. If we see things from the perspective 
of maturity and perfection, the visankharas
40 are actually right 
where the sankharas are. It is lik e death and the deathless being 
both in the same place.  
 
This is the way we contemplate things. Seeing things from 
this perspective, the feeling of peacefulness will arise. There will 
be stillness. Total peace in all aspects – peace from all sensual 
pleasures, peace from wanting, peac e from all mind states, peace 
from praise, peace from blame, peace from happiness and 
suffering.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
40  visankhara (Pali): the unconditioned, the unconstructed, where there are no 
proliferations.

We sometimes wonder where 
purity actually comes from. Purity 
comes from impurity, just like 
peacefulness comes from agitation 
and happiness comes from 
suffering. Brightness can arise 
because of darkness.

So, if we experience both sukha and dukkha in our 
practice, this is not a problem. We just need to try and not be 
negligent. There will always be a bit of sukha here and a bit of 
dukkha there. This is what I experienced. Thinking about myself, 
when I was new to the principles of the life in the yellow robes, I 
didn’t know anything. I di dn’t come with the ex pectation to take 
on this lifestyle for all my life, either. I thought I would ordain 
merely to follow the tradition (of young men in Thailand to ordain 
temporarily at least once in thei r life). I came to have a look, 
because people say that it’s good to try becoming a monk. But 
even after I had tested  the monk’s life and decided to stay, I kept 
drifting back towards my old ways of living in many situations. 
Actually I was still a layperson, although now I was part of the 
class of monastics. Living under the shade of the yellow robe, I 
had become an object of reverence for ordinary people, but I still 
had the thoughts of a layperson , and everything kept being 
influenced by this. I still had di rty thoughts – but at least it was 
only thoughts.   
 
There are these thoughts and feelings, and one can’t just 
go, stop and erase them all at once. It takes four or five years until 
one acquires new habits. Until then, one needs to live with dust in 
one’s eyes, always craving under the power of sensual desires. 
The eyes seeing a form is sensual desire, the ear hearing a sound, 
the nose smelling an odour, the tongue tasting a flavour – all these 
are sensual desires. It feels like one is clouded by the 
impingements of sensuality, and ther e is nothing that could clear 
or lighten the situation up. But,  I thought, one has to try anyway. 
When others bowed to me or paid  respects, I didn’t pretend that 
there was anything especially good a bout me. Rather, I felt I lack 
the merit to be able to pay people back for all their goodness 
towards me. With such thoughts spinning around in my head, I

actually felt quite depressed. There was nothing I had as a reward 
to return people’s kindness. Ho w people treated me was kind in 
every way. I kept worrying, is th ere any good in me? Why is it 
that I have all these bad and coarse thoughts? 
 
Now, I think, this is absolutely normal. I would say that it 
is normal to be in a weak and unc onducive state. But one needs to 
find skilful means in order to help  oneself out of this situation. 
One needs to take the practices the Buddha recommended and 
apply them. 
 
Sometimes, I would take up death as a reflection and use 
mental images of corpses for pr actice. Or I would go to very 
lonesome places which were secluded, silent and still, where there 
was no one around to be a friend. Then the thought of death 
would come up, since there were dangerous animals around. 
Thinking that something might harm  us takes away the desire to 
sleep, because we always need to  watch out for dangers. To be 
frightened is very good, all you can do is sit and observe it. 
Observe how the body heats up and breaks out in sweat. These are 
experiences of the sankharas ar ising and building up the illusion 
of a certain feeling. We face th em using patient endurance. We 
don’t need to give way to them. Ac tually, they aren’t much of an 
enemy for us. Sankharas delude us because we are in an 
unfamiliar situation which we aren’t used to. Experiences like this 
are simply symptoms of the unknown, so we need to try to 
understand them over and over again. For understanding a 
phenomenon it doesn’t make sens e to wish it away. If these 
experiences go, they go. If they come, they come. We see these 
experiences as particular states of  our existence that have to be 
just the way they are. All living beings have to face death and fear

death. There is no way around these experiences. We accept them 
as something natural for beings living in this world.   
 
What I tried more than anyt hing else is to handle those 
feelings that arise as obstacles in  our practice, when we need to 
relate to society and the world around us, with all kinds of desires 
and defilements stimulated by sense contact. As much as we see it 
as normal, that with all our weak spots we are prone to 
experiencing these impingements as obstacles. Still there is 
nothing as difficult to handle as our interest and desire for the 
opposite sex. Don’t think that I didn’t have this problem. Of 
course I did, with all its impli cations. But I tried to look at it, 
asking, “Hmm…, what’s the reason  for my desire?” We can see 
sexuality as a biological fact for all living beings. Although it is a 
natural instinct, this doesn’t prevent us from having to look for 
means to deal with it. Could we make our feelings in this area 
change? We might think, “No, th at’s completely beyond our 
capabilities.” But that still doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t be 
careful with it and train to deal with these feelings of desire. 
 
Sometimes when we suddenly get into contact with desire, 
we are completely taken by surprise  that strong feelings such as 
these are possible. In a situation like this we are taken back by 
worldly feelings dominating us. We need to take hold of these 
feelings and relate to them in  a new way. We can change our 
perception by turning it towards reflections about the unbeautiful, 
non-self-sufficient, non-durable nature  of things, or the very fact 
that there is not a personality or a self in them at all. You can 
bring the images of dead bodies to mind in order to counter the 
perception of the body as attractive and beautiful. Reflect on these 
images, but don’t expect sexual desi re to vanish completely. But 
at least it might change to the point where you can breathe again.

Just like when you come up and ta ke a deep breath after having 
dived under water for quite some  time. When you can breathe, 
your strength comes back to you again.  
 
So reflections on death can reduce sexual desire and the 
delight in romantic objects, but it won’t make desire disappear 
completely since the seeds for it are still in us. This practice is 
strengthening, so don’t give up. D on’t forget to build up a solid 
foundation and try to sustain awareness and focus of mind as a 
steady basis. We focus our awar eness continually. Sometimes we 
may feel ashamed, but there are also times when we feel pleased. 
So we just take the experience of  feeling ashamed as an object of 
our awareness. 
 
Eventually we will be able to  sustain our minds in being 
aware steadily. Equipped with sati  and sampajañña, we focus on 
the body and its conditioned nature. We can bring up the image of 
our own corpse in our mind and focus on it. Staying in the 
experience of the present moment, the paccuppanna-dhamma (the 
reality of the presen t moment) will grow in our mind. The mind 
won’t go astray into the past and future. It won’t pay attention to 
things that are already gone or  yet to come. It won’t worry 
whether a situation is go ing to be like this or like that. All that is 
left is the present moment. Our mind is like a flame when the 
wind is stilled. The flame is unmo ved and upright in itself and 
blazes light into all directions, when we are fully present. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether we have our eyes closed or open, 
or what is our particular posture – we always have the feeling that 
we are refuge unto ourselves. Still, an experience like this may 
not always be good – it still has its negative sides. (In my case,) I 
took it as an experience that comes entirely by itself. I hadn’t tried

to force it to arise. It all came by itself. The experience that arose 
was similar to what is called obhasa, a bright light or clear 
radiance, which is considered to be one of the vipassanupakilesas41. What arose was a bright radiance and happiness in 
myself. But it wasn’t the case at all, that I got deluded or carried 
away with it. This happiness was simply there by itself, even 
when resting or sleeping. What it is, and when it comes, one 
doesn’t know. There is simply the experience of it, an experience 
of uninterrupted wakefulness that sustains itself all through the 
day and night. Even when the b ody sleeps, it re sts in this 
happiness. All this comes by itself. 
 
An experience of bliss like this can last for a period of one 
or two days, and then it may ch ange again. There is nothing 
unusual about this. Things simply change. The happiness in this 
experience isn’t the usual happiness based on liking and disliking. 
It is the rapture and gladness that the Buddha calls piti, an ongoing joy throughout the day and night, whether sleeping or 
awake. There is nothing to compare with this happiness. If we 
have such an experience of piti, we need to establish the 
awareness in ourselves that, having  arisen, an experience like this 
will also be subject to change, and we need to uphold mindfulness 
and stay with this awareness of change. 
 
Over long periods of time, our experience will indeed 
change, maybe even to extreme, incomparable, heavy suffering. 
But we should sustain our mindfulness, saying, “Oh, this suffering 
is really suffering.” Thus we re main mindful of it. We see and 
watch, knowing that having arisen the suffering must also cease. 
 
41  Vipassanupakilesa (Pali): ten defilements or corruptions that hinder true 
insight, such as abundant feelings of energy, bliss etc.

Seeing suffering in this way is actually quite fun. We see it, 
“Suffering all day, suffering all night: Oooh…!” We want to cry, 
but there is no point in crying. We want to laugh, but  there is no 
point in laughing. There is only suffering in its genuine form, 
taking its turn as a normal experience. And we observe it, 
knowing that having arisen, it will also have to cease again. 
 
This is what we can feel when we really observe 
ourselves. After a while things will change again. Sometimes, 
after one or two days, our experience will go towards happiness 
again – happiness in the morni ng, happiness in the evening, 
walking, sitting, standing we experi ence happiness. We feel that 
our task is only to watch and follow this experience by knowing 
and seeing, keeping up mindfulness over long periods of time. 
Then, when we sense that we have been doing our task in 
practising this way long enough, we  sit down in meditation. We 
sit and develop samadhi. We sit with mindfulness well 
established. All by ourselves we keep sitting. And then, another 
change may take place: We experience peace, coolness and 
tranquility. We aren’t concerned with our body, we experience a 
feeling of lightness of the body as if there was not a “me”, not a 
“self”. There is complete lightness. This is a refreshing and 
cooling experience. One feels peaceful and secluded. The 
sankharas are stilled, all the prolif erations have ceased. The 
continuous changes of ups and downs and liking and disliking 
have disappeared.  
 
This is not something that we have created by ourselves, it 
is where the practice takes us if we follow the natural course of 
our training. If you are determined to practise in a similar way, be 
aware that experiences like these can only arise specifically in the 
course of one’s individual practice.  
7

If you want to follow this path, don’t follow it in a worldly 
way. This won’t be much good. Just like the Buddha warned his 
five first disciples not to take the path of worldly, unenlightened 
people, who follow merely thei r own moods. Don’t follow your 
moods. Be ahead of your moods. If something satisfies you, see it 
just as a state of mind. If somethi ng frustrates you, see it just as a 
state of mind. If you are pleased with something, it is simply one 
of the ways that pleasure manifest s. Don’t give way to relating to 
these experiences in a deluded way. 
 
  We need to walk following the footsteps of the Buddha 
in terms of knowing, knowing ourselves and knowing for 
ourselves, just as expressed in this little Thai saying: 
 
 
Know how to 
Look and figure it out 
Try and speak it out 
Go and carry it out 
 
 
So, today, as you have come to  show your respect to me, 
I’d like to say that I don’t take these ceremonies as too important 
for me as a person, but still they are a nice expression of our 
relationship towards each other wh en we are living together. As 
for now, I don’t have any more points of reflection for our 
journey together. May this be useful to your understanding in 
some way or another. Your listening is a chance for us to get in 
touch with each other – may we also work on our practice in the 
same way. 
 
***

Look and figure it out 
Try and speak it out 
Go and carry it out



Glossary ∗
 
agati-dhamma (Pali): biased views, ways of understanding and 
behaviour,  wrong courses of perception. Arises out of desire, anger, 
fear and ignorance. 
Ajahn Buddhadasa: A highly respected Thai monk who lived 
from 2449-2536 (1906-1993), and founded Suan Mokh monastery in 
Chaya province, Southern Thailand. Known throughout the world for 
his all-encompassing, contemporary, and highly accessible teachings. 
akaraniyakicca (Pali): The four things never to be done by a 
Bhikkhu (sexual intercourse, stealing, killing and falsely claiming 
superhuman qualities). 
anagarika (Pali): A homeless one; one who enters the holy life 
without formally entering the Sangha. 
anusasana (Pali): Advice given to new Bhikkus as part of the 
ordination ceremony. Comprises the four akaraniyakicca and the four  
nissaya. 
anatta (Pali): Non-self, not-self. One of the Three Characterisctics 
anicca (Pali): Impermanence. 
arahant (Pali): One who has attained nibbana. 
ariya (Pali): Literally: noble. 
ariyapuggala (Pali): Literally: noble person; Noble Enlightened 
Being. A person who has reached one of the four stages of 
enlightenment. 
ariya-sangha (Pali): Sangha in the highest sense: the group of 
Noble Enlightened Beings (ariyapuggalas). 
ariyavamsa (Pali): Literally: the noble lineage – the lineage of 
enlightened beings; specifically defined by the Buddha as those who 
possess the qualities of contentment and fewness of wishes.    
Bhikkhu (Pali): Literally: beggar; or one who sees the danger in   
samsara. Buddhist monk. 
 
∗ For the sake of simplicity, in this edition all Pali-words are given in ordinary 
English spelling, omitting special diacritical signs.

bhojane mattaññuta (Pali): Knowing the right amount in eating, 
or in consumption of other requisites. 
dana (Pali): The quality of generosity, and the act of giving. 
deva (Pali): Heavenly beings, angels, gods.  
Dhamma (Pali): (Sanskrit: Dharma) The ultimate truth of reality; the 
teachings about this truth; and the practice leading to its realization. 
Specifically refers to the Buddha’s teaching or doctrine. 
Dhamma-Vinaya (Pali): The name the Buddha gave to his own 
dispensation. 
dukkha (Pali): Suffering, unsatisfactoriness or stress. The central term 
in the Four Noble Truths.  
dukkha vedana (Pali): Unpleasant or painful feeling. 
Four Noble Truths (Pali): The first and central teaching of the 
Buddha about dukkha, its origin, cessation and the path leading towards 
its cessation. Complete understanding of the Four Noble Truths is 
equivalent to the attainment of nibbana. 
Going Forth: see pabbaja.  
khandha (Pali): The five aggregates, or basic constituents of life: 
rupa (form), vedana (feeling), sañña (perception or memory), sankhara 
(volitional formations), viññana (sense-consciousness). 
kilesa (Pali): Defilements, stains, afflictions or obscurations of the 
heart. Their various forms are traditionally summed up as greed, 
aversion and delusion. 
hiri (Pali): Sense of shame towards doing wrong; see ottappa. 
Holy Life (Pali: brahmacariya): Literally: the Brahma-conduct; a 
term for the monastic life that stresses the vow of  celibacy.  
Jataka (Pali): A collection of stories about the Buddha’s past lives, 
that forms a part oft the Buddhist canonical scriptures. 
lokadhamma (Pali): The eight Worldly Dhammas: praise and 
blame, gain and loss, fame and disrepute, happiness and unhappiness. 
These can be divided into agreeable and disagreeable phenomena 
(ittharammana and anittharamana dhamma). 
Luang Por (Thai): Literally venerable father; a respectful way of 
addressing seniour and elderly monks.   
Luang Pu (Thai): Literally venerable grandfather; a respectful way of 
addressing seniour monks that are very old.

magga-phala-nibbana (Pali): The path, fruition and full 
attainment of nibbana. 
metta (Pali): Loving-kindness, goodwill, friendliness. 
namadhamma (Pali): Mental phenomena as opposed to 
rupadhamma, the phenomena of the physical world. 
nibbana (Pali): (Sanskrit: nirvana) The extinction or complete fading 
away of all defilements, the complete ending of suffering, the ultimate 
fulfillment of the Buddhist path. 
nissaya (Pali): The four dependences on which a Bhikkhu’s life is 
founded (almsfood, robes made from cloth used to wrap corpses, 
dwelling at the foot of a tree, and fermented urine as medicine). 
nivarana (Pali): The five hindrances in meditation: sensual desire, illwill, sloth and torpor, restlessness and agitation, doubt and uncertainty. 
ottappa (Pali): Wholesome fear of wrong-doing; see hiri. 
pabbajita (Pali): Literally: One Gone Gorth; a Samana; a 
contemplative; see pabbaja. 
pabbaja (Pali): Ordination as a novice (Pali: Samanera). Going Forth 
from the household-life to the life of a Samana, a contemplative. 
pañña (Pali): Wisdom; discernment. 
pariyatti-dhamma (Pali): The study of the scriptures. 
Patimokkha (Pali): The 227 major rules of the Vinaya, recited 
fortnightly by the Bhikkhus. 
Patimokkhasamvara (Pali): The practice of restraining one’s 
actions within the 227 rules of the Patimokkha.
patipatti-dhamma (Pali): Practicing according to the scriptures. 
Right View (Pali: samma ditthi): The first of the eight factors of the 
Noble Eightfold Path, the path leading to nibbana. In the highest sense 
to have Right View means to understand the Four Noble Truths. 
rupa (Pali): form. 
rupadhamma (Pali): the physical world, as opposed to  
namadhamma. 
saccadhamma (Pali): The truth of reality. 
saddha (Pali): Confidence, faith or trust. 
Sangha (Pali): The monastic community. 
sankhara (Pali): Conditioned phenomena of the mind; proliferations 
of the mind; (occassionally) all conditioned phenomena.

samadhi (Pali): Concentration. The development of sustained, 
blissful, unified, one-pointed awareness on a meditation object, leading 
to tranquility. 
samaggi (Pali): Harmony, unity. 
Samana (Pali): Peaceful one, contemplative, renunciant, ascetic, 
recluse. 
Samanera (Pali): Novice. 
sampajañña (Pali): All-around awareness and clear comprehension. 
The Thai usage as “roo dtua” also means consciousness. 
samsara (Pali): The round of birth and death. 
sati (Pali): Mindfulness and recollection. 
sati-pañña (Pali): Mindfulness and wisdom. 
sila (Pali): Moral conduct, ethical behaviour. 
sukha vedana (Pali): Pleasant feeling. 
tanha (Pali): Craving or desire, sometimes translated as wanting. 
Three Characteristics: anicca, dukkha, anatta. 
upadana (Pali): The tendency to hold on to things, such as thoughts 
that something is one’s own or belongs to one. 
upajjhaya (Pali): Ordination preceptor. 
upasampada (Pali): Ordination as a Bhikkhu. 
upekkha (Pali): Equanimity. 
vassa (Pali): The three lunar months of the rainy season. The  
Bhikkhus observe an annual “retreat” for this period, passing every 
dawn within the same monastery or residence. 
vedana (Pali): Feeling. Either sukha-, dukkha-, or upekkha-vedana 
Vinaya (Pali): Training and discipline undertaken by the Buddhist 
practitioner; or, the Bhikkhus’ discipline with its 227 major rules. 
viññana (Pali): Sense consciousness. 
Worldly Dhammas: see lokadhamma.





About Luang Por Liem  
 
Luang Por Liem T hitadhammo is a Buddhist monk in the 
Thai Forest Tradition. He was bor n in Sri Saket Province in the 
Northeast of Thailand on the 5 th of November 1941. After higher 
ordination at twenty years of age,  Luang Por practised in several 
village monasteries throughout the Northeast until he joined the 
Forest Tradition in 1969. He took up the training under Luang Pu 
Chah, who later became one of the most famous monks in the 
country, and whose reputation and influence has continued to 
spread throughout the world, even today. Living under Luang Pu 
Chah’s guidance in Wat Nong Pah Pong in Ubon Province, Luang 
Por Liem soon became one of his closest disciples. After Luang 
Pu Chah became severely ill in 1982, he entrusted Luang Por 
Liem to lead the monastery. S hortly thereafter, as Luang Pu 
Chah’s illness prevented him fr om speaking, the Sangha of Wat 
Nong Pah Pong appointed Luang Por Liem to take over the 
abbotship. He fulfils this duty up to the present day, keeping the 
heritage of Luang Pu Chah’s Dh amma and characteristic ways of 
monastic training available for monks, nuns and lay disciples.  
 
Already for the second time Luang Por Liem was given an 
honorary monastic title by His Maje sty the King of Thailand. He 
is presently known as Tan Chao  Khun Pra Rachabhavanavigrom. 
For the Sangha at Wat Pah Nanachat (Luang Pu Chah’s 
International Forest Monastery for training monks using English 
as the language of instruction) . Luang Por Liem is not only a 
dearly respected teacher and guide in the monastic life, but has for 
the last ten years also conduc ted every monast ic ordination 
ceremony as the preceptor.  
7
