# Teachings about “Samana-Dhamma”, the virtues of a Buddhist Monk

The Ways of the Peaceful 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teachings about “Samana-Dhamma”, the virtues of a Buddhist Monk  
by Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo



The Ways of the Peaceful 
 
Teachings about “Samana-Dhamma”, the virtues of a Buddhist monk  
by Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo 
 
For free distribution only 
Copyright by Wat Nong Pah Pong, Ubon, 34190 Thailand 
Photos on page 46, 92, and 106  by Andreas Teichmann, Germany 
ISBN: 978-974-8284-16-3 
Printed in 2007  by Siritham Offset Ltd., Part  
114-116 Chayangkul rd., Muang District, Ubon 34000 Thailand 
Tel. 045-250437, Fax 045-250427

Information  
about the Ajahn Chah Tradition 
 
Teachings of the Ajahn Chah Tradition 
 in English (and other languages) for free distribution are 
available at  
 
Wat Pah Nanachat  
Bahn Bung Wai  
Amper Warin  
Ubon Rajathani 34310, Thailand 
 
or www. watpahnanachat.org, 
www. ajahn-chah.org, www.watnongpahpong.org. 
 
 The list of English Dhamma publications includes the first of 
Luang Por Liems books, “No Worries – Buddhist teachings and 
a short biography of Luang Por Liem Thithadhammo”.  
 
Wat Pah Nanachat (“The International Forest Monastery”) is 
also the monastery to contact for foreigners in Thailand 
interested in taking up monastic life in the Ajahn Chah 
Tradition. The training starts  from becoming an anagarika (a 
homeless one), observing the eight precepts for several 
months, to becoming a samenera (novice) for about one year, 
until one finally takes full Bhikkhu ordination with Luang Por 
Liem at Wat Nong Pah Pong. The training is mainly done in 
English language at Wat Pah Nanachat, but also at Wat Nong 
Pah Pong and its various branch monasteries in Thai. 
For becoming a monk  in Europe, Australia, the US and other 
countries please contact one of the overseas branch 
monasteries of Wat Nong Pah Pong via: 
 
www.amaravati.org

Contents 
 
Foreword  page    1      
Following the Footsteps of the Enlightened Beings   page    5 
Practise Within Ones Duties   page  13   
Ordination: Going Forth  page  21 
Ordination: The Announcements   page  35  
Contentment   page  41 
Restraint   page  47 
Gentleness, Humbleness and Patience   page  53 
Wealth and Fame   page  61 
Advice on Robe Washing Day   page  67 
 Creating Benefit   page  73 
Reflections after the Patimokkha Recitation   page  79 
The Embellishments of One Gone Forth   page  91 
Different From Ordinary People   page 105 
From the Darkness to the Light   page 117  
Glossary   page 141  
About Luang Por Liem  page 146



Foreword 
 
“The Ways of the Peaceful” is one of the many possible 
renderings of the term “Samana-Dhamma”, an 
expression that summarizes the whole lifestyle of a 
Buddhist monk. “ Samana” means somebody who is 
peaceful. Generally in the time of the Buddha all kinds of 
recluses, ascetics, contemplatives, and members of 
ordained communities living the life of a homeless 
practitioner (anagarika) were referred to as “Samanas”. 
The Buddhas disciples were often called the “Samanas 
of Gotama” or the “Samanas of the Sakyan clan”, using 
the Buddhas family and clan names. Whenever the 
aspect of celibacy of these religious practitioners is 
stressed, the term “brahmacariya” is used, which 
translates in short as “Holy Life”. The Buddha himself 
called his monks “Bhikkhus”. This literally means 
beggars, but especially in the Thai Forest Tradition a 
second translation is popular: “Those who see the danger 
in the round of rebirth”. Besides the specific monastic 
code that the Buddha established for his monks (the 
“Vinaya”, with its 227 major training rules and countless 
minor rules), that spells out the conduct of a Buddhist 
monk in great detail,  there was a general understanding 
of the etiquette, the virtues and qualities of a Samana, a 
peaceful ascetic. This is the “Samana-Dhamma”. It refers 
to these general virtues more than to the details of the 
training rules, but in fact the daily life of a monk is always 
a combination of both, in the same way as the Buddha

always used the words Dhamma and Vinaya as a pair 
when he talked about his dispensation.  
 
This compilation of teachings circles around the routines, 
practices and aspirations that form the life of a monastic 
community, (Sangha), as practised in the Thai Forest 
Tradition in the present day and age. Luang Por Liem 
Thitadhammo is one of the living teachers of this 
tradition. He was entrusted t he leadership of the famous 
forest monastery Wat Nong Pah Pong in Ubon Rajathani 
in Northeastern Thailand by Luang Pu Chah, who is well 
known in Thailand and abroad for his unique style of 
teaching this all encompassing way of life and meditation  
to both Thai and western monks. Presently, Luang Por 
Liem keeps this emphasis on training monks alive, 
ranging from mastering the details of daily life to very 
profound insights into the universal truths about life that 
the Buddha taught. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Luang Pu Chah                  Luang Por Liem

In this book, besides general outlines of monastic 
aspiration and its practice in daily life, some material on 
the ceremony of ordination, called the ”Going Forth” from 
the household life to the homeless life is included. In 
comparison with the Thai edition called “SamanaDhamma”, some talks have been shortened, as some 
parts are only of interest to those who know Thailand 
well. 
 
We hope that the teachings put together in this volume 
serve those who ar e not yet familiar with Buddhist 
monastic culture as an introduction to areas of Dhamma 
practice that are usually only accessible to monks and 
inspire those that are interested in taking up monastic life 
to do so, and those who are already monks, to continue 
to train themselves in the Ways of the Peaceful. 
 
 With best wishes in the Samana-Dhamma, 
 
   The Translators  
 
 (Wat Nong Pah Pong, June 2550 (2007))
