# “Creating Benefit”

“Creating Benefit”

Creating Benefit 
 
On April 25 th, 2006 (2549) during his visit to BuddhaBodhivana Monastery in Melbourne, Luang Por was 
asked for some advice on how to practise while working. 
Here are some extracts from his answer: 
 
Venerable Ajahn Buddhadasa gave some good advice (on 
the topic of work): “We need to work with no feelings of upadana 
or grasping.” When I work I am  not worried about anything or 
think much at all. I just keep doing the work, only in order to do 
something that is in some way of use to the community. That’s 
all. I don’t think about whether ther e is a lot to do or not – that 
only causes one to worry. I also don’t do things expecting that the 
outcome will last very long – I just consider that the things we 
build should be good enough to provide some shelter from heat 
and cold. Still, I try to do a good job. I guess it does make a 
difference for the stability of th ings whether the work was done 
properly or not. If one works without being worried about things, 
or with not much of a critical mind, one can really do these things 
properly. 
 
With working, it is just like with travelling: if we don’t 
care about reaching the destina tion particularly quickly, the 
distance won’t seem far. But if we  want to arrive quicker than 
usual, our aim will be far away. These things depend on our 
desires. 
 
When we work, we can pay attention to the different 
bodily postures and movements we make and observe them. If we 
keep awareness of our body, the st ress that comes from the power 
of desire won’t weigh on us. Whether we are sitting, standing, 
walking or lying down there won’t be anything (heavy). We can

see everything as a matter of chan ging one’s bodily posture, work 
included.  
 
When we work we sometimes experience strong feelings 
that we usually don’t have to face. But focusing on emptiness 
while working or seeing work as merely a change of posture can 
turn the experience in to something good. In the case of office 
work or writing, there is also not much of a problem, unless we 
worry a lot. Then things can become difficult. If we don’t think 
anything about the things we  do, they become something 
absolutely normal. 
 
There are different kinds of  work – coarse work, for 
example, when we do the building for providing basic supports 
for the physical needs of our bodies, the dwellings to live in. This 
kind of work demands great sacrifi ce. Then there is the work of 
creating benefit (for society), such as teaching Dhamma. 
 
The Buddha pointed out cert ain qualities a Dhammateacher needs, for example: 
 
– One shouldn’t hope for anything in reward for 
teaching Dhamma, but aim only at establishing 
(correct) views in a way that is suitable and fitting and 
gives rise to useful things. 
– One should teach the Dhamma in a well-reasoned 
and systematic way, gradually, without omitting 
points of meaning. 
– One should not teach for the sake of (material) 
gains. 
– One should not teach pr aising oneself and making 
insinuating or denigrating comments about others.

To teach the Dhamma is also work. But if we keep in line 
with the Dhamma, such unwholesome intentions as the ones 
mentioned won’t arise. Our intenti on is solely to aim at offering 
improvements and corrections for the sake of being beneficial. 
 
When I was still in the age where one is very strong, while 
living with Luang Pu Chah, sometimes he would ask us to sew 
robes for the new candidates that  wished to practise and train 
under the Dhamma-Vinaya temporarily. One year it was 40 or 50 
sets of triple robes. To sew as much as that, one has to start with it 
every morning. If one does the wo rk harbouring negative feelings 
about it in one’s mind, one will ha ve to experience feelings of 
irritation and anger and eventually start complaining. I was able to 
do the job feeling good. If on one particular day I would finish 
only a certain amount, I would be al right with just that, continue 
next day, and just keep on doi ng the work. I didn’t have any 
feelings about it. When it was time to stop, I stopped. Luang Pu 
Chah said to do just the amount we could handle. And when the 
night came, I would spend it quie tly keeping up my meditation. 
So, this is also a kind of work. One has to work with a willingness 
to help and an attitude of sacrif ice in one’s mind. It’s for the good 
that one sacrifices. 
 
Before, when Luang Pu Chah was still young, when 
somebody came to live with him he was very supportive and 
helpful, although it was a policy to let people spend some time on 
their own in the beginning – so they could test whether they could 
make it, living in such an unfam iliar place. After they made it, 
Luang Pu Chah would rely on th e method of letting people help 
themselves with all the work and their practice. All this meant 
giving people the opportunity to live self-reliantly.

As concerns the robe sewing – in the old days they were 
hand-sewn. One used needles and not machines or the tools we 
have today. Luang Pu Chah would help with the cutting, but one 
had to do the sewing oneself. Until a robe was finished it took 
many, many days. These practices show how much Luang Pu 
Chah cared about us being able to take care of ourselves. 
 
Concerning the use of our requisites – the ways of putting 
on the robes and looking after them, or even how we practise with 
conducting our bodies in all the different postures – Luang Pu 
Chah would give the advice to do things mindfully: sitting with 
mindfulness, walking and standing  and so on, or being mindful 
when putting on the robe. Everything would in some way give 
rise to people becoming self-re liant. And they wouldn’t be a 
burden for others by having them do  everything for them. This is 
also an aspect of ‘work’.  
 
The way Luang Pu Chah lived, it is not the case that one 
doesn’t have to do anything. One does work that is of benefit to 
oneself and to the community at the same time. 
 
***

We don’t just let our lives 
pass devoid of sense. We have to 
rise up to our ideals.
