The Ways of the Peaceful 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teachings about “Samana-Dhamma”, the virtues of a Buddhist Monk  
by Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo

The Ways of the Peaceful 
 
Teachings about “Samana-Dhamma”, the virtues of a Buddhist monk  
by Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo 
 
For free distribution only 
Copyright by Wat Nong Pah Pong, Ubon, 34190 Thailand 
Photos on page 46, 92, and 106  by Andreas Teichmann, Germany 
ISBN: 978-974-8284-16-3 
Printed in 2007  by Siritham Offset Ltd., Part  
114-116 Chayangkul rd., Muang District, Ubon 34000 Thailand 
Tel. 045-250437, Fax 045-250427

Information  
about the Ajahn Chah Tradition 
 
Teachings of the Ajahn Chah Tradition 
 in English (and other languages) for free distribution are 
available at  
 
Wat Pah Nanachat  
Bahn Bung Wai  
Amper Warin  
Ubon Rajathani 34310, Thailand 
 
or www. watpahnanachat.org, 
www. ajahn-chah.org, www.watnongpahpong.org. 
 
 The list of English Dhamma publications includes the first of 
Luang Por Liems books, “No Worries – Buddhist teachings and 
a short biography of Luang Por Liem Thithadhammo”.  
 
Wat Pah Nanachat (“The International Forest Monastery”) is 
also the monastery to contact for foreigners in Thailand 
interested in taking up monastic life in the Ajahn Chah 
Tradition. The training starts  from becoming an anagarika (a 
homeless one), observing the eight precepts for several 
months, to becoming a samenera (novice) for about one year, 
until one finally takes full Bhikkhu ordination with Luang Por 
Liem at Wat Nong Pah Pong. The training is mainly done in 
English language at Wat Pah Nanachat, but also at Wat Nong 
Pah Pong and its various branch monasteries in Thai. 
For becoming a monk  in Europe, Australia, the US and other 
countries please contact one of the overseas branch 
monasteries of Wat Nong Pah Pong via: 
 
www.amaravati.org

Contents 
 
Foreword  page    1      
Following the Footsteps of the Enlightened Beings   page    5 
Practise Within Ones Duties   page  13   
Ordination: Going Forth  page  21 
Ordination: The Announcements   page  35  
Contentment   page  41 
Restraint   page  47 
Gentleness, Humbleness and Patience   page  53 
Wealth and Fame   page  61 
Advice on Robe Washing Day   page  67 
 Creating Benefit   page  73 
Reflections after the Patimokkha Recitation   page  79 
The Embellishments of One Gone Forth   page  91 
Different From Ordinary People   page 105 
From the Darkness to the Light   page 117  
Glossary   page 141  
About Luang Por Liem  page 146

Foreword 
 
“The Ways of the Peaceful” is one of the many possible 
renderings of the term “Samana-Dhamma”, an 
expression that summarizes the whole lifestyle of a 
Buddhist monk. “ Samana” means somebody who is 
peaceful. Generally in the time of the Buddha all kinds of 
recluses, ascetics, contemplatives, and members of 
ordained communities living the life of a homeless 
practitioner (anagarika) were referred to as “Samanas”. 
The Buddhas disciples were often called the “Samanas 
of Gotama” or the “Samanas of the Sakyan clan”, using 
the Buddhas family and clan names. Whenever the 
aspect of celibacy of these religious practitioners is 
stressed, the term “brahmacariya” is used, which 
translates in short as “Holy Life”. The Buddha himself 
called his monks “Bhikkhus”. This literally means 
beggars, but especially in the Thai Forest Tradition a 
second translation is popular: “Those who see the danger 
in the round of rebirth”. Besides the specific monastic 
code that the Buddha established for his monks (the 
“Vinaya”, with its 227 major training rules and countless 
minor rules), that spells out the conduct of a Buddhist 
monk in great detail,  there was a general understanding 
of the etiquette, the virtues and qualities of a Samana, a 
peaceful ascetic. This is the “Samana-Dhamma”. It refers 
to these general virtues more than to the details of the 
training rules, but in fact the daily life of a monk is always 
a combination of both, in the same way as the Buddha

always used the words Dhamma and Vinaya as a pair 
when he talked about his dispensation.  
 
This compilation of teachings circles around the routines, 
practices and aspirations that form the life of a monastic 
community, (Sangha), as practised in the Thai Forest 
Tradition in the present day and age. Luang Por Liem 
Thitadhammo is one of the living teachers of this 
tradition. He was entrusted t he leadership of the famous 
forest monastery Wat Nong Pah Pong in Ubon Rajathani 
in Northeastern Thailand by Luang Pu Chah, who is well 
known in Thailand and abroad for his unique style of 
teaching this all encompassing way of life and meditation  
to both Thai and western monks. Presently, Luang Por 
Liem keeps this emphasis on training monks alive, 
ranging from mastering the details of daily life to very 
profound insights into the universal truths about life that 
the Buddha taught. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Luang Pu Chah                  Luang Por Liem

In this book, besides general outlines of monastic 
aspiration and its practice in daily life, some material on 
the ceremony of ordination, called the ”Going Forth” from 
the household life to the homeless life is included. In 
comparison with the Thai edition called “SamanaDhamma”, some talks have been shortened, as some 
parts are only of interest to those who know Thailand 
well. 
 
We hope that the teachings put together in this volume 
serve those who ar e not yet familiar with Buddhist 
monastic culture as an introduction to areas of Dhamma 
practice that are usually only accessible to monks and 
inspire those that are interested in taking up monastic life 
to do so, and those who are already monks, to continue 
to train themselves in the Ways of the Peaceful. 
 
 With best wishes in the Samana-Dhamma, 
 
   The Translators  
 
 (Wat Nong Pah Pong, June 2550 (2007))

To let other people see the example of 
one’s actions, to live so they can see, is much 
better than to teach using merely words. 
Therefore let all of us follow the footsteps of 
the Enlightened Beings together.

“Following the  
Footsteps of the     
Enlightened Beings”

Following the Footsteps  
of the Enlightened Beings 
 
 
Excerpts from a short speech written by Luang Por 
Liem to be read out opening the conference of the 
Australian Sangha Association, the umbrella organization of all traditions of monastics that have settled 
down in Australia, including Mahayana and Vajrayana 
besides Theravada, in June 2006 (2549).  
 
 
Siam, or Thailand, is highly renowned all over the world for 
being one of the countries where Buddhism is thriving and 
flourishing. This is in part due to  our ruler, His Majesty the King, 
giving Royal patronage to the national religion. As a result, 
Buddhism has flourished, especially in the areas of the study of 
theoretical knowledge and Dhamma education. 
 
Still, our country has not yet been able to present to the 
world an acceptable example of  somebody who has gained the 
highest spiritual fruits of Buddhism. Having emphasized the 
spreading of theoretical knowledge, we have yet to take the next 
step to spreading the practice of  Dhamma. If we have succeeded 
in this, we will be truly following the footsteps of the 
ariapuggalas, the Noble Enlightened Beings, who we have 
learned and studied about so much. We have yet to send one of 
those who have received the full fruits of practice to prove to the 
world that the path of Buddhism is capable of extinguishing the 
suffering in the hearts of beings – just in the same way as modern 
science is able to relieve the physical pain of the body.

Day by day our lives come closer to ending. Therefore we 
must strive to follow the footsteps of the Enlightened Beings , and 
incline towards the high est fruits of Buddhist practice. Thus we 
will fulfill our duty as monastics:  the obligation to abandon all 
things that are obstacles to the ending of suffering. To cast them 
off completely. In contrast to this , is the lifestyle of settling down 
in huge, big residences – the lif e of a householder who needs to 
take care of all kinds of posse ssions, and has many worries and 
lots of responsibilities.  
 
Actually, being a householder or  a monastic is not defined 
by the type of cloth worn, be it that of a layperson or a monastic. 
The way we lead our lives defines us and the spiritual qualities we 
have. This is independent of the external form or our special 
status as monastics. Anyone w ho lives without a house, who does 
not possess anything apart from th e clothes he needs for covering 
his body, only has a single vessel for taking his meals, and is 
solely intent on a life free from suffering, can rightly be called an 
anagarika, a “Homeless One” – irrespective of whether he wears 
lay or monastic clothing. Coming fr om the heart, the principles of 
the Dhamma are not aiming at taking status or anything external 
as essential. We need to main tain the Dhamma in our hearts, 
develop an internal resource of  refined thinking and have the 
dedication to act accordingly. This  means to follow the footsteps 
of the Enlightened Beings in our actions. 
     
If we keep following the footsteps of the Enlightened 
Beings, we will eventually discover a “science of the mind”– 
spiritual knowledge that can be of great benefit for the world. We 
will be able to maintain this lifestyle with dignity in its original 
form, bring it to the West and create something useful for the 
world. In fact, the world has tr emendous thirst for truth and

happiness. Are we going to lie down, waiting for our habits to 
change by themselves, or are we going to try and do what can be 
done by human strength and effort, the way the Buddha taught us 
to?  
 
If studying Buddhism by the books was all we needed to do, 
leading the Holy Life of a B uddhist monastic wouldn’t be 
anything very profound. Nevertheless, to study the books with the 
motivation to find a way out of suffering seems worthwhile. But if 
our primary motivation to study is based on ambitions for gain 
and fame, we begin the Holy Life  in a wrong way and are likely 
to go astray. So, can we see the danger in this? Isn’t it obvious, 
which path leads towards the world, and which one leads beyond? 
How can we hope to be able to pick up the fruits of the “noble 
science of spiritual qualities” if we only study the books? 
 
Our teacher, the Lord Buddha, was born on the bare earth 
under a Sala-tree in Lumbini. He was enlightened sitting on the 
bare earth with just a thin cush ion of grass, under the Bodhi-tree 
in Bodhgaya. He entered final nibbana lying down on the bare 
earth, under a Sala-tree, with me rely his outer robe underneath. 
Nothing more than that. His whole life the Buddha spent on the 
earth and under trees. This tells  us how withdrawn the Buddha’s 
life was. He didn’t get involved with using extravagant dwellings. 
That he was able to realize the truth about the world of the mind is 
due to just this dwelling in seclusion. If we have never given it an 
honest try to live in places of s eclusion, we shouldn’t just assume 
that we lack the opportunity to cultivate the wonderful qualities 
that the Buddha taught about. We s hould cut off the fetters in our 
hearts that bind us to seeking company, entertainment and a life of 
pleasure. We should maintain that it is an honour to  frequent the 
kind of places of retreat that the Buddha himself used with great

results and recommended to all of us. And we should hold our 
being Samanas of the Sakyan clan in honour, through our 
wholehearted determination to act with honesty towards ourselves 
and towards other people. Then we will reach the fruits of this 
noble science of the mind, an unchanging truth. Our hearts will be 
liberated, free from slavery to anything in this world. We will 
experience a power mightier than the sciences of the physical 
world – a power that is capable of  bringing the world to lasting 
peace and coolness. Isn’t the constant lack, hunger and thirst of 
the world aroused by the temptations and stimulations that 
modern science constantly k eeps inventing anew and anew? 
Modern science constantly causes people to suffer in all kinds of 
ways because it keeps stimulating the wish for more and more 
without knowing an end. Just like when somebody is actually full 
after he has eaten, but still some thing that he likes even more 
comes and tempts him. Taking it, he experiences suffering 
burning him up inside. The wealth y and poor suffer all the same 
in this matter, until they eventu ally get a taste of this noble 
science, a taste of the way of life of the Enlightened Beings. 
 
Why is it that people don’t take this wonderful medicine that 
can ward off all those diseases which arise in the mind? The 
suffering of the mind is really lik e a disease. Desire, never being 
satisfied, never knowing enough, is the virus which causes it. And 
peace and seclusion is the medicine which cures the illness. Those 
who lead their lives according to the practices of the Enlightened 
Beings are the ones who provide  others with the medicine, 
helping them, after they have cured themselves.  
 
So let us learn this noble scie nce, the science of truth, and 
help each other for the highest benefit and happiness of the world, 
ourselves included. To do this, we need to live our lives in a truly

fresh and soothing, cooling way, both externally and internally, 
deeply bright and radiant, repres enting a symbol of coolness and 
tranquility for others. We will be an example for those human 
beings who experience suffering weighing heavily on their hearts, 
whose eyes are dull and dark due to internal consumption by the 
fires of greed, anger and the frus tration of their wishes. Only 
externally representing the form of a Samana, but internally being 
full of thoughts of lust and cravi ng just like laypeople, we won’t 
be capable of giving the world an  example. We will be like the 
blind leading the blind.  
 
  We should create as much benefit for others as possible 
with our exemplary conduct, even though there won’t be any 
reward for it. By the power of  our kindness other people will 
develop friendship towards one an other as well. We should teach 
the world by sacrificing our own happiness, giving an example of 
how one can live well using only the bare necessities. We can 
collect what we have saved by refraining from luxury and use it 
for the benefit and happiness of those other people that are still 
suffering.   
 
All through history, in any day and age, a fully enlightened 
being, an arahant , would never spend his life in laziness or take 
advantage of other people by hiding away from society in order to 
search for merely his own happi ness. In truth, the arahant  merely 
waits for opportunities to give others the example of a truly happy 
person. All the time, all his life, the arahant  is a model of patient 
endurance, resolute strength and d iligent effort, even for people 
that aspire only to worldly success.  
 
Take a look at the process of becoming an arahant. It starts 
with making the same resolution the Buddha himself made:

“Bhikkhus, all of you should bring forth effort by determining 
in your minds: “Even if my blood and flesh al l dries up and 
only bones and sinews remain, if I have not yet attained the 
fruits that are attainable by stre ngth end exertion of energy by 
human beings, I won’t stop this effort of mine.” 
 
This resolution shows that people should be taught to be 
able to bear with and endure things, firmly, relentlessly and 
continuously. Those who have attained to arahantship will always 
continue to put forth effort for the benefit of others. They continue 
to be an example and teach to patiently endure what nature brings, 
hot or cold weather for example. They aim at perfecting what is 
beneficial, supporting only the essential. For an arahant it is 
normal to be an example of somebody who is able to sustain his 
smile in the midst of all the flames of a fire spreading out and 
burning him relentlessly.     
 
To let other people see the exam ple of one’s actions, to live 
so they can see, is much better than to teach using merely words. 
Therefore let all of us follow the footsteps of the Enlightened 
Beings together. True benefit, happiness and peace will then arise 
for all of us and for society as well, for our country, and for the 
world. 
 
***

Since we are living the life of one who 
 sees the danger in the round of rebirth and 
we are in a position where we have the duty 
to pass on the principles and practices of the 
Dhamma, it is necessary that we take this 
obligation seriously.

“Practise  
Within Ones Duties”

Practise Within Ones Duties 
 
Parts of a talk given on Jan 12 th 2007 (2550) in the 
ordination hall (uposatha hall) of Wat Nong Pah Pong, 
addressing the yearly monastic assembly commemorating Luang Pu Chahs passing away, where 
almost a thousand monks gather to express their faith 
towards their teacher and his specific way of training.    
 
This uposatha hall was built by Luang Pu Chah in 2519 
(1976), and was ready for use in 2520 (1977). One can say that it 
is quite a durable structure, as it has served its purpose now for 
already as long as thir ty years. An ordinatio n hall is a religious 
site, a place that specifically belongs to the Sa ngha. The Sangha 
has received permission (from the s overeign of the nation) to use 
this site for performi ng its religious tasks within Buddhism. In a 
way we can see such a ceremonial site as a fundamental feature of 
the Buddhist religion. This refers to the physical presence of a 
religion, in the sense of  material objects ( sasanavatthu) being a 
testimony and representation of th e religion. Religious objects of 
this kind are called senasana, the dwelling places (of the Sangha). 
For this dwelling place we have  received permission from the 
authorities governing society. We  have ownership over it, and 
have the right to perform what benefits the Dhamma-Vinaya in 
whatever way we wish. This means particularly to be able to 
accept new people into our religious  community (in this hall), 
which is called the ceremony of Going Forth and Bhikkhu 
ordination.  
 
The ordination ceremony is meant to ensure that there is 
enough human potential for doing the work of passing on the 
heritage of the Buddhist religion. Whenever people go forth into 
monkhood and ordain we gain streng th for the continuation of the

religion. This, in fact, relies on nothing else but the human 
resources in our community of monks. 
 
So the individual Buddhist, a member of the religion 
(sasanapuggala) plays a very important role, as it depends on the 
people within the religion to turn the religious teachings, the 
sasanadhamma, the dispensation of the Buddha, into something 
that is of benefit. That is why, when the individual followers of a 
religion take up the obligation to transmit and pass on the 
teachings, they need to be po ssessed with certain spiritual 
qualities, namely, as we understand it, some of the aspects of the 
spiritual realizations that are characteristic for the Sangha
1. Still, 
this doesn’t mean that the people forming the human resources of 
a religion are already perfect in th ese spiritual qualities from the 
start. But it is necessary to gradually develop such knowledge by 
means of following the principles of the Dhamma-Vinaya.  
 
If a person doesn’t have spiritu al values that are in line 
with the Dhamma-Vinaya, this will give rise to things that are 
incorrect and will further contradict  some of those teachings that 
form the noble qualities of the Sangha. For this reason we need to 
give knowledge and advice to thos e persons that we call monks 
and novices, those who fulfill the role of continuing Buddhism. 
We need to instruct them, so they acquire good standards and 
practise what is correct and in line with the guiding principles and 
values of the Sangha. This is what is called “sikkha”, training.  
 
 
1  This refers to the Nine Qualities of the ariya-sangha, the Noble Disciples 
that have attained one of the stages of liberation. The Nine Qualities are for 
example: to practise well (supatipanno) or to practice directly (ujupatipanno).

Sikkha means to educate onese lf through being aware of 
one’s conduct when performing the duties of a well-practised 
person, namely, keeping sila2 and Vinaya. We have to give this 
great importance, as sila an d Vinaya are considered the 
fundamental roots of our religion. If people have some education 
in the Vinaya, they will practis e and conduct themselves in a way 
that gives rise to neither conflict, nor decline, nor degeneration. 
  
Since we are living the life of one who sees the danger in 
the round of rebirth and we are in  a position where we have the 
duty to pass on the principles and practices of the Dhamma, it is 
necessary that we take this obligation seriously.  
 
To train and educate oneself is actually not very difficult, 
because the teachings of the Buddha, including the Vinaya with 
all its connections to th e principle teachings, do  in fact relate to 
our own behaviour and actions in  all their variety. Whatever 
behaviour is inappropriate or not right, the Buddha forbids, 
teaching us so we know how to refrain from it and give it up. In 
our interactions with other people, we need to be aware of the fact 
that our actions will have an effect on them. This is something to 
keep in mind very clearly.  
 
As one of the individual monks living in a certain place, 
doing his duties as part of the human potential (of Buddhism), one 
shouldn’t give way to thinking narrow-mindedly in terms of 
“atta”, one’s own person. One shoul d think in terms of the 
communal aspects of this religi on, considering the results and 
effects that occur on the communa l level. Anything that is not 
 
2 sila (Pali): virtue, morality, ethical conduct, or specifically: keeping the 
precepts of a monk, novice or layperson.

correct may cause division an d arguments in unskilful and 
unbeautiful ways.  
 
These days we hear a lot about the world being full of 
conflicts. Maybe you know the Jataka-tale 3, in which the Buddha 
gives the comparison of a Sangha that used to live together for a 
long time being like the wooden go ng of the people of Dasaraka. 
A gong is an instrument for callin g people together. If such a 
gong becomes old, its wood will start developing cracks, and the 
person that has the task of maintaining the gong in its original 
condition will have to insert a wedge or a peg into the gong in a 
way that the gong keeps the shape of a gong. There is actually not 
much about all those things that are inserted (into our lifestyle as 
Samanas) as long as we don’t become infatuated with what is not 
appropriate for a Samana. But this is exactly what happens when 
wealth and fame develop. Such a development creeps in the 
corners and bit by bit makes us fo rget who and what we are. One 
has to be very careful about that. All of us need to be aware of this 
and should not get carried away with  things. After all, we are not 
doing these things for ourselves . We are doing them for the 
benefit of the community, and act based on the principles of the 
Buddha’s teaching, the Dhamma-Vinaya. This is a point we need 
to take into consideration. If we refer to such principles, we most 
probably won’t become heedless, and we are likely to maintain a 
life with a heart of loyalty toward s practices and ways of conduct, 
which won’t lead to self-destruction.  
 
There is nothing that can destr oy us other than negligence. 
Negligence comes from not s earching and inquiring to find 
                                     
3 The Jatakas are the stories of the Buddha’s past lives as a Bodhisatta in the 
Pali Canon. 
7

knowledge about ways of improving things so that they become 
beneficial. This is what we need  to try, and each individual, being 
a part of the religion’s human potential, plays a role in 
maintaining it, both on the mate rial and the human side of the 
religion.  
 
Now, being in a position to do things and to  take over 
responsibilities, we should be aw are of the importance of having 
such a chance. We have the chance,  so we try to protect it for our 
own sake. We need to make the most of our opportunities. As 
concerns the support of the laypeople: they are ready. Even if they 
aren’t able to give material suppor t, they will still encourage us 
mentally. In any case they will give their appreciation. So we try 
to do our duty. Don’t be somebody who is weak.  
 
So I’d like to express my appreciation for all of you living 
in different places doing their duty in line with the teachings of 
our venerated teachers, and the Dhamma-Vinaya. Don’t merely 
do the things you do following your wishes. This isn’t good. One 
should counsel others. We ha ve many many friends in the 
Dhamma living together with us. At least, we shouldn’t do things 
in a rush, but rather act in a way that is reasonable. Then things 
won’t go to ruin and we will be pleased with what we have done. 
What we have done will be Dhamma and Vinaya. Our 
monasteries, once they are built up completely, will be conducive 
for practice, and we won’t have  problems, or be frustrated, 
burdened with a lot of worries. Everything will feel cool and 
tranquil, and we’ll be in a position where we are accepted by 
society. 
 
So all of you that are to fulfill these duties, be well 
motivated to do so, even if you are living alone – then there

shouldn’t be many problems, nothing to spoil. Plea se always do 
your duties according to our funda mental, essential principles. 
Always keep to the ideals and ha ve personal standards of practice 
in the way you lead your lives. Th ese standards will serve as our 
reinforcements, bolstering and warding off (problems). They will 
be a refuge for us to rely on. If we possess such standards of 
practice as our basic principles, our actions will give us strength 
and a feeling of being at ease. 
 
What I have just spoken about are things which are not too 
profound, but are the underlying prin ciples that I have practised 
with in this monastery. Having come together (to this meeting) 
here, you probably realize that this  monastery is a place that we 
should protect and keep functioning in every aspect: the material 
objects, the human resources, and ev en all the different religious 
ceremonies within the monastery. Le t us keep them in line with 
the fundamental principles of the Dhamma-Vinaya, within the 
Buddhist religion. 
 
***

Being a true human being means being 
somebody who possesses a mind that goes 
beyond the nature of the world.

“Ordination:      
Going Forth”

Ordination:  
Going Forth 
 
Going Forth is the translation of the Pali term pabbajja 
that is used for the samanera ordination (novice 
ordination). It means to go forth from the household life 
to the life of a Samana, a contemplative. This teaching 
was given by Luang Por Liem during a ceremony of 
Going Forth of Western monks at Wat Nong Pah Pong 
on Feb. 19th 2003 (2546). 
 
Now at this time, your presenta tion of these yellow robes – 
sewn and dyed according to the most  excellent allowances of the 
Buddha – and your utterance of the words requesting the Going 
Forth is well done by all of you. 
 
Apart from that, the Going Fo rth requires that – from the 
beginning onwards – you plant and cultivate your faith and 
inspiration within the field of  the Triple Gem. Because the 
Buddha, the founder of this religi on, has allowed the Going Forth 
only if one initially studies and knows what the qualities of the 
Lord Buddha actually are. 
 
The Buddha is endowed with goodness in the following 
ways: 
 
He possesses wisdom, sharpness  of mind and discernment, 
applying it to those things that  ought to be known and seen, 
knowing their advantages and di sadvantages, whether they are 
beneficial or not, all the way to each of th e Four Noble Truths – 
and he does so without anyone teaching him. This aspect points in 
the direction of the Buddha’s Quality of Wisdom.

The Buddha has left behind all unwholesome states of 
mind, the defilements and desires, the habits and modes of being 
that have been incited by these defilements over a vast stretch of 
time. He possesses the most excellent traits of character, and is 
composed of qualities of Dhamma that are essential. This aspect 
is the Buddha’s Quality of Purity. 
 
The Buddha is endowed with loving kindness and 
compassion for the crowd of beings heated up by the fires of 
defilement and dukkha. He advises and teaches so that these 
beings, having listened, may follo w and practise after him – for 
the complete extinguishing of the fires of dukkha – and he does so 
regardless of the troubles, hardships and difficulties arising for 
him. This aspect is the Buddha’s Quality of Great Compassion. 
 
The noble being that dwells in these three qualities is called 
“Buddha” – the one who knows well and perfectly. When, 
knowing well and perfectly  in this way, a Buddha points out and 
teaches, these doctrines and teach ings are called the “Dhamma”. 
Further, those people that have heard the Dhamma and behave 
and practise accordingly – following its disciplinary code, the 
Vinaya – are called the “Sangha”. 
 
These three, the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, are 
thus the three objects that we will have to give the highest 
importance. When we possess the feeling that we are completely 
respecting the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, it is 
appropriate to receive the Going Forth. 
 
Now I will tell you the basic meditation objects, as a means 
for you to train for liberation from the defilements. They are given 
in Pali, just in the same way as the teachers of old have been

passing them down for many genera tions. Please repeat after me: 
   
“Kesa, loma, nakha, danta, taco, 
 taco, danta, nakha, loma, kesa.”4
 
These meditation objects the Buddha called the mulakammatthana (the root meditation objects). They provide a way 
for us to experience mind states where the desires staining our 
hearts cease.  
 
It is normal that the ordinary unenlightened being identifies 
himself with his desires. But the Buddha wanted us to see desires 
as non-self, as non-personal, and to  realize that there is no being 
there, just the existence of elements – material form that behaves 
according to the laws of nature and relies on its environment 
being in balance. It is only then that a state like this can come to 
be. Still, once existing, it doesn’t mean that it is stable. It exists in 
such a way that there is change and alteration all the time. It is not 
in a condition that permanently st ays the same. Ther e needs to be 
arising, existing and ceasing. This way of being is what we call 
existence according to the laws of nature. 
 
Investigating these root meditation objects leads us to 
seeing instability, non-sustainabil ity and non-self, a way of being 
that is born, exists and ceases. This weakens our desires, our 
grasping onto and giving importance to the self.  
 
 
4  Meaning: hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin (repeated in 
reverse order), the first five outwardly visible of the 32 components of the body 
that the Buddha taught to reflect on.

Once we have weakened our assumption of a self, the 
mental states that come from having to interact with the worldly 
society will also be weakened – regardless of the kind of situation 
that we relate to. If it is one where we are accepted and receive 
praise, we won’t feel happy about it , and if it is a situation where 
we are blamed, we won’t feel hurt.  Not having feelings of either 
liking or disliking will allow us  to understand ourselves better. 
These feelings are Worldly Dhammas, lokadhamma
5, the qualities 
that rule over those people who s till have dust in their eyes – the 
average unenlightened beings that exist on a low level. They will 
see these mind states as somethi ng worth wishing for, but as we 
are practitioners who aspire to di minish the desires staining our 
minds, we take up the reflection of  seeing such states of mind as 
merely an experience of feelings that are born, stay for a while 
and then cease – both sukhavedana and dukkhavedana  (pleasant 
and unpleasant feelings). Happiness, the Buddha called 
somanassa, which is considered a mode of sukhavedana, and 
sadness he called domanassa, which is a mode of dukkhavedana. 
Dukkha and sukha are expressions of  reality that cause emotions 
to arise, so the Buddha taught us  to focus our minds on them and 
know any feeling as simply bein g a feeling. The emotions of 
liking or disliking we also know as simply feelings. There is 
nothing that could be firmly established and enduring, lasting or 
permanent. All these are just states (of mind) that, after having 
arisen, will naturally have to cease. 
 
Understanding our experiences lik e this, we won’t get lost 
and go astray, thinking in terms of “this is good” or “this is bad”. 
These kinds of thoughts are just attributes of delusion and wrong 
 
5  The eight Worldly Dhammas are:  praise and blame, fame and disrepute, 
gain and loss, happiness and suffering.

view – nothing else, so the Buddha taught us to focus and reflect 
on seeing them as modes of namadhamma6, being born, existing 
and passing away. There is no need for one to be a slave of these 
processes, a slave of the world, a slave of the defilements of 
sukha- and dukkhavedana. One should see that these processes 
always have an element in them that makes one feel that they are 
lacking something. They are of the kind that one can say is never 
full, that doesn’t know the point when there’s enough – just like a 
flame never gets enough fuel. 
 
So, focusing on these processe s as simply being born, 
existing and passing away, we are able to turn ourselves away and 
get out of the situati on of having feelings lik e this, not becoming 
slaves of desires or what is called tanha (craving). Generally, 
tanha is a feeling that is coupled with dukkha, a feeling that is 
difficult to bear with, a feeli ng of non-freedom. We need to 
investigate these feelings, and this will bring us to experience 
peace of mind – peace from sukha- and dukkhavedana. We can 
live like Samanas then, like “peaceful ones”. This is what we need 
to rely on. 
 
So, let us take these meditation objects and develop them, 
apply them and bring them to lif e, so that we know this world. 
Knowing the world, we know this reality, and what our human 
birth is about. Being a true human being means being somebody 
who possesses a mind that goes beyond the nature of the world. 
Let us take this as our attitude in  meditation, so that we can work 
on helping ourselves with the liberation from the powers of 
delusion, wrong views and unwholesom e mind states, so that we 
 
6  namadhamma: mental phenomena, as opposed to rupadhamma, the 
phenomena of the physical world (literally: form).

can attain a state of mind that is pure and clean, so that we 
experience the arising of the benefits of the practice of Dhamma, 
so that we will see the benefit of relating to ourselves in the 
correct and appropriate way. 
 
Now, I will hand over the yellow robes to you, to wrap 
around you. Then you can come in again and take on the precepts, 
so that the ceremony of Going Fo rth will come to completion. 
“…come here…!” ( Luang Por says in English) 
 
*** 
After the postulants have put on the yellow robes and 
taken the ten precepts of a novice, the talk continues: 
 
From now on, it is your duty as samaneras to correct and 
develop yourselves. You need to constantly recollect that now you 
are of a different species than the householders and the common 
people in the world. Here, we lead  our lives like ones that see the 
danger and disadvantages of the round of samsara
7. So it 
becomes necessary for us to do our duties in developing our being 
Samanas – or samaneras – in the sense of being somebody whose 
ways of life are peaceful.   
 
We develop peaceful bodily conduct. Our body, with all its 
parts and organs, shouldn’t be used  in the manner of fools. We’ll 
conduct it wisely. That means in  a humble way. Humility means 
to have an attitude of respect, to live in a subordinate way, not 
getting carried away with oneself . Manners like these are ways of 
guarding one’s body, as it is called. One also needs to guard one’s 
speech, as speech is the source of good and bad (actions). One 
 
7  samsara (Pali): the (endless) round of birth and death.

needs to know how to use speech well. Our speech should be 
grounded in humility, then it won’t give rise to troubles and 
dangers. So we need to observe ou rselves in our practice in order 
to protect ourselves, both in every form of our bodily conduct and 
in our verbal conduct. It is necessary to guard oneself, keeping 
within the principle of applying mindfulness and within the 
standards of the training. In this way we won’t fall under the sway 
of ignoble and confused mind stat es. Ignoble mind states are the 
mind states of worldly beings that  don’t behave well or behave in 
degenerate ways. They are following the ways of the 
unwholesome, the mind states of  anger, desire, greed and 
delusion. All of these are considered forms of ignorance. 
 
Our becoming Samanas should gradually give rise to 
changes in a good direction. Having taken up the training we will 
have to practise the lifestyle of one who sees how life can be 
beneficial. We will have to give great attention to ourselves, in the 
sense that we develop the quali ties of honesty and straightforwardness in our minds. We should maintain good ethical 
conduct, and possess hiri, a sense of shame towards doing bad. 
When one possesses a sense of shame towards bad actions, one 
will also show fear and be cautious, because one sees that bad 
deeds won’t lead to freedom (which is called ottappa). 
 
So we will have to consider th ings in this way and start the 
training in leading our life following the intention to keep sila and 
develop purity. Sila in fact means purity. Sila is the intention of 
loving kindness, friendliness, ( metta), or the intention to respect 
the rights of other people. What ever we do, we need to be 
considerate. And we should start to  relate (to our environment) in 
a way that examines and investigates it, for the sake of seeking 
the truth of reality, saccadhamma. These are some aspects that

you need to develop an understanding of and educate yourselves 
in.  
 
Another aspect is how we use our facilities for communicating and relating to the world. We have got eyes, ears, a nose, 
a tongue, a sense of touch and a mind. Having eyes, we need to 
know how to guard them. These eyes  we have can give rise to 
both good and evil. The same is true for the ears, etc. If there is 
both good and evil, we need the skills to organize and choose the 
good aspects. For example, if the eye sees something that gives 
rise to feelings of getting carried  away by the power of emotions 
like desire or sensuality, we need to know how to control 
ourselves. If this comes up, we need to use meditation. Having 
been given these objects for meditation we should apply them.  
 
So we start to investigate, taking the body as our object. 
We analyze it in terms of vedana, and watch out for manifestations of the Worldly Dhammas
8. We see these phenomena 
arising and ceasing. They are mere ly states of existence, and 
durability and stability cannot be found in them. This is why the 
Buddha wants us to be cautious and restrained whenever the eye 
sees a form, the ear hears a s ound, the nose smells an odour, the 
tongue tastes a flavour, the body sens es something touching it, or 
there are mind states arising in the mind. Then the Buddha wanted 
us to have mindfulness and no t be careless, not allowing 
experiences to come up that we didn’t filter (through wisdom). 
We always need to keep filtering. This is another aspect in which 
you will have to train in as Samanas. 
 
8  Here meaning the two categories of the eight  Worldly Dhammas: agreeable 
and disagreeable phenomena (ittharammana and anittharammana).

Furthermore, there is the topic of how to relate to the 
requisites9 and necessities of life. We live as somebody who is 
content and has few wishes. In this we follow the Noble 
Enlightened Beings. We follow the safe path of those who dwell 
in mind states that are beyond the world. The way we practise 
towards our requisites is: knowing what is enough. If we get little, 
that’s enough. If we get much, that’s enough. Even if we don’t get 
anything at all – that’s enough. We develop to become somebody 
who always has enough. That means, somebody who is happy 
with whatever comes. In this way our Samana life will be free 
from obstructions and worries. If  we don’t have to worry about 
our requisites, we have the chance to continue our studies, 
educating and observing ourselv es on and on, relying simply on 
tranquility and seclusion. We rely on all the opportunities given to 
us in this lifestyle. We really  don’t have to bother about anything 
else. As far as society out in the world is concerned: we aren’t 
living in conflict with anybody. We are living for the sake of 
creating benefits for ourselves and others. When we are not in 
conflict with others, a quality ar ises in our mind that makes us 
become accepted by others. This is our duty. 
 
The term “diligent effort” is another expression for making 
the experience of perfection arise in ourselves all by ourselves. 
Perfection means to be completely prepared and mature 10. This 
complete preparedness means that there won’t be any problems. 
This is the case with somebody wh ose spirit is completely radiant 
 
9  The four requisites of monks and novices are: the robes, almsfood, a 
dwelling place, and medicines. 
10  In Thai: prohm, a word colloquially meaning “ready” or together and used 
by Luang Por oftentimes in the sense of attainment, perfection, fulfillment etc., 
but it also carries the connotations of maturity, being ripe, or being fully 
prepared.

or enlightened, somebody who has already passed their “shining 
night of prosperity”11 where there is no more darkness, and there 
are no more feelings of being oppr essed and irritate d. A state of 
being at ease arises in one’s mi nd, with one’s heart feeling fresh 
and cool.  
 
So we need to apply ourselves to our tasks. We need to 
practise and investigate, very  much giving importance to 
ourselves. A chance like this is ve ry rare, and our lives are really 
short. We don’t have that much time. The Buddha compared us to 
dewdrops (being dried out by the sun), or to cattle being pulled to 
slaughter. It really  is like this. Time keep s passing, but it doesn’t 
just merely pass. The fact of na ture that our bodily formations 
keep deteriorating makes itself  known accordingly with every 
period of time that has passed. It is  possible that the hair on top of 
our head starts falling out, or our teeth that had once been strong 
start to become loose. Our eyesig ht that used to be clear and 
bright may become feeble, and our ears that had once been able to 
hear well and clearly may not be able to locate where the sounds 
come from any more. Sometimes a noise comes from the north, 
but we turn our head to the s outh. We will be making more and 
more mistakes. Our behaviour will undergo changes, so we need 
to understand these processes (of lif e). We have to be aware that 
time passes and see the value of changing ourselves towards 
living in the experience of pure and peaceful mind states, 
unconfused and with a heart at ease. 
 
 
11  An expression from th e Thai translation of the Bhaddekaratta Sutta that is 
frequently chanted in Wat Nong Pah Pong, here referring to the night of 
enlightenment.

Living without confusion is all we need for being at ease. 
We can’t be well when there is chaos. When the powers of 
defilements and desires are burni ng us up, we become completely 
heated up and there is no peace at all. We are forced to become 
slaves of our desires. We keep thinking on and on that this or that 
is good or brings happiness, or is  the best. There is no end in 
sight.  This is why the Buddha taught us to see the disadvantages 
in these processes. Don’t go tying yourselv es up with thinking 
that desires are something pos itive. They are poison. If we 
swallow a poisonous substance, it will poison us and we won’t 
feel well. We’ll be in troubl e and panic, burnt up by dukkha. 
Following our desires will bring us to fall deeply instead of giving 
us the chance to experience the supreme. We sink into an inferior 
position, into states of calamity. This is the opposite of the path of 
progress in our development. It isn’t good. 
 
So, now that you have the oppor tunity, bring up motivation 
for the training. Continually. Walk on the path that the Buddha 
pointed out. This path is called samma-patipada (right practice). 
Within this path lies full perf ection: the training in sila, the 
training of the mind and the traini ng of wisdom. Don’t lead your 
life like they do out in the world. Their lives keep following the 
stream of delusion. If pleasant feelings arise, they are happy about 
it. If unpleasant feelings arise, they become sad, so they eagerly 
pursue the pleasant feelings and ha te the unpleasant ones or try to 
destroy them. This seems unworthy. Just think about it. We 
human beings shouldn’t lose ourselves in our ignorance to such an 
extent. We should know things better. Then things will be to our 
advantage.

So, be determined and motivat ed – all of you – to take up 
these duties of ours that carry the name “Samana”. Do this, as if 
your being a Samana was a chedi 12 or a place of reverence and 
devotion that is worthy of respect and worship. Keep on fulfilling 
your duties in this way. Taking this  chance to fulfill our tasks, we 
will be an example and guide to  others, somebody who gives rise 
to benefit and usefulness in the future. So let all of us be 
motivated and determined in our hearts and minds. May every one 
of us fulfill these duties of a Sa mana in a complete and perfect 
way.      
 
*** 
 
12  A circular monument of veneration, also called a stupa in Pali.

Living at the foot of a tree we won’t develop  the 
tendency to hold on to things, such as thoughts that 
something is ours or belongs to us.

“Ordination: 
 The Announcements”

Ordination:  
The Announcements 
 
After the Going Forth – sometimes in the same ceremony – Bhikkhu ordination  (upasampada) is given. In 
the ceremony of upasampada, a certain canonical 
teaching called anusasana (announcements) needs to 
be recited. The teacher announces the  nissaya, the 
four dependences on which a Bhikkhu’s life is founded 
(almsfood, robes made out  of cloth wrapping up 
corpses, the dwelling at t he foot of a tree and fermented urine as medicine), and the akaraniyakicca, the 
four things never to be done by a Bhikkhu (sexual 
intercourse, stealing, killing a human being and falsely 
claiming superhuman qualities). The anusasana needs 
to be recited in Pali. In the ordination ceremony on 
Dec. 15
th, 2005 (2548) Luang Por gave the following 
brief summary of the anusasana in his own words. 
 
 
The procedure of ordina tion into monkhood becomes 
complete by the chanting of a fo rmal act of the Sangha, which we 
have just finished chanting. So, now you are Bhikkhus in this 
Dhamma-Vinaya.  
 
In the lifestyle of a monk it is necessary to have rules for 
proper conduct and practice. We consider it our duty to follow 
these guidelines, and we have to fulfill this duty correctly, making 
sure that our conduct and practice is in line with the principles 
handed down to us by the Buddha. This requires that we do some 
study and develop understanding.

What the Buddha called “the Announcements” states the 
points of conduct that  are the duties of a monk. The Announcements can be divided into two parts:  
 
The first one is what the Buddha called the nissaya (the 
things to depend on), and the second one is what the Buddha 
called the akaraniyakicca (the things that shouldn’t be done). The 
nissayas point out the way of leadin g one’s life that is simple and 
easy. There are four nissayas: 
 
For sustaining our lives as a member of the Sangha, we rely 
on wandering for almsfood in village s. It is up to others how 
much they support us. We do our duty of going on almsround in a 
way where we don’t demand or ask for anything. This is in 
accordance with the tasks and du ties of a Samana, somebody who 
aims at peace. The Buddha called this “the dependence of going 
on almsround”. 
 
Then there is the “dependence on wearing pamsukula 
cloth”13. This is meant to create a feeling of dispassion in us, 
since pamsukula cloth is used to wrap up something loathsome 
and disgusting (i.e. a corpse). Our body is in many ways 
loathsome and disgusting and show s signs that are not desirable. 
If what we use to cover our body gets in touch with this dirty 
thing, it becomes just as disgusting as the body itself. This is “the 
dependence of pamsukula cloth”. 
 
For our dwelling, the place we live in, the Buddha wants us 
to resort to tranquil and secluded locations. That means to live in 
                                     
13  Discarded cloth, rags, or specifica lly cloth that is taken from a corpse 
before the cremation. 
7

a situation where we naturally have to rely on a simple and 
uncomplicated lifestyle. The Buddha said to live at the foot of a 
tree. Living at the foot  of a tree – a place where there is silence 
and seclusion – we won’t develop upadana, the tendency to hold 
on to things, such as thoughts that something is ours or belongs to 
us, and similar attitudes. So it is  for the reduction of mind states 
of attachment to our desires that we need to practise this duty. 
 
The fourth dependence concerns the practice towards one’s 
health, when our body is in an abnormal condition – for example 
when it can’t adapt to changes of weather. Then we use something 
that everybody possesses without exception: we drink fermented 
urine, following the Buddha’s advice. The Buddha called it “to 
adjust one’s elements”, meaning, to bring our body back to a state 
where it has sufficient resistance towards change of external 
conditions.   
 
This is the part dealing with the four nissayas, things that 
we are supposed to do. The othe r part of the Announcements is 
about actions that we should never do.  
 
The things never to be done are:  
 
– sexual activities (namely, sexual intercourse), 
 
– taking objects that weren’t given  to us by others (or that 
others don’t consent to us taking), 
 
– practices that lack metta, friendliness and helpfulness 
(that is explicitly: not to kill , destroy or create conflicts and 
similar activities).

The fourth point is: The Buddha didn’t allow us to 
carelessly claim and boast (about superhuman qualities) out of 
self-importance and delusion about oneself. When we come to 
live in the status of a monk we shouldn’t misconceive ourselves to 
be better than anybody. All of us are in the same situation, 
determined by the laws of nature that we all have to experience. 
There is no exception. To see ourselves like this is for the sake of 
reducing feelings of self-importance that may arise. 
 
So these four factors are called the akaraniyakicca, the 
actions that shouldn’t be done. No w I will announce them to you 
in their original language, the la nguage that we use generally for 
the preservation of the original teach ings, so that we will be able 
to apply and use them as points of practice. We practise in order 
to fulfill the tasks and duties of a Samana. 
 
***

To ordain is not a 
matter of external things.

“Contentment”

Contentment 
During his visit to Malaysia in May 2005 (2548) 
Luang Por Liem was asked the following questions 
about monastic life: 
 
Question: We’d like to know about  your experiences living 
together with Luang Pu Chah. 
 
Answer:  Generally, Luang Pu Chah taught us to conduct 
ourselves practicing contentmen t and being of few wishes. 
Contentment and fewness of wishes, these are words that describe 
a lifestyle where one isn’t prone to obstructions. It is also called 
the lifestyle of the “ariyavamsa”14, to live without ties and fetters. 
Contentment and fewness of wishes is a factor of perfection, as it 
is one of the qualities of Dhamma  that the ariy apuggalas possess. 
Now, if one isn’t an ariyapuggala but just an ordinary person, one 
still trains according to the gu idelines of behaviour of the 
ariyapuggalas. One takes their ways of practicing and makes them 
become one’s habits. The ariyapug galas teach us not to become 
angry, so even though we still want  to follow our anger, we make 
a point of refraining from it. Doing so for long periods of time, 
becoming angry ceases to be one of  our habits, and eventually we 
don’t want to become angry any more. This is the process. 
Following this kind of model is aiming at a state where certain 
ways of acting become natural. We then understand that this is the 
way of living of someone who isn’t in conflict with anyone and is 
free from dangers. This is the way I have practised with Luang Pu 
Chah. 
 
 
14  ariyavamsa (Pali): noble lineage – the lineage of enlightened beings; 
specifically defined by the Buddha as those who possess the qualities of 
contentment and fewness of wishes.

Question: Luang Por, this layperson is planning to ordain and 
would like to ask for some pers onal advice about leaving behind 
the household-life and becomi ng an anagarika – a homeless one, 
one who has Gone Forth. Do you have some recommendations? 
 
Answer:  To set out and ordain mean s to go against the stream, 
and for going against the stream one needs patience and 
endurance. One needs to build up patience and endurance to the 
utmost. This means to the level where one gets used to it and 
becomes proficient in it. Just li ke fish go against the stream. Any 
fish that has life will go against the stream all the time. Only the 
dead fish float along with the cu rrent. We need to be like the 
living fish in our training, build ing up patience and endurance, 
making these qualities our habit and getting used to holding 
ourselves back. Because actually, this life isn’t about much. It 
always has its good and bad sides. This is something we all have 
the capability to understand – so renunciation means renouncing 
what we seek for and wish to have in the world.  
 
People in the world are like flie s that go for filthy and dirty 
things. If we see things like this , there is nothing difficult about 
ordaining. Feeling that we don’t want to get involved with things 
any more makes things easier. Then  one actually doesn’t have to 
bear with and endure much at all, it all depends on one’s 
disposition.   
 
 But as we all know, it is really  true that this practice goes 
against one’s biological instincts. Usually, the instincts of human 
beings are designed to have us create partnerships. Sexual feelings 
are definitely present. As all t hose feelings around love and hate 
are still present we need to know  how to apply patient endurance 
and effort.

Don’t go and follow the thoughts of wanting to have it easy 
and be comfortable. You need to keep in mind that the source of 
peace and the attainment to perf ection is to be found exactly 
where dukkha is. It comes from dukkha. That we can experience 
comfort stems from nothing else than dukkha. So, actually, 
dukkha is part of what enables human beings to experience the 
sense of perfection – by having mindfulness and wisdom.  
 
The external dukkha is something that all of us are able to 
observe with one another, but in  order to recognize internal 
dukkha – the dukkha that concerns one’s state of mind – one 
needs to know for oneself. So to ordain is not a matter of external 
things. I myself have also passed these experiences and know 
them well, having ordained when I was still in my youth, in the 
period of life in which one like s to lose oneself in fun and 
pleasure, easily forgetting oneself. But I upheld that being a boy 
or a young man, one has to st udy and learn from these 
experiences, even though they are painful, hard and difficult. One 
needs to understand them as a part of life.  
 
Problems are part of life and are meant to be learned from, 
so I undertook this, resisting and going against the stream, not 
taking much pleasure in things that are pleasurable and 
comfortable.  
 
Also, in our livelihood, one should live like somebody who 
doesn’t possess much. Even with clothing, we only have a single 
set, just that. When I’m in Thailand I have just this set of robes, 
coming here (to Malaysia) I have ju st this set of robes. We don’t 
have many possessions as householders or worldly people do. We 
have just this, and one can say that  just this is enough to alleviate 
suffering. It is enough to ward o ff sun, wind, cold or heat. We

maintain these possessions merely for living our lives. In the end 
everything deteriorates and di sintegrates anyway. Who would 
have strong feelings other than this about possessing things? This 
attitude creates a sense of bei ng satisfied and pleased in one’s 
heart.  
 
When one is satisfied in every respect, things fall into place. 
Feeling satisfied, we are happy and at ease wherever we are, 
simply that. We are happy whethe r we live by ourselves or in 
society, whether we have little or much. Just when we have eaten 
enough of our meal – whoever may come to fill up our plate 
again, we simply don’t want it.  
 
So we eventually develop into being somebody who doesn’t 
have any obstructions, doesn’t have any worries about anything 
any more, living like “sugato”
15. This is the way the development 
leads.  
 
***
 
15  literally: “well-gone” – an epithet of the Buddha.

When relating to the various things that 
are necessary for our daily living, we follow the 
example of the Samana, who leads a life of 
restraint and composure.

“Restraint”

Restraint 
 
 
Luang Por Liem gave the following advice when replying 
to questions of the monks and novices at BuddhaBodhivana Monastery, Melbourne, in May 2006 (2549).
 
 
 
To practise Dhamma means pr otection. It makes us strong 
and creates a feeling of solidity and stability. This relies on 
conducting ourselves with restrain t, as it is mentioned in a 
principle we are using, called patimokkhasamvara, to practise 
restraint within the training rules of a monk (the Patimokkha).  
 
We can also look closer at th e akaraniyakicca (the things 
never to be done by a monk 16), which are about actions in which 
our conduct needs to be different from that of the people in the 
world, householders, or average unenlightened beings who are 
dominated by the powers of desire, sensuality and lustful feelings. 
 
It is in the first one of the “t hings never to be done”, that 
the Buddha spoke about inter actions with the opposite sex, 
namely (forbidding) sexual interc ourse. This goes against the 
grain. It feels like this really goes against our nature, but we resist 
following it in order to change our habits of acting like people in 
the world. We don’t give sexual ac tivities much importance, as 
they are all about dirty things. A nd one can say that they bring us 
into situations where it becomes impossible for us to experience 
freedom. Seeing it from this angle helps us understand (this point) 
better. 
 
16  see previous chapter.

What is called “restraint” is all about changing one’s 
habits, coming from darkness and se eking the light – or the white 
and the pure, as one might call it. Maybe we don’t yet see and 
understand what this brightness and purity is actually like. We 
don’t know yet. But this is merely because we are s till in a state, 
where such experiences are still unfamiliar to us. 
 
In this situation, we have to pay special attention to the way 
we relate and communicate (with the opposite sex), as we will 
always need to inte ract in some way. But the Buddha did give 
some definite guidelines of pract ice here, directed to Venerable 
Ananda. In fact, at first the Buddha  spoke in terms of completely 
objecting to any contact at all.  When Venerable Ananda asked 
him, “How should I practise towards members of the opposite 
sex?” the Buddha said, “It is best not to look at them at all.” So 
the Buddha is in a way against us getting to know and see the 
opposite sex at all. This is because the Buddha doesn’t want us to 
face unconducive situations which we can’t resist and where 
things might go to the ruin or fall apart completely. Nevertheless, 
Venerable Ananda questioned the Buddha further, “It is 
sometimes necessary to look at  women. How should we practise 
then?” The Buddha replied in a way to make us learn how to deal 
with our feelings responsibly. He said, “If you need to look at 
them, don’t speak to them.” This was the Buddha’s advice, but 
Venerable Ananda, who held a pos ition where he had to fulfil the 
Sangha’s duty of teaching the Dhamma-Vinaya (to the nuns), was 
still doubtful and asked further: “What about situations where one 
has to speak, for example, when they don’t know the way. How 
shall one practise then?” The Buddha further commented, “If you 
have to speak, you need to have mindfulness while speaking.”

So, let us think about this: “When you speak, be 
mindful…”  How is one mindful? This is something we need to 
discuss further. One is mindful in a way that goes against the 
stream of our emotions. Just like the fish that have the skill to 
resist the current. They never give  way to the stream or give up 
going against it. Even when they sleep they go against it. Their 
whole life they are in the stream , but they withstand it. That’s 
what the Buddha meant with bein g mindful when we meet the 
opposite sex. Of course, this is also a matter of training. This, the 
Buddha called restraint and composure.  
 
When relating to the various things that are necessary for 
our daily living, we follow the example of the Samana, who leads 
a life of restraint and composure. A Samana needs to live 
restrained, composed and cautious. This is similar to the way we 
need to ward off (impingements) when we are developing 
samadhi
17, building up a threshold of stability and firmness (of 
mind). The Buddha men tions this in the sammappadhana (the 
four right efforts) 18. Although this is one of the principles from 
theory, there are parts in it that  we can apply in our practice and 
conduct. The Buddha speaks of developing the effort to be 
cautious not to let bad things arise out of one’s inner tendencies. 
We all know well what these bad things mean. We just need to 
look closely and ask ourselves what lies in us that is bound to take 
us to situations where we drift off on paths that feel insecure and 
low.  
 
 
17    samadhi oftentimes means meditation in general, although it is the specific 
type of meditation that aims at one-pointed concentration of mind.  
18  The first of the four right efforts is samvara-padhana, the effort to prevent 
unwholesome dhammas that haven’t yet arisen from arising.

This is one of the principles that leads to the realization of 
the Dhamma. So we try to cultivate a sense of restraint and 
caution when using our sense faculties. But not to the level of 
being sceptical of everything. If we practise restraint so much that 
we don’t dare to trust any more, that’s also not right. Restraint 
should be practised in the way of a Samana. If it only leads to 
scepticism and insecurity, it has gone beyond what feels 
appropriate and beautiful.  
 
***

Anyone who behaves gently 
and humbly will always be well 
respected.

“Gentleness,       
Humbleness  
 and Patience”

Gentleness, 
Humbleness and Patience 
Advice given to monks from Wat Pah Nanachat asking 
for dependence on Luang Por at the beginning of their 
stay at Wat Nong Pah Pong on Jan 28th, 2006 (2549).   
 
You need to train to bring fort h an attitude of gentleness 
and humbleness. The words “gentle” and “humble” are about our 
good conduct as Sangha members – something that we need to 
practise by ourselves and deve lop in ourselves. With these 
qualities, the Sangha is well accepted by society. Anyone who 
behaves gently and humbly will always be well respected, even 
by the devas
19. The devas praise gentle and humble demeanour. 
Whatever it is, our prostrations, or  the way we raise our hands to 
greet20, all these are expressions of g ood manners that all of us in 
our Sangha should practise. 
 
This practice and tr aining is one of the embellishments of 
a Samana. It makes him beautiful  and enriches him. When a 
Samana relates to society, he will never provoke feelings of 
aversion, irrespective of the social status of the people he meets. 
A Samana is well accepted by soci ety. It is worth noticing that 
those leaders of society who take the ten Dhamma qualities for a 
ruler
21 seriously also need to develop the quality of gentleness 
 
19  deva (Pali): heavenly beings, angels, gods. 
20  añjali in Pali or wai  in Thai. 
21  The ten Raja-Dhamma (Jataka 378): dana (generosity), sila (virtue), 
pariccaga (selfless work and sacrifice), ajjava (honest work), maddava 
(deporting oneself with gentleness and congeniality), tapa (austerity), akkodha

and humbleness. The same was true for the Buddha himself. He 
gave these qualities importance becau se they bring up beauty in 
oneself and cause others to a ppreciate one. We should understand 
that gentleness and humbleness ar e very important qualities for a 
Samana. The expression “adikalyanam” (beautiful in the beginning) points to this: one becomes beautiful to look at right from 
the start. So we should train in being gentle and humble. It is 
normal that raw materials need to undergo processes of change 
and alteration until the outcome is a useful product that pleases 
people. With no changes and corrections the result would be 
displeasing. Similarly, if hu man beings don’t undergo training, 
exercise or practice, they are like raw products and other people 
won’t see them as useful. 
 
As Samanas we need to train to mellow down and weaken 
our worldly behaviour. For example, it is the style of laypeople to 
sit on chairs or around a table. Merely to change this habit to 
sitting “pappiab”22 on the floor is already incredibly difficult for 
us. It isn’t impossible, though. Afte r a bit of training one can sit 
pappiab on the floor quite easily. I myself never sat pappiab or in 
the meditation posture before, when I was a layman. So I was 
very stiff and reluctant with thes e postures and with all the ways 
of paying respect or bowing. It didn’t go smoothly. For me, too, 
these things were irritating. But if  one relies on a sense of patient 
endurance and keeps on doing these practices over and over, then 
one becomes used to them. One’s way of bowing and being 
 
(freedom from anger), avihimsa (non-violence), khanti (patient endurance) and 
avirodhana (not straying from righteousness). 
22  pappiab (Thai): a semi-cross-legged sitting posture on the floor with one 
foot pointing behind to the back. This is the posture that is considered most 
appropriate and polite for monks to asume when not meditating, especially 
when listening to the Dhamma.

respectful starts to feel smoother and smoother, and the sitting 
posture doesn’t make one feel that  one is straini ng the leash any 
more. One can do these things if one keeps training, exercising. 
 
 The training of all these external aspects is necessary. 
One needs to rely on the continuity of one’s efforts. In the end one 
is able to do things. The reason we do such practices is because, 
following our principles as monks , we want to take on a very 
simple life. To sit on the floor, for example, is plain and simple, 
because there is no need to arrange the place with objects to sit on 
or cushions to support one, just like in those places that the 
Buddha considered to be simple dwellings
23. The Buddha wanted 
us to live in a way where we develo p an attitude that is orientated 
towards nature. This is an important aspect.  
 
We need to train and deve lop when we practise. Any 
aspect of the practic e relies on this trai ning. It relies on doing 
things over and over. There are certain qualities in the life of an 
anagarika, one who isn’t bound to a home, that the Buddha called 
treasures. They are valuable goods. You probably know some of 
them. One of them has to do w ith our body – it is what the 
Buddha called kayasamvara, restraint of the body. It concerns our 
bodily behaviour. Possessing rest raint towards the body helps us 
to see things clearly, because our attention needs to be connected 
to our bodily movements, activitie s and the respective feelings in 
each posture. We need to directly know these things in time, and – 
for the sake of restraint – we also need to be able to tell straight 
away whether each bodily action or movement is appropriate for 
 
23  e.g. living at the foot of a tree, in the open, or in empty houses, as 
mentioned in the thirteen ascetic practices allowed by the Buddha.

an anagarika, someone who pract ices in order to realize the 
danger of samsara.  
 
We practise to observe our bodi ly conduct in terms of the 
good manners and etiquette of a Samana. To practice like this 
makes beauty arise. To maintain one’s bodily conduct is similar to 
looking after one’s requisites, like the dwelling, for example. One 
needs to maintain it well, so it is  of use and provides comfort. In 
our training, we also need to check whether what we do is 
appropriate for society or not. What do our friends in the monastic 
life think? Would they approve of our behaviou r? If not, we need 
to train further. These are external  things, of course, but still, we 
should see them as important fact ors that determine our lives as 
anagarikas, those who realize the dangers and drawbacks of 
samsara. They have to be alert and aware of themselves and keep 
good etiquette – or, as one might say in other words, keep sila.  
 
Sila can also be called an awareness of the dangers and 
drawbacks in one’s actions and th e intention, or feeling, that one 
doesn’t want to commit anything that is not good any more. 
Possessing such intentions – a sens e of concern regarding actions 
that cause enmity and danger – we need to develop and improve 
our capacity to resist. Bodily resistance depends on factors like 
food, the weather and our enviro nment. Being a monk, food is 
something that we aren’t able to control or choose by ourselves, 
as we depend on people’s free will to sacrifice by practicing dana 
(generosity). We need to realize that what we get is independent 
from what we would like to have . Actually, the things that we 
want are very much conditioned by the things we are used to. 
Being monks, we need to understand that our practice has to 
follow the principle of being happy with whatever we receive or 
have. An attitude like this will make us feel normal about things. 
7

As lay people we always did what we were used to. We’ve 
been practicing to call anything “g ood” if it was what we liked. 
Anything we disliked was “bad”.  We’ve been supporting such an 
attitude over a long, long time. Now we need to go against it. We 
have to train ourselves in going ag ainst what we are used to and 
what we like. An example of this is to sit meditation. If we have 
never sat in this posture before, the first time we sit, there are a lot 
of painful feelings. All one experiences are feelings of agitation 
and irritation, to put it simply: dukkha. This is the same whenever 
we don’t get what we like or what we were used to. Sometimes 
we struggle so much that we become worried and start to doubt 
everything. This is where we need to learn how to let things go, 
how to put things down. We need to realize that, as monks, we are 
not part of those people that can  arrange things according to our 
wishes or ask for things. Which kind of food we get, for example, 
is up to the donor’s wish. So we need to be able to adapt and step 
back from our own ideas. Not ge tting what one wishes, one needs 
the quality of upekkha (equanimity) or at least patient endurance.  
 
This entails what is called “ going against the stream” – to 
resist one’s moods, or going against what one was used to in lay 
life. So we train to go against the grain, even though it can be 
incredibly difficult. But it isn’t beyond anyone’s capabilities. To 
go against the grain is somethi ng that anybody can do. If we go 
against our preferences, we get th e chance to understand that they 
are merely sankharas, conditioned ph enomena, proliferations that 
we have been supporting all the time.  Giving the sankharas 
importance by identifying with them, saying we are like this or 
this is  ours , they became very powerful and are able to tie us 
down.

So the Buddha taught that we should learn to go against 
the grain and skilfully develop patient endurance, with 
mindfulness well established an d our minds well focused, 
especially in situations that we have never encountered before. 
The process is similar to catching animals in the jungle. Catching 
a wild animal is not easy. Until one can catch one, one needs to 
learn a lot about its behaviour an d approach it with gentleness. 
One needs to be sure that one knows the animal’s behaviour very 
well until one can approach it. 
 
So we need to observe ourselves. Look at the external 
side, the way we live our life. If you’ve studied it well, you will 
know what this lifesty le of a monk is like . Whenever you don’t 
get what you like, take it as a training in the Dhamma. At least 
you get some experience and training with the Dhamma of patient 
endurance. It is exactly when we get used to patiently enduring 
things that it makes us feel that everything is simply normal and 
not particularly difficult, or something to get agitated about. 
These situations become easy and they are conducive for a life 
that pursues liberation. 
 
So we need to conduct ourselves accordingly and train 
ourselves, being aware and cautious , practicing to be mindful – 
mindful not to get lost in worldly attitudes, mindful not to get lost 
in one’s moods.     
 
***

To live in competition, 
one supports low-mindedness 
and uses one’s intelligence in 
bad ways.

“Wealth and Fame”

Wealth and Fame 
 
Excerpt from Luang Por Liem’s reflections after the 
meal on July 3rd, 2006 (2549) 
 
Not many more days and it’s going to be Asalha Puja Day, 
the beginning of the rains retreat, the vassa24. Actually, the day 
when we enter the rains retreat is the first day of the waning moon 
of the 8 th month. This is when the B uddha said to determine the 
rains. So now, before entering the rains, we should start doing all 
the work that need s to be done before. These are communal 
duties, duties of the Sangha. They benefit the monastic 
community.  
 
The best way to spend the rain s is when one can carry out 
all the duties of the Dhamma-Vinay a. If there are at least four 
monks together we can ٛfulfil our basic oblig ation, the carrying 
out of the formal act of the Sangha in which we recollect our 
training rules – the recitation of the Patimokkha. 
 
The recitation of our rules is done to emphasise our 
obligations and tasks as monks. It he lps us not to lose direction in 
the way we lead our lives and not to give way to heedlessness. If 
we have strayed off the proper course in the way we live our 
monastic life, many negative thin gs will happen and things will 
go to ruin. 
 
 
24  The yearly monastic rains-retreat, that the monks determine to spend 
together in one place for three months. Traditionally this is a time of intensive 
training.

To do all the practices needed in daily life – our routines, 
duties and chores – is something th at we will always have to deal 
with. In fact, they are all pr actices towards our physical wellbeing. At the meal, don’t eat too much. Generally don’t take too 
much time for eating; try to be finished in 20 or 25 minutes. When 
we practise, we don’t give much importance to food. 
 
Luang Por Maha Amorn 25 wrote some very nice 
reflections on one of the Dhamma-signs put up on the trees, 
which, as he hopes, may stimulate a bit of shame and scruple in 
us, preventing negligence. He wrote: 
 
“Some ordain just for food. Having filled up their belly they 
lie down to sleep – no better than animals.  
 Some ordain wanting to have fun and play around – just like 
householders.  
 Some ordain lost in delusion – the longer they stay, the more 
stupid they become.    
If one hopes for magga-phala-nibbana, having ordained, one   
upholds the Dhamma.” 
 
This is what Luang Por Maha Amorn wrote. After I read 
it, I remembered it straight away. If we behave like animals in the 
way we consume things, that’s not good. Only animals compete 
and snatch away things from each other. For us, we practise 
observing our principles. If it comes to competition, that’s not 
good behaviour. Luang Por Maha Amorn also warned the 
villagers of snatching away hous es, food, land and their partners 
from each other, and fighting for power to control. 
 
25  Luang Por Maha Amorn or Tan Chaokhun Mongkonkittithada is a seniour 
disciple of Luang Pu Chah.

When I read those lines, it really stuck in my mind as a 
warning. But some people never th ink like that, because it is the 
nature of animals to live constantly competing. Animals lack a 
sense of shame and just go ahead and dare to do things. They do 
things without any wisdom. To live like that, one supports lowmindedness and uses one’s intelligence in bad ways. Whenever 
we start thinking in such ways, we need to correct ourselves. 
Don’t drift off into this direction; don’t fall prey to these things. If 
there are areas where we have gone  too far, we need to try to 
correct our course. 
 
Now that we are close to entering the vassa, especially this 
year, there are many requests to Wat Nong Pah Pong from 
(smaller) branch monasteries to send some monks for the vassa 
(so they fulfil the qualifications of the Vinaya for being allowed 
to receive offerings within a ‘Kathina-ceremony’ after the 
vassa
26). It’s simply that these people like making requests. 
What’s the point of requesting monks (to spend the rains in a 
monastery only for the sake of the Kathina-offerings)? We are 
practitioners. Mostly, those who ask for monks are not ready for 
training them, and don’t have the capabilities and knowledge 
needed to give support to young monks in their growth and 
development. They keep asking  and the training withers away. 
The monks that go don’t benefit from it at all – they don’t develop 
good, beautiful qualities, nor improve  their character traits and 
habits. 
 
All that happens is that things go to ruin. And the reason 
for this is that, mostly, the monks fall prey to the worship of 
 
26 If at least five monks have spent the vassa together in a monastery, they 
may receive these usually very generous ‘Kathina-offerings’.

external, material goods ( amisa-puja). They fall into what Ajahn 
Buddhadasa used to call ‘a heap of excrement’. He took this 
comparison from the discourses of the Buddha – Ajahn 
Buddhadasa doesn’t speak wit hout foundation – and he quotes 
from the Discourse of the Dungb eetle: a beetle that feeds on 
excrement. His belly is full and round because of all the 
excrement. 
 
Are we going to get lost and deluded with things like that? 
Material possessions and wealth, fame and praise – these are 
external things. If these things accrue to us, we need to at least 
keep things within the scope of  the supporters’ intentions. They 
want to enhance good and beautiful qualities. But if we lose 
ourselves in these things, we w on’t develop anyt hing like that. 
We’ll fall into dangerous pitfalls. That’s why the Buddha gave the 
example of Devadatta
27, who came under the sway of wealth, 
honour and praise. In the end it’s just this wealth, honour and 
praise that ruins everything completely. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27  Devadatta, deluded by the fame due to his psychic powers, tried to kill the 
Buddha and take over the Sangha without success. Eventually he split the 
Sangha, and was swallowed up by the earth for this heinous crime.

The Buddha wanted us to reflect on 
the use of our requisites… although 
they’re ‘clean’ they are actually not clean.

“Advice on  
Robe Washing Day”

Advice on Robe Washing Day 
 
From Luang Por’s daily reflections after the meal on 
May 5th, 2006 (2549).  
 
Today is Friday the 5 th of May, the 7 th day of the waning 
moon of the 6 th month. It is the day when we do the work of 
cleaning and washing the requisite s that we use for covering our 
bodies (i.e. the robes). These thin gs always need washing. They 
get soiled and stained by this loathsome and filthy thing called our 
body.  
 
Our body is a dirty and unclean  thing. It oozes and drips 
out of its openings, the ones in the upper parts of the body and the 
ones in the lower. It excretes filthy stuff even from its pores. All 
this transforms the cloth we us e to cover our body into a state 
where it smells stuffy and stinks. We all like to see the human 
body as something nice and beautiful, but the truth is that there is 
nothing at all about it that is desirable.  
 
The body is a dirty, filthy thing and smells. If we don’t 
bathe and wash it, it will develop quite a strong smell – similar to 
uncivilized people that haven’t yet developed in terms of looking 
after their bodies: hill tribes or  people living in the woods, for 
example. When one meets these tribes, a stuffy, stinking smell 
tells one that this is an area where there hasn’t yet been any 
development of hygiene and care for the body. They can live with 
it, though. They are used to it. 
 
The Buddha taught to take th e unattractiveness of the body 
as an object of meditation, pointin g out that its reality is not 
desirable. Simply the fact that  the body excretes and drives out

substances is already something that causes feelings of disgust in 
us. Nevertheless, we still experience feelings of sensual desire. 
But there are people, though,  who become weary and 
disenchanted with the body and see its unattractiveness, and that it 
is not something that can be considered beautiful in any way. 
 
The Buddha taught, with special emphasis, that we should 
see the body as an unbeautiful thin g. He even scolded one of his 
monks who gave it too much impor tance and was attracted to the 
Buddha’s physical appearance. He scolded him so he would start 
to reflect on what is so desira ble about such a foul and filthy 
object. The Buddha pushed him towa rds realizing the truth about 
himself. One shouldn’t be enamoured and infatuated with mind 
states of desire. These are worldly mind states. If we want peace 
and seclusion from sensual desires,  we need to pay attention to 
our states of mind.  
 
So, living in society, we wash  and dye our robes because 
we want them to be in a condition that isn’t indecent and 
intolerable for society. That’s why we need to wash them.  
 
We wash our robes with an astringent liquid – the juice 
from jackfruit wood, and we have a well set-up place for that 
(called the dyeing shed). Using this method for washing our robes 
is uncomplicated and there s houldn’t be any difficulties in 
maintaining them. Also, we only have a limited number of pieces 
of cloth. All we have is a lower, upper and outer robe, a waistband, an angsa
28, and a bathing cloth.  
 
28  angsa (Thai): a small rectangular cloth th at covers the chest area that is 
used in Thailand whenever the main robes aren’t worn, e.g. in informal 
situations, out in nature or at work.

But still, the Buddha wanted us to reflect on the use of 
these requisites – although we keep them in a state which society 
acknowledges as ’clean’, the Buddha said that  they are actually 
not clean. In the same way we usually say that after we have had a 
bath we are now clean. But in fa ct, we’re not. Because the body 
itself is a dirty thing. Similarly, no matter how much we wash and 
dye – things are not clean
29. The dirt is right in them. It is like 
with our robes: In the beginning they are white pieces of cloth. 
Then we dye them with some dirt that is conventionally defined 
as colour, and stain the whole clot h. And our feelings of what we 
consider as clean suddenly flip. 
 
Thinking about these things, the Buddha wanted us to 
reflect on the ajjhatta- and the bahiddha-dhamma,  internal and 
external conditions: both internally  and externally, things are all 
just disgusting. He wanted us to see both as disgusting. This will 
make us experience mind states that are relieved from sexual 
desires – the cravings and desires that stain our hearts. 
 
So, washing and cleaning count s as one of our duties. 
Living under such circumstances, we need to take care of our 
things. We need to look after them, use them and wash or dye 
them, maintain and clean them, an d also clean up the tools in an 
orderly fashion.  
 
The Buddha wanted us to keep our dwelling and everything 
in the monastery in an orderly state. This is the way that 
 
29  The traditional method of washing the robes with the yellow water of boiled 
jackfruit-wood chips is more of a re-dyeing than a washing, since the robes are 
not rinsed out, as one wants the wash water to remain in the robes because of 
its astringent properties.

somebody who keeps sila behaves. It is a way of life that has good 
standards and is tidy and well organised. 
 
“A monastery, though designed to endure, 
with temple halls of surpassing beauty, 
wealthy, with uncountable treasures, 
becomes ‘good’ in measure 
only when the monks do their duty, 
keeping the Vinaya pure.” 
 
We need to be aware of this. Vinaya means being orderly. 
 
So today, the rain overnight hasn’t brought much water and 
the sun has come out, so these ar e very conducive conditions for 
drying the robes; there shouldn’t be any problems. Our chores we 
can do after robe washing. Everyone does what he can. But don’t 
forget our obligation to behave properly, and keep up living in a 
way that doesn’t get carried away with fooling around. It is the 
fooling around that ties up all the beings in the world. 
 
***

If one works without being worried about 
things, or with not much of a critical mind, one can 
really do these things properly.

“Creating Benefit”

Creating Benefit 
 
On April 25 th, 2006 (2549) during his visit to BuddhaBodhivana Monastery in Melbourne, Luang Por was 
asked for some advice on how to practise while working. 
Here are some extracts from his answer: 
 
Venerable Ajahn Buddhadasa gave some good advice (on 
the topic of work): “We need to work with no feelings of upadana 
or grasping.” When I work I am  not worried about anything or 
think much at all. I just keep doing the work, only in order to do 
something that is in some way of use to the community. That’s 
all. I don’t think about whether ther e is a lot to do or not – that 
only causes one to worry. I also don’t do things expecting that the 
outcome will last very long – I just consider that the things we 
build should be good enough to provide some shelter from heat 
and cold. Still, I try to do a good job. I guess it does make a 
difference for the stability of th ings whether the work was done 
properly or not. If one works without being worried about things, 
or with not much of a critical mind, one can really do these things 
properly. 
 
With working, it is just like with travelling: if we don’t 
care about reaching the destina tion particularly quickly, the 
distance won’t seem far. But if we  want to arrive quicker than 
usual, our aim will be far away. These things depend on our 
desires. 
 
When we work, we can pay attention to the different 
bodily postures and movements we make and observe them. If we 
keep awareness of our body, the st ress that comes from the power 
of desire won’t weigh on us. Whether we are sitting, standing, 
walking or lying down there won’t be anything (heavy). We can

see everything as a matter of chan ging one’s bodily posture, work 
included.  
 
When we work we sometimes experience strong feelings 
that we usually don’t have to face. But focusing on emptiness 
while working or seeing work as merely a change of posture can 
turn the experience in to something good. In the case of office 
work or writing, there is also not much of a problem, unless we 
worry a lot. Then things can become difficult. If we don’t think 
anything about the things we  do, they become something 
absolutely normal. 
 
There are different kinds of  work – coarse work, for 
example, when we do the building for providing basic supports 
for the physical needs of our bodies, the dwellings to live in. This 
kind of work demands great sacrifi ce. Then there is the work of 
creating benefit (for society), such as teaching Dhamma. 
 
The Buddha pointed out cert ain qualities a Dhammateacher needs, for example: 
 
– One shouldn’t hope for anything in reward for 
teaching Dhamma, but aim only at establishing 
(correct) views in a way that is suitable and fitting and 
gives rise to useful things. 
– One should teach the Dhamma in a well-reasoned 
and systematic way, gradually, without omitting 
points of meaning. 
– One should not teach for the sake of (material) 
gains. 
– One should not teach pr aising oneself and making 
insinuating or denigrating comments about others.

To teach the Dhamma is also work. But if we keep in line 
with the Dhamma, such unwholesome intentions as the ones 
mentioned won’t arise. Our intenti on is solely to aim at offering 
improvements and corrections for the sake of being beneficial. 
 
When I was still in the age where one is very strong, while 
living with Luang Pu Chah, sometimes he would ask us to sew 
robes for the new candidates that  wished to practise and train 
under the Dhamma-Vinaya temporarily. One year it was 40 or 50 
sets of triple robes. To sew as much as that, one has to start with it 
every morning. If one does the wo rk harbouring negative feelings 
about it in one’s mind, one will ha ve to experience feelings of 
irritation and anger and eventually start complaining. I was able to 
do the job feeling good. If on one particular day I would finish 
only a certain amount, I would be al right with just that, continue 
next day, and just keep on doi ng the work. I didn’t have any 
feelings about it. When it was time to stop, I stopped. Luang Pu 
Chah said to do just the amount we could handle. And when the 
night came, I would spend it quie tly keeping up my meditation. 
So, this is also a kind of work. One has to work with a willingness 
to help and an attitude of sacrif ice in one’s mind. It’s for the good 
that one sacrifices. 
 
Before, when Luang Pu Chah was still young, when 
somebody came to live with him he was very supportive and 
helpful, although it was a policy to let people spend some time on 
their own in the beginning – so they could test whether they could 
make it, living in such an unfam iliar place. After they made it, 
Luang Pu Chah would rely on th e method of letting people help 
themselves with all the work and their practice. All this meant 
giving people the opportunity to live self-reliantly.

As concerns the robe sewing – in the old days they were 
hand-sewn. One used needles and not machines or the tools we 
have today. Luang Pu Chah would help with the cutting, but one 
had to do the sewing oneself. Until a robe was finished it took 
many, many days. These practices show how much Luang Pu 
Chah cared about us being able to take care of ourselves. 
 
Concerning the use of our requisites – the ways of putting 
on the robes and looking after them, or even how we practise with 
conducting our bodies in all the different postures – Luang Pu 
Chah would give the advice to do things mindfully: sitting with 
mindfulness, walking and standing  and so on, or being mindful 
when putting on the robe. Everything would in some way give 
rise to people becoming self-re liant. And they wouldn’t be a 
burden for others by having them do  everything for them. This is 
also an aspect of ‘work’.  
 
The way Luang Pu Chah lived, it is not the case that one 
doesn’t have to do anything. One does work that is of benefit to 
oneself and to the community at the same time. 
 
***

We don’t just let our lives 
pass devoid of sense. We have to 
rise up to our ideals.

“Reflections after the  
Patimokkha Recitation”

Reflections after the 
Patimokkha Recitation 
 
A teaching given after the fortnightly recitation of the 227 
training rules of the monks (the Patimokkha) at Wat 
Nong Pah Pong on June 26th, 2006 (2549). 
 
What we have just listened to are the sikkhapada, the 
training rules, prohibitions laid down by the Buddha. These 
training rules are all about actions that s houldn’t be committed. 
One can call them “akaraniyakic ca”, actions not to be done. 
Going ahead regardless, and acting against these rules won’t lead 
to good results, as the Buddha put it. We presently still use these 
rules as our basis and as our roots, although they are given in the 
original language, a language th at has lasted over two thousand 
years in history. When recollecti ng and reciting the rules together 
now, if we don’t understand the meaning, we should look it up in 
a language that we understand. We  need to give these things 
attention, as they concern our et hical standards (sila). There are 
things that we should refrain fr om as monks. Certain actions we 
should stop doing. We should st art leading our lives being 
equipped with Dhamma.  
 
To be equipped with Dhamma relies on a number of 
factors, just as new Bhikkhus in the Dhamma-Vinaya need to 
have certain qualities. The physical, material aspects of our bodily 
khandhas
30 are only external, so we need to have Dhamma in the 
 
30  khandha (Pali): aggregates; the five causally conditioned groups of 
existence  forming a human being: rupa or physical form, vedana or feeling,

way we lead our lives. We should fulfill our obligations toward 
ourselves, supported by our spiritual potential (parami ). Our 
character traits and habits surely will change, as the principles of 
practice that we keep applying ar e definitely capable of causing 
changes in us. 
 
When we practise, we hope and aspire to attain to purity 
and perfection. This relies on putting those teachings into practice 
which enable us to experience an understanding of Dhamma. The 
bodhipakkhiya-dhammas
31 are considered the group of teachings 
that is best for the training and practice. For example, the 
iddhipadas (ways to success) – chanda (zeal, aspiration), viriya 
(energy, diligent effort) , citta  (thoughtfulness, active thought, 
dedication) and vimamsa (investigation and examination) – are 
qualities that we need to arouse in ourselves. One of them is the 
“putting forth of effort”.  
 
In putting forth effort, there needs to be continuity. One 
needs to put one’s heart into the practice, maintaining an interest 
and motivation that doesn’t cease or expire. Then one needs to 
refine one’s experience by using dhamma-vicaya (reflection on 
Dhamma), investigation of the conditions that one is practicing 
with, not letting feelings of discouragement and loss of motivation 
take over. For all this, one need s the very quality of patient 
endurance. 
 
sañña or memory/perception, sankhara or mental formations and viññana or 
consciousness.  
31  bodhipakkhiya-dhammas (Pali: the wings to awakening): a group of 
qualities that the Buddha considered essential for realizing Nibbana, 
comprising the four satipatthanas, the four sammappadhanas, the four 
iddhipadas, the five indriyas and the five balas (saddha, viriya, sati, samadhi, 
pañña), the seven bojjhangas (sati, dhamma-vicaya, viriya, piti, passaddhi, 
samadhi, upekkha) and the Noble Eightfold Path.

The qualities expressed in the iddhipadas are all very close 
to the quality of diligently puttin g forth effort – viriya. As we 
probably know from our studies, the Buddha gave us some 
similies for the perfection of the spiritual potential of viriya in the 
Jatakas, in the Mahajanaka Jataka
32. Relying on effort one 
eventually succeeds. Just like when chanting the Patimokkha – a 
task that is beneficial for th e Sangha – one needs diligence. 
Relying on effort one succeeds in memorizing the Patimokkha. 
This relies merely on effort. This  is why the Buddha stated that 
diligent effort is a quality that gives rise to success. 
 
The conditions of our lives, which we should find methods 
to overcome and become free from , don’t refer to anything else 
than the categories of rupa (the physical world) and nama (the 
mental world). In the bodhi pakkhiya-dhammas the four 
satipatthanas, namely kayanupassana (mindfulness of the body), 
vedananupassana (mindfulness of feelings) , cittanupassana 
(mindfulness of the mind), and dhammanupassana (mindfulness 
of mind-objects) concern both rupa and nama. Kayanupassana 
deals with rupa. We take up contemplation of physical form so we 
can free ourselves from it and come to experiences that are not 
bound up with the kinds of delusions and wrong understandings 
caused by attachments and mistaken identities. We apply our 
practice to the body, or the rupa-khandha, in order to create a 
feeling of not being concerned and worried about the body. We 
practise according to the ideals that are appropriate for walking 
the ways of the peaceful.  
 
 
32 The Mahajanaka Jataka refers to one of  the ten last lives of the Bodhisatta, 
in which he perfected viriya-parami, swimming across the sea for seven days 
without knowing when he will reach the shore.

We apply ourselves to this pr actice again and again, so that 
feelings of self-importance and mind states based on the ego don’t 
arise. We contemplate seeing th e body in the body as merely a 
physical phenomenon that is pron e to arising, existence and 
cessation. We should see the body from the point of view of the 
Three Universal Characteristics. Due to them the body is the way 
it is, and not any other way. This is how we need to contemplate 
the rupa-khandha. The body can’t be  otherwise. We should see it 
as a particular manifestation of Dhamma. It is anicca, dukkha, 
anatta
33 – precisely that. Seeing things like this allows us to 
experience a way of being where feelings of delusion – or 
misperceptions where we forget who and what we actually are – 
don’t arise. 
 
Concerning vedana (feelings): feelings are symptoms 
created by the sense bases. The sense bases are where their origin 
lies and also their extinction. Feelings arise due to pleasant and 
agreeable things ( piyarupa satarupa), experiences that we 
encounter in one way or another. The eye seeing something or the 
ear hearing something can be the cause of both happiness and 
suffering – pleasant and unpleasant e xperiences that we can also 
call “Worldly Dhammas”. They are part of the modes of the mind. 
We observe them. To really say that they are pleasant or 
unpleasant doesn’t hold when we look at them closely. They are 
merely modes of experience that arise. Feelings are just like 
waves that build up, break in a nd roll towards the shore where 
they eventually disintegrate into nothing. They are just conditions 
of experience that arise within the realm of the Three Universal 
Characteristics. To say that they are happiness or suffering isn’t 
 
33  impermanence, suffering and not-self. These are the “Three Characteristics”, 
or “Three Universal Characteristics”.

true, so we neither agree nor disagree with them. These symptoms 
arise if a person’s mental immunity is still insufficient – it has 
weak spots. Agreeable feelings  (or happiness) and disagreeable 
feelings (or suffering) occur. 
 
This is why the Buddha wanted us  to stay in a state that is 
neither happiness nor suffering,  where feelings are simply 
feelings, with no-one who owns them. He encouraged us to see 
feelings from the perspective of emptiness. When one is empty of 
feelings, empty of happiness an d suffering, there is neither 
happiness nor suffering. There is what is called the “dhamma of 
equanimity”, upekkha-vedana (neutral feeling). This is indeed 
nature. 
 
So we try to observe ourselves in this way. Particularly as 
we need to constantly keep tr ack of ourselves, with focus and 
awareness, so as not to be overwhelmed by the power of 
sensuality, or the power  of our desires and defilements. This is 
how we practise regarding vedana. 
 
Concerning the mind things are similar: We need to watch 
the activity of the processes of our minds, whether they are kusala 
or akusala (wholesome and skilful, or unwholesome and 
unskilful). We watch the kusala- citta with its positive emotions 
and the akusala-citta that can ta ke our lives towards defilement, 
depression, aversion and enmity, when it comes under the sway of 
agati (biased views or wrong courses of perception). 
 
We need to focus on our mind and observe it. We need to 
refer to the facts of existence when we look at the mind, well

grounded in the vipassana-ñanas34 which, in fact, are all about 
the Three Characteristics. 
 
The Three Characteristics are like a bright light that enables 
us to see things in a way in wh ich we don’t need to get involved 
or attached or need to hold on to things. The mind is simply the 
mind, whether it is wholesome or  unwholesome. We should not 
approach it in a way that leads to attachment and grasping. 
 
In relation to the objects of the mind (dhammas) we need to 
be like “one who is possessed w ith wakefulness and insight” – 
free from the nivaranas35. We shouldn’t allow the hindrances to 
be present. As long as they are, one is still in a state of being 
incapable of growth and progress. The hindrances are a shield that 
restricts growth, just like a tree that is hindered by some structure 
is unable to sprout. We  shouldn’t allow ourselves to live with the 
hindrances. We ought to live a life free from the hindrances. 
 
We always need to see how we can live putting forth effort, 
with diligence and mindfulness – being one who is awake. This is 
a factor that creates Right View and a feeling of peace. When one 
has Right View there is no desire  and no suffering. Right View is 
like a light, dispelling darkness.  The Buddha mentioned this, 
saying the light of Right View removes the obstacles and destroys 
the barriers. The Buddha also said:  
 
“Natthi paññasama abha” 
(There is no light equal to wisdom) 
 
34  vipassana-ñanas (Pali): the nine insight-knowledges. 
35  the five hindrances ( nivarana) of sensual desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, 
restlessness and agitation, doubt and uncertainty.

We live our lives as one who is awake, who is radiant – 
like a Samana, like one who is  possessed with the SamanaDhamma. 
 
Living according to the Samana-Dhamma, one of the 
points to reflect on every day is this: As Samanas we now have a 
different status from householde rs. They act, following the 
influence of defilements and desi res. Under the power of craving 
they are always in need. But we, as Samanas, endeavour only for 
being at peace. Our relationship to  the requisites of a monk and 
the necessities of life is free from likes and dislikes. It isn’t based 
on desire. Our life isn’t ruled by the power of craving. We live 
through the power of knowing. This is of true benefit for 
ourselves, and that is why the Buddha pointed it out. 
 
Also, in the daily reflections of a Samana, the Buddha 
reminded us to reflect on the fact  that time keeps passing, so we 
see that there is nothing really sure and stable in life. It is not just 
that the time of our lives passes, but along with it, everything that 
is part of the material world will also reveal instability and 
uncertainty. In the end everything will have to transform into 
emptiness, a state where a being, a person, a self, or “us and 
them” can’t be found. We should reflect like this, and find support 
in heedfulness, as time keeps passing and passing. We should live 
with an attitude of practice, and sustain our life being possessed 
both of Dhamma and of Discipline (Vinaya). Having DhammaVinaya is called a great fortune. It creates a feeling of being on 
the right path – the path leading to maturity and perfection. The 
treasure of sila refers to ha ving a feeling for good manners, 
behaviour and conduct – with all the physical expressions, namely 
our actions by body and speech. But if  we attain to perfection in 
terms of the asankhata-dhamma (the unconditioned) in all our

behaviour, there is only kiriya – mere performance of activities, or 
functioning. There is nothi ng that has to do with kamma  
(purposeful action). If one’s actions are still on the level of 
kamma, they are going to create ne gative effects in some way or 
another. In the case of actions that are kiriya, experiences of peace 
will arise. This arising of peace is called “asankhata-dhamma”, a 
state where there are no prolifer ations as found in the world. 
Proliferations that create moods in the mind don’t exist.  
 
So, the principles of the four satipatthanas ar e really worth 
studying, applying, developing and bringing to perfection. All 
four are synonyms for each other. They are interdependent. 
Seeing the body, feelings, the mi nd and the mind-objects should 
in fact be done in a way sim ilar to how the Buddha reflected on 
the law of conditionality, or “dependent origination”. How did the 
Buddha reflect? He started with  reflecting on the sankharas. 
Ignorance being the cause for san kharas to arise, and sankharas 
causing viññana, viññana causing nama-rupa … and so on. This 
should lead us to focus on the round of existence ( vatta), which 
one might as well call the “round of  change”, with its phases of 
passing on and beginnin g again. Ignorance causing proliferations 
to arise is like darkness cau sing people to have doubts and 
uncertainty. It is like being in the dark, where all we can rely on is 
making assumptions and suspicions. Walking in the dark one is 
anxious about everything. One doubts that one will arrive at one’s 
destination, one fears all ki nds of threats and changes. Avijja 
(ignorance) has got these qualities.  This is why we should live 
with vijja (knowledge), or vijjacarana, both knowledge and 
appropriate conduct.  
 
*** 
7

So we undertake this study and practice together – now it is 
almost time for entering the rains retreat, which we are going to 
spend together with the study of Dhamma and Vinaya. Those 
monks who are still young and physically strong – please try to do 
your duties. In relation to this, we have just been informed that the 
Sangha authorities of Ubon would like to know how many 
Patimokkha chanters there are in each monastery in Ubon 
province. To keep the Patimokkha in memory is a quality that will 
lead to benefit in many ways. So they asked how many 
“Patimokkha-holders” each monastery has. If you are not 
physically disabled and your body is still in a state that allows you 
to learn the Patimokkha, you should  try. There’s nothing wrong 
about giving it a try. 
 
Chanting the Patimokkha is also a means to overcome the 
hindrances. If we experience obsta cles in the development of the 
qualities of a Samana, we can re vert to recitin g the Patimokkha. 
The Buddha once gave Venerable Maha-Moggallana this advice. 
While Maha-Moggallana was pract ising in Kallavalaputtagama 
and his progress was hindered by some obstacles, the Buddha told 
him to recite principles of the teachings that he had learned in 
order to dispel the hindrances. In this way the Patimokkha can be 
helpful to our practice.   
 
We should also try to do some further studies. One of the 
qualifications mentioned by the Buddha of a monk who fulfills 
the duties of a senior member in the Sangha is to know what is an 
offence and the method of resolving it.  
 
Further, the Buddha stated very  clearly that a senior monk 
needs to be one who is possessed with a sense of shame and fear 
of wrong-doing (hiri-ottappa). One can’t do without these

qualities – to be equipped with a sense of shame preventing one 
from proceeding with incorrect act ions, or from not fearing to 
transgress the rules. This is what we understand by “sense of 
shame”. 
 
So we continue educating ourselves. This occasion of 
chanting the Patimokkha is an op portunity to demonstrate our 
skills and show how much dedication we put into these duties. We 
don’t just let our lives pass devoid of sense. We have to rise up to 
our ideals. Once we have achieved our aim, it’s not going to be 
without benefit. There will be more opportunities to use what we 
have learned in the future. One can see it also as another way of 
warding off obstacles. So we should make an effort in this area. 
 
Now that the rains retreat will soon begin, there is also the 
opportunity for us to move to ot her monasteries that provide good 
facilities for the development of the Samana-Dhamma, and spend 
the rains retreat there. We change  places in order to experience 
some new possibilities for developing the practice, our studies and 
in fulfilling our obligations.  
 
For myself – in the first year after spending the rains at Wat 
Nong Pah Pong, I went to Wat Suan Gluay. Just a few days before 
entering the vassa, Luang Pu Chah wrote a letter of 
recommendation and told me to go  there. I thought, okay, that’s 
fine – no problem. So I travelled to Suan Gluay. By coincidence 
there was a cremation just when I entered the monastery. “That’s 
a good start,” I thought (Luang Por laughs). Wat Suan Gluay is an 
old cremation site. I didn’t want to leave the site, thinking that this 
is a good chance, because I wanted to challenge and test myself. 
In the old days the burning of a corp se wasn’t such a neat thing as 
today. As soon as the fire was lit, all the people would run away.

Nobody would stay. There is a saying that if one stays around, the 
fire won’t really burn. So ev erybody had disappeared. When the 
night came I took my chance to observe things. But there wasn’t 
anything. There was a tiny bit of f ear: I was afraid that some dogs 
would come searching for somethin g to eat. To go to these places 
is also a good way of getting to know and train oneself. That year 
we were 16 monks and novices spending the rains in Wat Suan 
Gluay. The kutis were more like little shacks. The food was good 
enough to stay alive from day to day. The stay at Suan Gluay was 
also good in that it brought the experience of getting to know 
some of my companions in the m onastic life. Before I had always 
depended on a teacher. Now, at Suan Gluay, I was a senior monk 
with quite a few rainy seasons. So I did my duty in that position. 
This is also one of the good aspects of life in an other monastery. 
We get the chance for further trai ning. In that rainy season I also 
gave the monks and novices instructions on how to memorize the 
Patimokkha. 
 
So, at this time, now that we are about to enter the rains 
retreat, we’ll be having plen ty of opportunities for the 
development of the Samana-Dhammas, the virtues of a monastic. 
 
***

“The Embellishments  
 of One Gone Forth”

To be somebody who conducts himself 
with a mind standing firm…not 
becoming overpowered.

The Embellishments  
 of One Gone Forth 
 
A teaching given to the monks of Wat Nong Pah Pong on 
the occasion of entering the rains retreat (vassa) on July 

nd, 2005 (2548), after Luang Por had just returned from 
a stay in hospital due to acute heart-weakness.   
 
In the period that we undertake to spend the vassa, a period 
of ninety days, we take up both aspects (of the Buddhas teaching): 
the side of study (pariyatti-dhamma), in which we have to get a 
bit of a foundation; and the side of practice (patipatti-dhamma), in 
which we should know what is wh at. We rely on this period for 
developing these two because now we don’t need to worry and 
make plans about what to do and where to go. This cuts off all the 
problems about the things that we think we need to do when we 
are following our desires. We rely on this period for doing our 
duty of changing from the state of  ordinariness to a state which 
has more valuable qualities.  
 
We can observe that the principles of life in society, the 
lay-system, and the principles of  One Gone Forth, are different. 
Coming from the lay-system, we are now Ones Gone Forth. The 
life Gone Forth has ideals, and th ere are standards of behaviour 
and practice. Since there are guidelines for behaviour and 
practice, we follow these ideals and standards of practice. If we 
were to use our former system of life, the way of life of a 
layperson, there wouldn’t be as much value as there should be. So 
we have to keep reminding ourse lves that now we are of a

different gender than laypeople or householders36, who do as they 
like and act according to their moods. But we have ideals, which 
means we have principles in the wa y we live; that is, we are those 
who see the disadvantages and dangers in the round of rebirth. 
 
We need to have principles in  our lives. At least we need 
sila. Keep in mind that sila is one part of the embellishments of 
One Gone Forth. We need to liv e with caution, carefulness and 
restraint in our manners, actions and ways of expression by body 
and speech, for the sake of not allowing our conduct of body and 
speech to become inappropriate. We  need to change them to a 
state of appropriateness. This is a state that needs to be cared for 
and maintained. We train ourselves in this way by taking the 
principle of living as one who goes against the stream of lay life 
and the stream of worldly attitude s. We all know what the stream 
of lay life, the stream of worldly attitudes is like. It is always 
under the power of delusion, under the power of desires and under 
the power of craving and defileme nts. It is always lacking and 
insatiable, like a fire that can ne ver have enough fuel. So now we 
go against the stream and don’t act in conformity with our likes 
and our moods. We have guidelines of practice, such as the 
ascetic practices, which are for di recting our life as someone who 
doesn’t follow the stream of the world. We all know that the 
stream of the world is the stream  of darkness and blindness. It’s a 
stream in which there is no freedom, in which one is not one’s 
own. For this reason we need to change our character and habits, 
change our feelings, not letting them be like those of laypeople. 
Worldly people follow their moods, the stream of desires, and the 
Worldly Dhammas. These things concern the beings of the world. 
 
36  In Thailand there is an idiom saying that the “third sex” besides male and 
female is “ordained”.

These are the dhammas of the worldling. They concern what is 
called worldly materialism, the nutri ment of beings of the world. 
We come and look at ourselves and search for skilful means that 
help to relieve and eradicate the desires that stain our minds and 
reduce the mind states of entertainment, amusement and 
diversion. We start seeing the wo rld from a perspective that 
brings relief from desires staining the heart. This is how we try to 
see it. The only question is, where exactly should we look? In fact 
we can look both towards material objects, for example the body, 
and towards the mind and its moods. The Buddha always 
emphasized that all of us should lo ok at our experiences as being 
like an ornamented royal chariot,  which only fools get carried 
away with, but those who understand won’t see anything there
37. 
We come together here seeing things in a way where we can 
experience a feeling of not getting overpowered by craving and 
grasping when we get involved with things. Just like the Buddha 
taught us to pay attention an d reflect whenever material 
possessions accrue to us. Even in terms of external matters, such 
as the clothes we wear, the food we eat and our dwellings, the 
Buddha wanted us to understand th at they are merely elements 
that simply follow their nature. They keep transforming in a way 
that we don’t want them to at all. This is something we 
contemplate. It helps to relieve our eagerness.  
 
The Buddha taught that the enj oyment of sensual pleasure 
and the cords of sensuality is one of the dangers for the Sangha, 
and so is the wish to have more  and more of these pleasures. 
That’s why we are determined to look, know and see – seeing in a 
way that doesn’t get involved w ith the fetters and bonds caused 
by the sense of self. We are dete rmined to contemplate, allowing 
 
37 Dhammapada 171.

the sense of self to abate and ev entually be dissolved into the 
universality of the Three Characteristics which, as we understand 
it, is “saccadhamma”. What we  mean by “saccadhamma” is the 
ultimate truths of nature: aniccata, the state of not being 
permanent; anattata, that which doesn’t make the burden of 
conceit arise since, ultimately, th ere isn’t anything that is in a 
state of true constancy or absolute certainty. Nothing can be called 
stable or permanent at all. Seeing this will truly give rise to the 
feeling of some relief from the mind states where we delight in 
things and become deluded. The mind state where we experience 
ignorance in its various ways will be slightly reduced. This feels 
like a reduction of heat, the pulli ng out of drunkenness, and relief 
from dukkha.  
 
When we find that we can relate to things in this way, it 
will make us change from the state of ordinariness experienced by 
worldly people and give rise to a state that has valuable qualities, 
a state which feels peaceful, cool and shady. The Buddha taught 
this way so that we remind our selves that we are now of a 
different status than laypeople. We have to know how to reflect 
on ourselves and the fact that we rely on others for supporting our 
lives. For this reason we need to develop ourselves into somebody 
who welcomes whatever he is given happily and does not have 
the feeling that he needs to ch ange and improve things according 
to the pulls of craving and ignorance. He puts down these feelings 
and abides in a state which is  light and grounded in peace – 
irrespective of whether what he re ceives is good or bad. Actually 
there isn’t anything good or bad. It  is only since we have desires 
and rely on desires, that good and bad come to be. We have to 
approach and reflect on things like this, which means lowering 
oneself down to becoming one who accepts the truth of nature. 
Whoever accepts the truth of nature will not get worked up too

much, will not experience many problems. This is for the sake of 
peace of mind, not for anything else. Peace from the mind states 
of kilesas
38 and tanha. Peace from desires and craving. 
 
We need to develop and recoll ect the attitude of applying 
effort, having mindfulness and cl ear comprehension. This means 
to get rid of the sense of grabbing as if one was out of one’s mind, 
always taking hold of as much as one can, like worldly people do. 
Rather we live like ones who ha ve mindfulness and recognize the 
right measure in the way we lead our lives. We live just 
appropriately and well. This way of acting reminds us of being 
somebody who recognizes what is enough. One won’t get worked 
up when one recognizes what is  enough. Having little is enough, 
having a lot is enough.  
 
These are some of the quali ties and treasures of somebody 
who practices changing his char acter and habits. He always 
reminds himself of what these qu alities which embellish one who 
has Gone Forth actually are. The embellishments of the body are 
something that we can all see, they  are the things we use to cover 
ourselves to protect us from heat and cold, but there also need to 
be embellishments in the qualities of Dhamma. At least we should 
give rise to the beauty that come s from having intentions that are 
based on a sense of shame. Having a sense of shame to a certain 
extent enables us to restrain ourselves from falling into what is 
evil or bad.  
 
The Buddha held that having a sense of shame is like a 
goad for forcing a cart to go towards its destination at the end of 
the road. Another expression for this  is: to have sila, to observe 
                                     
38  kilesas (Pali): defilements, stains, afflictions of the heart. 
7

virtuous conduct, or to possess guidelines of practice which are 
harmonious and cause beauty to arise. Walking – one is beautiful, 
standing – one is beautiful, sitti ng – one is beautiful, speaking – 
one knows the right amount. It makes one feel that the factors and 
embellishments of a Samana are present in every way. This 
requires living like somebody who bears in mind a sense of 
shame, like somebody who has got sila. We consider this to be 
one of the constituent factors of our Going Forth, of our practice.  
 
Concerning samadhi and sati: sati is necessary, as it is a 
dhamma that gives great support. We must know the flow of the 
wind, the flow of kilesas and tanha, the flow of the world, not 
making ourselves like a water hya cinth going up whenever the 
water level rises, and going dow n whenever it falls. If there’s 
delusion letting it be just delusion, if there is sati letting it be just 
sati. We need to know how to go ag ainst the stream, have sati and 
sampajañña (clear comprehension), not  to be deluded by the 
world, not to be deluded by moods such as praise, blame, gain, 
loss. We shouldn’t feel obliged to  go along with everything, but 
be aware and have dama, self-discipline. At least we need to have 
control of our minds and hearts. If  we get what we wish, we get 
what we wish. It’s just that. If we don’t get what we wish, it’s just 
that. We need to know how to put things down and how to 
abandon. 
 
This should be enough to create  the feeling of being one’s 
own refuge, of not being deluded by the world or by moods. To 
be somebody who conducts himself with samadhi, a firm standing 
– a mind standing firm, mind- objects standing firm – not 
becoming overpowered and obscured, emerging into a 
characteristic quality called reso luteness. We have got immunity 
and we have got firmness. To have immunity is something very

valuable, therefore we need to train and learn. These are factors of 
our being Samanas, being ones who have Gone Forth. 
 
Some of our views may give rise  to feelings that lead us 
into ways of thinking that aren’t right or appropriate, so we should 
remind ourselves of nature, seeing things in a way that gives rise 
to a sense that fits in with na ture. As the Buddha says, having 
“wisdom, all-around knowledge, of this heap of sankharas”. 
Sankharas are states of construc ting. Constructing needs to be 
understood on the basis of the experience of anicca, impermanence. Certainly, there is the st ate that is hard to endure, but 
there is also the state where there isn’t anything at all. We try to 
focus on seeing things in this way, letting our understanding be a 
factor that influences our way of living.  
 
Further we need to be aware of the conventions in the way 
we live together with other people. If that’s not the case, we won’t 
attain freedom. To like certain persons in one moment and later 
hate them is like a virus causing damage to us and keeping us 
from a state of peace. That’s why we need to know, watch and 
observe things that concern us. Bit by bit we have to put our 
hearts into those things that are relevant to us. 
 
When at times our behaviour and our actions aren’t good, 
our friends in the Dhamma might warn us or criticize us. Then we 
have to know how to accept it, not just taking our own feelings as 
a basis, or taking atta, self, as our principle. We need to know 
how to relax, whether the criticis m is right or wrong. We need to 
be humble and lower ourselves first. If the criticism is right, we 
really need to accept that there are still parts of ou rselves that we 
have to face with humbleness.

So our practice relies on following certain ways that uphold 
the training and our lifestyle needs to be supported by the 
activities of a Samana. Getting up  early we recognize straight 
away that we need to change our feelings, not allowing them to go 
in a direction where we give things too much importance and 
grasp onto them. We consider and remind ourselves that the days 
and nights are passing, passing. What  does this mean? It is a way 
to see that the passing of time ve ry clearly reveals the truth. It 
really speaks for itself: days a nd nights are passing, relentlessly. 
Even the parts of us that are considered rupa-khandha, the “formsankharas” (i.e. the physical worl d), still point to ending and 
deterioration, changing into a st ate where there is nothing that 
belongs to oneself. What shall we expect from them?  
 
So, taking up contemplations like this is done  for the sake 
of pulling out asmimana (the conceit “I am”), a view that seems 
to be controlling us all the time. We have to really pull it out 
through living as One Gone Forth who possesses guidelines for 
his behaviour and practice. The way we lead our lives has to be 
like this. 
 
We understand that this involves changing our character 
and habits towards seeing the disadvantages and dangers in the 
round of rebirth. All of us alread y know that this danger isn’t 
anything far away. It is in fact the danger of ignorant mind states 
that are associated with greed, hatred and delusion. Just this is the 
danger. And just this is what forces us to live in a state where we 
are tortured, with freedom unable to arise. That is why the 
application of effort is considered something very good, a 
valuable quality that we can receive benefits from. It eliminates 
the problem of going in a directi on in which we can get lost and 
are aiming at dukkha.

The meaning of applying effort amounts to living in a way 
that is not careless, just that. When we relate to external objects in 
our lives we relate to them as someone who has sati-pañña 
(mindfulness and wisdom). .In the same way we relate to 
conventions. It is better to do so, because this can give rise to 
peace and enables one to experience happiness. This happiness 
does not rely on worldly or materi al things, but on the application 
of energy and effort.   
 
Since we live as a society or group we do have to take on 
agreements and a variety of duties for our living together. 
Whatever is communal activity we  need to hurry to help each 
other with, especially concerning the application of effort (in 
meditation). Each day there should be an occasion of putting forth 
effort together in order to bu ild up strength and energy. We don’t 
always do meditation together, only from time to time. In the 
language of the Buddha, building up  strength and energy together 
like this is called sangha-anubhava (the power of the Sangha). If 
we do something we do it through  the power of the Sangha. The 
sitting meditation we do all together. In any activity which goes in 
the direction of samaggi (harmony) we try to do our part, but if 
the state of nature (i.e. Luang Por’s health) doesn’t support it, one 
has to accept that it  is too much, going be yond one’s range. An 
example of this is related in th e Vinaya. It concerns our practice 
with the requisites to cover ourselves (i.e. the robes). The Buddha 
forbade us to be without the thre e robes, even for one night, but 
he did allow us to be without  them if our body and our formelements are in a state of deteri oration. This is about nature and 
the fact that it is beyond the range of one’s control. But if one is 
still in a normal state, the Buddha  advised us not to be careless, 
and to live in a way where we put our hearts into looking after and 
protecting our requisites – for th e purpose of training our habits.

We should take it to be a part of our lives that we need to have 
things to cover ourselves. If we stay far away from these things 
they may disappear or get lost . Somebody who wants our robes 
might come and use the opportunity to take them away. We aren’t 
allowed to beg (for new robes) th en. This is something that we 
have to consider very well. If something like this happens, it 
might make us break our precepts. At least we’ll have to go and 
request replacement from somebody else, either from a relative or 
non-relative, or from the communal stores. As we are training to 
change our character and habits we don’t request or do anything 
based on craving.  
 
All the different tricks of d eceit and ways of acting based 
on craving: don’t go and use th em. We uphold that we should 
make our ways of acting as st raightforward as possible, not 
making excuses in this or that way. One can’t do that – finding 
excuses… we’ve been excusing ou rselves for a long time already 
and it just brings bad habits, th e habits of a fool. Now who’s 
going to do this? Our training has to have resoluteness. To be 
resolute means to possess strong determination of mind ( manopanidhana). This can cut off those pr oblems that give rise to 
degeneration and decay. This is what it relies on: it relies on the 
actions we do. Just that. 
 
Concerning our chanting now , during the time that we 
determine the vassa, we have to pay attention to the proper time 
and place (for coming together). This is something that is 
considered part of the traini ng of the new monks, but it also 
means maintaining our communal duties as a Sangha. This is 
another factor of the practice.

Something else that we also consider to be part of the 
season of vassa is that we will have to study that which is related 
to the pariyatti-dhamma, the Vinaya, the training rules, 
concerning the things that the B uddha forbade us to do – for the 
sake of support and increase of our knowledge on a deeper level. 
The Vinaya is all about our bod ily, verbal and mental actions. 
One can say it is something that affects our lives. The issues of 
the body, speech or mind are all about life in this way. 
 
*** 
 
Today we have come together to determine the vassa. In 
this period my health is a state th at can be called definitely “not 
sure”, it is in a state of degeneration, the degeneration of the 
mechanism of the pump, the motor in side the system of the heart. 
The condition of the heart isn’t good. The muscles of the heart are 
weak. One can say that they don’t have strength in their function 
and when they push and pump, the heart doesn’t contract as much 
as it should. So I had to rely on consulting those who have 
sufficient experience and knowledge. They said the system is not 
capable of ejecting all the fluid out of the heart. This then causes 
fluid to accumulate in the heart. This makes the heart weak and 
enlarged and there is the possibil ity of it stoppi ng to work, which 
in technical terms is called having a heart failure, suddenly and 
unexpectedly. All this, one can say,  is a matter of nature. I think 
of it like this. It’s about the process of dege neration in nature, but 
in a position of livi ng in society one can’t  just let go. So one 
needs to know how to cure, maintain and nurse as much as one is 
able to support it, only for that reason.  
 
These are some of the issues  concerning the body that I’m 
facing now, so I’m telling you this  to let you all know. It isn’t 
anything that’s far away. Concerni ng other inner organs, like the

liver, lungs and kidneys, they are still usable. But the system of 
the heart is damaged, simply that . There’s the chance of complete 
failure. This can happen, suddenly. There’s nothing difficult about 
it, it’s not hard, and it’s good in that there will be no dukkha 
vedana. With these symptoms there is no dukkha vedana, only the 
breathing becomes quicker, that’s all. We went to see the doctors 
and they said these will be the symptoms (preceding total heart 
failure). I have the feeling that the tests, checks and the things that 
they observe mean this. 
 
Regarding the fact that we are living together, we have 
come together now for determin ing vassa, in order to create 
feelings that give rise to concor d and unanimity in principles, the 
principles of Dhamma-Vinaya. So  today we have come together 
to do this act of determining the vassa with each other as 
witnesses. We understand that this  is a special occasion in this 
period.  
 
I don’t have much more, so I don’t want to say much 
more. It is appropriate. If I speak much it also uses a lot of energy, 
so I’d like to use this occasion to  express my appreciation for all 
of us who have come together for determining the vassa, doing 
the duty of changing our character s and habits and leading our 
lives as those who see the disadva ntages and dangers in the round 
of rebirth. Doing so, we can be a bit of a light for others, for the 
people in the world, so that they may open up their eyes and ears; 
because just as the external light is capable of giving support and 
convenience, the light inside is capable of making the hearts of 
people in society change. May yo u all have happiness that is 
without any dukkha. With your permission, may I end now. 
 
***

“Different from    
Ordinary People”

If one is able to change and leave behind 
the emotions of an ordinary person, that’s 
something amazingly strange.

Different from Ordinary People 
 
A teaching  given at Wat Nong Pah Pong after the 
Patimokkha on August 26th, 2003 (2546). 
 
Now we have already reached half of the vassa. The 
ceremony of entering the rains was 1½ months ago. Another 1½ 
months and the rains period is over.   If we all practise continually 
and make a habit of putting forth effort, this will be sufficient to 
change our behaviour in some ways . At least the practice with the 
conditioned physical form of our bodi es is well within the realm 
that is capable of change. But it takes time for us, who have just 
come here to this lifestyle, to follow the principles of the Buddha 
with all the methods of practice for leading this life. Even more, it 
takes time, if one has been closely linked to friends and relatives, 
to free oneself from worries. We  have become acquainted and 
used to places and people, so it takes time before we can change. 
It is only after a long time that we can see that we don’t need to 
worry about the situations that our old friends and relatives are in. 
It is very difficult to develop th is “unconcerned” feeling towards 
people we have been closely linked to. It is not easy. When we 
study how the Buddha trained himself in his practice, we see that 
it is something that takes a long time, to abandon these feelings of 
being bound up and fettered to ones  old life. So for us, it should 
be similar: it will take us some time until we can let go of the 
things that bind us to people and places that we used to relate to. 
 
So I’d like all of us to deve lop a mind that doesn’t follow 
wrong courses of perception (aga ti-dhamma). Normally we do 
have these mistaken perceptions . Our views are not the true 
Dhamma; we are prejudiced. If one sees things from an angle

without preconceptions, one can s ee the way things normally are. 
An example is our living together: if we look at the physical 
features (of people), or the conditions of their bodies, everybody 
is different. There are big and sma ll people, the colour of the skin 
is not the same, and there are differences all the way up to 
people’s voices and the languages they use for communication. In 
these aspects, each individual is special, but if we see things in the 
light of the facts of nature, in terms of form, elements and 
aggregates everybody is the same. We chant this in the “five 
subjects for frequent recollection” : we all age, become sick and 
become separated when we die – all the same for everyone.  
 
From this point of view, the feeling of being especially 
closely related to certain persons  won’t arise. We see everybody 
in the same way. Actually, everybody is our relative in terms of 
nature, or concerning our true situation, the saccadhamma, the 
truth of the reality of life. If we can manage to realise this aspect 
of nature, we will be possessed of a mind that isn’t prone to 
seeing others with perceptions of  being better, worse, or on the 
same level. The term for these biased perceptions is mana, 
conceit. The Buddha wanted us to  observe in what kind of forms 
mana occurs. Thinking “I’m not li ke this or that person” will 
eventually lead to seeing others as either good or bad. It will lead 
to accepting or resenting them. When such mind states arise, we 
need to put things in the right pe rspective, a perspective that is 
based on saccadhamma, the truth of reality in its universal scope. 
From this angle, states of mind that are free from aversion, where 
we neither denigrate nor praise others, will come about naturally. 
We see others as part of nature, as perfectly right and appropriate. 
The Buddha called this the attitude of so mebody who has Right 
View. It is the mind state of a person that is accomplished and 
pure in the qualities and virtues of a true Sangha member.

Talking about ‘Sangha’: it is  worth noticing that Sangha 
doesn’t have anything to do with  individual monks that can be 
specified. Speaking about the Sangha in its conventional sense 
(sammuti-sangha), the Buddha didn’t re fer to certain monks. 
Sammuti-sangha (merely) means a group of four monks or more, 
a sufficient number to be able to perform communal duties. This 
is one way the Buddha understood  ‘Sangha’. But in what the 
Buddha called the ‘ariya-sangha ’ (the group of the Noble 
Enlightened Beings) the word ‘Sangha’ is related to the 
realisation of Dhamma. There th e Buddha did refer to certain 
individuals: those that don’t fall under the power of the Worldly 
Dhammas, those that are not prone to agati and therefore progress 
with right practice ( samma-patipada) – namely: those who walk 
the Middle Way. The Middle Way doe sn’t follow the course of 
Worldly Dhammas. These are th e paths of householders and 
ordinary unenlightened beings. If our behaviour is not yet 
accomplished in the Dhamma, there will always be elements of 
agati. So in this matter of ch anging one’s behaviour, what we 
should do is have a look at ours elves and take our own feelings 
into account. Moving towards obser ving other people can take us 
very far from relating to ourselves in a way where we are able to 
see the Dhamma. 
 
Thinking about it, this is an aspect of Dhamma that is 
interesting: how is it possible that good and ba d feelings arise, or 
happiness and suffering? Happiness, according to our model of 
thinking, is positive, and for us wh o haven’t yet reached the level 
where one is content, anything th at is dukkha is undesirable. But 
those who are accomplished and free from the mind states of 
worldly, unenlightened people w ould uphold that even sukha is 
something negative. They would see neither sukha nor dukkha as 
something positive. The Buddha still considered feelings of

appreciation as dangerous. They are another aspect of dukkha. 
Only because we agree to this type of dukkha, we say it’s 
positive. There has to be peace from sukha and dukkha, peace 
from good and bad, peace from agreement and disagreement. This 
peace arises from seeing things in the light of the nature of reality. 
 
This is how we see things. On e needs to be well aware of 
the different kinds of angles from  which one looks at things. This 
is why the Buddha taught us to  live grounding ourselves in 
attention and heedfulness, looking at the world and all the mind 
states that arise in ourselves. If the things that arise in our mind 
arise in a peaceful way, without pr oliferating or fantasizing about 
the Worldly Dhammas, they are a potential that can provide peace 
and happiness for us. This is what is called “seclusion from the 
sankharas” in the Buddha’s word s – seclusion from the mind 
states of proliferation. 
 
This is also something that is hard to explain: if there is no 
mental proliferation, how is it possible for somebody to act at all? 
One can understand it in this way: those (who don’t have any 
activity of mental proliferation) carry out their actions in a mind 
state that is perfected with what the Buddha called kindness, 
friendship, and helpfulness, or me tta.  Metta means wanting to be 
useful to those people that are s till in a state of danger – wanting 
similar benefits to arise in them. You could call it the intention of 
a real grown-up person. It is th e way the Buddha acted. In that 
sense, when one pursues the peace  that arises from separation 
from the defilements ( upadhi-viveka), peace means peace from 
the mind states of a normal, unenlightened being – where the 
mind experiences greed, disagreement or all kinds of negligence 
and errors.

Peace from these defilements ar ises because of seeing their 
drawbacks, dangers and inapprop riateness. In this way the 
Buddha’s mind state was secluded from defilements. Still, looking 
at the way he lived, the Buddha seemed just like an ordinary 
person. He needed clothes to cover his body, ward off cold, heat, 
mosquitoes and gadflies. He ate food for sustaining the physical 
condition of his body, just so that it feels like neither too much 
nor too little, consuming it only for stilling the hunger that arises 
due to the work of the body’s digestive system (and not overcome 
by desire). His dwelling place can be considered ‘good’. It was 
merely a shelter from sun and rain, a place of relief from having 
to deal with insects. It can ’t be called ‘good’ by worldly 
standards. The Buddha was indifferent towards it. He lived just 
well enough to sustain his life an d to have some relief from the 
heat and cold that nature brings , from the sun and the rain. The 
same with medicines: the B uddha wouldn’t use medicines 
thinking of curing his illnesses – but only for the sake of a little 
relief, as the situation of having to experience the physical 
conditions of a body always has to  involve constant changes, 
according to causes and conditions . Eventually the physical body 
will have to reach its end, disintegrate and transform into its 
original state: earth goes to eart h, water to water,  wind to wind, 
and fire to fire. Seeing that th is is the way it goes, the Buddha 
didn’t think of his physical body bei ng a person or an entity in 
itself. The body is merely a mani festation of the elements and 
khandhas – arising, existing, and ceasing to be. With this 
perspective there is nothing that is to be assumed as a self – 
whether relating to the rupa- khandha, the vedana-khandha, or 
sankhara-khandha.  
 
The Buddha saw that the khandhas are a way of being that 
follows causes and conditions – arising, existing and ceasing –

which one can’t consider a being or a person at all. Because the 
Buddha saw things from this pe rspective, he was able to 
experience true peace. When we study aspects like this, we need 
to do it with an attitude that doesn’t allow mindfulness to slip. We 
need to possess mindfulness and clear comprehension, 
immediately understanding the wo rld and our states of mind, 
knowing them as they are. Knowing people, realizing the world. 
One who understands the world and knows the truth about it is 
able to still his feelings towards it. This means to look at things 
with an attitude of practice, following the ideal of heedfulness. 
We can also say it is a way of keeping track observingly, with 
comprehension and vision. Another expression (for an attitude 
like this) is to keep looking until  one has revealed it, to keep 
addressing it until it works, and keep using it until one can handle 
it: look, figure it out, try to articula te it, apply it, and carry it out. 
Practicing in this way, both benefi t for ourselves and benefit for 
others will arise together by itself. This all falls under the topic of 
guarding one’s faculties, so they’re beneficial – nothing more than 
that. 
 
So these are the principles that we practise and give 
importance to. If one is able to realize peace and liberation from 
suffering, one changes in a strange  way from being an ordinary 
person. In the ordination cerem ony, when a young man enters the 
new gender of being a celibate, he is required to be a ‘complete 
male human being’ ( purisa). But this only refers to the common 
features and conditions of an ordinary human. When one comes to 
completion of one’s person (in th e sense of complete freedom 
from dukkha), one actually goes against one’s biological nature as 
a male person. One doesn’t drift along the current of one’s natural 
conditioning. This is truly strange.

The same is true for the mi nd with its various moods. If 
one is able to change and l eave behind the emotions of an 
ordinary person, that’s someth ing amazingly strange. One can’t 
say one feels good, because one doesn’t see anything ‘good’ 
there. And instead of feeling bad, one sees that there isn’t 
anything ‘bad’ there either. One merely sees these feelings as 
modes of being, states that ar e neither good nor bad. One’s mind 
doesn’t behave in terms of approv al or disapproval. This is an 
effect of experiencing seclusion – seclusion from the world. 
 
This is also something strange: if one practises a lot to be 
continuously observant, then even wh ile one is asleep, one is able 
to remain watching. Those expe riences that concern the body, 
relate to the body. The experience s that the ‘one who knows’ 
makes, relate to the ‘one who knows’. One eventually needs to 
separate: what concerns the body is just a matter of the body, and 
what concerns the mind is just  a matter of the mind. Practising 
following the Buddha’s guidelines indeed leads one to very 
strange things.  This is the course  of the training. It leads all the 
way to becoming awake, to the arising of maturity and to 
fulfillment and completion. Therefore we try to develop an 
attitude of taking every opport unity, studying and observing. We 
study right at our six senses. The Buddha didn’t want us to study 
anywhere else, but to see what is happening at our sense bases. 
This is something that we ought to know very well and 
thoroughly. 
 
Again, there is something st range: when we have the 
experience of a very pure state of feeling and view, a ‘mysterious’ 
or strange phenomenon arises in the form of gladness and bliss. 
But it is not that we become obsessed with feelings of liking 
experiences like this. As I see it, su ch states of gladness and bliss

have to do with a person’s previous wholesome behaviour 
(upanissaya). Whatever it is that we have invested importance 
into will eventually manifest at the right opportunity. Such an 
experience the Buddha refers to as ‘ vasana’, a gift of merit from 
the past. One can see it like that . Not every monk is equally wellgifted. Even the noble disciples in the Buddha’s time weren’t all 
the same. 
 
Just look at Luang Pu Chah. When I was spending time 
with him he definitely had some very special gifts. From what I 
observed, it was very special th at the people who came to pay 
respects and visit never felt bo red or fed up with him – they 
wouldn’t even think of these feelings. This is one of the aspects of 
vasana. 
 
His special qualities also created good opportunities for 
him to be useful to others. Even though his activities mostly took 
place in the period of his life when  he wasn’t yet old, still they 
were of great and long-lasting benef it. It is a fact that we have 
received our style of practice from him, and even today, his 
principles (in the Dhamma) are st ill preserved by various means. 
Even his voice we can still hear. Or, in terms of the monastery 
regulations, standards an d routines that he guided us in, we still 
reap benefits. He really laid  good foundations. For example, our 
practices toward material gains or  fame and reputation that arise 
from offerings made, Luang Pu Chah wouldn’t let these fall to 
any individual. He always tried to designate them for communal 
purposes. 
 
Then we need to recollect his spiritual practice and the 
qualities of Dhamma that he realised. Even in the time when his 
conditioned physical body deterior ated, he never showed such

symptoms visibly, or displayed a state that gave rise to aversion. 
It is noticeable that those who were involved in looking after him 
and nursing him (during his illness) never experienced feelings of 
being weary or fed up with it. He  also never showed any extreme 
reactions. All this is part of vasana. 
 
Also, Luang Pu Chah possessed an aspect of the four 
patisambhida (analytic insights), that which is called patibhana 
(ready wit, initiative, creative a nd appliable insight), and he was 
skilled in using speech in all kinds of ways. This definitely 
enabled great benefits to arise. 
 
Then there was his relationship to his fellow monastics. All 
these are factors of vasana, the gi fts of an individual person. So 
when we train, things are similar. Sometimes we need to see that 
the practice also depends on each and everybody’s individual 
qualities. 
 
 
***

Our mind is like a flame when the wind is stilled. 
The flame is unmoved and upright in itself and blazes light 
into all directions, when we are fully present.

“From the Darkness  
 to the Light”

From the Darkness to the Light 
 
Excerpts of a Dhamma talk given to the monks, 
novices and nuns after the ceremony of asking 
forgiveness at the annual retreat of Luang Por’s 
disciples at Wat Nong Pah Pong on September 12 th, 
1996 (2539). 
 
In our practice we constantly have to remind ourselves that 
all of us need to begin like child ren. We can’t be like adults right 
from the start. At first we are not yet purified and keep falling into 
states of dirtiness. We live in the mud and mire like a lotus that 
hasn’t yet bloomed and still depe nds on the dirt for nourishment. 
We are the same – when we are born in the world we are not yet 
fully mature, ready and complete, but come with the burden of 
having to fight obstacles of all kinds. There is happiness and 
suffering, good and bad, right and wrong. To experience this is 
normal for an unenlightened person, who still has dust in his eyes. 
That someone who has dust in his eyes could experience the 
brightness and clarity of being unburdened with suffering and 
drawbacks cannot be. In the beginning there are always hardships, 
there always has to be suffering – this is just normal. 
 
It’s like we live in the dark. Living in the dark is not as 
pleasant as one might wish. There is always a certain feeling of 
discomfort and uneasiness. In this state we are still not free from 
dependence, are not yet wholly accomplished. We still experience 
a bit of happiness and a bit of suffering from time to time, some 
satisfaction and dissatisfaction. We  haven’t yet transcended the 
world of conditions and are not yet in a safe place. We are going 
back and forth in samsara, the round of birth and death. 
Sometimes the situations that arise are good, sometimes bad. In

our lives we are not going smoothly over all the ups and downs. 
Until we reach the aim of our practi ce this is just the natural way 
things are. 
 
Although we accept that anything th at is still in a stage of 
development is of course not ye t as good as it ideally should be, 
we still need to make change s and improvements. And for doing 
this we need to know what we are supposed to do, so we can try 
to direct the development toward s our aim. Whatever doesn’t fit 
in our plan, we seek to let go, keep away from, or not respond to.  
The things which aren’t alright will  come to an end in this way. 
They won’t be allowed to become part of our behaviour patterns 
or habitual attitudes. 
 
Everybody has goodness, everybody has perfection and 
purity right inside himself. Surely everyone of us possesses at 
least some personality traits  which could be brought to 
consciousness in a way that is useful for oneself. Make these 
complete and perfect them. It is lik e with the flames of a fire: in 
the places where the flames light up there wasn’t any fire before. 
But once they are ignited and kindled, the flames appear out of 
the darkness – and eventually the fire and flames are burning right 
there. With us it’s the same as with the flames: everyone of us has 
to come from dark places, come from being a child, being 
someone who has no strength, is not yet mature. Naturally, of 
course, this brings disorientation. That a state at this level could 
give rise to full confidence and clar ity just can’t be. To be able to 
experience purity straight from the start is impossible. One has to 
gradually develop oneself like this. 
 
Until the state of perfection is reached, we need to 
understand the situation we are i n, and that it is normal to

experience both happiness and sufferi ng. Still, we need to find 
means to improve ourselves. We can use the guidelines the 
Buddha established for us monks in order to correct the 
shortcomings and faults in our ac tions. Inabilities, negligence and 
thoughtlessness in our behavior can make us feel very 
inappropriate. But we have the chance to open ourselves up to the 
friends we live together with, to  let them know about our deeds. 
We can confess or speak up in a meeting, letting the others 
witnesses our actions, saying words like:  
 
“What I have done here wa s careless and wasn’t right. 
I have transgressed (a rule of conduct) here. That 
wasn’t good. What I have done  wasn’t appropriate for 
someone who lives by th e ways of a Samana, who 
practises for the sake of penetrating dukkha with clarity 
and insight.”  
 
By letting others know and be witnesses in this way, we 
implant our principles deeply in to our memory, building up our 
capacity to be aware of what we  are doing and gradually creating 
a sense of shame. If we are grounded in this sense of shame, 
shying away from things that could cause us problems becomes 
natural. Seeing dangers and disadvantages will keep us alert and 
attentive. This alertness is the way leading to the experience of 
freedom and safety. It leads to  the attainment of the “nonsuffering”, the “unburdened”. This is the way to fulfill our task in 
the practice and development of ourselves. 
 
In the beginning of the prac tice, we always do things 
according to the standards and rules,  similar to a fighter preparing 
to enter the fighting arena. First, he  trains strictly according to the 
rules and regulations. But when he  really faces the fight, he

sometimes goes beyond the rules. But in our case, everything still 
remains within our general princi ples – principles that aim at 
peace and cessation and lead us to freedom from danger and 
enmity. For determining these prin ciples, the Buddha gave us the 
criteria: 
 
Any Dhamma that reduces th e desires that stain our 
hearts won’t deviate from  the principles of the 
Buddhas teaching.  
 
There are many skilful means and tools in the Buddha’s 
teachings for correcting our actions, for destroying and 
abandoning confusion and unpeaceful, unhappy states in oneself. 
These tools are needed, and none of them transgress the general 
principles that the Buddha proc laimed. They are the Buddha’s 
recommendations, so we should put them into practice.  
 
Usually our mind likes to ge t carried away with having 
fun. If we find ourselves infatuat ed with amusement, take it as 
important and hold on to it, th e Buddha recommends to ground 
ourselves in an attitude of alertness. Hilarity is a tie. It can drag us 
onto the path of foolishness. When we are infatuated and crazy 
about something, we can go wrong  anywhere. Whether in the 
hidden or in the open, it’s all the same – it’s really like when one 
is drunk.  
 
People get drunk with their bodies through the illusion that 
the body doesn’t have illnesses, afflictions, pains and fevers 
threatening it. They think they won’t die, won’t degenerate and 
wear out. They don’t consider the possibility, but it happens. 
Because in reality our physical body is a conditioned 
phenomenon, it always will follow the nature of its material

constituents. Nevertheless we like to see the body as permanently 
powerful, tough and strong and not afflicted by disease and pain. 
We want to see it in this perspective, the way we are used to 
seeing it, just as if  the body was fit for al l circumstances. But the 
Buddha said, if there is light, there will be darkness. If there is hot, 
there will be cold. It has to be like this. So in this very way, any 
state of strength, agility or ease may degenerate in just a single 
day or just a single moment into a state of decline and ruin, 
becoming deteriorated and worn out, following its nature. But if 
we cultivate an attitude of seeing the disintegrati on of the body as 
natural, we won’t be upset by the decline. We won’t take the body 
as something important, keep holding on to it or attach feelings of 
self to it. 
 
The Buddha called the illusions we create around the body 
sakkayaditthi – the view that the body is  self, that we and other 
people are our bodies, that the body is our possession. The 
Buddha reminds us to keep recollecting that whatever thing there 
may be, it is not ours, not our self. Nothing really belongs to us. 
Thinking like this prevents wrong courses of perception (agatidhamma) from gaining power. One can easily get lost in these 
perceptions. They stimulate feelings  of self-importance in us. So 
the Buddha taught to remedy them by reflecting in one’s mind that 
there is nothing that really belongs to us. Through thinking like 
this we won’t start holding on to th ings. Attachment is the root of 
all self-importance. 
 
The more we take ourselves as important, the more we are 
prone to drifting away towards unwholesome feelings, towards 
suffering, until we finally follow the path into the realms of 
darkness. In this way we fl oat along the round of birth and 
becoming. The Buddha saw this as the source of all suffering.

States of anger, greed or delusion come to be. Desire, aversion and 
ignorance arise. All of these stat es of being entail suffering and 
unhappiness. 
 
Analyzing and observing our personality we see that it 
consists of what is called namadhamma. Mental phenomena, too, 
are not ours, not our self. Our pe rsonality is not “we” or “they”, 
but simply consists of certain stat es out of all the possible mental 
states. Don’t see it as “this is me” or “this is mine”. See it in the 
light of mental states which aris e naturally on their own and then 
cease on their own. Just like the da rkness comes to be naturally, it 
goes naturally as well. As brightness is born in its own natural 
way it likewise ceases. These states arise and vanish. 
 
Mental states arise and cease, whether they are states of 
happiness or suffering, ittharammana (agreeable states) or 
anittharammana (disagreeable states). These two are what we call 
the the Wordly Dhammas, attributes that dominate the hearts and 
minds of beings living in the world. Seeing the Worldly Dhammas 
simply as elements of Dhamma , we won’t make the assumption 
that we are happy whenever we fe el happiness, or that we are 
suffering whenever we feel su ffering. There is nothing like our 
goodness or our badness either. We see these attributes, but they 
are just aspects of Dhamma. Each one is just one of all the 
possible states of Dhamma. There is nothing special about it. 
 
Feelings are just feelings, happiness is just happiness, 
suffering is just suffering. Only that. Having arisen, it all ceases. 
We don’t have happiness and suffering. We don’t take interest in 
them. They are just attributes of the mental objects that come up – 
just that much. The Worldly Dhammas appear and vanish 
according to their own logic. Finally , if we don’t show interest in

them, don’t support and give importance to them, they lose their 
existence. 
 
The fantasies our mind spins, the sankharas, can be seen in 
a similar way. Sankharas are states  of proliferation. They come 
and disturb us all the time, because, by giving importance to them, 
we keep feeding them. So of cour se they continue to provoke and 
challenge us. Naturally, then, we ar e constantly subject to feelings 
of up and down and states of confusion. We don’t have freedom. 
We are not even refuge to ourselves for a second, only because we 
give importance to these states of mind. 
 
The Buddha teaches us to be aware that sankharas are 
states that aren’t permanent and endurable. We shouldn’t build up 
the perception that they last foreve r. It’s their characteristic that 
having arisen they cease. We should see sankharas as being 
nothing more than changing states  of the elemen ts, nothing but 
nature in the end. 
 
We aspire to experience full accomplishment in the 
Dhamma. At least, we’d like to have mindfulness and clear 
awareness of ourselves, so this is the place to start the training. 
Normally, people start off with th eir emotions and moods, letting 
them lead everything. The people out in the world think their 
moods are what counts. But emotions and moods are illusions that 
swindle. They are tricky. Sometimes they take us on a good path, 
sometimes on a bad one. Following our moods easily turns to our 
disadvantage. We should take superi or states of mind rather than 
moods and emotions as our guide . Why not let the one they call 
“Awakened” and “Blessed” lead us? Let “Buddha” walk in front 
of us. Let “Buddha” be the leading principle. Let “Buddha” be our 
guideline. Whatever we do, there will always be moods, so we

should see through them by being in a state of awareness.  In this 
way eventually there is no danger. There are no drawbacks. We 
are on the watch.  
 
Let the various moods and emotions that come up simply 
be as they are. In this way we train really to be with ourselves. We 
train this very self to sit and really be there, to stand and really be 
there, to walk and really be there, until always, in whatever 
changing posture, we can be called fully aware. We are fully there 
through our peace. It’s different from being on top of our 
experience through getting carrie d away with pleasures and 
having fun. Instead, being fully present with life comes from 
peace of heart. If there is peace, we are in a state where we can 
adjust to anything that comes up, so we can always be in the 
appropriate mode. That people at tain to Right View and right 
understanding is because the sankharas are quiet. They don’t have 
mental proliferations. Therefore they experience peace. With all 
the kinds of opinions that could come up, they won’t start arguing.  
 
When relating to the world and society, those who are 
intelligent, understanding and have  a feeling of peacefulness will 
praise us. But should they prai se us, we don’t get happy because 
of it. We don’t get infatuated with  it. Ultimately, the praise of 
someone is just a product of the delusion of the one who expresses 
it. Just that much. We don’t have  feelings of like and dislike. 
Praise is just what it is. We don’t feel that we need to foolishly run 
after it. We don’t want to get on th e track of being a slave. If we 
maintain peace, there is nothing that can do harm to us. Even if 
others should blame, criticize or condemn us, making us subject to 
suspicions out of enmity, we nevertheless have peace. We have 
peace towards the anittharammana, the mental states we don’t 
wish to have, which don’t go acco rding to our likes. Even they

can’t cause us harm and hurt us. Should someone criticize us, it’s 
just that much. Eventually it all dissolves by itself. It flows away 
in its own specific way. This is where the Worldly Dhammas can’t 
dominate us, since we have nothing but peace in our hearts. 
 
 When standing, when walk ing, when sitting, when 
sleeping and when getting up, this is it. If we deal with society, 
and with things in the world around us, we can relate in a way that 
is of benefit for all. We don’t go astray and drift away. We behave 
like one who can let things be . We behave like Samanas or 
anagarikas, those  who are not bound up. This is the way we train. 
Training ourselves like this is really peaceful. We make peace 
arise all the time. Whenever we are in society, we will always 
have smoothness and tranquility. 
 
We might not have succeeded yet in our aim to experience 
the feeling of peace. If  we don’t yet succeed, we can at least try 
and practise to recall the state of peace. Practicing to write all the 
letters of the alphabet is similar: First of all, we need to follow the 
method given to us. The lines we draw sometimes turn out 
straight, and sometimes not. Sometimes the result is good, 
sometimes it’s not good, but it’s enough to make sense, it is 
usable. In our training and practice, even if we get lost in our 
moods from time to time, we notic e it immediately. So what... If 
we get lost in our moods, we just  “reset” to start anew. Be up to 
knowing your state of mind. Don’t lose yourself. Only observe the 
emotions, observe the mind, observe and watch out for the 
sankharas. If we have the determin ation to observe ourselves in 
this way, we allow correct knowledge and vision to arise, 
according to the reality of existence.

Seeing it like this, I would say, gives us  an understanding 
of the way to let things be Dhamma – it gives us a sense for the 
state where we are Dhamma. If we truly are  Dhamma, external 
things, the realm of forms and conditions (rupa-khanda-sankhara), 
our living in society, and objects around us are no problem – they 
won’t make us struggle. There is  no confusion, no happiness, no 
suffering, no delight, no sorrow. There is nothing which can give 
rise to feelings of opposition or aversion. Everything flows 
naturally following the force this state of peace has. Everything 
dissolves through the power of peacefulness. Nothing really 
matters, there is nothing to gain. It’s not essential, it’s 
uninteresting. We don’ t find all those things that we were 
interested in when we were child ren attractive anymore. There is 
nothing about the world that can overwhelm us, there is nothing 
that can make us go wrong. Not to fail is really a good thing. This 
is indeed something we could rightly accept praise for – but there 
is no one to praise. It just praise s itself, just like the name and the 
qualities of the Buddha that we recite together in the chant on the 
Nine Qualities of the Buddha. The praise is intrinsically there 
through itself.  
 
People who have no problems, who don’t have dukkha can 
be said to be free from having kilesas, but actually they live 
together with them, only that ther e’s nothing to them. This has to 
do with one’s delusion. The attention one gives to the kilesas  
comes from delusion. If one isn’ t deluded, one couldn’t care less 
about the kilesas. Kilesas  are just what they are. This doesn’t 
mean that one doesn’t have to relate to the world or society or use 
language in order to speak. One sti ll has to relate to others. But 
one doesn’t let dangers and drawbacks arise, since one’s whole 
attitude isn’t one that would allow anger to come up.

There is no anger, just like water that doesn’t have any 
dirty particles in it. The water is free from dirty particles until we 
agitate it by mixing something in  to make it muddy. Even though 
we may be challenged or provoked, we don’t feel stirred up, since 
the water of our heart is clear. Th ere aren’t any particles of dirt 
inside us which could be agitated. We keep the goodness of our 
heart. Praise can’t provoke it, criticism can’t. There is always the 
feeling of purity in it. That this  purity exists, we can only know 
individually by ourselves. 
 
We sometimes wonder and ask ourselves where this purity 
actually comes from. Well, purity comes from impurity. This is 
exactly where it comes from, ju st like peacefulness comes from 
agitation and happiness comes from suffering. If there is suffering, 
then there must also be happiness. Darkness can only come to be 
because there is brightness. Br ightness can arise because of 
darkness. This is the way we see it. 
 
Seeing things in this way, we live our lives with 
knowledge and awareness, with a feeling of being ready and 
prepared, possessing perfection in a pure way, free from 
provocation. 
 
Unluckily for most of us, what can easily arise is the 
feeling that we are still at a stage where we haven’t yet 
established these new qualities. Well, if they aren’t habitually 
there yet, we can make them become habitual. It’s not that this is 
something difficult, it’s not much of a problem to get a foundation 
in order to get started. 
 
For example in relating to social problems around us, we 
build up an attitude that is read y to tolerate, or at least we

maintain an attitude of relinquishment ( caga) and generosity 
(dana). Maintaining generosity, giving and tolerance supports our 
mindfulness, since whenever discontent arises, we think: “Well, 
living together has just got to be this way!” You can compare it to 
my tongue here. It’s normal that it sometimes gets hit by the teeth. 
We just admit that being togeth er sometimes doesn’t go hand in 
hand. 
 
Of course there are always c onflicts in life. But we know 
how to forgive, we know how to give up, we know how to open 
up and invite constructive critic ism from others. When we live 
together in a community, we have to find ways of expressing 
ourselves to others, so that our living together leads to 
peacefulness and goes into the di rection of harmony. We call this 
pavarana
39. Pavarana means to give those with whom we live 
together the chance to criticize us, granting them the freedom of 
speech, as we say in modern terms.  This cultivates the ability to 
open oneself up. It also involves th e ability to listen in an open 
way, to accept the opinions and feelings of other people. Whether 
their views are right or wrong, we can always see them as 
something to learn from. If we can contribute this openness of 
pavarana to our living together, we won’t have anything that 
stimulates self-importance or holding on tightly to ourselves. 
When we have these qualities it is possible to go one’s own way 
and nevertheless create a community feeling of living together in 
peace and happiness. 
 
When we live in society and with the objects in the world 
around us, of course there is unevenness. There is unevenness, but 
 
39  pavarana (Pali): literally means “invitation”, i.e. the invitation to 
admonishment by other bhikkhus in this case.

we can still live together in ha rmony. Because of this unevenness 
we have to live with the attitude  of not taking anything for sure. 
We have to live in accordance w ith the underlying principles of 
reality. We live in uncertainty but we create a feeling of certainty. 
There is change (aniccam), but in this there is stability (niccam). 
There is suffering, but there is non-suffering in there as well. We 
have a feeling of not-self (anatta), but right in there we have a 
feeling of self (atta). The deathless (amata), the Dhamma that 
doesn’t die, lies right here as well. When we start to look at 
impermanence (aniccam) and view  it through an experience of 
maturity and perfection, we will see permanence (niccam) coming 
up as a reality. This is similar to contemplating our mental 
proliferations, the sankharas. If we see things from the perspective 
of maturity and perfection, the visankharas
40 are actually right 
where the sankharas are. It is lik e death and the deathless being 
both in the same place.  
 
This is the way we contemplate things. Seeing things from 
this perspective, the feeling of peacefulness will arise. There will 
be stillness. Total peace in all aspects – peace from all sensual 
pleasures, peace from wanting, peac e from all mind states, peace 
from praise, peace from blame, peace from happiness and 
suffering.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
40  visankhara (Pali): the unconditioned, the unconstructed, where there are no 
proliferations.

We sometimes wonder where 
purity actually comes from. Purity 
comes from impurity, just like 
peacefulness comes from agitation 
and happiness comes from 
suffering. Brightness can arise 
because of darkness.

So, if we experience both sukha and dukkha in our 
practice, this is not a problem. We just need to try and not be 
negligent. There will always be a bit of sukha here and a bit of 
dukkha there. This is what I experienced. Thinking about myself, 
when I was new to the principles of the life in the yellow robes, I 
didn’t know anything. I di dn’t come with the ex pectation to take 
on this lifestyle for all my life, either. I thought I would ordain 
merely to follow the tradition (of young men in Thailand to ordain 
temporarily at least once in thei r life). I came to have a look, 
because people say that it’s good to try becoming a monk. But 
even after I had tested  the monk’s life and decided to stay, I kept 
drifting back towards my old ways of living in many situations. 
Actually I was still a layperson, although now I was part of the 
class of monastics. Living under the shade of the yellow robe, I 
had become an object of reverence for ordinary people, but I still 
had the thoughts of a layperson , and everything kept being 
influenced by this. I still had di rty thoughts – but at least it was 
only thoughts.   
 
There are these thoughts and feelings, and one can’t just 
go, stop and erase them all at once. It takes four or five years until 
one acquires new habits. Until then, one needs to live with dust in 
one’s eyes, always craving under the power of sensual desires. 
The eyes seeing a form is sensual desire, the ear hearing a sound, 
the nose smelling an odour, the tongue tasting a flavour – all these 
are sensual desires. It feels like one is clouded by the 
impingements of sensuality, and ther e is nothing that could clear 
or lighten the situation up. But,  I thought, one has to try anyway. 
When others bowed to me or paid  respects, I didn’t pretend that 
there was anything especially good a bout me. Rather, I felt I lack 
the merit to be able to pay people back for all their goodness 
towards me. With such thoughts spinning around in my head, I

actually felt quite depressed. There was nothing I had as a reward 
to return people’s kindness. Ho w people treated me was kind in 
every way. I kept worrying, is th ere any good in me? Why is it 
that I have all these bad and coarse thoughts? 
 
Now, I think, this is absolutely normal. I would say that it 
is normal to be in a weak and unc onducive state. But one needs to 
find skilful means in order to help  oneself out of this situation. 
One needs to take the practices the Buddha recommended and 
apply them. 
 
Sometimes, I would take up death as a reflection and use 
mental images of corpses for pr actice. Or I would go to very 
lonesome places which were secluded, silent and still, where there 
was no one around to be a friend. Then the thought of death 
would come up, since there were dangerous animals around. 
Thinking that something might harm  us takes away the desire to 
sleep, because we always need to  watch out for dangers. To be 
frightened is very good, all you can do is sit and observe it. 
Observe how the body heats up and breaks out in sweat. These are 
experiences of the sankharas ar ising and building up the illusion 
of a certain feeling. We face th em using patient endurance. We 
don’t need to give way to them. Ac tually, they aren’t much of an 
enemy for us. Sankharas delude us because we are in an 
unfamiliar situation which we aren’t used to. Experiences like this 
are simply symptoms of the unknown, so we need to try to 
understand them over and over again. For understanding a 
phenomenon it doesn’t make sens e to wish it away. If these 
experiences go, they go. If they come, they come. We see these 
experiences as particular states of  our existence that have to be 
just the way they are. All living beings have to face death and fear

death. There is no way around these experiences. We accept them 
as something natural for beings living in this world.   
 
What I tried more than anyt hing else is to handle those 
feelings that arise as obstacles in  our practice, when we need to 
relate to society and the world around us, with all kinds of desires 
and defilements stimulated by sense contact. As much as we see it 
as normal, that with all our weak spots we are prone to 
experiencing these impingements as obstacles. Still there is 
nothing as difficult to handle as our interest and desire for the 
opposite sex. Don’t think that I didn’t have this problem. Of 
course I did, with all its impli cations. But I tried to look at it, 
asking, “Hmm…, what’s the reason  for my desire?” We can see 
sexuality as a biological fact for all living beings. Although it is a 
natural instinct, this doesn’t prevent us from having to look for 
means to deal with it. Could we make our feelings in this area 
change? We might think, “No, th at’s completely beyond our 
capabilities.” But that still doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t be 
careful with it and train to deal with these feelings of desire. 
 
Sometimes when we suddenly get into contact with desire, 
we are completely taken by surprise  that strong feelings such as 
these are possible. In a situation like this we are taken back by 
worldly feelings dominating us. We need to take hold of these 
feelings and relate to them in  a new way. We can change our 
perception by turning it towards reflections about the unbeautiful, 
non-self-sufficient, non-durable nature  of things, or the very fact 
that there is not a personality or a self in them at all. You can 
bring the images of dead bodies to mind in order to counter the 
perception of the body as attractive and beautiful. Reflect on these 
images, but don’t expect sexual desi re to vanish completely. But 
at least it might change to the point where you can breathe again.

Just like when you come up and ta ke a deep breath after having 
dived under water for quite some  time. When you can breathe, 
your strength comes back to you again.  
 
So reflections on death can reduce sexual desire and the 
delight in romantic objects, but it won’t make desire disappear 
completely since the seeds for it are still in us. This practice is 
strengthening, so don’t give up. D on’t forget to build up a solid 
foundation and try to sustain awareness and focus of mind as a 
steady basis. We focus our awar eness continually. Sometimes we 
may feel ashamed, but there are also times when we feel pleased. 
So we just take the experience of  feeling ashamed as an object of 
our awareness. 
 
Eventually we will be able to  sustain our minds in being 
aware steadily. Equipped with sati  and sampajañña, we focus on 
the body and its conditioned nature. We can bring up the image of 
our own corpse in our mind and focus on it. Staying in the 
experience of the present moment, the paccuppanna-dhamma (the 
reality of the presen t moment) will grow in our mind. The mind 
won’t go astray into the past and future. It won’t pay attention to 
things that are already gone or  yet to come. It won’t worry 
whether a situation is go ing to be like this or like that. All that is 
left is the present moment. Our mind is like a flame when the 
wind is stilled. The flame is unmo ved and upright in itself and 
blazes light into all directions, when we are fully present. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether we have our eyes closed or open, 
or what is our particular posture – we always have the feeling that 
we are refuge unto ourselves. Still, an experience like this may 
not always be good – it still has its negative sides. (In my case,) I 
took it as an experience that comes entirely by itself. I hadn’t tried

to force it to arise. It all came by itself. The experience that arose 
was similar to what is called obhasa, a bright light or clear 
radiance, which is considered to be one of the vipassanupakilesas41. What arose was a bright radiance and happiness in 
myself. But it wasn’t the case at all, that I got deluded or carried 
away with it. This happiness was simply there by itself, even 
when resting or sleeping. What it is, and when it comes, one 
doesn’t know. There is simply the experience of it, an experience 
of uninterrupted wakefulness that sustains itself all through the 
day and night. Even when the b ody sleeps, it re sts in this 
happiness. All this comes by itself. 
 
An experience of bliss like this can last for a period of one 
or two days, and then it may ch ange again. There is nothing 
unusual about this. Things simply change. The happiness in this 
experience isn’t the usual happiness based on liking and disliking. 
It is the rapture and gladness that the Buddha calls piti, an ongoing joy throughout the day and night, whether sleeping or 
awake. There is nothing to compare with this happiness. If we 
have such an experience of piti, we need to establish the 
awareness in ourselves that, having  arisen, an experience like this 
will also be subject to change, and we need to uphold mindfulness 
and stay with this awareness of change. 
 
Over long periods of time, our experience will indeed 
change, maybe even to extreme, incomparable, heavy suffering. 
But we should sustain our mindfulness, saying, “Oh, this suffering 
is really suffering.” Thus we re main mindful of it. We see and 
watch, knowing that having arisen the suffering must also cease. 
 
41  Vipassanupakilesa (Pali): ten defilements or corruptions that hinder true 
insight, such as abundant feelings of energy, bliss etc.

Seeing suffering in this way is actually quite fun. We see it, 
“Suffering all day, suffering all night: Oooh…!” We want to cry, 
but there is no point in crying. We want to laugh, but  there is no 
point in laughing. There is only suffering in its genuine form, 
taking its turn as a normal experience. And we observe it, 
knowing that having arisen, it will also have to cease again. 
 
This is what we can feel when we really observe 
ourselves. After a while things will change again. Sometimes, 
after one or two days, our experience will go towards happiness 
again – happiness in the morni ng, happiness in the evening, 
walking, sitting, standing we experi ence happiness. We feel that 
our task is only to watch and follow this experience by knowing 
and seeing, keeping up mindfulness over long periods of time. 
Then, when we sense that we have been doing our task in 
practising this way long enough, we  sit down in meditation. We 
sit and develop samadhi. We sit with mindfulness well 
established. All by ourselves we keep sitting. And then, another 
change may take place: We experience peace, coolness and 
tranquility. We aren’t concerned with our body, we experience a 
feeling of lightness of the body as if there was not a “me”, not a 
“self”. There is complete lightness. This is a refreshing and 
cooling experience. One feels peaceful and secluded. The 
sankharas are stilled, all the prolif erations have ceased. The 
continuous changes of ups and downs and liking and disliking 
have disappeared.  
 
This is not something that we have created by ourselves, it 
is where the practice takes us if we follow the natural course of 
our training. If you are determined to practise in a similar way, be 
aware that experiences like these can only arise specifically in the 
course of one’s individual practice.  
7

If you want to follow this path, don’t follow it in a worldly 
way. This won’t be much good. Just like the Buddha warned his 
five first disciples not to take the path of worldly, unenlightened 
people, who follow merely thei r own moods. Don’t follow your 
moods. Be ahead of your moods. If something satisfies you, see it 
just as a state of mind. If somethi ng frustrates you, see it just as a 
state of mind. If you are pleased with something, it is simply one 
of the ways that pleasure manifest s. Don’t give way to relating to 
these experiences in a deluded way. 
 
  We need to walk following the footsteps of the Buddha 
in terms of knowing, knowing ourselves and knowing for 
ourselves, just as expressed in this little Thai saying: 
 
 
Know how to 
Look and figure it out 
Try and speak it out 
Go and carry it out 
 
 
So, today, as you have come to  show your respect to me, 
I’d like to say that I don’t take these ceremonies as too important 
for me as a person, but still they are a nice expression of our 
relationship towards each other wh en we are living together. As 
for now, I don’t have any more points of reflection for our 
journey together. May this be useful to your understanding in 
some way or another. Your listening is a chance for us to get in 
touch with each other – may we also work on our practice in the 
same way. 
 
***

Look and figure it out 
Try and speak it out 
Go and carry it out

Glossary ∗
 
agati-dhamma (Pali): biased views, ways of understanding and 
behaviour,  wrong courses of perception. Arises out of desire, anger, 
fear and ignorance. 
Ajahn Buddhadasa: A highly respected Thai monk who lived 
from 2449-2536 (1906-1993), and founded Suan Mokh monastery in 
Chaya province, Southern Thailand. Known throughout the world for 
his all-encompassing, contemporary, and highly accessible teachings. 
akaraniyakicca (Pali): The four things never to be done by a 
Bhikkhu (sexual intercourse, stealing, killing and falsely claiming 
superhuman qualities). 
anagarika (Pali): A homeless one; one who enters the holy life 
without formally entering the Sangha. 
anusasana (Pali): Advice given to new Bhikkus as part of the 
ordination ceremony. Comprises the four akaraniyakicca and the four  
nissaya. 
anatta (Pali): Non-self, not-self. One of the Three Characterisctics 
anicca (Pali): Impermanence. 
arahant (Pali): One who has attained nibbana. 
ariya (Pali): Literally: noble. 
ariyapuggala (Pali): Literally: noble person; Noble Enlightened 
Being. A person who has reached one of the four stages of 
enlightenment. 
ariya-sangha (Pali): Sangha in the highest sense: the group of 
Noble Enlightened Beings (ariyapuggalas). 
ariyavamsa (Pali): Literally: the noble lineage – the lineage of 
enlightened beings; specifically defined by the Buddha as those who 
possess the qualities of contentment and fewness of wishes.    
Bhikkhu (Pali): Literally: beggar; or one who sees the danger in   
samsara. Buddhist monk. 
 
∗ For the sake of simplicity, in this edition all Pali-words are given in ordinary 
English spelling, omitting special diacritical signs.

bhojane mattaññuta (Pali): Knowing the right amount in eating, 
or in consumption of other requisites. 
dana (Pali): The quality of generosity, and the act of giving. 
deva (Pali): Heavenly beings, angels, gods.  
Dhamma (Pali): (Sanskrit: Dharma) The ultimate truth of reality; the 
teachings about this truth; and the practice leading to its realization. 
Specifically refers to the Buddha’s teaching or doctrine. 
Dhamma-Vinaya (Pali): The name the Buddha gave to his own 
dispensation. 
dukkha (Pali): Suffering, unsatisfactoriness or stress. The central term 
in the Four Noble Truths.  
dukkha vedana (Pali): Unpleasant or painful feeling. 
Four Noble Truths (Pali): The first and central teaching of the 
Buddha about dukkha, its origin, cessation and the path leading towards 
its cessation. Complete understanding of the Four Noble Truths is 
equivalent to the attainment of nibbana. 
Going Forth: see pabbaja.  
khandha (Pali): The five aggregates, or basic constituents of life: 
rupa (form), vedana (feeling), sañña (perception or memory), sankhara 
(volitional formations), viññana (sense-consciousness). 
kilesa (Pali): Defilements, stains, afflictions or obscurations of the 
heart. Their various forms are traditionally summed up as greed, 
aversion and delusion. 
hiri (Pali): Sense of shame towards doing wrong; see ottappa. 
Holy Life (Pali: brahmacariya): Literally: the Brahma-conduct; a 
term for the monastic life that stresses the vow of  celibacy.  
Jataka (Pali): A collection of stories about the Buddha’s past lives, 
that forms a part oft the Buddhist canonical scriptures. 
lokadhamma (Pali): The eight Worldly Dhammas: praise and 
blame, gain and loss, fame and disrepute, happiness and unhappiness. 
These can be divided into agreeable and disagreeable phenomena 
(ittharammana and anittharamana dhamma). 
Luang Por (Thai): Literally venerable father; a respectful way of 
addressing seniour and elderly monks.   
Luang Pu (Thai): Literally venerable grandfather; a respectful way of 
addressing seniour monks that are very old.

magga-phala-nibbana (Pali): The path, fruition and full 
attainment of nibbana. 
metta (Pali): Loving-kindness, goodwill, friendliness. 
namadhamma (Pali): Mental phenomena as opposed to 
rupadhamma, the phenomena of the physical world. 
nibbana (Pali): (Sanskrit: nirvana) The extinction or complete fading 
away of all defilements, the complete ending of suffering, the ultimate 
fulfillment of the Buddhist path. 
nissaya (Pali): The four dependences on which a Bhikkhu’s life is 
founded (almsfood, robes made from cloth used to wrap corpses, 
dwelling at the foot of a tree, and fermented urine as medicine). 
nivarana (Pali): The five hindrances in meditation: sensual desire, illwill, sloth and torpor, restlessness and agitation, doubt and uncertainty. 
ottappa (Pali): Wholesome fear of wrong-doing; see hiri. 
pabbajita (Pali): Literally: One Gone Gorth; a Samana; a 
contemplative; see pabbaja. 
pabbaja (Pali): Ordination as a novice (Pali: Samanera). Going Forth 
from the household-life to the life of a Samana, a contemplative. 
pañña (Pali): Wisdom; discernment. 
pariyatti-dhamma (Pali): The study of the scriptures. 
Patimokkha (Pali): The 227 major rules of the Vinaya, recited 
fortnightly by the Bhikkhus. 
Patimokkhasamvara (Pali): The practice of restraining one’s 
actions within the 227 rules of the Patimokkha.
patipatti-dhamma (Pali): Practicing according to the scriptures. 
Right View (Pali: samma ditthi): The first of the eight factors of the 
Noble Eightfold Path, the path leading to nibbana. In the highest sense 
to have Right View means to understand the Four Noble Truths. 
rupa (Pali): form. 
rupadhamma (Pali): the physical world, as opposed to  
namadhamma. 
saccadhamma (Pali): The truth of reality. 
saddha (Pali): Confidence, faith or trust. 
Sangha (Pali): The monastic community. 
sankhara (Pali): Conditioned phenomena of the mind; proliferations 
of the mind; (occassionally) all conditioned phenomena.

samadhi (Pali): Concentration. The development of sustained, 
blissful, unified, one-pointed awareness on a meditation object, leading 
to tranquility. 
samaggi (Pali): Harmony, unity. 
Samana (Pali): Peaceful one, contemplative, renunciant, ascetic, 
recluse. 
Samanera (Pali): Novice. 
sampajañña (Pali): All-around awareness and clear comprehension. 
The Thai usage as “roo dtua” also means consciousness. 
samsara (Pali): The round of birth and death. 
sati (Pali): Mindfulness and recollection. 
sati-pañña (Pali): Mindfulness and wisdom. 
sila (Pali): Moral conduct, ethical behaviour. 
sukha vedana (Pali): Pleasant feeling. 
tanha (Pali): Craving or desire, sometimes translated as wanting. 
Three Characteristics: anicca, dukkha, anatta. 
upadana (Pali): The tendency to hold on to things, such as thoughts 
that something is one’s own or belongs to one. 
upajjhaya (Pali): Ordination preceptor. 
upasampada (Pali): Ordination as a Bhikkhu. 
upekkha (Pali): Equanimity. 
vassa (Pali): The three lunar months of the rainy season. The  
Bhikkhus observe an annual “retreat” for this period, passing every 
dawn within the same monastery or residence. 
vedana (Pali): Feeling. Either sukha-, dukkha-, or upekkha-vedana 
Vinaya (Pali): Training and discipline undertaken by the Buddhist 
practitioner; or, the Bhikkhus’ discipline with its 227 major rules. 
viññana (Pali): Sense consciousness. 
Worldly Dhammas: see lokadhamma.

About Luang Por Liem  
 
Luang Por Liem T hitadhammo is a Buddhist monk in the 
Thai Forest Tradition. He was bor n in Sri Saket Province in the 
Northeast of Thailand on the 5 th of November 1941. After higher 
ordination at twenty years of age,  Luang Por practised in several 
village monasteries throughout the Northeast until he joined the 
Forest Tradition in 1969. He took up the training under Luang Pu 
Chah, who later became one of the most famous monks in the 
country, and whose reputation and influence has continued to 
spread throughout the world, even today. Living under Luang Pu 
Chah’s guidance in Wat Nong Pah Pong in Ubon Province, Luang 
Por Liem soon became one of his closest disciples. After Luang 
Pu Chah became severely ill in 1982, he entrusted Luang Por 
Liem to lead the monastery. S hortly thereafter, as Luang Pu 
Chah’s illness prevented him fr om speaking, the Sangha of Wat 
Nong Pah Pong appointed Luang Por Liem to take over the 
abbotship. He fulfils this duty up to the present day, keeping the 
heritage of Luang Pu Chah’s Dh amma and characteristic ways of 
monastic training available for monks, nuns and lay disciples.  
 
Already for the second time Luang Por Liem was given an 
honorary monastic title by His Maje sty the King of Thailand. He 
is presently known as Tan Chao  Khun Pra Rachabhavanavigrom. 
For the Sangha at Wat Pah Nanachat (Luang Pu Chah’s 
International Forest Monastery for training monks using English 
as the language of instruction) . Luang Por Liem is not only a 
dearly respected teacher and guide in the monastic life, but has for 
the last ten years also conduc ted every monast ic ordination 
ceremony as the preceptor.  
7