## Awakening

Meditation

Take up a comfortable sitting position, keeping the back upright. Begin by bringing attention to the body sitting, sensing into the physicality of body, the sensations which are our direct experience of body. Are there any places where there is some strong or obvious sensation? If so, we try to relax or relieve these strong sensations as much as possible.

Now, as you are attentive to the sensations of body, can you just be present with whatever sensation is there? Or do you notice the mind drifting into interpretation, judging, liking or disliking? Just observe what is happening. As a point of reference you can settle your attention on the sensation of breathing, just silently observing the inhalation and exhalation.

Now for a moment bring attention to the feeling tone. Is the most prominent feeling tone pleasant, or unpleasant or neutral? Can you just be clearly and openly aware of that feeling tone, beyond judgement? Then go back to focusing attention on the sensation of breathing once again.

For a moment bring attention to the condition of the mind. Can you distinguish a particular condition of mind? Is the mind calm or busy, clear or cloudy? Can you be clearly and openly present with that condition, silently observing?

• • •

This chapter’s theme is awakening. This may seem like an anti-climax, because we all know that real awakening is a direct personal experience, not something we can just talk about (in fact, all we can do is talk about it). The Buddha had his own unique experience of awakening, although he didn’t talk much about it. There’s a danger that talking too much around the subject may only lead to mental speculation and thus give a wrong direction. On the other hand, providing at least some guidelines and explanation may give some inspiration. As long as we keep in mind that these are only words which can’t really explain or encompass the whole experience, words may give us the right attitude. If awakening is presented as ‘the void’, or ‘nothingness’, or something ethereal, we fill in the blanks ourselves with our own ideas.

I deliberately chose this word ‘awakening’ as a translation of the Pali word ‘nibbāna’. I could have chosen the word ‘enlightenment’, but I think it can be misinterpreted. The problem is that ‘enlightenment’ is a noun; it’s a thing, an object we want to get, and thus the word triggers our old ways of thinking. Years ago when I went off to Thailand for spiritual practice, I was actually going there to ‘get’ something like enlightenment. I was going to sacrifice a whole month of travel, get enlightenment, put it in my rucksack and bring it home with me. Customs authorities wouldn’t require me to declare my enlightenment – everything else, but not enlightenment. It’s duty-free. What would happen if they asked whether I had anything to declare, and I replied, ‘Just my enlightenment’? They’d probably lock me up – they wouldn’t want people like that, just ordinary tourists.

The word ‘awakening’ is part of a verb, it is an activity, a waking-up process. We can even reflect on the analogy of waking up in the morning – consciousness begins to become clearer, it tunes in to reality more and more, until you recognize that this is how it is. The limitation of that analogy is that when we wake up in the morning, our self-consciousness usually wakes up too. Consciousness is not only waking up and seeing the sun shining or rain falling; there’s also a sense of ‘I’ coming into consciousness – ‘I am feeling good’, or ‘I’m feeling bad’. But you could try waking up in the morning without your self-consciousness, giving it a holiday, giving yourself a break. Can you do that? Maybe you could come closer to it if you’ve developed the Seven Factors of Awakening.

The Buddha delineated four successive stages of awakening. We don’t have to awaken all at once, so it’s not too overwhelming. The Buddha also gave an analogy: just as the shore of the ocean slopes gradually, so his teaching also inclines gradually towards nibbāna, awakening. Some Buddhist sects believe in instant enlightenment, not the gradual process of awakening. Maybe some people do have an instant or spontaneous awakening, but I think that even if they do, that experience still requires a certain development and filling out. One can have moments of clarity and glimpses of truth, but unless the experience becomes really grounded in our whole being, it’s just a flash of insight and that’s about it. It’s like when we wake up in the morning. We can have an ‘insight’ into how the day might be, but then we need to build our life around it. So even if we have an ‘awakening experience’, we still need to integrate it into spiritual practice, put it into our life and live it.

When I went to Thailand I just wanted to get enlightenment and go home again – still be my wonderful old self and enlightened too. The trouble was that when I was practising meditation, I realized my self actually wasn’t so wonderful after all – in fact, it was a real problem. The process of awakening entails awakening to the ultimate truth, which is beyond our selfhood, beyond our limiting grasping at self. Everybody can wake up in the morning to their self and their self-created view of the world; that’s what we do all the time. But to wake up to a world without self-distortion is quite different. It’s a radically different way of being.

The Buddha’s graduated teaching on the four stages of awakening is one way of giving people something practical to which they can relate. They can recognize that they are changing. Certain fetters, certain disturbances, certain ways of relating are gradually relinquished. The most important breakthrough is the uprooting of personality view. Recognizing that the self is really just an artificial creation and not an ultimate entity is the first really profound insight. It’s a very significant insight into impersonality.

The self is interpreted in different ways, but one primary interpretation is that it has control. This is my body, I can tell it what to do. This is my mind, I can tell my mind what to do. But if we look closer and more honestly, we see that we don’t always have control over our body. We’re certainly not always able to control our mind; in fact, it seems to have a will of its own. Try to direct it somewhere and often it doesn’t go there; try to think of something and you’ve forgotten it. You soon realize that you have only limited control over your body and mind, that they are not ultimately a permanent self.

We can have some intellectual appreciation of this. We recognize that there are certain uncontrolled impulses. An American psychiatrist wrote a book called ‘Emotional Intelligence’, which is about being mindful or more aware of our emotions. He coined the phrase ‘being emotionally hijacked’. Some people don’t know themselves very well and their emotions take them over, hijack them. Realizing this may encourage us to bring more awareness to the conditions of mind and emotional life. Most people so identify with their emotions that they see those emotions as themselves, and are thus enslaved by them. However, by realizing the impermanent and impersonal nature of body and mind, we release this identification habit and see just conditions arising and passing, just bodily sensations and mental conditions, without grasping at a fixed self-entity.

If one knows one’s own mind fairly well and has been able to observe the conditions of mind that arise on different occasions, one can be in those moments of change and still be very confident and at ease with them. We can ride that wave of change with the breath; if we’re just with that breathing process as it’s happening, the moment of change can be quite exhilarating. We recognize that we can’t really know where the wave is going to break, but we can know the general possibilities. We can’t say exactly that ‘this mood’ or ‘that thought’ will arise, but by observing the conditions of mind that do arise, we have a general idea of where the wave will go. Surfers can’t say exactly where a wave is going to break, but if they’ve experienced many waves, they have a pretty good idea. They can almost predict where a wave will go.

So if we’ve been developing the Seven Factors of Awakening – especially mindfulness or awareness, being able to observe the conditions of mind and conditions of body – we have a pretty good idea of what’s going to happen, although we can’t say exactly. We may observe that a lot of these conditions arise through causal processes, without any ‘me’, just impersonal cause and effect processes. We can open to the way the mind really is, the way the body really is. Our grasping at selfhood feeds on habit and predictability, and needs to preserve its familiar ground. That’s why fear is such a big emotion for people who grasp very strongly at the self; they are afraid of the familiar order falling apart, of losing control of things. It’s a very great relief when you don’t have to keep up that charade of ‘me and my special body/mind, and my particular patterns of behaving’. Of course, this doesn’t lead to total chaos either; we’re still within the cause and effect relationship. So the way the Buddha explains awakening in the conventional sense is as a causal process – develop these particular qualities, and this will lead to insight and the uprooting of the various ‘outflows of selfhood’ (āsava). When we’ve recognized some of the games the self can play, we no longer accept them so easily. We ‘wake up’ to some of the ways in which selfhood is trying to block us from seeing truth: sense desires, the coming into existence of certain conditions of mind or being, or holding set views. Selfhood tries many ways to disguise the truth.

The Buddha didn’t talk very much about awakening, but when he did he referred to it in very practical terms. For example, the word ‘nibbāna’ literally means ‘going out’, in the sense that a flame goes out. You could make a play on words by saying, ‘The candle has nibbāna-ed’. But if we translate it too literally, ‘nibbāna’ becomes ‘extinction’ – we’re going to be extinguished. This may sound exciting to nihilists or annihilationists – ‘I won’t be anything, just a puff of ash.’ But the Buddha’s teaching was not annihilation and not eternalism. He taught the middle way between those two extremes. If we translate ‘nibbāna’ too literally as ‘extinction’, we may give the wrong impression and simply attract nihilists. Eternalists may go to Christianity, which offers eternal bliss. But annihilationists would be attracted to Buddhism, where they can be extinguished.

But in a sense there is a kind of extinction, because nibbāna can be said to be the extinction or cessation of greed, aversion and delusion, the cessation of craving and ignorance. Thus it is the cessation or extinction of certain aspects of selfhood with which we’re familiar. On the other hand, the Buddha also gave some very positive explanations of nibbāna as the ultimate well-being, and he talked about it in a more mystical sense as the unborn, the undying, the unformed, the uncreated, the unconditioned. But what is that? How can we know it? What we know are the formed, the created, the conditioned. That’s where our practice is, within the realm of what’s created and conditioned. And so we don’t go directly to the unconditioned, but rather we observe any condition and realize that it arises and passes away. We actually realize by a process of elimination – not extinction, but elimination – that if nibbāna is not that, then it must be something else. If we see the conditional arising of selfhood – the incessant ‘I like this’, ‘I don’t like that’, ‘I like the body’, ‘I am the body’, ‘I am the thoughts’ – we realize this is not the unconditioned. So we just turn away from those references to self and recognize that the unconditioned is somewhere towards the selfless. We can get a hint of it through awareness, by just observing what the conditions of the body and mind are, by not going into ‘I like it’, ‘I don’t like it’, ‘It’s good’, ‘It’s bad’, but just being directly with a particular experience as it is. Then that sense of ‘I’ does not arise, but there is still clear presence of mind. There is a quality of knowing, there is some clarity and collectedness, not clouded by the sense of ‘I’.

In the Buddha’s time there were many different teachers and teachings, and different spiritual seekers, and some of those seekers would go to the Buddha and inquire about his teachings. Once somebody came and asked him for a simple, very succinct teaching. The Buddha answered, ‘In the seeing, just the seeing; in the hearing, just the hearing; in the cognizing, just the cognizing.’ When we can do that there’s no more self-referencing and no things which the self can grasp. It’s not ‘me’ seeing or hearing, it’s just seeing, just hearing, just being with the immediate experience. It sounds very easy, but try to do it – ‘Am I seeing?’ ‘Am I not seeing?’ ‘Am I not thinking about ‘I’?’

However, developing the meditation exercises gives us a different orientation in our mind – just being able to observe the breathing, for example, not observing ‘me’ breathing. I could sit and observe ‘me’ breathing for the next thirty-five years, and that would probably just inflate my ego – ‘look, I am an exceptionally accomplished breath meditator’. But if I’m just observing the breathing process without that interference or addition of self-reference, something different happens – there is just breathing. We’re coming closer to that direct experience of awakening to the unconditioned.

And we may sometimes have a kind of spontaneous awakening. What we awaken to then is the truth, which is always here. If it wasn’t always here, or if it was only here on Sundays and Thursdays, it wouldn’t be the truth. It would just be Sunday truth or Thursday truth, but not the ultimate truth. But it is here all the time, and every once in a while when the self is on holiday or caught off-guard, there may be a moment of clarity – quite a different experience. In effect, this can happen at any time. Meditation does not create such moments, but when practised within a comprehensive spiritual path, it can create the most fertile ground for awakening to happen.

You have probably read some Zen stories. They’re very inspiring to read: some monk is just brushing his teeth or washing his bowl and – Aha! – he’s enlightened. Note that his previous thirty or forty years of meditation in the freezing snow are rarely mentioned. It’s always just that awakening experience; wow, he’s got it! The benefit of these stories is that they point out that awakening can happen at any time when there is mindfulness and concentration.

The word ‘nibbāna’ was translated as ‘extinction’ by the early scholar translators of the Pali Canon. Many of them were not Buddhists and never practised Buddhism, so they could only rely on the literal meaning of the words they read, and that’s what ‘nibbāna’ meant literally: extinction. But there’s another interpretation of the word which is derived from the Hindu belief system. Going out (‘nibbāna’) referred to a flame going out, but in the Hindu belief system a flame is a manifestation of the fire element, a fundamental elemental quality. Earth, fire, water and air are the four primary elemental qualities which are always present. Everything physical contains these elemental qualities, so our physical body shares them with the floor, the walls, the trees, everything. This is very good in environmental terms – we share this body with the trees and the rest of nature. We’re part of nature, and we’ll go back to those elements again when this body’s life force finishes and it breaks up. If we apply this to the concept of a candle going out (taking care to avoid the extreme of eternalism instead of annihilationism), the candle flame is simply non-manifest when it goes out. But it hasn’t totally gone. It’s not totally extinct, not totally vanished. It’s just non-manifest any longer, not apparent or visible.

The elemental qualities of earth, fire, water and air are inherently present, and sometimes they manifest as an object. An empty glass is primarily the earth or hardness quality, manifesting temporarily in the form of glass. When it breaks it is no longer a glass, but the earth quality still persists. That doesn’t mean that it is gone; it is just not manifest as a glass anymore. This is the sense of ‘nibbāna’ – a ‘going out’ of what we normally consider to be ‘myself’, ‘my’ body, ‘my’ mind, a ‘going out’ of the usual identification with physicality and mentality as being my self.

A more refined explanation of awakening or nibbāna is that there are two kinds: there is awakening ‘with residue’, meaning being awakened with a living body, or while still alive; and there is awakening ‘without residue’ when the awakened person dies and the body breaks up. The first designation refers to the condition of awakening with the usual expressions of body/mind still intact. The awakened person still has the five aggregates – body, feeling, perception, mental formations, consciousness. If we translate ‘nibbāna’ as ‘extinction’ in this case, it could be interpreted as meaning that somebody who is awakened simply disappears as if by magic. However, it really refers to the fact that although there still is a body/mind complex, there’s no self-identification with it. So in a way this normal designation of a person has ‘gone out’, it’s not manifesting anymore. But that doesn’t mean the total extinction of body and mind, just the extinction of the personal identification with body and mind as ‘me’ and ‘mine’.

We have to be careful to avoid falling into some form of eternalism, for example by thinking that when we realize awakening, we go to some eternal Buddha-realm, are whisked off into a non-manifest realm of Buddhahood. Indeed, some people have referred to nibbāna with residue in those terms. However, I think that what the Buddha is trying to point out is that it’s something we can no longer designate, or which is non-manifest according to our usual terms of reference. It is very hard to define because it is the unconditioned, while we are only familiar with the conditioned. There is not the usual reference to a subject, a person who can know what the unconditioned is. The unconditioned can be experienced, but it can’t actually be demonstrated. It’s impossible to show someone the unconditioned. It doesn’t manifest in this self-referential realm.

So we must go back to our practical understanding of what we designate as ‘the conditioned’. What are the conditions of our selfhood? Maybe that’s why the Buddha designated four different stages of awakening. The first stage is the ‘stream-enterer’, which at least is attainable in this lifetime. On one occasion Ajahn Chah said something like, ‘If you live a whole lifetime with spiritual practice, with morality, diligence and meditation practice, at the end of your life you should be awakened. You should be at least a stream-enterer.’ If you can devote a certain percentage of your time and energy to spiritual practice, you should be awakened. If you’re not, you obviously haven’t been practising properly – not enough energy or morality or meditation.

I think Ajahn Chah was trying to make awakening more accessible to people, because there is a risk that we may raise it up to be such a high and lofty thing that it seems unattainable. It’s the carrot up there; we can never reach it, but we will still soldier on anyway, ever-suffering Theravadans. If awakening seems too remote, people will believe they can never be awakened because it’s too far away, or they’re incapable of it, or something similar – that ‘I’ again. But Ajahn Chah was trying to point out that awakening is something which is attainable, which is realizable. With right view, with right effort, it’s not totally impossible. It’s a different way of being, of perceiving, of manifesting (or non-manifesting). If we’re still functioning within the realm of ‘me practising, me wanting to get better and more developed, me getting closer to awakening’, the carrot of awakening will keep moving away, because we’re still referring to ‘me, me, me’, ‘I, I, I’. But instead we can just come back to those direct experiences when the sense of ‘I’ falls away and doesn’t need to manifest any more. It doesn’t need to be there all the time. You can wake up in the morning and say, ‘Hey, self, take a rest today. Sleep in’, and then you can just see, hear, smell, taste, touch, think, without the self being involved. I think this does happen quite spontaneously on occasions, but usually it’s outside the realm of our control. The best we can do is to create the right conditions for its arising – the Eightfold Path, the Seven Factors of Awakening. This creates the right environment for it, but then we have to let go and trust.

In one of the scriptures the Buddha gave the analogy of a ship that’s been wrecked on the beach. There’s no need to take it apart; if it’s just left, it’ll slowly decay by itself. The analogy is that we don’t have to dismantle our self; if we just keep observing what is actually there – just breathing, just seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking – the grasping of self gradually fades away. It doesn’t need to be used any more; it doesn’t have a place to be used. It just takes a holiday. And if we can abide with that, the habit of grasping of self gradually loses its self-importance. It doesn’t manifest any more, it ‘un-manifests’. Unfortunately, many people interpret awakening as some powerful and special experience. Instead of patiently and steadily uprooting the various seeds of selfhood, they aim for an intense experience which transports them to ‘awakened land’ to live happily ever after.

The insights leading to awakening are into impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality. A primary quality of selfhood is constancy. It seems always to be here, but when you look closely at what is there, you realize that it’s not as constant as it appears. You notice that what we call ‘my body’ is just physically changing processes, and what we call ‘mind’ is just changing mental processes. You begin to wake up to the truth of impermanence, change, transience – there are only changing processes, so where is the ever-constant self? Believing in this selfhood is deeply unsatisfactory, since we are continuously disappointed by this false view; it is out of tune with reality. And if this illusion of selfhood is impermanent and unsatisfactory, can I really hold onto it as my dearest self?

We could say conventionally that there are many different selves. If one takes a holiday, another temporary one may fill in for it. That is, I have a multitude of selves, but ‘they’ manifest depending upon the conditions or the situation. There is not one solid, permanently-abiding entity. This doesn’t mean that there’s absolutely no self, just that there’s no permanently abiding selfhood. The Buddha himself referred to a ‘sense of self’ when he said, ‘I remember this’ and ‘I feel like that’. But of course, he knew that ‘I’ is just a convention, a point of reference, and not a permanently abiding ‘I’ or selfhood.

In the first level of awakening, the three basic fetters that are broken are personality view, attachment to rites and rituals, and doubt. If you meet this requirement you’ve made it, you’ve entered the stream. But the ending of those fetters is based upon insight into impermanence so deep that we fully embody it. We live on the crest of that wave of change, or we flow with the ever-changing stream of change. This also applies to our spiritual practice, because our selfhood takes on different disguises. Perhaps the spiritual exercises which worked previously will not work as before. With a fuller realization of impermanence we become more creative, vigilant and dexterous in our practice. The danger of getting too attached to a system or technique is that we can identify with it and then hold on to it, ‘Here I am, I’ve only developed three of the Factors of Awakening so far. Give me another few years to get to the fifth, then the sixth, the seventh.’ By thinking in that way we may be identifying with a developing spiritual self – ‘I’m at this level’, ‘I can do this’, or ‘I’ve got this far’ – and thus turn these spiritual exercises into another kind of self-reinforcement.

As insights begin to deepen greed and aversion are lessened, and gradually the four ‘outflows of selfhood’ become more rarefied and less fixed ways of relating. We see through them. To be manifest and functioning they need a constant selfhood, with its views and its habitual coming into existence in different forms. I think the term ‘stream-entry’ is a very good analogy. Some people operating in the attainment-oriented mode think they have to ‘get’ to stream-entry, but the whole point is that one has to go with the flow of the stream. It’s not a matter of just getting a certain insight or reaching a certain stage; we have to be able to flow with that new way of being, live our life in the flow of awakening, the flow of impermanence, the flow of non-self. This means that our life is transformed. But if we have not prepared the ground for that through skilful living, mental development and wise self-knowing, this transformation is only temporary. As the saying goes, ‘It is relatively easy to be awakened, but it is hard to stay awakened’.

The analogy of ‘entering the stream’ means entering the stream flowing to full awakening. Some people want at least to reach this first level because they think that otherwise they’ll have wasted their time, as those who don’t at least reach stream-entry can always slip back down to the suffering of the hell realms. (Of course, even if they did, they would still have generated good kamma for their future existences). But with stream-entry there’s no more falling back, you’re in the stream to awakening, straight on course for nibbāna. At the very worst, if you’re a really recalcitrant stream-enterer, you’ll be reborn in the human realm seven more times. Isn’t that a relief? Only seven more mortgages!

Of course, it can be hard to judge attainments. I remember that people in Thailand had many different views about people’s attainments. If a teacher was very good he was obviously a fully-awakened arahant. But if he fell from grace there was bewilderment – how could that happen to an arahant? Well, someone may have a profound insight and be quite transformed for a while, but unless he can really ground that insight in ordinary life and flow with it, selfhood will emerge somewhere else. He has realized the process, but hasn’t learned to flow with it; he has confirmed it, clutched it and made it into something solid – ‘I am now enlightened, so it’s okay.’ But that’s missing the point. This is the problem of relating to spiritual practice from the goal-oriented attitude. Unless there is a truly deep and well-integrated realization of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality, the habitually grasping self is still active to grasp at anything, even spiritual experiences. This analogy of being a stream-enterer means we have to enter the flowing stream of truth.

Quite a few people I met in Thailand were practising to ‘get to stream-entry’, but there seemed to be something a little doubtful about this. Ajahn Chah’s main approach to teaching was to provide people with the right way of living. He didn’t talk a lot about big breakthroughs to awakening. Sometimes he would even say the opposite, ‘Don’t get awakened too quickly. It won’t be fun any more.’ He placed greater emphasis on the way of practice, and this is actually what is in the Buddhist scriptures, where most of the teachings are about the path or the practice. Very rarely do they mention the result. Ajahn Chah’s approach was to give people a grounding in the fundamentals of living in this way, being in harmony with it, and then awakening would happen quite naturally.

It’s very hard to judge other people because we have different interpretations and sometimes very fixed ideas. It is believed in Thailand that arahants never touch the ground – they hover above it. But I think this is taking things too literally. Arahants floating above the world seem not to be of the world any more. They are still in the world, but not of the world. In a way they are beyond it – but they still eat, still go to the toilet, still take a shower. So to take the notion that they hover too literally is to miss the point.

There’s an interesting story, not from the scriptures but from the later texts. There was a very highly esteemed and honoured teacher. Everybody (himself included) thought that he was awakened because he was such a great teacher and gifted meditator. But one of his disciples was even more gifted and realized awakening first. The awakened disciple, with his great psychic powers, applied his mind to his teacher and realized that he was not quite awakened yet; he just thought he was because he was so famous. This was a bit embarrassing, of course, because he was the teacher, and it’s hard to go to your teacher and say, ‘Excuse me, teacher, but you’re not awakened yet.’ However, the disciple had a clever way of showing the teacher that he wasn’t awakened. He said to him, ‘I hear you’re really good at manifesting psychic images. How about making one of an elephant?’ So the teacher created an image of a raging elephant. Then the disciple said, ‘See if you can make the elephant come charging towards you.’ So he made the elephant come charging, and then he saw he was afraid – ‘Ah, there’s fear; I’m not awakened.’ But he was very close to awakening, so he could easily establish concentration and insight and was quickly awakened. He had been very close to awakening, but not quite there, so beware of thinking you are awakened. Conceit is one of the last fetters before awakening to the level of the arahant.

So rather than trying to explain too much about awakening, it’s at least possible to give some general idea of what its principles are. Maybe the realization that awakening is indeed possible will be an inspiration. Some degree of awakening can happen at any moment, and very likely quite a few people have had awakening experiences, but just didn’t recognize them as such. Suppose you didn’t have all those thoughts about yourself (if you observe your thoughts, you may have noticed that quite a few are about yourself). Just imagine how spacious your mind would be. Think of all the energy you wouldn’t waste thinking about yourself. So where would that energy go?

An American psychologist did some research into what are called ‘peak experiences’ – moments of clarity, not necessarily within any kind of religious tradition, but some very profound experiences people have had. He found that most of them didn’t want to have such an experience again, even though it was really transforming and very blissful, and so on. I think the reason was that they didn’t have a context for the experience. One woman who came to talk with me had had quite a profound experience of selflessness. When she was about eighteen she was out walking in the garden, and quite spontaneously lost her sense of being someone, of being a solid self. There was just oneness with the garden, the flowers and the butterflies, just bliss for some minutes. Then she came out of it and thought, ‘What is this? Who can I talk to about it?’ but she had nobody to talk to. That’s really sad, really tragic. So she kept it to herself for about forty years, and then she came to the monastery and had this talk with me. I said, ‘Oh yes, that’s a state of spontaneous unified consciousness. It happens sometimes.’ She was very relieved that I didn’t diagnose her as schizophrenic or something similar. Such an experience can happen in meditation or even outside it: people sometimes forget themselves spontaneously, because our selfhood is an artificial thing. These moments of selflessness are the way things really are, but we think they are moments of craziness They may sometimes be due to chemical imbalances in the body, but if we can recognize them in the right context, we know they are glimpses of the truth behind the illusion that the self presents to us as reality. We see things then as they really are, and if we know this within the right context we can use those experiences in a skilful way.

The Buddha points out that the mind has great possibilities. He gives us the map showing the way to truth – this is what awakening is like, this is what delusion is like. He allows us to see more clearly where we are and where we’re going. This can help us to benefit from the supports of spiritual practice. That woman wasn’t a Buddhist when she had her experience; it doesn’t require only Buddhist practice or only Buddhist interpretations. It can happen to anybody at any time. But the Buddha gives us a path of practice so that we can carefully prepare the right conditions to ensure this experience is not just a one-off, fleeting and sometimes confusing event. Through the ever-deepening development of the Seven Factors of Awakening, we increasingly uproot the basis of selfhood and awaken more fully to the truth.

Hopefully this gives us a better perspective on what awakening is, and some direction or point of reference which we can use to refer back to some of our experiences. Are we still in the self-centred conditioned mode? We can spend years and years developing spiritual practice, but still remain in that conditioned mode – ‘I’ve got more concentration, I’ve got deeper insight, more wisdom.’ The real wisdom, the real insight, is outside that – selfless, impersonal, transpersonal, beyond the influence of self.

I’m actually referring to two things here: a sense of self, and selfhood. Selfhood is expressed through the ‘outflows of selfhood’ – this is the selfhood we believe in as being an ultimate reality and to which we cling as being a permanent entity. When we see through this falsehood there is still a ‘sense of self’. I have a sense of self, but I know it’s only a sense, not the real self, so I can refer to it, but I can put it down too. It doesn’t become an obsession, though sometimes it does become an obstruction. The thinking, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching are more true without ‘me’ intruding and interpreting them, distorting them; when I realize that, I can just put ‘me’ down and be with the seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking. Being with those direct experiences lets that sense of self take a holiday.

That sense of self has its place too; it isn’t total delusion, but believing in it as an ultimate reality obstructs us from seeing the truth. The sense of self is only one part of the picture. If we begin to observe what’s going on in this mind and body, we can see that non-self is actually the bigger picture. We can learn to integrate that in harmony with a balanced sense of self. So hopefully this possibility of awakening may be awakened within you.