## 1. Mindfulness

Meditation

Take up a reasonably comfortable sitting position, keeping the back upright but not tense. Begin by bringing attention to the body as it sits, sensing into the body, becoming aware of the sensations which make up our direct experience of body.

Next we bring attention to the sensation of natural breathing, observing the inhalation and exhalation directly as they occur.

Now for a moment return attention to the bodily sensations. What is the feeling tone associated with those sensations? Is it pleasant, unpleasant or neutral, that is, neither pleasant nor unpleasant?

Then go back to focussing attention on the breathing once again.

Now, bring attention for a moment to the condition of the mind as it is right now. What is the degree of clarity, wakefulness or alertness of mind? What is the degree of busyness or quietness of mind? Is there some specific activity of mind which is obvious, such as thoughts about the future or memories of the past?

Then go back to focusing attention on the breathing once again.

• • •

The Four Attendings with Mindfulness

The first of the Seven Factors of Awakening is mindfulness. The topic of mindfulness is outlined in detail in two scriptures on the ‘Attendings with Mindfulness.’1 In these scriptures the Buddha is quoted as saying that this practice is the ‘direct path’ to awakening, and as adding that awakening could happen within as little as seven days! Of course, it is stated that one should practise deeply and directly, contemplating with persevering diligence, clearly knowing and mindful, free of worldly desires and discontent. This is not usually the kind of mindfulness with which most of us are familiar.

One author coined the phrase that the practice of mindfulness is the ‘Heart of Buddhist Meditation’. Generally, mindfulness practice and concentration are the two main pillars of Buddhist meditation. Some of the scriptures describe exercises for developing concentration, but the two scriptures referred to above give a very detailed presentation of the practice of developing mindfulness, which has become very much emphasized in meditation practice, especially insight meditation or vipassanā.

The four areas of our experience for developing mindfulness are the body, feeling tones, conditions of mind and dhammas, or specific mental phenomena. In practice we could take any one of these four areas, such as developing body awareness, and that could lead us to awakening. All four are not actually necessary. However, we may have to make a general study of all of them in order to discover the theme with which we are most comfortable; and even if we do attain some ‘success’ with developing mindfulness on one particular theme, it can still be helpful to have a more complete overview and practise in a broader context by developing awareness of all four themes. And even if we do have some success with one theme, it may only take us so far. It is implied in the scriptures that only development of mindfuIness on all four themes leads to higher realization. 2 At the very least, the developing of mindfulness on all four themes provides a good, rounded balance in our life, as well as in our spiritual practice.

In my view it’s not so difficult to have some sort of insight, even quite penetrating insights, into, say, the body or conditions of mind, but unless these insights are developed in the broader context of our whole life experience, they don’t last very long or are not very complete, authentic or substantial. Having a broader repertoire of meditation practices or exercises helps us to integrate these insights and allows them to penetrate wider areas of our life. For example, one of the primary insights is into impermanence. Someone can have quite deep insight into impermanence, into the changing body or changing conditions of mind, for example. However, the insight often stays related only to that limited experience – I know my mind is changing, or I know my body is changing, but this insight does not extend much deeper into my whole life. It is only a memory or abstract reflection for that time, that place, that experience.

I remember meeting a monk in Thailand who had been on a meditation retreat and had a truly deep insight into the changing of the body, which had really inspired him. He held up his hand and said, ‘I’ve really got to understand this before I die.’ He had had a moment of insight, but wanted to deepen it, I suppose to full awakening, before he died. I was quite impressed with that at first, but then I began to reflect on it and realized that while he had indeed had an insight, he was now chasing that insight rather than putting energy into cultivating the practice. He wanted to see the body really clearly as he had done before, but my experience over the years has been that this type of event never happens again in the same way. We have an insight, and there is clarity of mind and some wisdom develops, but this is just like seeing in one direction, and it will never happen like that again because the mind is changing. We have had that initial insight, but our practice really needs deepening or broadening. If we are still looking to replicate the insight, is that really impermanence? Even that insight is impermanent.

I think the real point of this development of mindfulness is putting our energy back into the whole process of developing clearer seeing and more awareness in general, rather than just achieving a specific insight. I prefer to use the word ‘awareness’ rather than ‘mindfulness’, which was first used in this sense in the Victorian era. It was a useful word then and maybe it is still useful even today, because it is not too ordinary and it explains the whole process quite well in one word – keeping in mind or heedfulness. But I personally prefer the word ‘awareness’, because it is one with which we’re all familiar – we’re aware of the word ‘awareness’! We can also appreciate that there are different degrees of awareness.

Awareness of body

So in this training, this development of awareness, if we have practised the meditation given at the beginning of this chapter, we have already developed some awareness of the body. I know my knee is getting sore or the cushion is getting hard. We are aware to a certain degree of the bodily sensations, but we can also put energy into developing that awareness of the body in a more sensitive and refined way. Not only is this an exercise in variety and refinement, noticing more sensations and more subtle sensations, but it also involves noticing what is common to all these sensations.

When we just refer to the body, we usually think of a concept: my body. I can close my eyes and think, ‘It looks like this, it’s short’, and so on. But going into the experience of sensation is something different, sometimes very different. I remember that once, after sitting for a ceremony for a couple of hours, my back began to ache. But I couldn’t get up and walk away, I couldn’t escape because I was front-stage, so I just had to be with that backache. I could recognize this kind of backache as familiar, but it was different too, especially because I was just trying to be present with it, rather than resist it or become angry with it. Just being with it was actually very peaceful. It wasn’t pleasant, but it was peaceful just to be with that sensation.

We can carry out this exercise formally by developing awareness of bodily sensations. The body is the general topic, but we know the body by sensation, by the sense of touch. We experience it by tactile sensation, hot and cold: for example – I went outside and it was cold, I came in here and it was hot. When we first sit down the cushion is soft, but after an hour or so it gets hard. This is the direct experience of the body. And there are a great variety of sensations. As I mentioned earlier, we can be aware not only of general bodily sensations, but perhaps also of some specific sensations. My back is all right, but my neck may be a bit sore. Some parts of the body may be reasonably comfortable and some not so comfortable. Being able to develop this exercise gives us the ability to go into the direct experience in all its dimensions. We all have our familiar habitual experiences. If I were to ask how you experience the body, you would probably bring to mind a familiar sensation. My familiar sensation is my knee – ‘Oh yes, it must be Ajahn Thiradhammo because it’s that same knee problem.’ But who had that experience of backache? I didn’t know that guy. That was not the same familiar sensation of body to which I relate to as being myself. On the one hand this can be quite liberating. When we begin to experience different dimensions of the body, we don’t have to hang on to its same old habits. Sometimes, though, we just take on new habitual patterns of body. But the whole point is to be able to see the body as it really is. That’s the ultimate point of mindfulness practice.

So although we may know the body to a certain degree, we may not really understand it as it actually is. For example, a common experience in meditation is that while most people are very familiar with their comfortable body, when it starts to become uncomfortable they have resistance rising. They don’t want to know that body; they want to know the comfortable body, not the uncomfortable one. But we are only able to develop awareness of the body fully through being aware of its changing aspects and facets, not just when it’s comfortable. The uncomfortable aspects are perhaps the ones that need the most investigation and exploring, because those are the ones we’re resisting. I didn’t want to sense my aching back. My first choice would have been to get up, stretch my back and lie down somewhere, but I couldn’t, so I had to sit there with the unpleasant back. And although it wasn’t pleasant, it was peaceful because I could open up to it, be with it.

There are various exercises with regard to this body awareness. The very first exercise in the scriptures about developing the attendings with mindfulness is breathing meditation. One brings awareness to the breathing process. One is aware when the breath is long or short, deep or shallow. Quite a significant amount of the scriptural explanation is devoted to breathing. Something as simple as breathing, which we do all the time, could be a very important source of insight. It’s actually breathing which keeps us alive, it’s the most immediate nutriment of our life. We can go without food or water for a while, but we can’t go without breath for five minutes.

There are also other exercises on the awareness of body, for example, awareness of how it moves – walking, standing, sitting, lying down, dressing, eating, drinking, going to the toilet, falling asleep, waking up, talking, etc. Here the body is being displayed or expressed in different ways. Then there are more detailed or specialized exercises in developing awareness of the body. The first such exercise is about what are traditionally called the thirty-two parts of the body. Its purpose is to develop more awareness of the body in a different context, by allowing it to be seen more clearly. Normally we have our own particular preferences when we look at a body. I guess most people look at faces, and maybe that’s our main reference for the body, but of course there’s a lot more to the body than that. This exercise of examining the thirty-two parts of the body, although not very popular in the West, is one of the main meditation themes in southeast Asia. Of course, to be able to develop it one needs to study these thirty-two different parts, learn about them and be able to remember them. Some of them are internal organs, others are the external parts of the body; some are the fluids in the body, which relates to the next topic of the four elemental qualities. The purpose of the exercise is the development of awareness, providing a much broader overview of what we take to be the body.

If thirty-two parts are too much, some people just use the first five – hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth and skin. At first this can seem a bit abstract, but the point is to use our conceptual faculties to bring up these aspects of body, and then go more deeply into them, experience them more directly. If we have an image of, say, teeth, and we’re not looking in a mirror, we have to think, ‘teeth are like this’. But by meditating on them or contemplating them at a deeper level, we have a different experience of them. When I was in Switzerland I used to do my ‘teeth-brushing meditation’ in my room after breakfast. It was a very good opportunity, because here was a situation where I could collect myself on this simple everyday act. I knew about these thirty-two parts of the body and that teeth were one of the parts, but I’d never really developed the exercise. But here was an opportunity early in the morning while brushing my teeth. It’s a simple act which we do several times every day, so it’s a good opportunity for meditation. It only took five or ten minutes, not a real knee-cruncher of a meditation, but it was sometimes very insightful to be aware of this theme of teeth. We may not usually notice them very often (until we have to go to the dentist, and then there may be rather too much emphasis on them!) Through becoming more aware of teeth, I sometimes had some quite interesting insights. One was maybe more of a fantasy: I used to think that many years later, when people thought of Ajahn Thiradhammo, all that would be left would be teeth. Everything else would be gone, my hair and my skin and the rest of the thirty-two parts – just teeth would be left. It’s interesting to reflect like that, because we naturally assume that we’re going to persist, to just keep going.

There’s a story of an early disciple of Ajahn Mun, the grandfather of the contemporary forest tradition in Thailand. This disciple was following the usual vocation of monks at that time as a schoolteacher, but he was also a very good meditator. Because this development of the thirty-two parts is a common meditation theme in southeast Asia, he was contemplating at least some of these parts of the body. One day he was teaching the children in the class, and he looked up from his desk to see a classroom full of skeletons there, just skeletons! Normally we see a skin-enclosed human being with clothes and so on, but because of his deep contemplation he saw skeletons instead; he saw beyond the normal superficial appearances of the body. After that he realized that he had to quit his job – obviously he was more interested in developing his meditation than in being

A schoolteacher.

This sort of visualization is a very positive sign in meditation. It’s called a nimitta, a vision. First of all we think about these parts, the skeleton, for example, or bones, and we have some kind of image of them. But when the image comes up as a strong vision, much more than just a fantasy or hallucination, this real and powerful vision comes from a deeper, clearer level of seeing, a deep concentration. And when that happens, it’s not frightening, because it’s not a fantasy. It is real, as real as seeing people as they appear normally. For example, when I was brushing my teeth, sometimes it was more like teeth-being-brushed rather than ‘me’ brushing my teeth. Sometimes it was just teeth and nobody brushing. But because it was very natural and a development of meditation, it wasn’t frightening. This is not like seeing a horror-movie frightening image – because this image had come from development of awareness, it was very peaceful. It wasn’t a normal perception, but it was very peaceful because it was reality, seeing reality much more deeply and clearly. With it a certain dispassion arose too. It’s hard to get excited about teeth when we truly see them. When we don’t see them so clearly, we think, ‘I have really good teeth’ or ‘I have bad teeth’, and we get caught up in the stories about them. But if we just perceive teeth as they are, there are no more stories about them – it’s just like seeing the truth, we don’t argue about it.

The next formal exercise in developing body awareness is contemplating the four elemental qualities which comprise materiality – earth, fire, water, and air. At a monastery where I stayed in England there was an annual ten-day retreat, and usually the same people attended every year. I thought that rather than just give the same instructions, I’d do something else, so I chose a few different topics, and during the exercises in body awareness I suggested developing awareness of the four elemental qualities: earth, fire, water, air. This takes a bit of study at first – what are these elemental qualities? What is earth? It’s not so much that we’re made of dirt; rather, the earth element is hardness – the bones, the teeth, something solid, stable, substantial. The water element is fluidity, liquidity, expressing itself through the blood, saliva, tears and so on. The air element is distension: it fills things out as the breath does, but it’s also what helps to move the limbs. It’s the air element that allows us to walk and be mobile. And fire is the heat or cold in the body, and it’s also the heat which causes aging and makes digestion take place, like a furnace.

By using these four elemental qualities as a template of the body, we can see it differently. Instead of me lifting my arm, there is the air element causing movement of ‘earth’ bones, ‘water’ blood and ‘fire’ aging. My teeth are clacking – that’s earth. If I’m swallowing, that’s water. We have a different definition of the body as just these four elements here and now: earth, fire, water, air. Some people find this very useful because it gives a new perspective on physicality, rather than always referring back to ‘my body’ which is aching now, or is comfortable or hungry or cold. If it’s cold, it’s just the heat element. If it’s hungry, it’s the heat element as digestion. If there’s an ache somewhere, it’s the air element, so instead of my body feeling painful, it’s just the air element out of order.

Being able to look in this new way gives a different perspective, and maybe enables us to see not only change or impermanence, but another characteristic of the body – impersonality. It’s not a personal entity, not controlled by a person. It’s just cause and effect, energies and forces going on. When we look at the body in terms of these four elemental qualities, just earth, water, fire or air moving, where is the person? Where is the entity, where is the soul, where is the self? There are just these four elements moving. This can be quite liberating, in the sense that we don’t have to worry about our teeth because they’re just the earth element and eventually they go back to the earth (maybe someone will dig them up in ten thousand years!) Air goes back to the air, water to water, heat to heat.

So I can be less personalized and less obsessed with regard to my body, because it’s really just these universal elements. The air which allows my arm to move is the air that also blows through the trees. The earth element in this body is the same as the rocks in the stream down there. So we join nature. That’s where we came from through eating and drinking, and that’s where we’ll end up. Looking at it in this way enables us to be a bit more receptive to the truth of this body. Rather than its being my particular situation which I try to control, or my personal problem, the body is just nature which subsists here for maybe seventy years. And then it’ll return to nature again, but as elements it will still be there in some form or another.

Another practice with regard to the body which is mentioned in the scriptures but rarely used in the West is known as ‘cemetery contemplations’, i.e. contemplating the body in various states of decay and dissolution. This body is going to pass away, but we always focus on its ‘livingness’. However, we very rarely look at the body when it’s decaying, and especially when it’s dead. It may even be illegal to do so – a corpse must be quickly put in a coffin and whisked away. But when somebody died in the Buddha’s time, the body was taken to the charnel-ground at the edge of the village and left there for the vultures to feed on. Nowadays, just the thought of a dead body, ugh! I once found a dead possum by my hut in New Zealand. It had been there about four or five days. The smell was absolutely revolting. As I removed it I had to keep it at arm’s length, it was so disgusting. And that wasn’t even my body, fortunately. We can’t bury our own body, can we?

A less dramatic but more practical way to develop this exercise is to become aware of the aging nature of the body. We can observe the increased wrinkles on the hands and face, the decaying teeth or the creeping decrepitude of the body. This is a much more direct, immediate experience, which does not require any imagination, but just clearer seeing of what is already there.

Another effect of contemplating that this body is eventually going to fade away, decay and dissolve is that it actually gives us more appreciation of life. I think we just assume that we’re going to live until one day we’re not alive any more. But if we have a much clearer awareness that this body’s definitely going to decay, every day that we’re alive becomes quite a miracle, especially if we know a bit about anatomy. We get up in the morning and think, ‘How can all this stuff keep working?’ Cars break down in ten or twenty years, but this thing keeps going for sixty or eighty years. It gets rather worn out sometimes, but actually it’s quite a miracle that it keeps going at all. So this contemplation changes our perception, giving us an appreciation of life rather than just plugging along day after day. But how do we use this opportunity for maximum benefit, rather than just thinking, ‘Ho hum, another day’? Another day for what? Will we appreciate this day, live it in a beneficial way, or will we just put up with it?

The meditations to develop awareness around these particular themes give us a clearer insight into the real nature of the body. By just bringing up in our mind the fact that this body is going to decay, we already know that something in us is impermanent. Maybe this is first an intellectual understanding, but when we really observe the body we may, for example, look in the mirror and see impermanence in another grey hair. Thus the understanding becomes personal – it’s not just an abstract Buddhist scriptural teaching, but personal experience. By personalizing these abstract principles we see them directly, so that when old age and sickness come, we’ve already seen them, already anticipated them, and there’s no surprise. We don’t need to resist them and feel resentful about them – that’s the way it is. The ultimate truths of impermanence and impersonality are embodied right here. I can say, ‘OK, knee, behave yourself, don’t cause me any problems, make it through the meditation’, but all I can really do is just listen to the knee. I can’t control it – that’s the way it is.

Awareness-Wisdom

Teachers in the Forest Tradition talk about awareness and wisdom. They don’t talk much about scriptural wisdom or intellectual wisdom; they talk about ‘awareness wisdom’, the wisdom which comes from direct seeing, direct experience. This is what the faculty of awareness becomes in its more developed sense. Normally our awareness is just being aware of what we want to be aware of; it’s very subjectively controlled. We only want to be aware of the body when it’s comfortable, but in the course of meditation, when we have committed ourselves to sit for a certain time, the body may become uncomfortable. We can’t escape from the discomfort, so we become more aware of it, developing that side of the awareness equation too. Thus we become more aware of the unsatisfactory nature of bodily experience. Previously we only paid attention to the body when it was comfortable, and as soon as it became uncomfortable we moved it back to comfort again. But that selective awareness is only seeing part of how the body is. If we can develop awareness so that it becomes a power in itself, it becomes less controlled by this selectivity of our preferences. This is when awareness breaks out from the limitations of subjectivity, and then we can be aware of a much fuller range of body, not just what we want to notice when it feels comfortable for us. We begin to experience the body in a whole range of situations beyond personal preferences. This is what the development of awareness can do. And of course, as we become more aware of the body, we also notice its relation to our feelings and states of mind, which is a very good foundation for developing awareness of the other themes of mindfulness.

Awareness of feeling tones

The second of the attendings with mindfulness is feeling tones. ‘Feeling tone’ is the translation of the Pali word vedanā. It is the general emotional tone of our experience, whether it’s pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. The scriptures mention up to 108 different feeling tones, but we will keep it simple with just three: pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. Try to appreciate the difference between these definitions of feeling. If we ask how someone is feeling, they don’t normally answer, ‘pleasant’, ‘unpleasant’ or ‘neutral’. It’s usually, ‘I’m feeling great’, or ‘I’m feeling terrible’, or ‘I’m feeling fine’. For most people, feeling refers to the emotions, but in Buddhist terminology vedanā is that general feeling tone of emotion as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. This is a very important topic, because these feeling tones are the whole basis of what motivates us. Very simply, we can say that most people’s main motivation in life is to experience pleasant feeling tone and get away from unpleasant feeling tone, and they don’t know or are unclear about neutral feeling tone.

If we have neutral feeling tone we just sit there with not much happening, but when pleasant feeling tone comes, we think, ‘Oh, isn’t that nice? How can I get more of that?’ An unpleasant feeling tone comes along and we think, ‘How can I get away from this?’ These three feeling tones sound rather insipid: pleasant, unpleasant, neutral. They don’t amount to ecstasy or hell. But they are the fundamental motivating influences of our lives – towards the pleasant and away from the unpleasant. So becoming more aware of them is very beneficial, because we can begin to see just how we are being impersonally controlled by them. If we investigate feeling tones in the course of a sitting, for example, we’ll notice how much they change. If our whole life is built on feeling tones though they’re so ephemeral, so unreliable, our life will also be pretty unreliable. If I’m just living for pleasant feeling tone and it’s changing so quickly, I’ve essentially built my life on sand. By developing awareness of feeling tones, our direct seeing gives us understanding of them, insight into their true nature and how they motivate us.

There are also a variety of ways to distinguish feeling tones. For example, there are feeling tones that arise from bodily sensations and feeling tones from conditions of mind. In the discourses on the development of mindfulness an important distinction is made between ‘worldly’ feeling tones and ‘non-worldly’ feeling tones; that is, it is very important to be able to determine whether certain feeling tones arise from a spiritual source. This is especially relevant when we come to the topic of joy as a factor of awakening, as the Buddha recognized the significance of pleasant spiritual feeling tone on the path to awakening.

Awareness of conditions of mind

The third theme is conditions of mind. Actually, this theme is rather hard to define, because a ‘condition of mind’ suggests a condition with a definite boundary. In my experience many conditions of mind are not so easily distinguishable; they often flow together. The word translated as mind, citta, means the contents of our mind, what’s going on mentally. As you will probably appreciate, quite a few different levels may be involved. As we observe our condition of mind, for example, whether the mind is busy or not, we may also observe what sort of busyness is going on in the mind, or what types of thoughts or memories are arising.

The theme on conditions of mind specifically refers to a range of sixteen mental conditions, but these are by no means the only ones which can occur. Is the mind obsessed with aversion, for example? Are we carrying aversion with us from some event which happened last week or last year? Or is there some greed, some longing or desire for certain things, like wanting to have that new car we saw today? Or is there just delusion, states of confusion, doubt and uncertainty crowding into our life? We can also notice the lack of those things. Maybe on the one hand things look a bit negative – I’m carrying this aversion around with me – but on the other hand there’s no greed. I find it helpful to look at what is not in the mind, when the mind is not obsessed by greed or aversion or delusion. This does happen sometimes, actually more often than we imagine. When I was experiencing my backache I had no serious aversion; there was a little irritation with the backache, but I had no greed to go to my hut and lie down. It wasn’t very deluding because there was some clarity in observing it. So we’re also able to be aware when those qualities are not there, those times when the mind is not obsessed with greed, aversion, or delusion.

There are, of course, a great variety of conditions of mind. Some of those specifically mentioned in the scriptures are whether the mind is contracted or distracted, exalted or closed in, incomparable or not, concentrated or not and liberated or not. To be aware of these conditions we may need to step back from the specific contents to observe the prominent overall condition, similar to taking a weather check. Conditions of mind also include emotions. In Buddhist terminology emotions come in the category of conditions of mind or mentality. Emotions are very energized thoughts or memories, and that energy can be harnessed. If we are able to non-reactively observe the energy behind aversion or greed, we may be able to tune into it. Trying to resist it drains energy away – ‘Poor me, I’ve been meditating for twenty years, I shouldn’t have greed or aversion.’ But if we can open to emotions and receive them as they are, what is that like? It doesn’t mean we grasp and indulge them, but rather that we tune into them. It’s like bringing our hands closer to the fire, but taking care not to get burned. We have to know the right distance – too far away and we don’t get warm, too close and we’re burned, and this depends on our degree of collectedness and our development of awareness.

If we are still functioning in a reactive mode, we can be pulled into the energy, or we don’t want to see this greed, aversion and delusion; we want to blot it out or sit there with a blank mind. But when awareness is sufficiently developed, it steps outside those old habitual reactions. It has a power of its own rather than being controlled by our preferences. Awareness can look at this stuff, because that’s what comes on the screen. Our old habits don’t want to see it, they want a blank screen. But then we are choosing the kind of awareness that suits us, rather than allowing awareness to be its own power.

I find it helpful to see these conditions of mind as ‘mental weather’. In the same way as we observe the changes in the weather, we can observe the changes in mental conditions, and behind that is our ‘mental climate’. Maybe our mind’s general climate is windy and wet. Something comes up and we make it wet, we put a wet blanket on things. When we ask some people how they are, it’s always, ‘Very well, very well!’ Others always say, ‘Not too bad.’ That’s their general disposition, their mental climate – not too bad (wet climate), or wonderful! (sunny climate). And then there’s the mental weather. Somebody can be generally of a sunny disposition, but then an emotional storm comes in and they’re not so sunny any more. That’s just the passing weather. We can be very even-minded, but then some crisis arises in our life and all kinds of strange things come up, all kinds of atypical reactions may manifest. Someone who is normally unflustered can become very flustered when their ‘buttons are pushed’. However, if we have developed this exercise of awareness of mental conditions, we may be able to step back into the observing mode rather than getting caught up in a reactive mode which not only affirms the condition, but also leads to further mental conditions, and on and on.

Awareness of the dhammas

The fourth theme is called dhammas. This word ‘dhamma’ has many different meanings in different contexts, but here it means phenomena or categories. This theme of dhammas comprises five topics: the Hindrances, the Aggregates, the six senses and sense objects, the Seven Factors of Awakening and the Four Noble Truths.

There’s a progression in this teaching, moving on to more and more refinement of awareness. If we observe the whole range of conditions of mind, we begin to see patterns emerging. For example, we observe which conditions pull the mind down, distract the mind, cloud the mind. They’re subsumed into a category called the Five Hindrances.3 Likewise, we begin to see that these Seven Factors of Awakening are also in the mind. That’s useful to know – the Seven Factors of Awakening are in our mind already; we just need to observe them, be mindful of them, be aware of them in their context. We can be aware of certain qualities, tranquillity for example. We have tranquillity sometimes, but do we really appreciate it in its context as a Factor of Awakening? When tranquillity rises, we may think we ought to be doing something. Why be tranquil? There’s this pile of books to read. We could do something else rather than just be tranquil. But by realizing that tranquillity is one of the factors of awakening, we can begin to appreciate it in the right context. Tranquillity inclined towards laziness may just be wasting time, but tranquillity as a positive factor that calms down mental and bodily activity becomes an important factor for awakening.

It’s a matter of observing and watching for these factors to come together. If we can carefully watch all these conditions arising in the mind, it can be like watching sheep being herded in the right way – Hindrances over there and Factors of Awakening over here. We begin to recognize what to watch out for.

If we aren’t aware of the Hindrances as Hindrances and don’t know what they do to us, we may actually be cultivating them. Maybe we’re cultivating laziness and thinking it’s tranquillity, sitting there snoring and thinking we’re tranquil, when it’s actually sleepiness we’re cultivating. That’s a Hindrance, not a Factor of Awakening!

But one person’s tranquillity may be someone else’s laziness – it’s very individual. A common experience in the heat of Thailand is the Hindrance called sloth and torpor. Even when the teacher was teaching, some monks would be torpid. People would think that sleeping during the talk was not very respectful, but one teacher said, ‘Their ears are still open, it’s OK, they’re still hearing.’ Maybe they were not in a sleep state, just a very tranquil state of receptivity. Their ears were open, and they heard the teaching and it went very deep, whereas if they were sitting upright there might have been a lot of self-consciousness blocking or judging what they heard, so they didn’t actually receive it openly. We can’t judge other people’s awareness by their physical expressions.

Another theme of the dhammas is developing awareness of the activity of the six senses: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind as a sense organ. It is through the senses that we put a ‘world’ together and then create our interpretations, opinions and reactions. This is a very rich area of investigation and a deep source of wisdom.

A further theme is to see our experience in terms of the Five Aggregates, the basic psycho-physical aspects of our self, i.e. materiality, feeling, perception, mental formations and consciousness. Clearly seeing these constituent parts of our being and how they arise and pass away can give very deep insight into non-self or impersonality.

The last dhamma is the contemplation of the Four Noble Truths, the uniquely Buddhist teaching on suffering, its cause, its cessation and the Eightfold Path to the cessation of suffering. With the deepening of this realization, a comprehensive understanding of the entire extent and profundity of the Buddha’s teaching is attained.

The development of each of the exercises is further explained to encompass four general principles. The first one is to contemplate them internally (within oneself), externally (in another person) and both internally and externally. This allows a broadening out of awareness to include their more general nature as opposed to specific details. The second principle is contemplating the nature of arising, the nature of passing away and the nature of both arising and passing away relating to each exercise. Thus one is encouraged to actively contemplate the universal characteristic of impermanence, one of the ultimate truths of insight. Next we are reminded to establish mindfulness just for the purpose of knowledge and continued mindfulness. Finally, the practitioner is directed to ‘abide independent’ and ‘not cling to anything in the world’. These two phrases are often used to refer to an advanced state of spiritual attainment for which the practice of mindfulness is specifically prescribed.

Conclusion

It takes some degree of study to know what these four attendings with mindfulness are. That’s part of what the Buddha’s teaching provides for us. It’s like having a recipe: we can just go into the kitchen, throw some things together and hope the dish comes out all right, or we can look in the recipe book and get the proper recipe. Maybe we still can’t follow the recipe, but at least we know how it should be. That’s the benefit of having the Buddha’s teachings; he gives us this recipe for awakening, the development of mindfulness. So once we know what the recipe is, we can apply it, we can do our best with it. If we don’t know that there is this diverse range of topics, we might struggle to try to develop body awareness for years, but get nowhere. And then we might begin to work with the feeling tones and really benefit from that; we might have a special ability to work with the feeling tones. Others who are more analytically inclined may need to work with some of the dhammas. If they look at conditions of mind they may not see anything but a blank window. But what about the Five Hindrances, what about sloth and torpor? They know that. Once they receive some direction, this can lead them into a more direct experience of their mind through recognizing those Hindrances. Others can be inspired when they recognize what the Factors of Awakening are. So by having a broad knowledge of what these instructions are we have many openings, many ways of entering into this teaching and finding what suits us, finding some accessibility to it. Otherwise we may just hear different bits and pieces of the teachings and think that’s all there is.

By knowing what these different aspects of the Buddha’s teachings are, we also see the diversity of mindfulness practice. At the very beginning of the scripture about mindfulness, the Buddha is quoted as saying that this is the ‘direct path’4 to realizing awakening. The scriptures outline many different ways of practice which lead to awakening, but mindfulness is the main one. The practice of mindfulness brings together all these factors: body, feeling tones, conditions of mind; all these categories, the Five Hindrances, the Five Aggregates, the six senses and sense objects, the Seven Factors of Awakening, the Four Noble Truths. It’s the primary way, the main way to the realization of awakening.

So the practice of mindfulness is a very comprehensive summary of so many aspects of the Buddha’s teachings. I think that’s why the Buddha said it is the direct path to realizing awakening. Mindfulness is a very important foundation of the teachings. If we’re able at least to recognize its breadth intellectually and then put it into practice, we can realize its depth as well. Seeing how this body and this mind really are can lead us to experience the way things really are directly, in the ultimate sense of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality. We start with awareness in an elementary sense, and once developed it becomes mindfulness, which I interpret as ‘full awareness of mind’. When we’re aware of the body, we start off with a sense of ‘I’ doing it. First of all it’s, ‘I’m being aware of my body’; that’s the first level. The next level is, ‘I’m being aware of the body’. It’s not so much mine anymore, just the body as physical conditions. Then comes, ‘I’m just being aware; and finally, just awareness, with nobody being aware. If there still is a sense of ‘I’ being aware, it’s not full awareness of mind, there’s still a bit of ‘me’ in it. But once awareness is developed in the fullest sense, there’s fully complete awareness of mind. The mind is fully aware, without any need for a sense of self to know it, to be aware, to be present. And this full awareness of mind can penetrate through the ignorance of selfhood and reveal the truth of impersonality. That’s the highest development of mindfulness or awareness, pure awareness.

So this is a practice, a development of awareness, which then becomes wisdom. We have the wisdom to know the way things really are: impermanent, unsatisfactory and impersonal. We’ve seen it directly. We don’t need to read a book about it. We’ve seen it for ourselves.

This is only the beginning of the Factors of Awakening, but already we’re well on the way.

1Digha Nikāya (DN) 22 and Majjhima Nikāya (MN) 10. For a very thorough explanation, see Analayo. Satipatthāna: The Direct Path to Realization (Windhorse Publications, 2004), whom I have followed in translating ‘satipatthāna’ as ‘attending with mindfulness’ (p.29).

2Analayo, p.22.

3The Five Hindrances are explored in greater detail in the chapter on Concentration.

4So Bodhi in note 135 to his and Bhikkhu Ñanamoli’s translation of MN (Wisdom Publications, 1995); and Analayo, pp.26-8.