## Introduction

This book is based on a series of talks on the Seven Factors of Awakening given at Bodhinyanarama Monastery in New Zealand during the Rains Retreat in 2007. My intention is to give some basic information about the Factors based upon the teachings in the Pali Canon, the scriptures of the Theravada school of Buddhism, to readers ranging from complete beginners to experienced meditators, including guidance on how to develop these important spiritual qualities. Thus this is a series of meditative contemplations to help support a direct experience of the Factors. I have therefore tended to emphasize certain aspects of particular Factors, for example, acknowledging natural energy rather than only will-power, making Awakening more accessible rather than explaining the ‘higher stages’, etc. I have included a suggested meditation at the beginning of each chapter to encourage a meditative enquiry. The book is by no means a definitive presentation of this theme. I suggest that those interested in more information on these themes should consult the Pali Canon directly, or the other books listed in the bibliography.

The Seven Factors of Awakening (in Pali, bojjhangā) are one of the categories of spiritual qualities frequently mentioned by the Buddha as very beneficial for spiritual development. In the Samyutta Nikāya (SN V,74) of the Pali Canon it is stated that if the Seven Factors of Awakening are developed and cultivated, they fulfil knowledge and liberation. However, the Buddha qualifies this by saying that their development must be based upon ‘seclusion, dispassion, cessation, maturing in relinquishing.’ At SN V 93 they are referred to as ‘non-obstructions, non-hindrances and non-defilements of the mind’. In the same discourse they are stated to be fulfilled by the development of the Four Attendings with Mindfulness. It is helpful to note that one of the categories in the development of mindfulness is the Seven Factors of Awakening. Thus the development of each of these two areas of spiritual practice feeds back into the other.

There are many other references to the Factors throughout the Buddha’s teachings. The whole of chapter 46 of the Samyutta Nikāya (Bojjhangāsamyutta, Book V, discourses 63-140) is devoted to the Seven Factors of Awakening. A number of the Factors are also found in other categories of the Buddha’s teaching. For example, Mindfulness, Energy and Concentration, together with Faith and Wisdom, comprise the Five Faculties and Five Powers; and Energy as Right Effort, with Right Mindfulness and Right Concentration, forms the concentration (samādhi) group of the qualities of the Noble Eightfold Path.

I would like to thank the transcribers who spent many hours on these talks, as well as my diligent editor and layout manager. All translations are my own unless otherwise indicated. The references are by Pali Text Society Pali version by volume and page, or discourse (sutta) number.