## Glossary

ajahn – teacher (Thai. Pali: ¯ cariya).

akh (ancient Egyptian) – the transfigured spirit which is released into eternal happiness.

anāgāmi – a “non-returner,” i.e., one who has reached the third stage of enlightenment.

anāgārika – a lay person holding the eight precepts; literally a “homeless one,” one who has entered the first stage of monastic training.

anatta – not-self.

anicca – impermanence or uncertainty.

añjali – a gesture of respect made by placing the hands with palms together at the heart.

ārammana – sense object; also commonly used to refer to a mood induced by those sense objects.

asmimāna – the conceit of identity; one of the final fetters obstructing enlightenment.

asubha-kammathāna – the contemplation of the unattractiveness of the body.

avijja – ignorance; nescience; not understanding the Four Noble Truths.

Ba (ancient Egyptian) – the soul.

baksheesh – a small sum of money given as a gratuity or as alms.

bardo (Tib.) – “in-between state,” used to refer to the state of being between death and rebirth.

Bedouin – an Arab of any of the nomadic tribes of the Arabian, Syrian, Nubian, or Sahara deserts.

bhante – “Venerable Sir,” the most common form of address for a Buddhist monk in the Southern school.

bhava – Becoming; the process of existence.

bhavacakka – the wheel or cycle of becoming, also known as the Wheel of Birth and Death.

bhikkhu – Buddhist monk.

bodhi – enlightenment.

bodhisattva – a practitioner on the Mahāyāna path who is working towards the goal of full enlightenment for the sake of all beings; also refers to individual Bodhisattvas, such as Manjushri, who are the subjects of devotion in certain sects and are often represented in paintings and sculpture.

bodhi tree – the tree under which the Buddha was sitting at the time of his enlightenment.

Buddha – “One who knows” ; one who is awakened, who represents the state of enlightenment or awakening; the historical Buddha, Siddhatta Gotama. Also: Buddho.

Buddha-rūpa – a statue representing the Buddha.

Buddha-Dhamma – the teaching of the Buddha.

burka (Ar.) – the veiled, full-length gown worn by traditional Muslim women.

cankama – walking meditation.

citta – the heart or mind.

devadūta – literally “Heavenly Messengers”; the qualities of old age, sickness, death and the religious seeker when they encourage spiritual practice.

dhamma – phenomenon; mental object. See also: nāma-dhamma, saccadhamma, sankhata dhamma, sīla-dhamma, worldly dhammas. Dhamma (capitalized) refers to the teachings of the Buddha, as well as the quality of Ultimate Truth itself.

Dhammacakka – “The Wheel of Dhamma” is a name for the teaching “set turning” by the Buddha.

djellabah (Ar.) – an ankle-length tunic worn, along with a turban, by the majority of Egyptian men.

dukkha – suffering, unsatisfactoriness; the inherent insecurity, instability and imperfection of conditioned phenomena.

Eightfold Path – the spiritual method described by the Buddha as being the only reliable means to completely transcend unsatisfactoriness. The eight factors are: Right View, Right Intention, Right Speech, Right Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort, Right Mindfulness & Right Concentration.

evam – thus; thus it is. An expression often used to conclude a Dhamma talk.

felucca – small sailing boats that have been used on the Nile for millennia.

gātha – a verse of Pali or other scriptural poetry.

hajj (Ar.) – the pilgrimage to Mecca that all Muslim men are encouraged to make at least once in their lifetime.

hajji (Ar.) – an honorific title given to a Muslim who has been or is on their way to Mecca on pilgrimage.

Hīnayāna – “Lesser Vehicle,” “Inferior Vehicle.” It is a derogatory term for the Southern, Pali-based lineages of Buddhism. The PTS Dictionary lists as meanings of “hīna”: inferior, low; poor, miserable; vile, base, abject, contemptible, despicable.

hiriottappa – Sense of shame (hiri) and an intelligent fear of consequences (ottappa), two positive states of mind that lay a foundation for a clear conscience and moral integrity.

imam (Ar.) – Islamic priest.

insha’Allah (Ar.) – “If Allah is willing,” or “If Allah wills it,” i.e., “It might happen if things go as we wish them to.”

indriya – spiritual faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom.

jāti – birth.

jīvita – the life force.

Ka (ancient Egyptian) – variously rendered as “divine double” or “individual life force.”

kamma – volitional action by means of body, speech, or mind; Sanskrit: karma, used in the text to indicate the more common, popular usage, implying both action and its results.

khandha – “heap” or aggregate; one of the five constituents of human existence: form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and sense consciousness.

King of Death – Yama, the judge of the dead in Buddhist cosmology.

kusala – wholesome or skilful actions or mental states.

kuti – a small dwelling place for a Buddhist monastic, a hut.

lobha – greed.

lokapāla – literally “Guardian of the World,” it is a word used to describe moral sensitivity (hiriottappa q.v.) and, cosmologically, the Four Great Kings who guard the earth.

lokiya – worldly.

lokuttara – supramundane, transcendent.

Luang Por – Venerable Father, Respected Father; a friendly and reverential term of address used for elderly monks.

magga – path. See Eightfold Path.

Maha – (Pali & Skt.) – “Great”; it is also a title given to monks who have studied Pali and completed up to the fourth year or higher.

Mahāyāna – “Great Vehicle,” a term used to refer to the Northern Schools of Buddhism.

māna – conceit, pride.

mani stones (mani, Tib.) – rocks inscribed with the mantra “om mani peme hung” (meaning “Hail to the Jewel in the Lotus”) that are found at shrines, on pilgrimage routes and on high passes in the Tibetan Buddhist world.

Māra – evil and temptation personified; a powerful malevolent deity ruling over the highest heaven of the sensual sphere; personification of the defilements, the totality of worldly existence, and death.

metta – loving-kindness.

mudita – sympathetic joy, gladness, happiness at the good fortune of others.

nada (Skt.) – sound; particularly the inner, high-pitched tone that is used as a meditation object in various spiritual traditions.

nāma – Nonmaterial (mental) phenomenon (Also: nāma-dhamma).

nāmarūpa – mind and body; name and form; mentality and materiality.

neter (ancient Egyptian) – the principal deities of the Egyptian religion, also the inner essences of the heart that these divinities represent: “A neter is a principle or an agent of a cosmic law or function.” (Her-Bak, Vol. II, p. 130.) “A man’s heart is his own neter.” (Her-Bak, Vol. II, p. 105.)

Nibbāna – the state of liberation from all suffering and defilements, the goal of the Buddhist path (Sanskrit: Nirvāna).

nibbida – disenchantment, world-weariness.

nirodha – cessation; often used as an abbreviation for dukkha-nirodha.

“one who knows” – An inner faculty of awareness. Under the influence of ignorance or defilements, it knows things wrongly. Trained through the practice of the Eightfold Path, it is the awakened knowing of a Buddha.

ottappa – see hiriottappa.

pabhassara citta – the radiant heart.

pañña – wisdom, discernment, understanding of the nature of existence.

paramattha-dhamma – Ultimate Reality

paramattha sacca – Ultimate Truth

pārami, pāramita – the ten spiritual perfections: generosity, moral restraint, renunciation, wisdom, effort, patience, truthfulness, determination, kindness, and equanimity. Virtues accumulated over lifetimes manifesting as wholesome dispositions.

phassa – sense-contact.

prāna – (Skt.) literally “breath”; also the energy winds that move through the body and mind.

rūpa – material or physical objects, corporeality (Also: rūpa-dhamma).

saccadhamma – Ultimate Truth.

sakkāyaditthi – personality view, one of the obstacles to stream entry, the first stage of enlightenment.

sāla – a large meeting hall

salāyatana – the six sense bases: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

samādhi – concentration, one-pointedness of mind, mental stability; state of concentrated calm resulting from meditation practice.

samatha – calm, tranquillity.

sammā-sambodhi – “perfectly self-enlightened,” an attribute of the Buddha.

sammuti sacca – conventional, dualistic, or nominal reality; the reality of names, determinations. For instance, a cup is not intrinsically a cup, it is only determined to be so.

samsāra – Wheel of Existence; lit., “perpetual wandering” ; the continuous process of being born, growing old, suffering, and dying again and again; the world of all conditioned phenomena, mental and material.

Sangha – the Buddhist monastic community. Also refers to those disciples of the Buddha, both monastic and lay, who have realized the various stages of enlightenment.

sankhāra – compounded, or conditioned thing; phenomenon; anything constituted by preexisting causes. In the Thai language the word sungkahn is commonly used to refer to the body.

sankhāra-dukkha – the unsatisfactoriness inherent in all formations, mental and physical.

sankhata dhamma – conditioned thing, conventional reality; as contrasted with asankhata dhamma, unconditioned reality, i.e. Nibbāna, the Deathless

sīla – virtuous conduct, morality; moral discipline. sīlabbata-parāmāsa – attachment to rites and rituals, conventions, an obstruction to stream entry.

sīla-dhamma – another name for the moral teachings of Buddhism. On the personal level: “virtue and (knowledge of) truth.”

soka-parideva – sorrow and lamentation.

sutta (sūtra, Skt.) – literally, a thread: usually used to refer to a discourse of the Buddha as recorded in the Pali canon; the Sanskrit term is also used to refer to the teachings of the Buddhas in the Northern schools.

tanha – craving; desires conditioned by ignorance of the way things are.

Tathāgata – Perfect One; lit., the one who has “thus gone” or “thus come”; an epithet of the Buddha.

Tathāgatagarbha – literally, “the womb of the Tāthagata,” meaning the origin of Buddha nature.

tathata – suchness, as-is-ness.

Theravāda – “The Way of the Elders,” also known as the Southern School of Buddhism; it prevails in Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand.

thītibhūtam – the primal mind.

Udāna – exclamation, or uplifting verse; one of the collections of suttas in the Pali Canon.

upādāna – grasping, clinging, attachment.

upekkha – equanimity.

vedana – feeling, sensation.

vicāra – contemplation of a meditation theme.

vihāra – monastic dwelling place.

vinaya – The Buddhist monastic code of discipline; lit., “leading out,” because maintenance of these rules “leads out” of unskilful actions and unskilful states of mind; in addition it can be said to “lead out” of the household life and attachment to the world.

viññāna – consciousness, particularly through the senses.

vipassana – “insight”; refers to insight meditation, particularly based on the contemplation of the Three Characteristics of Existence: transience/uncertainty, unsatisfactoriness, and “not-self.”

virāga – dispassion.

viveka – seclusion, either physical, mental or spiritual.

vosagga – abandonment, relinquishment.

yoniso manasikāra – wise reflection, consideration, contemplation.