## Preface

When Silent Rain was first compiled, back in 1993, part of the idea of producing such a varied collection of material – talks, poems, travelogues and artwork – was that it would then provide an easy source for smaller offprints over the years. Things, however, rarely turn out as predicted by foresight and thus, up until now, no smaller booklets had been spawned from it.

This present book, Rain on the Nile, is something of a remedy for that, being both an outcome of that original intention as well as an arena for the offering up of some more recent material – to wit, the travelogue of a journey to Egypt made in December of 2006. In truth, without there having been plans to reprint some of the talks from Silent Rain, the Egyptian diary would never have been written.

The idea to select some talks from the book and to create this smaller reprint was originally that of Venerable Tenzin Chogkyi, an American nun practicing in the Tibetan tradition. She had been the recipient of a bequest from a family member and was of a mind to direct some of it to be used to bring parts of Silent Rain back into circulation, the original stock of books having long ago been exhausted. She had found the book very helpful in her own life and wished it to be accessible to others. She thus approached me, in the autumn of 2006, and floated the idea of such an offprint being sponsored by her. I readily agreed and, during the conversation, it was mentioned that I had plans to travel to Egypt with Luang Por Sumedho that December.

“You’re going to Egypt!” she exclaimed, “I grew up there! At least that’s where I spent the first four years of my life. What’s taking you there? Are there Buddhist groups? Are you giving teachings?”

“No, nothing like that. There’s a small group of us who have been on little expeditions in recent years – to the Arctic and then to Bhutan – and now there is the plan to visit Egypt; also, one the monks who is going is an amateur Egyptologist, he can even read and write hieroglyphics.”

She was enthralled and inspired by the idea that Luang Por Sumedho and the rest of us would be making the journey to her “homeland” (she spoke Arabic more fluently than English in her earliest years); accordingly she suggested, “What about including an Egyptian travelogue in the book?” And thus it was.

By the end of our sojourn in Egypt, those nine words of hers had transmogrified into some 26,000 of mine, filling the pages of a thick, soft-bound notebook. Along the way several thousand photographs were also taken – by Edward and Ead Lewis, Richard Smith and I – so it seemed natural to include a number of these along with the Egyptian narrative. In this manner Rain on the Nile took shape, to be rounded out with a number of pieces of artwork that had appeared before in Silent Rain.

One notable exception amongst these illustrations is the spectacularly intricate and evocative graphic, originally crafted by Ajahn Sucitto and included in his book Dawn of the Dhamma, that appears in this volume before the chapter entitled “The Ring of Fire.” His book is a combination of illuminated manuscript – in a mode best described by imagining Robert Crumb doing a Buddhist rendition of The Book of Kells for a Grateful Dead album cover – and an erudite and practical commentary on the Buddha’s first discourse, “The Setting in Motion of the Wheel of Dhamma.” This book was originally published by Buddha-Dhamma Foundation in 1995, in Thailand, and has long (and sadly) been out of print. The illustration is used there, as here, to describe the process of dependent origination and is thus ideally suited to be included in this collection; indeed, the epigraph for “The Ring of Fire” (“Circles can be peaceful, but they can also be vicious”) is the opening phrase of his corresponding chapter in Dawn of the Dhamma, entitled “Getting Burned.”

All of the talks that appeared in the former book have been left largely as they were, with minor adjustments made only for consistency of grammar and spelling, and for the correction of a couple of factual errors. The order of the material has been changed, however, this being with the intention that the content of the talks somewhat match the flow of the extended travelogue.

As is the spirit in which Buddhist teachings are traditionally offered, all the words and images gathered here are presented for reflection upon by the reader; may the eye and heart take in and retain what is useful, and may all the rest be gently laid aside.

Amaro Bhikkhu Abhayagiri Monastery, California May, 2009