## Perfect Proof

From a talk given on the winter retreat, Chithurst, January 1991

Something which comes up regularly in dealing with the question of spiritual practice and spiritual authority in the scriptures is: How do we know anything is true? So I thought to speak this evening about proof, about how something comes to be proven.

I remember reading somewhere that the definition of proof is that it is a shrine in front of which pure mathematicians immolate themselves. The quest for certainty, absolute knowledge, is something which has been very strong in our culture, particularly in the last few hundred years. So much of our thought and our style of life has been based around rationalism and certainty that this has given a whole tone to our society. The sense of wanting to be able to prove everything is very strong, and this quest for certainty is based on the understanding that, when we have everything proven, then everything will be all right…

Up until the turn of the last century, people in the scientific world felt that we were getting through the problems bit by bit and that soon we would have the whole material, natural world understood – there was even the hope that psychology was going to become a mathematical science. At Harvard University, in the 1890s I believe, they closed the post-graduate section of the physics department because they thought that there was nothing left to discover. There were just two slightly strange effects that they needed to figure out: one was radioactivity and the other was why hot bodies emit light in the way that they do. The belief was that once they got those two little things figured out, then all knowledge about the physical world would be complete.17

So they shut the post-graduate department. Unfortunately, Max Planck and Albert Einstein came along a few years later and blew the whole thing to pieces with their insights and discoveries about the nature of matter, energy and the sub-atomic world. This kind of hubris within us is very strong – the rational mind feels that somehow it can get everything tied up, and that we can establish absolute knowledge within the realm of thought.

Also around the turn of the 20th Century in England, a couple of philosophical mathematicians, Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead, set about trying to prove from first principles all of the most important theorems and aspects of mathematics, starting out with the absolute basics – no assumptions whatsoever – for example, they take 345 pages to define the number “one.” They spent about fifteen years doing this and they published, I believe in 1913, their massive masterpiece, Principia Mathematica. They had the whole thing tied up: “There’s nothing more to be done here, this is it, we’ve got it, it’s all fixed, WE KNOW.”

A few years later another person came along with an insight that I feel is extremely important for the philosophy of our age. From a background also of rationalism and logic, which our society worships and looks up to as its great idol, this man came up with an insight, a proof that turned the whole thing on its head. And, for humanity at this time, an inroad into the realization that the absolute cannot be established in terms of the relative is very important.

This man’s name was Kurt Gödel. In 1931 – when he was quite a young man – he produced a proof whereby he showed that any formal system, any logical form whatsoever, any mathematical system has to be either incomplete or imperfect. Paraphrased, it reads something like, “All consistent axiomatic formulations of number theory include undecidable propositions.”18 In this way he came up with a very straightforward and ingenious proof that shows one can’t establish absolute certainty in relative terms. It is intrinsically impossible. It cannot be done. It is like a camera – it can take pictures of everything in the world except for itself, there is always something that has to be left out of the picture. You either have to generalize things and leave things inaccurate or there is something left out, there is a piece missing. And he proved that no matter how hard you try and work it, no matter how you try to get around it, intrinsic in every single proposition, every single idea or proof, there is this quality of incompleteness, the lack of absolute certainty.

In a way this was an insight into the First Noble Truth, it was a recognition of dukkha in its subtler sense. This was displaying, from a very logical standpoint, the same insight that the Buddha had: that any thing whatsoever, by its very thing-ness, by its very existence, has imperfection or insubstantiality or change or unsatisfactoriness intrinsically embodied in it. It has to be there. There is no way around it.

Now this rather deflated poor Bertrand Russell, even though young Gödel didn’t really trust the strength of his own insight; when he published it, he published it as “Part One,” sure that people were going to come along and shoot holes in it – but they didn’t. There was nothing wrong with it. There was no “Part Two.” He had captured it in one simple expression, a clear act of understanding that still stands up today. Its verity is unshaken and it’s proving to be more and more of a significant factor in the understanding of our own nature as conscious interdependent beings. It’s having more and more of an effect on the philosophical climate. Interestingly enough, Whitehead seemed to get the message, adapted his line of thinking in this later work and it is his name behind much of today’s liveliest and most viable thinking in the academic world.19

The Buddha used the term sankhāra-dukkha to refer to this same kind of imperfection, which is not saying there is something bad about the world of things and ideas but that, in the very nature of the apparent independence or particular individuality of things, there is dukkha bound up with them. There is not the vision of wholeness.

A way to look at this and understand it is to think in terms of the arising of the material and mental realities that we experience from the scientific point of view. From a Buddhist point of view we describe nāmarūpa, mind and body, as arising from consciousness, and originally arising out of the saccadhamma, the fundamental, ultimate reality which is the ground, the basis for all things. In scientific terms, some have called this saccadhamma the “sea of potential”: that energetic quantum vacuum which is the basis of all physical and mental reality, and out of which all things emerge.

The body and the mind – atoms and molecules, protons, neutrons, electrons and everything that forms our material world and the consciousness that arises also – they all arise from the same place. They arise from that same basic, fundamental reality. They are two aspects of the same fundamental reality that spring forth into being. And one can reflect that atoms and molecules and the forces between them exist in very much the same way that we as individual people and the relationships between us exist. The wave-like and particle-like nature of matter is mirrored in the material and mental aspects of our own life: nāmarūpa is like an expanded version of the wave- and particle-like nature of matter, of reality at its most basic level, rūpa being the particular and nāma being somewhat wavey.

So, springing out of this sea of potential, this ground of being, are our physical being, our mental world, our thoughts and feelings and the whole universe. These spring forth and then return to that same sea; as Ajahn Sumedho is fond of saying, “All conditions arise from the Unconditioned and they return to the Unconditioned,” “All conditions merge in the Deathless.”

This is a pattern for our whole experience of existence. We see that the Unconditioned in itself can be uninteresting. One analogy often used is that the Unconditioned is like space, like the space of this room. It doesn’t catch our attention – the bodies, the pictures, the light, the colours in the room do. So in that sense the Unconditioned is not “interesting.” It has no features, it has no characteristics. When the mind opens to it, its nature becomes more vivid and understood, more real. But at first glance it seems as though there’s nothing there. The potential that is there can perhaps only know itself through the fluctuations or excitations that occur within it.

Our thoughts arise out of the Unconditioned. They come into being and become interesting, then the attention fixes on them and so they start to seem very real but they purchase that reality, that substance, at the cost of separation from the ground of being, from the Unconditioned. So this is where the experience of dukkha or alienation, imperfection arises, and trying to know or to understand the Unconditioned in terms of the conditioned will always bring us a sense of lack, a sense of incompleteness.

In Buddhist terms, this is what we talk about as the arising of sankhāra – that bringing forth of a whole material/mental world and the attendant dukkha that arises within it. But when that is seen with knowledge and vision, when the mind is awake, then this is the ending of dukkha, the ending of illusory separation; we understand clearly the origin and nature of things.

In a way this is also what is represented by the Fall, in the Biblical sense – that separation which is eventually the source of knowledge, bought at the price of leaving the total fusion and wholeness of the Unconditioned, life in Eden. Our journey through life and our evolution as human beings is an evolution through this sense of separation to the quality of knowledge clarified, to where we realize the true nature of things. We find our way back to Eden, back to the peace of the Original Mind that was always there but we felt we’d lost only because our eyes were closed, our vision was absent and we didn’t see it. It’s like becoming so enraptured with all of the objects in this room or so worried about all the people, liking this one and not liking that one, becoming so caught up in the web of relationships that we feel there is no space in this place. “I need more space, I need more space, there’s just things and people and activity and…” The place is full of space, there’s nothing but space, but we just fail to see it.

The Unconditioned, the bliss of the mind’s own nature, is here right in our own hearts, it’s always right here behind every thought, behind every sound, inside every colour, every feeling, every mood; if we penetrate to the heart of it that same purity, radiance, peacefulness is right there, right here, if only we take the trouble to look for it.

This is pointing to the fact that in order to deal with the Fall, to deal with suffering and the inability that we have to establish certainty and completeness on the sensory level – or in terms of what we think, what we do and what we have – we can solve this simply through being awake. We solve the riddle through the true understanding and penetration of the sensory world, by the complete relinquishing of any illusion that wholeness can come from any thought, from words, from achievements or from possessions. It’s only through the true awakening in our own hearts to the fundamental nature of things – which is not just a clear idea but an actual transmutation of our vision of life right here within us – a breaking of the habit of self-identification that divides reality into subject and object, self and other – it’s only through this that we come to recognize absoluteness, we come to recognize certainty, we come to perfect proof, to completeness.20

In terms of Dhamma, spiritual teachings, we often talk about nonduality; this is because there is something in us which knows that wholeness is true, that is to say that any kind of apparent separation or fragmentation is somehow a mistake, an error. There’s something in our gut level feelings that tells us, “This just isn’t right”; there’s a longing for completeness, and this takes shape as desire. Desire is a sense of having something missing, so we look for an object of desire to fill that gap: longing for home – like Ulysses longing to return to Ithaca, that feeling driving him on and on through all the terrors and trials of a ten-year journey – being pulled home.

With any kind of desire that we experience, we feel that there is something missing and that, if only we could just get that thing: “If I could only achieve this or acquire that or get to this place then everything will be all right.” We want to be whole, we don’t want to be two, we want to be one. So tanhā , upādāna, bhava – craving, clinging, becoming – these, in a sense, come from the same drive that pulls us towards that realization of wholeness, the Unconditioned. In the moment of becoming, that thrill of, “At last I’ve got it, this is it, I have it,” that thrill is like an echo that comes from the thrill of wholeness, the satisfaction of knowing there’s not two, there is one.

It’s because that thrill doesn’t and cannot last that we experience dukkha, so the spiritual path is always pointing to the place where we can really find completion, where we won’t be disappointed, where that sense of wholeness and satisfaction won’t be conditional, temporary and fragile. The Buddha taught the Four Noble Truths based on the letting go of desire, arriving at nonduality. He said: first of all, stop looking for wholeness in terms of sense objects. This is where we really cause problems for ourselves. He also said, “Ignorance is the cause of suffering,” but this is perhaps a bit too subtle for most of our minds to grasp. Desire is the place where we can see the problem most easily, most readily. We can spot the mistake happening. So he taught us to see desire, notice desire but to not follow it. Just let desire pass through the mind like a wave. Let it come through the mind. Let it dissolve back into the silence, into the Unconditioned. Let desires end, relinquish, abandon them.

The Buddha uses a beautiful sequence of terms: viveka, virāga, nirodha, vossagga. This means seclusion or separation – this is viveka; then virāga, detachment; nirodha, cessation; vossagga, surrender or abandonment – this is the putting down, leaving alone of desire. It’s like putting down something in your hand which is burning hot, leaving it alone, walking away from it, not looking back – we let go of desire in this way.

The problem is that we don’t recognize that desire is desire. Often it can seem to be very reasonable: putting one’s mind onto a task and getting down to it. In spiritual practice there’s a lot of emphasis on making effort and using energy but often this is particularly difficult to be clear about. It so easily slips into the desire to become: that effort, doing the right thing, very easily overreaches itself and becomes a yearning, a racing ahead, a blind trying. Particularly if we are engaged in spiritual practice, what we want to become is something that has got all the right credentials. We want to become a good person, we want to become wise, compassionate, loving, unselfish and so on and so on. The objects of desire are all very wholesome and praiseworthy, but that very trying can be that which blocks the mind.

I had a very revealing experience a year or so ago, when I was on retreat in the forest here at Chithurst. I’d been about two weeks on retreat and my mind was very energized and concentrated. I came in to spend an all-night sitting on the new-moon day here in the house. I was very awake and found myself sitting up all night long without any trouble. I was sitting there full of energy with a mind concentrated and clear but all the time there was a feeling of adjusting and pushing and shoving: “Just a little bit more of this and a little bit less of that and, oh yes, nearly there, and oh, right, doing well here, yes, this is it, this is what I like, yes, oh no, no, gone, oh it’s slipped away, oops, O.K., what am I doing, yes, go back to what I was doing five minutes ago, right, O.K., a bit more of this, ah, right, yes, yes, getting there, nearly, that’s it, steady, steady, right...” and all night long this was going on. There was a nagging feeling of discontent, restless becoming, going on all the time. When the night was over and I was walking back to my hut in the forest, I felt a deep sense of irritation and disappointment, sadness that somehow I was getting it all wrong. The breakthrough into perfect peace had seemed so close, yet so veiled all night long, like pressing at a thin curtain, tantalizingly unable to get through.

It was just after dawn when I got back to the little hut. I lay down in this same kind of mood, fell asleep for about half an hour and then woke up. I was really energized, my body was still charged up from the night’s meditation and so I thought, “Oh, no. I can’t even go to sleep. This is really unfair!” So I shoved my bedding into an untidy heap in the corner and decided to forget the whole thing. “I’m not going to meditate. I’ll just lie here in a crumpled heap,” so I flopped down and just let go of everything – the result of this was that my mind instantaneously went into an absolutely clear, peaceful balanced state. It was as if I could hear the voice of Wisdom saying, “At last! I was wondering when you were going to stop all that mucking about. It was getting quite exhausting there.”

As I half sat, half lay there I experienced a wonderful, transcendent peacefulness and clarity. The mind seemed light, empty and void of personality. It was a tremendously liberating and wonderful experience. It was very clear that, all the way along, the trying was what had been obscuring the Truth; that bashing, thrashing effort in the mind, trying to get something and become something. Even though what I wanted to become was very reasonable, it was “I” that was doing it and that was what was creating all the problems.

The following afternoon, just by way of reiterating the predicament, I found myself sitting in the doorway of my hut, as I often did. The door was open but there was an insect, a bee, bashing away on the glass trying to get out. Over and over again it kept flying into the glass and bashing into it to escape, even though the door was open. I began to look at the poor thing, thinking, “Let me help you get out.” I got a little card and tried to get the card behind it to scoop it out around the window frame and release it, “Look, friend, all you’ve got to do is just go around this way, its right here; let me help you.”

But the more I tried to help it the more frantic and frustrated it became, the harder it flapped its wings and the harder it bashed itself against the glass. I kept saying, “No, no, no, it’s all right, don’t worry, just sit still and I’ll help you to get out.” Then I began to notice a distinct similarity between my own mind states of the previous night and this insect bashing away on the glass. So I thought perhaps I’d better leave it alone; and in exactly the same way, once I stopped trying to help it, after a little while the insect calmed down, it eventually got to the edge of the window frame and then, by just waiting for the right moment, with one quick move and a little flick with a piece of card, the insect was away. I thought, “How wonderful! This is exactly what was happening during the previous night: there I was, bashing away at the glass, longing for the Light – I could see the Light and was flying at it but kept colliding with time and the sense of self – resulting in frustration.” All that it had needed was a moment of inconsequential calm, when the fury and flurry had abated, patience, observation for when the time was ripe and then BOP! Freedom at last – the open door.

The state of freedom, wholeness, carefree peace is our original nature and we only appear to depart from it and feel the need for something to replace it because of avijja – not knowing, in its most profound sense. Space, light, selflessness: these are all words pointing to that inexpressible pure heart that is the centre of everything. It is from that wholeness or suchness that the sense of self and other arises – the arising of sankhāra is the division between self and other, subject and object, the sense of “I” and “the world.” This sense of self is the most basic illusion so, even if one is breaking the chain of Dependent Origination at “desire,” there is still the unconscious creation of the sense of “I” and “the world” or even “I” seeing the “Truth.”

In one of his teachings (the Pañcattaya Sutta, M102) the Buddha points out how, if some person is meditating and has developed a lot of insight and peacefulness, they might arrive at a blissful state of mind where there is clarity and knowledge; then the thought arises in them, “I am at peace, I am without clinging, I have attained Nibbāna.” Then that very thought proclaims the clinging which is still there. Even if there is just a sense of “I seeing the Truth” then there’s still a subtle sense of division, there’s still sankhāra there, subtly being created and producing the feeling of separateness and therefore imperfection.

Our goal is to break through even that, to be able to remain at the root, to go right back to the Source and break through even that sense of there being an observer. Just to let the mind dissolve in the ground of its own being so that there is no sense of “me” seeing the “Truth,” an observer and an observed, there’s only peacefulness, clarity and the sense of wholeness. The world of “things” is not formulated and therefore any idea that there could be certainty or “decidability” is without a basis – there is no thing there to be decidable or not – this is true completeness, proof of the Real. In knowing such completion, no shadow of imperfection of any sort at all can remain.

17 “…all knowledge about the physical world would be complete.” “The most fundamental laws and facts of physical science have all been discovered, and these are now so firmly established that the possibility of their ever being supplemented by new discoveries is exceedingly remote.” Albert Abraham Michelson, 1903 – two years before Einstein published his “Special Theory of Relativity.”

18 “All consistent axiomatic formulations of number theory include undecidable propositions.” Technically it reads like this: “To every ω-consistent recursive class к of formulae there correspond recursive class-signs r, such that neither ν Gen r nor Neg(ν Gen r) belongs to Flg (к)(where ν is the free variable of r)”!!!

19 “…behind much of today’s liveliest and most viable thinking in the academic world.”His insights have become the basis of what is known as “systems theory”; one of his most influential books being Process and Reality, published by McMillan.

20 “…we come to perfect proof, to completeness.” The Cistercian monk, Brother David Steindl-Rast, phrases this point very beautifully:

“At the peak of our Peak Experience everything suddenly makes sense. Your heart is touched and there is peace. Not that suddenly you found answers to all your questions. Not that all contradictions are suddenly reconciled. Not even your problems are solved. But you have hit upon something deeper than questions; more comprehensive than all contradictions; something that can support all problems without need for solutions. How strange. We usually think that we must trace our questions to the ultimate question to arrive at the ultimate answer. We are convinced that we must work our way through contradiction after contradiction to arrive at an ultimate reconciliation; struggle with problem after problem to find the ultimate solution. Yet, what happened here is something entirely different. For one split second we were distracted from our preoccupations with problems, questions, and contradictions. That child catching minnows in a tide pool, that line of a melody, that flash in our lover’s eyes, did it. For one split second we dropped the load of our preoccupations and the super-solution, the super-answer is suddenly ours, in one great super-reconciliation of everything.

“What paradox! When I drop the question, there’s the answer. In fact, we might begin to suspect that the answer is there all the time, trying to get through to us, while we are too preoccupied with our questions. But what disproportion between cause and effect. Why should one moment of true looking or listening yield what no amount of grappling with problems can wrestle from life? Our experience itself suggests an answer to this question. When we watch carefully, we notice that the child, the music, the loving glance, teased us for a moment into saying ‘Yes’ to reality, a very special ‘Yes.’ We were caught off guard. Our heart went out to this tiny fragment of reality and burst into an unconditional ‘Yes.’ But having said this kind of ‘Yes’ to the humblest fringe of reality, we have implicitly affirmed all there is. By drinking deeply from the stream we have said ‘Yes’ to the Source. That is why our humble encounter is truly mystical, truly an experience of communion with Ultimate Reality. And since Ultimate Reality is the very ‘coincidence of opposites,’ we should not be surprised if we experience this communion as paradoxical.”

Brother David Steindl-Rast, A Listening Heart, p. 39, Crossroads