MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH THOUGHTS

Get to know the mood of the mind from the time you wake up in the morning. What kinds of thoughts are being produced by the mood. Are they thoughts of the past or future? What’s the mood of the mind?

Maybe there’s nothing when you let go of thought. So, listen to sound. Just let go of thought and notice the silence of knowing.

Tune into the present moment.

Now tune into your body – the body sitting here, not as a concept, but as a visceral experience. Let the body and bodily feelings become conscious. The knowing, silent, conscious, silent consciousness, or knowing awareness, remains the same even if the object changes from body to feelings.

Whether you feel pain or discomfort, or the body is comfortable, the knowing doesn’t change because it is not a quality. Awareness is the space within which things are known.

Qualities come and go during meditation, so be the knowing.

Bring your attention to the centre of the chest. Feel the rising and falling of the chest with the breath.

When inhaling, visualise someone or a group of people who are dear to you. Name or imagine them, but don’t think about them. This isn’t about thought. It’s about connecting with endearment and affection. So, on the in-breath, mentally say the name of the person who is dear to you. On the out-breath, wish them, ‘May you be well.’

Just let your attention abide in the heart centre and remind yourself of what affection feels like.

After a few breaths, you can choose another person or group. Go through a few iterations like this.

Make that feeling of affection quite clear, strong, and obvious. Then you can let go of the naming of people and be with that affectionate attention one in-breath at a time.

The mind is very open, quiet, and composed.

COMING HOME

It is difficult to speak about the heart with intellect. With the word, ‘affection,’ I’m trying to use a different language to explain the felt sense of opening the heart. Again, this isn’t sentimental. To me, sentimentality is in the thought realm. Expressions like, ‘Oh, what a cute puppy,’ and ‘Oh, that’s nice,’ are fine. But, for me, the heart is something more profound. It’s not that you don’t feel for the cute puppy, but I’m trying to point to something deeper. Maybe this is more of a problem for men than women. In my experience, men, through conditioning, tend to look at the things of the heart with scepticism. They’ll say it seems sentimental, but let me reassure you, it is not.

Here’s an example of staying with the heart. This morning, I wanted to go online but the internet was down. We have another router near the workshop that works sometimes. So, I took my iPad to the workshop and managed to get connected. Earlier, when I discovered the wi-fi wasn’t working, I sensed annoyance. I was attentive to the annoyance arising in consciousness. I immediately went to and stayed with the heart – and the annoyance disappeared.

As humans, it’s natural for us to analyse and comment on our experiences but, for me, there is another way of participating in this world. We can relate to the world by intuitively tuning into physical sensations, by being sensitive to the energy coursing through the body and, most importantly, through the heart area.

Conversely, I know, for myself, I can be attentive to something, but it is very much in thought – there is a ‘me’ attending to ‘something’. Through inner comments, that ‘something’ is continuing to ‘live’ in the realm of thought.

Bearing witness

If I live from my heart a lot, then I notice the arising of, say, annoyance – like this morning. It wasn’t a difficult event for me. Annoyance arose simply because of not getting what I wanted. Usually, not getting what I want tends to produce thought. If I stay with the thought, it doesn’t cease the same way as going to the heart. If you decide to analyse the annoyance, you’ll remain in the thought realm. While that’s still witnessing, bearing witness from the heart seems much more powerful and immediate. If I stay with the heart and contemplate the annoyance that has arisen (inquiring: ‘What is that?’), then it is more like coming home. The heart is more my real home than thought.

Thought, I find, is becoming more and more an untrustworthy territory. I have stopped believing a lot of my thoughts. They’re just Māra’s words. I find that at the heart, there is direct contact with the way things are, rather than with all the complexities that thoughts bring forth.

As I said yesterday, affection has the quality of equanimity (upekkhā), an open-hearted abiding. Upekkhā is not experienced as a dismissal or deadness of the heart. In the little wi-fi experience, annoyance arose in consciousness because desire was frustrated. Also, the desire to try to connect to the internet did not develop further because it wasn’t given life through thought. It arose and ceased.

Now, if I’ve had many internet issues and invested a lot of negative energy in the preponderance and perversity of inanimate objects, then I would react angrily every time the problem arose. In this case, the annoyance would be stronger. This is called vipāka kamma.

Going to the heart does not mean things are going to disappear instantly. It all depends on previous conditioning and one’s actions. There is an assumption that as soon as you awaken to something, it is going to go away. This is a mistake many people make. Our practice is a marathon. It takes a long, long time for most of us. Awakening to the way things are means that, at least, you know the resultant kamma or the momentum of consciousness around these issues. Then the work is to bear witness to it. If you can bear witness from the heart, then I have found that you are not going to thought, and the issue isn’t given more life. It can feel messy and contracted at times. But you also know that the work is very immediate there.

Trust awareness, as it is rewarding. The kammic momentum of now has a chance to be released from consciousness.

Anyway, it is hard to explain in language. So, I recommend people get more conscious of their life experiences through different avenues, rather than just through thought, intellect, analysis, and judgement. You can perceive life through other senses too.

INSTRUCTIONS ON LYING DOWN MEDITATION

There’s formal practice and then there is 24/7 mindfulness practice. Formal practice involves taking a posture of choice. When you think about sitting meditation, you are establishing a clear structure for your practice. You may sit on a zafu with your knees lower than the back, and your hips pushed forward. You open up your spine and chest, and in this way, the body’s posture is well set. You can also establish this formality when sitting on a chair. After finalising the posture, you resolve to not fidget or move around. A formal posture is good because it sets up your mind for meditation. The rigour of the posture will remind you of what you are doing. You won’t forget and fall asleep (which often happens).

You want to take on that same formality in lying down meditation – yoga nidra. Register in your mind that this is a formal posture, and that you’re meditating.

Lying down meditation almost sounds like cheating: ‘I’m going to go to bed and meditate. Come on, that is too easy. There’s got to be pain to gain something.’ Actually, it is difficult to stay awake in lying down meditation. It does not work for everyone all the time. Sometimes you have lots of energy, but your body does not. I used to maintain a good Full Lotus posture as a youngster. I loved it because the form provided a strong, energetic foundation. But I did my knees in, so the posture had to change.

To set up a good lying down meditation posture, find a comfortable surface, such as your mattress. A monk who was practising lying down meditation ended up with sore heels because he was lying on a hard surface. You can’t meditate for two hours on a hard surface!

Lie down like a seal, in Savasana (Corpse Pose in Yoga), or pick a posture where you are really open. Make sure your knees are slightly folded in and up, as flat knees place a lot of pressure on the small of the back. Some people meditate with their knees up and feet flat on the mattress. It is hard to hold that posture for a long time. I recommend a pillow or a bolster under your knees. In this posture, you can attempt long meditations.

Just like the knees, make sure the neck is well supported. My neck was too far back in the beginning, so I had to get a proper pillow and tuck in the chin like I do in the sitting posture. It took a while, but I figured it all out eventually.

The first instruction I got, and this was years ago, was to then adjust the posture and make it ten percent better. That was helpful because I would get myself settled and then, of course, the way the body works, it doesn’t like it. So, I would adjust ten percent, and then the instruction was, ‘Don’t move, itch, scratch, or roll.’ Of course, within 30 seconds, you will sense an itch. Now, the formality of the meditation is ‘not moving’. Logically, I know this itch is not life-threatening. I do not have to move. In sitting meditation, the knees would hurt. It would feel life threatening. You would feel like you must move but you know you can sit through this desire to move. Similarly, you can lie through the desire to move. When you don’t follow the desire, you get a sense of the whole body in awareness as well as of the body being a mass of vibrations that keep arising, evolving, and ceasing.

When you deliberately stop moving, it’s difficult to not roll onto your side because that’s the posture of annihilation or sleep. There is a desire to roll onto your side. When practising lying down meditation you are going against all those signs of falling asleep because you are not planning to nap – I hope. You sustain that posture without moving.

During lying down meditation, it is common to experience energy releases. At that point, one wants to move. Sometimes I will feel a little pinprick in my arm. If I just let that be the way it is, the arms or legs will flick, releasing energy. The body settles in even more after that, and it becomes quiet. It is interesting to be able to sustain that posture for a long time. In this posture, you can learn to be awake in ‘sleep.’ As you become proficient in it, you might be tired, but you are awake. You get to the point where you’re awake, but you can’t move your body, as it is asleep. It is an interesting investigation. During a retreat, if you can toggle between lying, sitting, and walking postures, then you can do long periods of meditation without it becoming too painful.

Finally, with lying meditation, snoring is great. You might be lying there and then, ‘oink,’ you hear the little piggy. This happens because your mind dips deeper into consciousness, which is profound sleep. It goes there and falls into it. The snoring alerts you to that. Obviously, if you do fall asleep, there might be some resonant snoring, which your whole family will talk about later. This is just that initial dropping of the mind into deep sleep. Then you are awakened, but you’re actually not because you weren’t really asleep. You’re able to go into that deeper state without falling asleep. It is obviously an interesting space to explore. Also, you do not have to hold up the body. There is not a sense of me holding up the body. It is an interesting investigation of the whole sense of me meditating or doing something and the struggle with the discomforts we experience.

I sound like a salesperson for lying down meditation – but give it a go. You could end up with a posture that you can use when you have a lot of energy, but your body doesn’t want to sit still. That is very true if you are waking up at two in the morning. Rather than fidgeting, you can determine to lie down and experiment with the posture. Try it out. Even if you fall asleep, you can’t lose anything. It is much better than being in a negative state and annoyed at not being able to fall asleep or have your usual eight-hour snooze.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH BODILY SENSATIONS

Let’s come to that sense of open-heartedness, and then do a whole-body sweep to get a sense of the body in awareness, which is helpful for lying down meditation. I can explain that, so take a posture of your choice.

Start with sound: listening; knowing; receptive awareness. Let the sound come to you.

Savour the stillness of knowing. There is the movement of sound, the changing nature of sound, and there’s this still knowing.

Feel the rising and falling of the chest.

Tune into the sense of kindness that I’ve been talking about. If you want, use the image of someone dear to you on the in-breath and feel that endearment and kindness when you imagine them.

Sustain that sense of kindness from one breath to another. This isn’t about you getting some kind of loving experience. It’s remembered, not as a story, but as a heartfelt note.

Tune in.

With that attitude of kindness, localise your attention on the body. Begin with your face. Make conscious the feelings in your mouth. Notice the language: ‘Make conscious. Let it come into full awareness.’ You are not looking for sensations. Rather, you’re allowing attention to dwell there, and then things just appear, don’t they? For example, what does full awareness of the mouth mean? Well, you start to let your teeth and tongue come into the stream of consciousness.

Move your attention to your ears, the outer structures, and the ear canal. Let that become conscious. Sometimes you feel obvious things, and other times, there’s nothing much there. The most important thing is awareness.

The quality of the sensation doesn’t really matter. Localise your attention at your nose. Let that become conscious or come into full awareness. Don’t squeeze your eyes trying to see or look for something.

Receptive knowing.

Your eyes, the eye sockets, and the eyes are sensitive areas with lots of vibration and are tickling with pressure and pain. Let them be conscious.

Your temples and the top of the head. You are not looking for something but you’re allowing what is to become conscious. There isn’t the stress of looking for something. It’s just what it is.

The back of the head. Let it become conscious.

Feel your whole head. Now, perceive the head in awareness rather than you in your head. That contributes to the perception of space and awareness, rather than the perceptions of me, my body, and my head.

So, the feelings and sensations are changing and are in awareness. It’s no longer a concept but felt more like energy or changing vibration.

Feel your shoulders, upper arms, elbows, lower arms, and hands. These are in awareness.

Keep savouring the stillness of knowing.

Feel the clothing on the chest, and the movement of your chest. The back, upper spine, and ribcage. Let that all become conscious in whatever way it does.

The abdominal area, skin, lower spine, lower ribcage, and organs in the abdominal area. The bones and the organs in the pelvic area. The hips, thighs, knees, legs, and feet. Let them become conscious.

Notice that we’re not trying to achieve anything with this. We’re just sustaining awareness of the way things are.

Now, kind of step back, as it were. Feel the whole body. Again, not as a concept, but as changing temperatures, vibrations, pressure, and pains.

I call this whole-body awareness. This experience is in awareness.

Listen to sound and notice that sound is in awareness.

The space of awareness contains bodily feeling, sound, thought, and emotion.

Perceive awareness as spacious. You want to use this perception in lying down practice.

Now, let go of paying attention to a particular object, and be the knowing itself. It’s hard to describe that. The objective world of experience is changing. You hear things. Thoughts come and go, and there’s just this witnessing of change and knowing change.

The knowing is unchanging. That’s why we say, ‘Be the knowing.’ If you get too distracted by thought and you want to ground yourself, then go back to the breath, one breath at a time. Compose and collect the mind on the breathing.

If you can, experiment with choiceless awareness where you are only choosing to be the knowing.

THE HARBOUR

In 2011, I took a trip with two friends to the Atlantic coast of Canada. My mother wanted me to scatter her ashes in the Atlantic Ocean, so that they might drift back to Latvia, her motherland. This heartfelt request was very poignant. It made me understand why refugees never get over the yearning for their homelands.

My friends and I planned to scatter the ashes kayaking off the coast of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, Canada. Ken had his late father’s shaving brush, and Adrienne, her dog’s ashes. Ken’s father died two years before my mom passed away in 2011. Coincidentally, we set out to sea at the base of Gampo Abbey where Bhikshuni Pema Chödrön is the principal teacher. I’d never kayaked in an ocean. I’ve mostly canoed in freshwater lakes and rivers. Fortunately, Adrienne had experience in coastal kayaking. She guided us throughout the trip. Altogether we spent five days camping on the rocky coast of Cape Breton.

One day, we set up our tents too close to the tideline. In the middle of the night, we had to scurry up the banks, as the tide was coming in, and we almost lost all our belongings. The next day was beautiful, sunny, and calm, so we went into the sea on our kayaks. Out on the open water, I chanted and gradually emptied my mom’s ashes. I was able to scatter some more off the Baltic coast in Latvia on another occasion. Next, Adrienne scattered her husky’s ashes. Finally, Ken tied a rock to his dad’s shaving brush and dropped it into the ocean. It was very emotional, and we all cried.

We then paddled for some time along the coast. It was beautiful. Little pilot whales and a herd of a hundred or so seals dove off from the shore, as if to see us. It was sweet to see curious youngsters, teenagers I guess, slip off the rocks, come up through the waves, look at us, and then dive down and disappear into the water. We noticed that one seal had stayed back on the shore. It took a while for us to realise the seal was dead. It was poignant. Mom had died, and yet, there was all this life around me, as well as death. It was very moving.

The ocean swells were getting bigger as we continued along the coast. My kayak was almost surfing along the waves’ crest. Adrienne became anxious because she understood that our little sea kayaks needed to get to shore. Before casting off onto the sea that morning I had not noticed a little harbour. As the ocean swells grew, they pushed us towards what I then saw were concrete walls surrounding the harbour. Then suddenly a narrow mouth, an opening to this haven appeared, just as a breathtaking wave shoved us through it. And inside, the water was still; a beautiful, beautiful stillness. It reminded me that Nibbāna is sometimes referred to as the Harbour or Refuge in the texts. Language can make it hard to find the right word. That is why the language in Buddhist texts is often around imagery. So, this visceral experience of the safety of a harbour in my little kayak was insightful. I understood deeply why they chose the image of a harbour to describe Nibbāna – it is safe and is a refuge.

STILLNESS

I was once asked, ‘What does enlightenment taste like?’ I replied, ‘Chocolate!’ But it is like the stillness in the harbour.

Words are always dualistic. For instance, if you describe ‘it’ as ‘it is happy, and not sad,’ then you get into the dualism of experience. Nibbāna cannot be contingent on experience or circumstance. This is not an experience you have, but something you notice is there all the time. Otherwise, it would not be transcendent. That is why, when we talk about the Dhamma, it is always here and now. It’s not a matter of time. It is timeless (akāliko). As explained in the Homage to the Dhamma chant, you do not search, but realise here and now.

I’d like to return to that contrast of the repetitive swelling of the ocean waves to the still waters of the harbour. Riding in the kayak on the surface of the increasingly frightening waves, one could feel the power of that body of water. You do not want to be out there unless you are a whale! That very image of sensory experience may suggest swells can be fun, but the danger is in forgetting that they are born and die constantly. The stillness, by contrast, is neither born nor dying: It simply is.

The closest approximate experience would be when I ask you to listen to sound and then savour the stillness of knowing – because knowing is still, isn’t it? At least, until thoughts arise. The thoughts are usually habitual or based on trying to get something or get rid of something.

It is not a question of sense experiences being bad. It is just that you will not find stillness when continually shifting and moving from one sensory experience to another. But, in the movement, you can notice stillness. While listening to sound, you can also notice the stillness.

I like to listen to oratory. I enjoy the speeches of Barack Obama and Dr. Martin Luther King. During those moments, I’m listening to an object, and perhaps enjoying its beauty, which is fine. But I can also listen to change and not be concerned about the quality of the object. I can notice the stillness of knowing and witness change. The emphasis then is on awareness.

You can apply this suggestion to your meditation. Remember, the quality of your meditation is not going to change. You may still feel restless, anxious, or something else when meditating. But if you are interested in the ‘Harbour,’ rather than in the qualities or the comings and goings, then you understand the project. There can be these ‘waves’ of restlessness, but what about the harbour in the waves?

The harbour is the stillness of knowing. That is why, in the previous meditation (p87), I was encouraging you to ‘listen to sound and savour the stillness of knowing; feel your body and savour the stillness of knowing.’ These are very good images for me, reflections of presence in my own life.

You can try to do this in family situations. I’ve heard that a lot of young adults are living with their parents now. The music preferences of these generations are different. Imagine a 60-year-old mom or dad living with a 25-year-old daughter who likes rap or heavy metal. The loud percussion sounds can be disturbing. Yet, you’re in that situation. Can you find stillness in that loudness? If you can come to the sense of, ‘it’s like this,’ you will start to notice stillness within the movement.

Now, difficult emotions can be more complicated and contractive. In those instances, my suggestion would be to bypass intellectual processes. We are well trained in analysing problems. When we try to figure out a difficult emotion with thought, we are in the same thinking realm. It doesn’t work. Whereas, if you can feel the strong emotion in the body and heart, then you bypass judgement and all the analyses. You are directly with the emotion. For example, anger is not a thought. It is visceral and a felt sensation in the body. The more you can be directly in contact with that difficult emotion, the more you will understand it. More importantly, you can understand it in a way that isn’t analytical. You realise this emotion is something that has arisen, endured, and has been cast away. Each time you have a strong experience of something, and you witness it, you understand: ‘It is like this’ – and see that it is also changing. That realisation is right understanding, one of the factors of the Noble Eightfold Path.

Awareness is quite ordinary. It’s not going to blow your head off. You may think, ‘Well, that can’t be it. It has to be more than that.’

We often don’t trust in the awareness of change because it seems unimportant. We want something but this desire mind will only find another condition, another experience, or contingent object. So, think of the stillness of knowing as the harbour, the refuge, which is awareness itself.

HOMAGE TO THE DHAMMA

[Handa mayaṃ dhammābhitthutiṃ karomase]

[Now let us chant in praise of the Dhamma.]

Yo so svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo

The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One,

Sandiṭṭhiko

Apparent here and now,

Akāliko

Timeless,

Ehipassiko

Encouraging investigation,

Opanayiko

Leading inwards,

Paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhi

To be experienced individually by the wise.

Tam-ahaṃ dhammaṃ abhipūjayāmi tam-ahaṃ dhammaṃ sirasā namāmi

I chant my praise to this Teaching, I bow my head to this Truth.

[bow]

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH MOVEMENT

Things are moving in awareness. Inquire into that during this meditation. You also want to have an extremely easy way to remember the present moment. It’s not that you are not here, but you’ll need an object to get a sense of remembering and knowing the present moment, which I like to describe as ‘know that you know’. I use sound. The idea is receptive knowing.

Observe yourself. Are you trying to notice a particular sound or just letting sound be what it is? If you are not trying to find the sound, you are not only grounding yourself in the present moment, but also noticing the stillness of knowing.

I can hear the wind blowing through the trees. It is raining now and then, which is the change. Know the stillness of knowing. Of course, it is hard to sustain that knowing because we go off into thought. So, keep returning to that still knowing.

Sometimes you’re trying to control, forcefully hold the attention or get something during meditation, so bring your attention to the centre of the chest. Don’t tighten your eyes or hands. You are not trying to get anything. You’re just localising attention. Feel the sensations in the body, and there is that stillness of knowing.

An attitude of kindness is crucial and helpful, so bring to mind the image of someone dear to you on the in-breath. Connect to that tone of mind, which could be grateful, affectionate, or appreciative, when you think of that person. The in-breath reminds you of them. On the out-breath, say, ‘May you be well’ or ‘Thank you.’

In meditation there is no rush to get anywhere. There isn’t an urgency to achieve anything. Feel the whole breath. We sometimes call this the breath body, breathing from the beginning to the end, and from the end to the beginning. All this time, there’s the stillness of knowing for one in-breath and one out-breath. Now this could be sufficient, but you can localise your attention even more. An interesting place to observe your experiences is at the end of the out-breath. What is the end of the out-breath? What happens there? Make a note of that.

There remains the stillness of knowing and whole-body awareness. You may notice that you tense your hand or face on the in-breath, or your mind wanders at the end of the out-breath. By choosing this sort of a window to localise your attention, you heighten the capacity to sustain awareness moment by moment. You are not trying to get anything. It is just training in still knowing for spans of time.

WHEN PRACTICE FALLS APART

Q: What happens when your practice falls apart?

A: You put a lot of time and effort into the practice. You try to lead a skilful life, but sometimes it becomes complicated, difficult, or painful. People fall seriously ill, they are betrayed, or get burned out while caring for others. These are the kinds of situations we face as human beings. When they arise, it is very disheartening, and sometimes our meditation practice isn’t working.

What’s important for me is to come back to the basic principle of making conscious the way things are. I don’t tend to use the word, ‘mindful,’ much. Since it is frequently spoken of in so many different ways, I’m not sure what people mean when they use it. So, I prefer to not use that word, in case it’s misunderstood.

With the phrase, ‘make conscious the way things are,’ I’m trying to point to awakening to the moment without any desire or necessary focus in it; just recognising that life is this way now. That is easy to say, but hard to do. Often, there isn’t an awakening to the way things are. Rather, there’s a resistance to the way things are, or there’s a wanting for things to be different from how they are. Also, the mind is very quick. The habituated instances of resistance and wanting appear quickly. Habits appear suddenly.

During guided meditations, I often suggest that practitioners make conscious the feeling in a body part like the mouth. When doing these types of body meditations, I suggest you simply recognise the different bodily sensations instead of focusing on one area. Hopefully, the sensing is free from desire. If you understand that idea in something very simple like a bodily sensation, then you can encourage it with another sense base like sound: make sound conscious; invite sound. This way you can return to the same receptive awareness. I also found it useful to quietly repeat terms like ‘non-desire,’ ‘non-becoming,’ and ‘non-resistance’ to develop this quality of receptive awareness where there is an open attention to the way things are.

It is more difficult to make negative emotions conscious. With a negative emotion, you might have a whole history of trying to figure it out and getting caught up in the storyline. You may be thinking that you must fix it, or you may be blaming yourself. For instance, the arising of one negative emotion might lead to an hour of self-disparagement. It gets complicated. So, return to the simplicity of ‘it’s like this’; ‘make conscious the feeling’; or ‘let the feeling become conscious’. Even if the meditation seems to be falling apart, trust in awareness.

If you start there, then, hopefully, you’ll see the resistance to the way things are. You may be telling yourself, ‘My meditation is pathetic.’ Instead, open to, ‘this is what pathetic feels like,’ or ‘this is hopeless, and this is what hopeless feels like.’

The feeling of hopelessness is different from the thought, ‘I am hopeless.’ That is the key. The issue is self-narratives are driven by a feeling of hopelessness and an attachment to that self-identity.

However, the feeling is real. Telling someone, ‘it’ll be alright,’ or ‘it’ll change,’ doesn’t validate their feelings. For them, it’s not alright. It is hopeless. So, instead consider being more empathetic and acknowledge, ‘That must be really, really difficult.’ This way, you are connecting with them in their predicament. Maybe after that you can have a conversation. You will have a way of talking to them because you’ve validated their feelings instead of dismissing them.

A compassionate strategy for yourself and others would be to make conscious the feelings. Name the terrible feeling of betrayal, hopelessness, the sense of losing the plot, inadequacy, nervousness, physical pain or whatever it is. All these feelings are part of the ‘curriculum’.

The challenge is in trying to diagnose the issue. It is not the pleasantness or unpleasantness of any experience, but rather it’s the attachment to the desire to have it otherwise. Yet, what could be more natural than not wanting unpleasantness?

Sometimes we’re faced with complex life situations. Maybe someone’s been betrayed in a horrible way, or they had to deal with chronic illness. The accumulation of all that stress will create huge strains on the nervous system. The result will be difficult and unpleasant. If, however, we can get to awakening to the feelings as objects in awareness, then we won’t get lost in the self-narratives that run on from these situations. There is a huge difference between recognising a feeling of hopelessness as an object and running with thoughts of hopelessness. This is what non-grasping is all about. Stay alert, as non-grasping is not a magical cure. When you ‘notice’ something, that thing is not going to cease right away. All things have a ‘life’ of their own. If that ‘life’ has been conditioned into the mind through adverse circumstances – which is no one’s fault – then it is going to take tremendous patience and endurance to constantly witness the condition until it ceases.

I’m quite happy now. But there have been times when I’ve been blindsided by difficulties and my psyche has gotten out of whack. It felt like there was no grounding in those moments, nothing seemed to work except running around trees or something like that. Or just walking, walking, walking, and walking, until somehow, balance was restored.

At all times, there can be this constant reference to awakening within the framework of moral virtue and social responsibility. With this, you can somehow get through tough situations.

In painful situations, if you can internalise, ‘stress feels this way’ – without trying to fix it – then you are able to create some space around it. But the attitude might be, very quickly, to try and fix things by going to the object of meditation with the hope it will rectify the situation. The problem with the trying-to-fix method is that you are pushing away issues that can’t be brushed aside. They need to come into consciousness to no longer be a threat.

The way of non-grasping is the way of just knowing without all the narratives of thought.

In Buddhism, the ideas of grasping and attachment are always around self-thinking. It’s not about the experience itself. The experience itself is conditioned by previous events that are triggered into consciousness. They could also be constantly retriggered by circumstances. The experiences are natural phenomena and neither good nor bad, but nonetheless painful. Self-thinking then picks them up in whatever patterns it does (e.g. ‘This is hopeless’ or ‘I’m terrible’). It remembers. You have to work with self-thinking as an object and try to see, ‘Yeah, that’s what self-thinking is doing.’

Then ask yourself, ‘What is it really like, this feeling of, say, hopelessness?’ With this question, you’re coming back to the grounding of the awakened mind. You have to do that again and again until its power dissipates.

Notice that the sense of personality is sustained by compulsive habits of the thinking mind.

If self-doubt comes up, then know it as a mood, a type of mindset. It only creates a personality when believed as through thought.

If you can see the mood and have the awareness that this is self-doubt, then there’s no fuel to keep it going. It still has the feel of history though. If you were a strong self-doubter for many years and have finally managed to create some space around it, then it can still come up a lot. The only problem there is the I-thinking, me-thinking, and my-thinking mind. That’s what we mean by attachment.

The way through is the experience of right understanding: all conditioned thoughts and mindsets are empty of self. There is suffering, but no one is suffering.

We are not saying there’s no self. We’re just saying that this experience, in whatever way it might be, is not who you are. It is a painful natural phenomenon. Running with it by thinking about it makes it worse. It’s a wrong perspective, wrong view, and wrong understanding because that’s not who you are. There is no personal entity in it. But it is personal in the sense that you are experiencing it. This is what we try to differentiate. There is individuality as well as individual formations of mind-body, and they’re all natural. While its natural functions are coming through consciousness, none of that can be your real home. Awareness knows ‘that,’ and you begin to see awareness is what you can trust.

It’s important to understand the Buddha’s teaching of anattā (not-self, impersonal, without individual essence).

Here’s a Zen joke about anattā. A man says, ‘There’s no self.’ The rōshi (an experienced teacher) kicks him in the shins. The man asks, ‘Why did you kick me?’ The rōshi responds, ‘There’s no self. What’s the problem?’

The question is not, ‘How can I perfect personality?’ Rather, ‘How can I know personality as an object that comes and goes through self-thinking?’ Once you start to not believe in self-thinking, then these worldly ideas are not problematic. It may take a lot of endurance.

Once you have trust and faith in awareness, of knowing change in this way, then you have a way of being with phenomena. This is what we mean by emptiness in Theravada Buddhism.

Emptiness doesn’t imply empty of content or emotional vacuity. It means, ‘The sense of self that I’m identifying with is actually just a phenomenon in nature.’ You may ask, ‘Who am I?’ Well, that is the ultimate question, which cannot be answered through thought because it’s more than that. Abide in trusting awareness. Things will become obvious.

Dhamma of frustration

Trusting in awareness of change opens the heart to what Luang Por Chah would say is our real home. Luang Por Chah was very good at creating situations that frustrated desire. When asked whether his teaching method was mettā bhāvanā, ānāpānasati (mindfulness of breathing), or body sweeping, he said, ‘Toraman’ (frustration). I misunderstood it as torture. Twenty years later, I realised my translation of the Thai word was wrong. When I asked Ajahn Jayasaro, he clarified that toraman means frustration.

Luang Por Chah would, quite deliberately, set up situations, which were not harmful, but frustrating. The classics were, as you know, long talks. Some talks would be four hours long. You knew he was playing with you. He would ask, ‘So, why are you suffering?’ The mind would respond, ‘Because you won’t shut up.’

I tried looking at the cause of suffering. Is it Luang Por Chah talking for long periods of time, knees hurting, etc., or is it that I wanted something else? Yes, I wanted to go and meditate somewhere else when it was perfectly possible to meditate where I was situated.

Luang Por Chah would keep pounding at the Four Noble Truths: ‘Okay, there is suffering right now. What’s the cause?’

He was fearless. There would be around 50 monks, all internally whining, ‘Oh, please stop.’ But he would just go on and on. It had an interesting effect. I was in a situation where it was hard to meditate. I was sitting on a concrete floor. Mosquitoes were biting me. It was too hot. I didn’t understand the language, as Luang Por Chah spoke in Thai. I just kept bringing up the mantra, ‘Why am I suffering?’ I realised it was because of attachment to desire – the desire to not be there, not to be in pain, and to instead be doing yoga nidra.

I was basically whining to myself. Sometimes, there would be a breakthrough. I was able to eventually accept: ‘Oh, this is the way it is now. It’s just pain;’ ‘It’s boring;’ ‘It’s just mosquitoes biting. And hey, it’s alright. I’m not going to die.’ That was actually pretty easy because I wasn’t stressed out with anything except my own mind. That kind of lesson was incredibly valuable. It taught me to always go back to the basic question of, ‘Well, what’s the problem?’

The idea in the Four Noble Truths is of discontent. There is suffering; there is a cause, which is attachment to desire; the end of suffering is the cessation or letting go of desire; and the method is the awakening to all of that by following the Noble Eightfold Path. It’s very much a medical diagnosis. You have a disease; the cause of the disease is known; the prognosis is good; and there is good health at the end of the tunnel with the letting go of attachment to desire.

In a contemplative life, you have to see the situation is ‘like this.’ Then you must diagnose it. Ask, ‘What do I want that I don’t have? And what do I have that I don’t want? What is the problem here?’

The experience is not the problem. That concept is hard to wrap our heads around. So, let’s revisit my experience of sitting and listening to Luang Por Chah for hours.

One would think Luang Por Chah’s talks were always inspiring. Not really. It doesn’t work that way. If they were, then I probably wouldn’t have gotten any wisdom out of them. So, what was the problem with Luang Por Chah’s long talks? Was it boredom, painful knees, mosquitoes, the lack of understanding, or loneliness? Or was the problem that I didn’t want any of those things? Once I understood that, I could apply the same diagnostic method to more serious issues like social anxiety, fear, and self-disparagement:

What’s the problem? Is it fear?Yes, that’s the problem.No, that’s not it.The fear has risen. I can’t do anything about it.So, what’s the problem?Ah, it’s the desire not to have the fear.

That realisation took a few years. Once I understood that fear was horrible, it was okay because now, I could sense, ‘Fear feels this way.’ Getting to the point of accepting, ‘it’s like this,’ is a huge step, isn’t it? It feels like this because quite often the desire not to have it arises quickly. This desire then kick-starts the mental proliferation. So, worrying about something is typically driven by fear. If you don’t see that and your thinking mind takes over, then you can feel hopeless or get depressed.

This ‘awakening to the way things are’ is very profound. It’s kind of the beginning and end of the Path. As you take refuge in awakened consciousness, you begin to see it as your home ground. It liberates you from entanglements. You gain confidence. When the entanglements or attachments to greed, hatred, delusion, and fear come up, you see it as a chance to not only purify the mind, but also to make that refuge solid. The thing that plagued, crushed, or defeated you in the past ironically opens like a gateway. Not that one likes it. It’s still unpleasant, but you can consider entanglements as good opportunities for spiritual growth. With sincere, insightful understanding you see the problem is desire and an attachment to this changing realm. The liberation from that attachment is the cessation of desire.

When I began to see my fearful responses to life as conditions, I could see the desire not to stay with it: ‘I don’t want this.’ I was able to stay with it and the desire eventually ceased. When desire ceases, the heart is open and receptive. The mind is equanimous and quiet too.

Those were some of my travails and traumas. Obviously, I don’t experience them now. But when I got blindsided by complex events, my meditation did fall apart. There was something deeper though. Awareness was there. I kept being a monk and doing ‘monkish’ things in a confused manner. People were concerned about me. I was perturbed too, but somehow, I just kept going.

Taking care of my mother helped me a lot. I was really floundering, and suddenly, my mom needed me. I had to stay focused on the job, which was all about service. That was helpful, as I loved my mom.

If you have a whole grounding in this understanding, then it is functioning subconsciously. We describe this as ‘the practice clicking in.’ If one’s never done this kind of work, then it can be confusing because you don’t have the psyche and viewpoint to be with these things.

So, my advice to the questioner is to go back, especially when everything fails, to the instructions that are the Four Noble Truths in the moment, not intellectually, but experientially and existentially: ‘So, what is it now? What’s the desire?’ Then be with the confusion. Be with the horribleness as an object in awareness. Again, it’s easy for me to say, but I encourage that grounding.

QUESTIONS & ANSWERS

Q: When you do mettā meditation, the benefits are almost instantaneous. I was wondering about the object or the person you are sending mettā to. Do the benefits spill over onto them?

A: Well, if you send an e-mail notifying them that you are sending mettā, they’ll feel good. But if you don’t, I do not know. So do both. Send mettā and an e-mail. You’ve got it covered.

I don’t find that way of talking about mettā bhavana in the texts. The thing is, you’re assuming that there is a ‘you’ and a ‘them’. In Buddhist philosophy, that’s problematic. I’m sorry. I don’t want to destroy your relationships. On one level, you feel good sending mettā. Other than that, I don’t know.

Now, is your consciousness different than my consciousness? Is the knowing different? I don’t know. Certainly, my knees and haircut are different from yours. Those are objects. But what about consciousness itself? This is where thought, for me, gets mysterious. So, I don’t go there. When I started meditating, I never picked up mettā bhavana as a practice of sending out energy. I did not learn it that way. I was taught that the mind can be imbued with loving-kindness by thinking of others. When the mind is filled with loving-kindness, it becomes a powerful antidote to all forms of judgement, criticism, and negativity. Also, the individual can participate in society with an attitude of loving-kindness.

I never learned to send out mettā and I don’t want to be a spoilsport with this. Go for it if the method works for you.

Sending out mettā always seemed to me to be an idea from the Christian tradition. My understanding of it is that the whole sense of individuality (I’m here and you’re out there) needs to be challenged if we’re going to take the teachings on anattā seriously. You can use it as a verbal strategy. For example, ‘Milena, may you be well. Bernard, may you be well.’ That can work. But at a deeper level, you have to question, ‘Who is this person? Is it the body, emotions, or personal history?’ For example, I live in Tisarana Buddhist Monastery in Perth, Canada. That’s not untrue. But is there a real ‘I’ there or a ‘me’ in this experience? That’s what we look into. Each time we investigate, the sense of self vanishes and there’s the emptiness of knowing. But it’s not vacuity. The emptiness of knowing is vibrant. It’s alive. It isn’t self-identified with this mind and body.

Q: What is ignorance?

A: In Buddhism, ignorance is viewed around the three characteristics of impermanence, not-self, and dissatisfaction: Ignorance is when, in that which is impermanent, you see permanence; when, in that which is not a self-entity, you see self; and when, in that which is unsatisfactory, you see satisfactoriness.

Let’s say you have a meditation, which is really neat. You have been waiting for years, and finally, your mind is blissed out, as described in the books. You feel like you’ve achieved a goal. The next day your mind is absolute twaddle during meditation. You lose it then. Why did that happen? You took the impermanent experience as being permanent. That is ignorance. As a result, you suffered. You took the whole experience of attaining bliss and losing it the next day personally. This view caused suffering. Plus, you invested a sense of satisfaction in the experience that was very short-lived, and hence it was unsatisfactory.

So, all experiences that arise and cease are unsatisfactory. It’s not bad or ugly. It’s just not the Unconditioned. It is important to understand that a beautiful experience is unsatisfactory because it’s bound to change. So, don’t make it more than it is. Enjoy it for what it is and be grateful. When it changes, accepting it as the way it’s supposed to be is wisdom. So, when that sense of attainment ceases and you start to feel self-doubt, tell yourself, ‘Oh, it’s supposed to change. Happiness is supposed to change to unhappiness.’ That’s wisdom.

Luang Por Sumedho’s book, Don’t Take Your Life Personally, would be a good one to read. Also, observe how much you’re suffering because of taking things personally.

As I mentioned earlier, there is individuality and individual responsibility. In Buddhism, that is what you have to get right. If you determine to not take it personally, but are socially irresponsible, you don’t understand the teachings. Buddhism has both. It espouses social responsibilities, strong ethics, a powerful sense of social norms and commitments, and social justice. Through the teachings about not taking it personally, we’re trying to find that deep peace and silence behind all experiences.

The three characteristics of saṁsāra are one way to define ignorance. Another definition would be not understanding the Four Noble Truths and that the cause of suffering is attachment to desire. For instance, with the fears I faced, I thought the cause of my suffering was fear. So, I ran away from it. I did not see that the problem was the attachment to fear through the desire of not wanting it.

You could talk about ignorance in various ways – such as being caught up in the conditioned realm and not noticing the Unconditioned.

Q: Please expand on how becoming is a form of desire and how to work with the compulsion of becoming.

A: The Pali word for becoming is bhava, as in bhava-taṇhā (desire for a future state). The English word, ‘desire,’ has a broad context. It can be good or stupid. There’s also biological desire. Taṇhā (thirst, craving) is desire conjoined with ignorance, as opposed to the desire to be free from suffering, which is a wholesome one. According to the teachings, not all desires are wrong.

Bhava-taṇhā (desire for a future state), vibhava-taṇhā (desire to get rid of) and kāma-taṇhā (sensual desire) are the three forms of desire the Buddha asked us to contemplate. I see kāma-taṇhā as the constant consuming of experience be it mental, visual, food-related, or sexual. If you’re always indulging in sensory experiences, then you’re not available to the Unconditioned.

Bhava-taṇhā is the sense of going somewhere or becoming something. The third is vibhava-taṇhā, a pushing away or rejection, where there is a sense of resistance. The way bhava or becoming might arise, specifically in meditation, is around reading too much about attainments. This is a kind of trouble we get into in Theravada Buddhism. We read about masters who worked diligently and had a fantastic experience. You also want that. You read about levels of concentration, and wish, ‘I’d like just a bit of that.’ In addition to this, every now and then you get a taste of something. Your meditation works and it’s not just about painful knees. You’re really in trouble if you’ve programmed yourself to get what the masters got; get what the texts say you should get; or get that experience you just had or the person next to you had.

I sometimes do interviews with small groups of people during retreats. In those interviews, people talk about the struggles they have in meditation. Every now and then, one person will look radiant, lit up with insight. Everyone else would naturally wish for a similar experience. That want would be bhava-taṇhā. It’s very insidious when you sit down with an agenda to either repeat the performance you had two years ago or get a certain level of attainment or concentration. That attitude is conjoined with ignorance, not awareness. Quite often, this cannot be noticed.

It’s easy to joke about it in this facetious way because I think we’ve all been there. We can relate to this bhava. We’ve also seen that you can be really, really trying and not actually noticing that you’re trying to get something.

That’s why the kind of language I’m trying to use is the language of, ‘What’s it really like now.’ Simple words. For example, ‘Listen to sound’, or, ‘Feel the wind on your face’. Just very ordinary experiences to get to that sense of non-becoming. In terms of contemplative language, I find the Noble Eightfold Path very helpful. We have right understanding, right thought, and right intention. This kind of thinking, for me, is not analytical. It is just popping in words that remind me of right understanding.

The project of enlightenment cannot be in time because anything in time must be born, and if it’s born, it will die. Your relationship to time becomes fundamental to your philosophical attitude towards this whole business. Freedom or the Unconditioned cannot be tomorrow or in the future. It does not make sense. It’s not possible. It can only be akālika dhamma, here and now; not a matter of time. This understanding begins to underpin your attitudes and the efforts you’re making. If you notice you’re trying to get something, then you’re beginning to undercut the whole sense of ‘me in time becoming something’. That insight, which is a part of right understanding, will serve your analytical process. Your thinking processes are now impelled, assisted, directed, or intended by those right understandings. You naturally start to use language (e.g. non-becoming and non-resistance) that enunciates or makes conscious your right understanding. All that conscious use of language can bring you into akālika dhamma.

Indeed, there are worldly forms of becoming. People have ambitions and want to achieve certain goals. Is achievement wrong? Are you going to live under a rock for the rest of your life and watch turtles? Take the case of building a monastery in central Ontario without enough funds. That’s a crazy, ambitious idea, isn’t it? Can the ambition be from goodness or from a sense of responsibility of wanting to put food on the table for the children and earn enough so that they can go to university? Those can be good ambitions. We have jobs, skills, and ambitions, but they don’t have to be egotistical. Your job becomes your monastery. Your family is your monastery. That’s where you learn.

Ambitions can be good. You’d like to improve your skills be it gardening, teaching, or woodworking. The whole becoming thing at a worldly level isn’t a recipe for being an uninteresting and boring person. There is beauty, culture, and art, which can all be uplifting. But worldly skills are ‘in time.’ If I want to improve my woodworking skills, then I need to study, work, and make mistakes. So, the development of skill is in time. The development of meditation, you could say, is also in time. You get better at it. But spiritual realisation is here and now; not a matter of time. So, the meditation skills you are developing are not for you to get something later, but to be better at knowing now. This is akālika dhamma.

Q: How do you discern whether to leave a situation or to stay with it and just accept the suffering?

A: Yes, it’s life, isn’t it? When do you retreat? There’s no easy answer but one considers the situation. If it is abusive, then get out of there, if you can. Also, if the situation is so overwhelming that you cannot be aware and mindful, then you’re heading for trouble because the stress you are experiencing is going to compound.

The other considerations are social responsibilities like children and finances. They are complex. There are no easy answers. I suppose you could be looking at things like: ‘I should be doing something’ or ‘I should be a certain way’. Be careful of those. Maybe there are cultural norms that are putting pressure on you to do something or a feeling of fear or insecurity. Get in contact with the underlying resistance to the situation. Ask yourself, ‘Why is it like that?’

I spoke earlier about a situation where I got burnt out. I got so overwhelmed by it that I didn’t see what was happening to me. The idea of strategic retreat must be considered in difficult situations. The idea that you should face and work through all the stresses you face is an absolute one that you should not hold on to, as it might crush you. That’s an absolutist, heroic mindset, which is just another sense of self and personality. This mindset could have been inculcated into you culturally. There is so much conditioning in that attitude. Try to look at the underlying self-view. If you’re exhausted and crying all the time, then you need space and help. That’s very important. But again, how do you know? I’m not sure. Seek the help of kalyāṇamittas (spiritual friends). They’re not going to preach to you. You can bounce off ideas with them. They can give you an external perspective, which is important. You don’t want to be alone during tough times. Kalyāṇamittas can provide you with information and protection when making tough decisions.

The monastic life is based on spiritual friendship. The Vinaya is not designed for solitude. Monks like solitude, but the Vinaya is designed for community living with kalyāṇamittas, so that we can help each other.

Q: Please explain the phrase, ‘Four pairs of persons, the eight kinds of noble beings,’ in the Buddha-dhamma-saṅgha-guṇā chant?

A: It refers to the four levels of attainment – stream-entry, once-returning, non-returner, and arahant. The commentary literature mentions two phases – magga (path) and phala (fruit) – for each level. It’s complex. But it’s talking about Aryans, which is a Sanskrit word for ‘noble’. This word is used in Theravada Buddhism, and these four levels refer to the Aryans or the noble disciples of the Buddha.

The phrase describes the path to the Deathless. There’s also a lessening of greed and hatred at each of these levels. The arahant is a fully awakened person. I would recommend reading No Worries to get a sense of the four levels of attainment. I think Luang Por Liem is fully attained from what he’s recorded as saying in that book.

The first level (stream-entry) happens when the first three fetters of sakkāyadiṭṭhi (personality view), sīlabbata-parāmāsa (attachment to rites and rituals), and vicikicchā (doubt about the Path) are broken. Personality view is taking things personally. For instance, rabbiting away with angry thoughts induced by self-view, such as: ‘That was idiotic’ or ‘I’m never going to forgive him.’ When I see anger as anger, I’m in the stream of Dhamma.

Doubt is when you don’t have faith in awareness. You keep doubting and trying to figure it all out. A lack of faith in the awareness of change blocks the deepening of wisdom. At that time, you’re in the stream of thought.

If I think my spiritual practice is a time-bound exercise which will get me enlightened later on, that’s a ritual to which one can get attached. For instance, I pray to a deity with the hope that the deity will look out for me in the future. This is a superstitious ritual. All rituals and superstitions are about time – whereas Dhamma is timeless, here and now, and not a matter of time.

BUDDHA DHAMMA SANGHA GUNĀ

(Qualities of the Buddha, Dhamma & Sangha)

Iti pi so bhagavā arahaṁ sammā-sambuddho

He, the Blessed One, is indeed the Pure One, the Perfectly Enlightened One.

Vijjā-caraṇa-sampanno sugato loka-vidū

He is impeccable in conduct and understanding, the Accomplished One, the Knower of the Worlds.

Anuttaro purisa-damma-sārathī

He trains perfectly those who wish to be trained;

Satthā devamanussānaṁ buddho bhagavāti

He is Teacher of gods and humans; he is Awake and Holy.

Svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo, sandiṭṭhiko, akāliko, ehi-passiko

The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One, apparent here and now, timeless, encouraging investigation,

Opanayiko, paccattaṁ veditabbo viññūhīti

Leading inwards, to be experienced individually by the wise.

Supaṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho

They are the Blessed One’s disciples, who have practised well,

Uju-paṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho

Who have practised directly,

Ñāya-paṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho

Who have practised insightfully,

Sāmīci-paṭipanno bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho

Those who practise with integrity —

Yad-idaṁ cattāri purisa-yugāni aṭṭha purisa-puggalā

That is the four pairs of persons, the eight kinds of noble beings —

Esa bhagavato sāvaka-saṅgho

These are the Blessed One’s disciples,

Āhuneyyo, pāhuneyyo, dakkhiṇeyyo, añjali-karanīyo

Such ones are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of respect.

Anuttaraṁ puññakkhettaṁ lokassāti

They give occasion for incomparable goodness to arise in the world.