ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This book, like much of life, is the result of wholesome collaboration. The sincerely diligent effort of dear friends spending many hours poring over these pages to get it to you, the reader, is truly commendable and leaves me amazed.

The inception of this book was the result of a meeting one afternoon at Tisarana when Nithya and Colleen Glass presented an idea that they had. The idea was to create a meditative companion – a sequel of sorts to The Contemplative’s Craft, which was published a few years ago. The content of this new book, they said, would feature transcripts of a retreat held during the COVID-19 lockdown.

Soon this idea gathered momentum and took shape into what you hold in your hands today. Along with Nithya and Colleen, the enthusiastic and continued support of the Ottawa Buddhist Society is something I’m deeply grateful for. Apart from hosting the retreat, they further offered to sponsor associated costs of this book. Most of its key members have been actively involved right from the beginning of this project.

Much gratitude to my dear friend Ajahn Sucitto whose skill and love of language have transformed spoken words into readable printed format. Despite his many teaching engagements and other commitments, he has given so generously of his time to correct, refine and polish this manuscript. His way with words is magical. Thank you, Ajahn, for working your magic.

Through this entire process, Nissanka Pussegoda, Joan Thompson, Philip Jurgens, Lisa Gorecki, Teri Phripp, and Corinne Baumgarten have always been available and provided recordings and other material that were the basis of the initial transcript. This was then painstakingly edited by Jane Brown, Vivienne Bartlett, Nithya, Colleen Glass and was passed on to Jan Andrews for another round of editorial work. Many thanks for your involvement and generosity.

Marsha Stonehouse was eager to contribute her sketches that provide lovely texture by representing scenes from life at Tisarana. Nicholas Halliday offered his skill with graphic design, and we couldn’t have asked for a better person for this task. Thank you so much, Marsha and Nick, for your artistic touch that has added such an appealing dimension to this book.

Finally, I’d like to express my heartfelt appreciation for Venerable Amarasiri’s involvement. Attending meetings, taking notes, responding to emails, et cetera, he encouraged us all with his kindness and generosity.

Memory is an unreliable faculty, so if I’ve forgotten to mention anyone’s contribution, please excuse my lapse. Know that even if you haven’t been mentioned by name, you have my most sincere appreciation and gratitude.

Much love,

Ajahn Viradhammo