EPILOGUE

There is the Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated and Unformed – this is one of the phrases from the Pali canon that can be described as the taproot of Ajahn Viradhammo’s spiritual cultivation. This commitment to and exploration of the Deathless has defined his spiritual pursuit and is the foundation of his teachings.

Ajahn’s teachings help us understand the three characteristics of existence properly, which leads one towards the exploration of transience, the sense of self, and the nature of experience. He often says, ‘That which knows suffering doesn’t suffer.’ Ajahn emphasises that the teachings of the Buddha would be incomplete if they do not encourage us to realise the Deathless.

Ajahn’s teachings motivate us to explore the relationships we create with objects and how an experience can be approached objectively. But by only exploring objects, do we lose sight of something beyond? The answer to this question, Ajahn Viradhammo emphasises, is not to be found in analysis or active thinking, but through unbiased observation, receptivity, and gentle curiosity – basically, with our heart. This is where our innate capacity to be aware abides.

By avoiding verbiage, which he describes as ‘loaded’ (with preconceived notions), technical terminology, and dogma, Ajahn skilfully uses day-to-day, simple language, and familiar metaphors to guides us in a manner that’s straightforward and direct. Setting aside confusing analyses and lists, he shares his own experiences with adopting the Buddha’s teachings in a way that is easily and enjoyably assimilable.

The preceding pages are transcripts of a retreat led by Ajahn Viradhammo in the late summer/early autumn of 2020. Amid the fear and uncertainty of the COVID lockdown, these hours of teaching and contemplation were a great source of uplift and inspiration to the participants. His unique, gentle, and wise offerings were and continue to be a precious gift in times of great turmoil and panic.

Over the years, Ajahn Viradhammo’s metaphors and phraseology have evolved. Yet, they are consistently faithful to the main implication of his explorations – awareness. As a student of Luang Por Chah and Luang Por Sumedho, his teachings are loyal to the ethos of the Thai Forest Tradition, which is: personal insight and meditative experience are the most dependable ways of understanding life. Honouring the advice of his teachers and by taking their teachings to heart, Ajahn’s voice is spontaneous, as he offers relatable, yet profound teachings.

After setting the stage with the traditional refuges and precepts, Ajahn Viradhammo presents the idea of receptivity, which he states is crucial to our spiritual growth. Receptivity moves us away from control, thereby reducing the possibility of stress during meditation. Receptivity is indeed where it all begins – where opinions and judgements gradually lose their footing. When we are receptive, we witness the arising of a spontaneous curiosity, unclouded by thought or doubt.

This curiosity is neither intrusive nor does it pull us away from the point of it all. It simply frees us from the confines of our thinking minds, which are often constricted by our habitual value judgements. A palpable sense of care and compassion accompany receptivity and curiosity – and they give rise to a feeling of acceptance and wellness.

A great reminder to the adept as well as to beginners is Ajahn’s encouragement that meditative practice is largely built upon reflection. Once the base of receptivity is in place, our curiosity around emerging sensations, thoughts, emotions, and memories leads us to reflect on cause and effect. We begin to realise that we add a lot to everything that arises. We add our likes, dislikes, judgements, and criticisms, which somehow distort what’s arisen into something quite different.

Ajahn encourages us to understand that reflection is the ability to bear witness by neither adding nor denying, akin to a mirror or the surface of a placid body of water. Something has arisen and we remain receptive and curious. We notice the background in which all things arise. We try not to embroider what should or shouldn’t be – we learn to let go of the drama. This naturally gives rise to a feeling of stillness and silence; a stillness in the midst of movement and a silence that can be touched even in the presence of sound. He calls this, ‘Listening with the heart’ or Tuning into affection’.

With this approach, we sustain our innate capacity to receive, empathise, and celebrate others’ successes in a way that’s not biased, coloured, or lopsided. We move towards experiencing the brahmavihāras in a manner that’s beyond intellect and analysis. We begin to understand and participate in what’s truly abundant, exalted, and immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

This, says Ajahn, is the inclination that spontaneously accompanies stillness, silence, and composure. It’s always there, but we habitually tend to overlook it as we are constantly preoccupied with activity or with objects. We can now see that our thoughts, attitudes, feelings, etc., which cause stress, anxiety, and alienation, are neither who we are nor are they definitive of our nature.

Witnessing in this manner engenders a wakefulness and alertness that takes us to spaciousness and freedom. What a relief to finally know that grumpiness has arisen and that I’m not a grumpy person. We then relax into this knowing, as there’s objectivity and space around whatever arises. Our hearts don’t feel cramped, restricted, or heavy. With willingness to accept, there’s relief – and the burden of judgements and mental proliferation gradually let go.

A large part of what we face when we are truly aware is not beautiful, comforting, or sublime. We come face to face with our fears, anxieties, criticisms, impulses, etc. We see how we are compelled to immediately satisfy the demanding voice of desire. Facing all this requires commitment and confidence.

By trusting awareness and simply allowing emotions to arise and have their say, we do ourselves a great favour. Their energy runs out and they diminish, subsumed into the very awareness that bore them. We learn to witness the process of their cessation. Even if it’s only for a moment, it gives us an undeniable taste of freedom. May these pages offer you the same sense of liberation.

This book can be used as a guide for a seven-day self-retreat or it can be used every Saturday or Sunday over seven weekends. Or you may simply want to use the themes listed to guide your daily meditation sessions. In whatever manner you decide to use these precious offerings, may these pages, as Ajahn would say, bring you unshakeable deliverance of the heart.

Amarasiri Bhikkhu