MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH THE MOOD OF THE MIND

What is the mood of the mind this morning? Are you tired? Are you troubled by family or health issues? Do you feel inspired? Do you want to meditate or not? What is the mood of the mind? It doesn’t really matter. The knowing accepts all things and let’s go of all things.

The mood of the mind might not be anything special. It can be neutral and ordinary. You could also be grumpy about feeling tired and not having a good night’s sleep. But you don’t have to be that way. You can just know, ‘tiredness is like this’ – and be patient. Then tiredness is known; it is not a problem. You don’t have to create a self around it through thought, which causes unnecessary suffering.

Establish clarity of presence; that’s the first thing to do. Right now, how is it? How are you? Let that become conscious. You’re not having an internal discussion about your likes and dislikes. You’re allowing whatever is – the good, bad, and indifferent – to become fully conscious. The mind is open, attentive, and awake. It also has the heartfelt quality of allowing life to be as it is.

After establishing clarity of presence, you enter the practice you’d like to do. I like to go to the heart and bring up the feeling of gratitude in each in- and out-breath. It’s a lovely way to start the day. On the in-breath, I bring up thoughts of gratitude. On the out-breath, I mentally wish, ‘May all beings be well.’

If you feel sleepy or dull, then increase the volume of breath. Breathe more deeply, enjoy the breath, open the chest, straighten the back, and sit taller so that you’re active in attention as well as in posture. Know the mood of the mind, rather than being it.

THE MORNING RITUAL

This morning, I felt tired. I’m 73, so I’m going to feel tired more often. But tiredness is tiredness. What to add to that? I can also be unaware, grumble to myself while brushing my teeth, and sort of be awake but not really awake. The other option is to set the intention even before sleeping to always know the mood of the mind.

Train yourself to know the mood of the mind from the moment you wake up. Right away, you’re into awareness. There’s freedom in that.

The mood is still the mood, but you don’t have to create a sense of self around it. It’s just life. Our practice is about not becoming, such as not becoming a grumpy person.

His Holiness the Dalai Lama once said, ‘Compassion is the method.’ I found that insightful as I thought compassion was the goal. Before I became a bhikkhu, my understanding had been that, in Theravada Buddhism, the method is strong concentration, and you attain different levels of meditative refinement. I didn’t know anything about them. I just took it on trust. But then none of my teachers talked about concentration. Luang Por Chah and Luang Por Liem focused on non-grasping, non-attachment, compassion, and kindness. They encouraged us to be sensitive, generous, and responsible as well as to cultivate harmony and friendliness. That was the language used in my training. When His Holiness said, ‘compassion is the method,’ I understood that it’s not the goal; it’s what one does. Now, I can’t always be compassionate. I can also feel tired. But then I can open the heart and tell myself, ‘Oh, with compassion, I can know tiredness.’

I realised that awareness needs to have this heart component of acceptance and openness.

These insights are very important. That’s how insights work sometimes. Someone says something, which makes sense and then becomes the path for years. For instance, what’s the mood of the mind? What does the heart feel like? The mood can be tired, which is unpleasant, but then with the heart you are aware, ‘Unpleasant feels this way.’ It’s not a problem, then. It’s alright.

Waking up to the mood of the mind as soon as you get up in the morning is part of the contemplative’s craft. It prepares you well for breakfast with family and whatever else comes along that day. But if you wake up and don’t know the mood, then you just make the next hour or so more difficult. It is quite practical that way as is starting the day with a chant like The Buddha’s Words on Loving-Kindness (p193).

Luang Por Liem

LUANG POR LIEM

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Luang Por Liem is now 80 years old. He has been a monk for more than 60 years. He comes from an agricultural family with little formal education, and yet he is the abbot of Wat Nong Pah Pong in Northeast Thailand, the monastery started by Luang Por Chah. It is our main monastery. All the others are emanations from it. As you may know, Luang Por Chah was paralysed for ten years before his death; he couldn’t move his body. Before he became ill in 1982, Luang Por Chah appointed Luang Por Liem as Wat Nong Pah Pong’s abbot. Luang Por Liem managed the monastery’s affairs and ensured Luang Por Chah was looked after well. Luang Por Liem, a highly attained monk, is very much beloved by all of us. He is engaged with work in the monastery and has even been mistaken as a labourer at times. He is a very interesting monk.

I will share a few interesting bits from the book, No Worries, which contains some of Luang Por Liem’s teachings as well as a short biography.

The incident quoted below happened in 1969 when Luang Por Liem had been a monk for around eight to nine years and was very much in the study realm of Thai Buddhism. He must have been in his 30s then. Luang Por Liem found it unsatisfactory and was fed up with studying. He met Luang Por Chah and felt he could trust him. Luang Por Liem believed Luang Por Chah would guide him properly. He had great faith in Luang Por Chah.

LUANG POR LIEM

I came to Wat Pah Pong with a mind that was interested in the training, practice, and development of myself. I undertook some special practices all for myself. For example, after the group meditation meetings in the evening I took the opportunity to put forth some more effort in the practice, trying to develop diligence as a habit. I didn’t socialize. I didn’t relate to other monks. I didn’t speak with anybody. In that rainy season we were almost 50 altogether, if I remember correctly, 47. I didn’t get into contact with anybody, living like somebody who really takes his chance. And the opportunities for practice were fantastic. I was trying to train myself in understanding all the feelings that arise when one is completely left to nature. If we are given a chance like this, we need to try hard and be resolute to use it. But it wasn’t always the case that I was very diligent. Sometimes, I also felt lazy. Laziness comes up when egotistic feelings take hold of us. What I did to face this was to ask myself constantly: ‘What have I come here to do?’

BOOK’S TRANSLATORS

The rains’ retreat is a time when the monks of a monastery usually intensify their efforts in practice. Luang Por’s high aspirations and motivation led to a powerful experience at the beginning of the rainy season, of which he tells:

LUANG POR LIEM

I experienced something stranger than anything I had ever experienced before. From the beginning of the rains retreat on up to the second month I felt great saddhā (faith) in the practice. There was no decline, no thoughts of discouragement at all in my practice.

The practice went well the whole time, although there were a few experiences of the mind getting involved with desires or defilements. But they weren’t very strong.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Obviously, Luang Por had a lot of pāramis (perfections) that he had developed by working very hard and constantly practicing mindfulness, awareness.

Again, the translators of the book write:

BOOK’S TRANSLATORS

Around the middle of the rainy season of the year 2512 (1969) Luang Por Chah encouraged the monks to practise with special intensity. They weren’t supposed to speak to each other and the communal morning and evening meetings for chanting and meditation were cancelled. Luang Por Chah saw that it was the time to give the monks more opportunity to do this practice on their own. So Luang Por Liem increased his efforts and as he did so, results became evident. On the 9th of September around 10:00 p.m. he experienced an immense transformation in his mind. He had a feeling of extraordinary brightness and happiness, of which he reports:

LUANG POR LIEM

It is impossible to describe this kind of happiness to someone else. It is impossible to make someone else know and understand it. It isn’t the happiness of getting things according to one’s wishes and not the happiness because things are agreeable; it’s the kind of happiness that goes beyond these two. Walking is happiness, sitting is happiness, standing is happiness, and lying down is happiness. There is the experience of delight, and joy all the time. Furthermore, one is able to uphold the knowledge in one’s mind that this happiness arises completely by itself and eventually will vanish by itself. Both sukha [happiness] and dukkha in an experience like this are still entirely impermanent states. I was able to maintain the knowledge of this fact all the time. In every posture – standing, walking, sitting, and lying down – there was a continuous and equal experience of happiness. The state was the same whether I was doing sitting or walking meditation.

If one were to try to describe the mind in this state one could say there is brightness, but the word ‘bright’ actually doesn’t describe correctly what the experience is like. It is as if there is nothing that can make the mind get involved with anything. This experience lasted for a day and then changed again. Then the mind became utterly peaceful, not at all exhausted, tired, or sleepy, but filled with clarity, radiance, and coolness, imbued with various kinds of delight and rapture. This experience lasted completely without reference to time. It was truly akāliko, timeless. The same feeling continued on through all the four postures. Eventually I asked myself: ‘What is this?’ The answer was: ‘A mode of the mind.’ It is like this in itself. When there is happiness, we simply take it as happiness… it is simply a matter of happiness. When there is peace, we simply take it as a matter of peace… and we just look at our happiness on and on and we just look at our peace on and on… unremittingly.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

What I take from this account is not just the bliss of the experience, but also his capacity for sustained awareness. Such an extraordinary experience can excite you. You can easily lose awareness. You wonder, ‘What have I got? What attainment is that?’ You then try to recreate that experience in a future meditation and feel frustrated when it doesn’t happen. Here, Luang Por Liem is practising awareness unremittingly, but it’s not in a concentrated, absorbed manner. It is very much with life. There’s unremitting awareness of anicca, dukkha, and anattā. To me, that is a better way to understand sammā samādhi than ‘right concentration’. There’s composure and focus, but it’s not separate from life.

BOOK’S TRANSLATORS

Eventually on the evening of the 10th of September a change to something new that Luang Por hadn’t experienced before took place. A feeling of weariness, frustration and fatigue took over. Whenever he sat or walked, he felt sleepy. Even after he got up after having rested the tiredness remained. In each posture he felt completely exhausted. It got to the point where he fell asleep while he was doing walking meditation and ran into some thorns. His whole face became scratched and sore. ‘At least the sleepiness will disappear now,’ he thought, but the fatigue continued to remain as strong as before. Still, he endured, telling himself that it is natural to face obstacles in the practice, which to some extent everybody needs to pass. With these reflections in mind, he understood that he needed to look at this tiredness that previously hadn’t been present. After all, this fatigue just arose, so it was impermanent too. Using this insight, he attempted to maintain awareness of the sleepiness.

On the 11th, Luang Por experienced another change, namely, a great peace and happiness returned to his mind. In all four postures there was clarity and gladness. Simply being by himself was very pleasant. Nothing could intrude and stir up his mind. External objects impinging on the mind just couldn’t reach it. When working together with the monks and novices during chores, although he was together with others, he felt the same as if alone. He wasn’t interested in what they were talking or chatting about. He couldn’t be bothered to think much about what was happening at all, and when the chores were finished, he simply went back to his hut. The next day passed with the ongoing happiness and peace continuing as if it was a normal and ordinary experience. With unceasing attention, Luang Por continued to look at both his mind and the objects of his mind.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Before reading this description, your vision of Theravada Buddhist meditation was perhaps one of strong concentration and absorption. But in this book Luang Por Liem talks about hauling water and working alongside other monks. We can see that he’s living the normal life of a monk; he’s not absorbed into a refined mental state and living in some kind of meditative trance. He’s with the situation, but there’s unremitting mindfulness. That might be an interesting way to think of sammā samādhi, rather than to use the ideas of absorption. I’m not saying they’re wrong, but I do wonder if they’re misleading.

Luang Por Liem is very focused, but it is not on an object. It’s about presence. It’s about awareness. It’s about knowing the way things are. At least, that’s how I interpret it.

BOOK’S TRANSLATORS

When the evening of the 12th approached, he started to question himself: ‘Why do we actually practise …? What’s all this practice for?’ And the answer arose:

LUANG POR LIEM

We don’t practise for anything; we practise for the sake of practice. Whatever it will lead to doesn’t matter at all. Our duty is to practise, so we practise and try to maintain mindfulness and awareness with it. In each moment we keep teaching ourselves. Whatever we are doing, we try to have mindfulness and awareness. Whether we are walking to or fro, we keep everything in a state of perfect balance.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Even when doubt arose, Luang Por Liem didn’t go into analysis or look for answers in a book. He is just there:

LUANG POR LIEM

Why do we practise? We practise for the sake of practice.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

He doesn’t get caught in the intellect, trying to figure something out because he knew it as a condition. Instead, he continued practising. Now, the understatement of this paragraph:

LUANG POR LIEM

Finally, I felt I had done enough walking meditation for that day, because I became quite tired, and my feet already hurt very much. The bones of my feet felt like they were piercing through the skin, as I had been walking the whole day and night without rest. It is normal to experience painful feelings in the body if we overuse a single posture. But it is also normal that feelings change again, so I thought, it’s really enough walking meditation for today. I went up to my hut, put on my robe with the right shoulder open and the outer robe folded over the left shoulder, sat down facing east (the same direction as Luang Por Chah’s hut), thought of my teacher and started meditating.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Who can do that? He has resilience and determination to have unremitting mindfulness all the time.

BOOK’S TRANSLATORS

The meditation was very peaceful and the same reflection as before came up in Luang Por Liem’s mind: ‘We don’t practise for anything; we practise for the sake of practice.’

LUANG POR LIEM

Keeping this teaching in my mind, I kept on meditating. Normally I would sit in meditation until about 10 or 11 p.m. and then stop to have a rest, but on this day, I continued sitting for about eight hours without moving or making the slightest change in posture.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Again, who can do that? You might think, ‘Oh, that’s not for me. I am going to do the seal posture; I’m finished after half-an-hour.’

Luang Por Liem has incredible pāramī. Obviously, he’s bringing a lot into this lifetime. He is an amazing person. Set that aside for a moment and think about what he is actually doing – unremitting mindfulness and awareness. We can take this from his biography. He’s also putting in a fair bit of effort into doing that – he sat without moving for eight hours. Certainly, when people read such accounts, they try to sit, without moving, for hours and end up injuring their bodies. This cannot be done with wilfulness. Not moving with wilfulness is still down to ego. It has to be done with mindfulness and with kind regard for yourself. As Luang Por Liem showed us, it requires an understanding of continued, unremitting mindfulness and awareness.

LUANG POR LIEM

With this experience of peace, the mind changed. The feeling of peacefulness shot up and pervaded throughout the whole body, as if something were taking hold over it. It felt cool, a coolness that suffused the whole body … so very cool … an experience of the whole body becoming completely light and at ease. The head felt so cool the whole day and night, as if there was a fan blowing over it. Cool, peaceful, quiet, and still. No experience of thoughts at all, and no clue at all where they had disappeared. Everything silent, completely. It felt totally quiet. The only experience left was that of utter peace and stillness. The body felt tranquil, cool, and light.

This experience continued on throughout the whole year, not just for a day or two. In fact, it has continued on unchanging for many years, all from that one go.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Here you have someone who has realised the Unchanging, the Unconditioned, Peace, the Harbour. I love Luang Por Liem’s description. It has no technical terms or jargon. His language is ordinary, but he is a very extraordinary person.

LUANG POR LIEM

There is the state of coolness, as if in the brain, whether sitting or lying down, coolness in every position. All worries, concerns, or similar thoughts from the thinking mind are totally gone. Thinking in this or that direction ceased. All quiet, just like a forest where there isn’t the slightest sound of any bird singing. Truly quiet. No wind blowing at all. Just ongoing tranquillity and peace.

It feels like there are no saṅkhārās, no proliferations of the mind. All the suffering that arises with kilesas [defilements] that had bothered me before, the kilesas concerning the other sex or all kinds of ambitions that I had before, I don’t know where they all disappeared. Seeing somebody, I just had the feeling of seeing it as absolutely normal. To see a person as simply a person: just that much. No beautiful persons, no ugly persons – people simply would be specifically the way they were. This is the kind of peace and tranquillity that arose. I don’t know what it was, but I also didn’t care what it was, always knowing it is like this by itself in just this way.

It is like this through peacefulness and tranquillity. There isn’t anything to be concerned about, as far as how various things exist. As concerns dukkha, I don’t know what dukkha is like. As concerns laziness, I don’t know what laziness is like. Questioning myself about laziness, there wasn’t any. Questioning myself about dukkha, there wasn’t any. The feeling inside my heart was exactly like this.

I tried to recall and pin down that which is called dukkha. What is it? I really don’t know. I only know how they discern the meaning in terms of conventional language because dukkha is just something created by common conventions. When the mind has no dukkha, all conventions whatsoever don’t exist in the mind. And the experience of this feeling has lasted on continuously all the time since then; there has been no change all the way up to the present day. This same state still lasts on, and it has been stable, continuous and without changes.

LUANG POR VIRADHAMMO

Sādhu, sādhu, sādhu!

For a bit of context, Luang Por Liem is the abbot of our biggest monastery, which was established in 1954 by Luang Por Chah. Around 60 monks live there. Every year, on January 16th, there is a large gathering to commemorate the death anniversary of Luang Por Chah. Over four days, more than 20,000 people come to the monastery to circumambulate Luang Por Chah’s stupa and pay their respects. I was there one year. At that time, there were 1,200 monks, 700 nuns and around 10,000 laypeople. The place was packed.

I asked Luang Por Liem, ‘How was the gathering?’

He said, ‘It was just about the right size.’

He is not at all disengaged from life. He is simply not bothered by it and brilliant at what he does. He climbs scaffolding, does cement work, and sweeps the monastery grounds. People have mistaken him for a janitor. When visitors ask him about the abbot, he’ll direct people to his kuti without revealing his identity. He is a very interesting, quiet man.

Luang Por Liem used to contemplate the fragility of life by using an actual human skeleton that was housed in Wat Nong Pah Pong’s fairly small sala (meditation hall). He would bring up the skeleton’s image in his consciousness during meditations. This became the mainstay, his go-to practice.

Monks do this type of practice. They develop it as an image that they can visualise when meditating. This is called a nimitta (sign).

This practice allowed Luang Por Liem to deepen his understanding of the fragility of life. It brought forth considerations of urgency, and the aspiration to the Unconditioned.

What does this life story do for your mind? Certainly, it inspires awe of this being called the Buddha because you have a real-life example of this possibility. Hopefully, when one recites Namo tassa … (Preliminary Homage chant), one gets the sense of this amazing being, and we have the good fortune of still hearing his echoes, as it were. That possibility to me is an optimistic teaching even though we’re not as gifted as Luang Por Liem.

How do you manifest that possibility? Luang Por Chah would tell us, Western monks, ‘You want to get enlightened overnight, but you’re not the Buddha. You have to build pārami and the reserves of patience, kindness, conviviality, focus, and composure. You have to work.’ It was always couched in that reasonable way.

When you see people like Luang Por Liem, you realise he’s really that. He has so many gifts that we don’t have, but what’s he showing us? He’s displaying unremitting mindfulness and awareness. We can do that. He’s not asking us to get all the states of mind that he’s experiencing. We can work with that. He can inspire us in that way.

The possibilities that these beings realise are very profound. Yet, Luang Por Liem questions himself, ‘Why do we practise?’

His response: ‘We practise for the sake of practice.’

We can do that. It’s not esoteric at all. It’s very relevant. I find Luang Por Liem’s account of his realisation very inspiring and uplifting.

Hopefully, all of us can become conversant with at least one type of meditation technique that has the capacity to settle us into the present moment.

Once the mind is settled, you can start to emulate Luang Por Liem and practise unremitting awareness, witnessing change: ‘Ah, it’s like this.’

Unremitting mindfulness

Luang Por Sumedho’s constant refrain of ‘it’s like this’ is not a dismissive statement of life. Rather, it’s enlivening, alive with the way things are. It’s like this, it’s like this, it’s like this is …’ unremitting awareness. Do you see what I mean?

‘It’s like this’ is just a phrase. But it could be a practice too; your go-to phrase. The mind would be open and attentive like it is when you’re listening to sound. You just keep doing that unremittingly.

The power of ‘it’s like this’ is that it’s not such a huge thing that we can’t do it. While it’s not esoteric, it’s challenging to do it constantly because we get distracted by our thoughts and habits and our love of distraction. Then desire comes up to do something else. Doubt comes up: ‘This doesn’t work. It doesn’t seem like much of a practice.’

In life, there’s nothing that you can’t really notice.

For me, Luang Por Sumedho’s model doesn’t create a sense of, ‘I have to get something that I don’t even know about,’ which is a risky strategy. Someone tells you about an altered state of consciousness. You don’t even know what it is, but you start looking for it. Worse, you don’t even know what they know. I never liked that.

I always preferred the idea of reflection. With Luang Por Sumedho’s phrase, I can reflect. It helps me understand my own entanglement with sense experience, how disentangling works for me, and how to sustain that aware mind in the present moment. In that sense, this teaching is a personal preference.

Different teachers talk about different things and offer different techniques. Develop your own confidence around that. If I suggest something, try it out. If it doesn’t work, it’s not my fault or yours; it just doesn’t work for you. It’s not a matter of getting each technique to work for you. It’s really a matter of getting one that settles you into the present moment and then sustaining the practice.

ME, MINE AND THAT

Q: What does bhava mean?

A: Bhava is the sense of becoming or being, which creates a sense of self. Let’s say an aunt, who I’m close to, dies. I feel grief for her passing, even though her death was timely. I feel it because I was close to her. The arising of that grief is natural. It dependently originated as a result of her death. Bhava or this sense of becoming or being would be when I create self-thoughts around that loss. So, there’s the arising of the emotion and then the addition of thoughts like, ‘Oh, I should have been near her,’ or ‘My aunty was a lovely person.’ All the thinking that creates a kind of a person or personality would be considered bhava.

This morning when I woke up, I felt tired. Tiredness is a natural condition. If I wasn’t aware of it as a natural condition and I was heedless, then this natural condition would grow into a sense of a person through ignorance and my own misunderstanding.

For example, the mind could start complaining and worrying, ‘Oh gosh, I should have another ten hours of sleep and four cups of coffee, and I don’t want to get up.’ I would then be caught in suffering. These mental proliferations could go on and on. That’s the whole sense of a person coming into the present moment. It’s a creation. It is one of the ways we talk about avijjā, which is different from personal responsibility.

Personal responsibility is the social functions we have. Bhava is in thought, first and foremost. You could call it egoistic thought, but it is definitely in thought.

I think we can all see that as soon as I know tiredness as simply tiredness, the thinking drops away. There isn’t that ‘person’ anymore. There’s awareness. There’s presence – and that personal being, self, or ‘me’ falls away. This is what we mean by emptiness in Theravada Buddhism. Emptiness doesn’t mean nothing is happening, rather that this phenomenon is empty of that seeming sense of a personality. That extra bit of thinking, personality view, is called sakkāyadiṭṭhi. Bhava is about the coming into being of this personhood. It can be known in awareness.

The Thais use the phrase, ‘prung daeng’. Prung means to season and daeng means to dress up. For example, you dress up to go into town. So, if there’s a feeling of tiredness, ignorance grasps that, and prung daengs it. We, Westerners, created the English phrase, ‘prung daenging,’ to refer to instances of papañca (mental proliferation), ahaṃkāra (I-making), and mamakāra (my-making).

Bhava, ahaṃkāra, and mamakāra tendencies can be discerned in awareness. We can see how we do that. Something happens, and it’s natural for disappointment, frustration, or other feelings to arise in consciousness. But then we’re accustomed, through habit, to lapse into ahaṃkāra and mamakāra or prung daenging. There’s this whole ignorance and lack of understanding of ‘selfing’. It’s no longer about nature and change. It’s a me and a mine and that.

You don’t need to do that. As soon as you witness sakkāyadiṭṭhi, you realise it’s just pain, grief, fear, etc. You can see it and choose not to go with it. You develop the skill around this kind of understanding through small instances of ahaṃkāra and mamakāra. For instance, if you’re grumpy when you wake up, then you can choose to not go to the grumpiness and simply know, ‘Oh, it’s just tiredness.’ Once you get good at that, you will find that insight and skill useful to deal with the more complex emotions that you experience around your children, your own health, political issues, etc. This becomes your go-to place to resolve stressful situations. It’s neither repressive nor are you getting rid of something. In time, you realise this place of becoming, which is rooted in ignorance, has a way of being known either in the body, in the hara, or the heart chakra.

So, my question to you is do you have some confidence in a go-to practice that you can do all the time? That would be important to consider on this retreat. Then, what’s its relationship to unremitting awareness? How does that fit into your own idea of spiritual life? You noticed in the reading that Luang Por Liem had exalted states of mind, but he didn’t take it personally. There was no ahaṃkāra, mamakāra, or prung daenging. His awareness is so powerful that even fabulous states of mind don’t overwhelm him. Most of us would love ‘fabulous’ states of mind, but he doesn’t go there. There is no trace of egotism.

If you understand the project, it all makes sense because there’s no entanglement with anything that’s changing. So, the possibility of realising the Unchanging is manifest. If there’s any entanglement with the changing, then you’re not available for the Unchanging.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH CONDITIONS

Settle into your posture, be it sitting, lying down, standing, or walking. Use sound to establish presence and know what’s going on. You’re not listening for something but allowing sound to come to you. Then you get the sense of still knowing.

We have a tendency to control things all the time. To help with that, create a sense of affection or kindness. Go to your heart centre. Welcome in an image or name someone who is dear to you and feel the opening of the heart. It’s nothing extraordinary, but quite beautiful.

Let that sense of kindness imbue your awareness practice. As you know, I use Luang Por Sumedho’s image. On the in-breath, I’d quietly say, ‘Luang Por, may you be well.’ That quickly takes me to gratitude and affection. It’s not about him. It’s about the heart being open. The memory is merely the avenue.

This way, you establish still knowing and an open-hearted affection. It’s a relaxed and happy state. It’s not controlled or forced. You’re not overly focused. Then, if you want, ground yourself in the breath. The end of the out-breath is a lovely place to hang out. Balance still knowing and kindness right through to the end of the out-breath.

If the mind feels settled and not too busy, and you’re at ease, then you can open it to space. Use choiceless awareness. This is your time to explore. Use what works for you.

When conditions arise, remember the beautiful phrase Luang Por Sumedho has given us: ‘It’s like this.’

DEATH IS NATURAL

In 1973, I ended up in Luang Por Chah’s monastery in Northeast Thailand after three months in the country. At that time, Northeast Thailand was one of the country’s poorest regions. The monastery was well supported, but there was nothing in excess. It was so isolated that it was rare to spot a car there. The society was agrarian. Rice farming was the mainstay. People lived off the land and ate frogs and insects for protein. They led a simple, minimalistic life. Yet, many great Dhamma teachers like Ajahn Mun, Luang Por Chah, and Luang Por Maha Boowa were from Northeast Thailand. This was completely opposite to what I found in the West, especially in my culture and society, which was affluent; I didn’t find any Dhamma there, although I’m sure it was somewhere.

Every lunar quarter, on wan phra (lunar observance days), lay people, mostly women, would take the Eight Precepts and stay in the monastery all day. Everyone in the monastery including the lay people would meditate all night long. Some of the strongest meditators were the village women. Their dedication was impressive. The following day, they’d help with the offering of food before returning to the village. The lay people were always trying to give their very best to the monks. They really loved the monks and the monasteries, which weren’t busy places. The monastery was their spiritual home, and the monks were their boys. So, we were well loved and cared for as monks and yet, we were separate from that society.

One of the things that struck me about Northeastern Thais was the naturalness of their reflections on death and the naturalness of the ceremonies they had around dying. The monks would go to the neighbouring village, which would usually be within a few kilometres, to do the mātikā (matrices or lists) chanting. This chant comes from the Abhidhamma and is traditionally chanted during funerals in Buddhist cultures. The chanting is intellectual. It’s not emotional. It’s a spreadsheet or taxonomy of different types of mindsets. It describes all the different forms of experiences a human being might encounter in a lifetime. It’s chanted in a monotone. It’s not emotive or about a soul going to heaven because, in Buddhism, we think that whatever kamma the dead person was engaged in, the energy of that would condition consciousness in the future. So, it’s not up to us, monks, to somehow make that worse or better. The teaching is: ‘All beings are born of their kamma; heir to their kamma; and whatever kamma they shall do for good or for ill, of that they’ll be the heirs.’

Venerable Amarasiri was telling me a story of the Buddha that S.N. Goenkaji (a teacher of vipassana meditation) would share with his students. A person once asked the Buddha to pray for his father’s soul. The Buddha replied, ‘Get me a clay earthen jar and fill half of it with stone and the rest with ghee.’ The man did as instructed. The Buddha then asked him to take the jar to the river and break it. The man did that.

The Buddha asked, ‘What happened?’

He said, ‘The stones fell, and the ghee rose to the surface.’

The Buddha said, ‘That’s what happened to your dad. It’s not my business. The beautiful things he did and the wholesome kamma rose to the surface. The heavy stones fell to the bottom.’

The Buddha was teaching that we’re responsible for what happens to us.

Our chanting is a reflection on the naturalness that with birth there is death, and then the realisation that there is peace. This is a natural phenomenon. Dying is natural. Birth is natural. In Thai villages, people hear the mātikā chant again and again because quite a few people die annually, and everyone is a part of the funeral ceremony. In such cultures, this chant has a soothing quality because it evokes a sense that everything is being done correctly and rightly – death is natural and with birth there is death.

The villagers would bring out the dead body to the charnel ground. The body would be cremated, and we would repeat the chanting. At no time would there be eulogizing. The monks wouldn’t sing the praises of the dead person. That was the duty of relatives and would be done at home. For the monks, it was always a reflection on Dhamma – with birth there is death; that which begins ends all the time; it’s like this. Everyone, young and old, would be there and participate in a natural and respectful way. They would wear clean, ordinary working clothes. I don’t think they had any fancy clothes. Sometimes they would honour the monks and give them something special like a case of Pepsi.

In Thailand, funerals and death aren’t hidden; there’s nothing to hide really. Everyone constantly sees death, as there might be several cremations in the monastery in any given year. To see a body burning for the first time is a powerful experience. One of the meditations the Buddha recommended was the contemplations on asubha. These meditations are not a rejection of the beautiful, but they have a sobering effect on it.

Asubha practice

Monks are also invited by doctors in Bangkok, Thailand, to watch autopsies. I’ve never done that in the West, but in Thailand it is a respectful act for monks to contemplate on corpses. This is a powerful experience. In the beginning, the smells and visual forms are repulsive. As one gets past the repulsiveness and contemplates on, ‘this is the way it is; with birth there is ageing and death,’ the mind becomes peaceful. During one of the first autopsies I saw in Bangkok, the doctor used a scalpel to cut the face off the body. Apparently, the dead person was a 40-year-old monk. The doctor then used a hacksaw to open the skull. They took the brain out to look at it. I didn’t have medical training, so the whole exercise was far from normal for me. But it helped to get past the repulsiveness and understand a body is like that.

In Western culture, we don’t get to do these kinds of contemplations. On account of make-up, the corpse looks more beautiful than when the person was alive. This may be a way of trying to help a family grieve but does it really help? I don’t know. I once attended a burial where the morticians added a bed of artificial grass to alleviate the shock of the bare earth. These attempts to sanitise death and burials, to me, are missed opportunities for reflection. Death is normal and ordinary. Contemplations on death aren’t meant to make you depressed. If they make you depressed, then don’t do them. These contemplations are intended to ground you.

I remember that the Bangkok hospital where I saw the autopsy was close to a marketplace. The area was busy with lots of sensory inputs. The market had a fair share of young Thai women. Since I had just contemplated on a corpse, the mind had a lot of coolness because it had seen the unattractive side of the body. This was quite interesting for me to experience as a young monk at that time.

I personally have not done a lot of asubha meditations because I tended to be negative, cynical, and depressed. So, it was dangerous for me to take that route. Luang Por Liem contemplated death as an antidote to all the excitement in his own mind. He used a skeleton. These meditations are not leading you to reject the body. The body is quite amazing because of how well it functions. The asubha meditations make you look at the mind that is looking for satisfaction in that which is unsatisfactory as well as at the conditioned tendency to overemphasise beauty. These meditations try to cool the mind. They’re not an aesthetic rejection of life.

FIVE SUBJECTS FOR FREQUENT RECOLLECTION

[Handa mayaṃ abhiṇha-paccavekkhaṇa-pāṭhaṃ bhaṇāmase][Jarā-dhammomhi] jaraṃ anatīto MEN CHANT[Jarā-dhammāmhi] jaraṃ anatītā WOMEN CHANT

I am of the nature to age, I have not gone beyond ageing.

Byādhi-dhammomhi byādhiṃ anatīto M.Byādhi-dhammāmhi byādhiṃ anatītā W.

I am of the nature to sicken, I have not gone beyond sickness.

Maraṇa-dhammomhi maraṇaṃ anatīto M. Maraṇa-dhammāmhi maraṇaṃ anatītā W.

I am of the nature to die, I have not gone beyond dying.

Sabbehi me piyehi manāpehi nānābhāvo vinābhāvo

All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will become separated from me.

Kammassakomhi kammadāyādo kammayoni kammabandhu kammapaṭisaraṇo m.

Yaṃ kammaṃ karissāmi, kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vā, tassadāyādo bhavissāmi

Kammassakāmhi kammadāyādā kammayoni kammabandhu kammapaṭisaraṇā w.

Yaṃ kammaṃ karissāmi, kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vā, tassadāyādā bhavissāmi

I am the owner of my kamma, heir to my kamma, born of my kamma,related to my kamma, abide supported by my kamma.Whatever kamma I shall do, for good or for ill, of that I will be the heir.

Evaṃ amhehi abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbaṃ

Thus we should frequently recollect.

EMPATHETIC DISTRESS

Q: How to cope with and prevent empathetic distress when the lives of so many people in the world are in turmoil and nature is under stress.

A: I know two doctors who worked in the emergency department for at least 20 years. They really thrived in those situations. You need a certain kind of skill and gift to be on the frontlines. A nurse who worked in the COVID-19 treatment wards once told me his stress partially came from wearing the personal protective equipment (PPE). He used to work eight- or nine-hour shifts. He was sweating all the time under the PPE, and it was hard to breathe. He said it was absolutely exhausting. His stress was situational and related to work. Hopefully, there are professionals who can help people deal with those situations.

The distress people feel in witnessing suffering is slightly different. You’re not on the frontlines or in a physically stressful situation but you’re feeling empathetic distress because you’re experiencing the suffering of others. Now, why is that a problem? Let’s say a close family member starts to engage in self-destructive activities. They’re not interested in your views or in listening to you. You have empathy for them, obviously, but it’s very hard to be at peace with that situation because you don’t want them to suffer. The stress, I think, is from wanting, not because of empathy. I don’t think empathy is stressful. It’s the wanting of people not to suffer that seems to be the stressful part. I experienced that with my mom. The empathy was always beautiful, but not wanting her to have pain was stressful and reactive. I did as much as I could, but she had to bear her own suffering. The Buddha said you pick up your own kamma and work with it. You can’t work through someone else’s kamma. Empathy doesn’t imply, ‘I must fix this,’ or ‘I don’t want this to happen, and I wish the world wasn’t like this.’ That attitude is stressful because it’s coming from wanting. It also doesn’t mean that you don’t act when you can. Empathy is an active force in our hearts and will act when it can.

Stress arises in situations where you’re unable to fulfil your empathetic inclinations. Media overload can cause this. If you’re watching terrible news about refugees crossing the Mediterranean Sea, racial discrimination in Sudan, or the violence against women all day long, then you not only feel ‘oh, these poor people,’ but also, ‘it shouldn’t be this way.’ You’re going to get more distressed, but unable to do anything.

It’s not that we can’t engage with social issues. If the local school board is doing something that’s going to affect your children, then certainly, you can or will talk to the teachers.

There’s a kind of voyeurism in our society. We witness the stress of others, get appalled and shocked, and then witness it again. How is that helpful? So, step back and judge how useful is worry over issues that you have no control over.

At peace

There’s this natural desire to not have your loved ones suffer. Notice how this desire causes suffering.

The Buddha spoke of upekkhā, peaceful coexistence with the way things are. It is one of the brahmavihāras. Just to remind you, there are four brahmavihāras. Mettā is a sense of goodwill to all beings. Karuna has a sense of compassion to all beings. Karunā is that which activates action and sees the suffering of others. Burnout is called the far enemy of compassion and the near enemy is indifference, bordering upon cruelty. Muditā is the appreciation of beauty and joy. Upekkhā, as mentioned earlier, is the peaceful coexistence with the way things are. It is sometimes translated as equanimity. Upekkhā is always at peace because the heart is open.

So, if the heart is open but stressed, then one has to contemplate, ‘What does it mean to be at peace with the way things are?’ I learned this the hard way. As a young monk at Chithurst Buddhist Monastery in the UK, I used to get stressed out because I thought I had to fix the problems people came to talk to me about. The empathy was there, but I was doing the wrong thing. Their problems weren’t mine. This didn’t mean I didn’t do everything I could. But I used to take it back to my kuti and distress myself. It seemed like a good idea, but it wasn’t – because it was not constructive.

Luang Por Sumedho helped me. I began to see that I can be fully empathetic, do the best I can and not worry. It’s not indifference. It’s knowing the ‘world is this way’. There is injustice and cruelty, and there are refugees – and I’m doing the best I can.

It’s challenging to be at peace when loved ones are suffering. For instance, a grandmother thinks the way her child is raising their child may lead to bad results. That’s very stressful because you don’t want the innocent little one to get hurt, but the grandmother has no power, no possibility to change the situation, which is very painful. You have to go to the pain and understand life is like this.

Quite often, the movement towards peaceful coexistence with the way things are is the ability to feel heart-crushing pain.

My mother was in a lot of pain despite taking painkillers. She tried to be cheerful so I wouldn’t suffer. I’d try not to worry so she wouldn’t worry – two loving people trying to deal with a human situation. I contemplated this situation.

I reflected, ‘What is the problem here? You’re doing everything you can and your mom’s not complaining. She’s a brave woman. What’s the problem? Well, I don’t want her to suffer, obviously. Yes, but she has to suffer. This is her body. This is her kamma that she has to go through. Again, she isn’t complaining, and everything was being done.’ That was a good insight into what equanimity means when the heart is open. I was a better caregiver after that. My mom realised she need not hold back her concern about pain for fear of upsetting me. Things improved, and she was less tired.

That was an easy situation when compared to some of the experiences people share with me, such as children addicted to drugs. Those are tough. What can you do? You can’t force or will change. I think you first have to look at the wanting of it to be different than it is.

Ask yourself, ‘What do I want that I don’t have and what do I have that I don’t want?’ Return to the Four Noble Truths – the cause of suffering is attachment to desire.

Obviously, you want your loved ones to be free from suffering. But their suffering is not the cause of your suffering. It’s the existential holding of a hope that is hopeless. If you can go right to the pain of wanting, then it is possible to come to a peaceful coexistence with the way things are. The process may be painful, and you may cry. But by opening and embracing that reality, you can come to a peaceful coexistence with the way things are.

Protecting the mind

Be careful with large-scale issues affecting the world where you have no control. Monks are asked to seriously consider indriya saṃvara, the restraint of the senses. Take in only as much as you need of political arguments, socio-cultural issues, and environmental problems. Do what you can and guard the mind from too much stimulation of horrible things. This isn’t Pollyannaish. It’s not about always having an attitude of, ‘Oh, how lovely the world is.’

It’s important to protect the mind. None of us are cold or indifferent. People who do retreats are compassionate and caring. But sometimes, there can be an over caring of issues and people, which can lead to suffering.

Also, if you have access to beauty, participate in it. It has an important effect on our minds. It is vital to appreciate beauty and not just engage in horror. But also contemplate on how you can get attached to beauty. For instance, I could get attached to this beautiful monastery. When I have to go into the city, I can create in my mind perceptions of, ‘Oh, it’s so polluted and terrible.’ But that’s something I’m creating. Rather, I could use beauty of the blue sky, the green grass, or sounds of birds to uplift my mind and come to a sense of joy; joy is an aspect of the open heart and is also empathetic. So, you can see that, within the whole of experience or picture, life is like this.

The Buddha’s take on suffering is interesting. As the story goes, he went into a village where he saw sickness and death for the first time. The suffering didn’t impel him towards compassionate distress, rather a spiritual search. He wondered if there was a dimension that wasn’t subject to old age, sickness, and death.

In that allegorical tale, the Buddha encounters four heavenly messengers – an old person, a sick person, a corpse, and a sadhu. He asks his charioteer Channa about the sadhu. Channa says the sadhu is seeking the Deathless and the Unconditioned. That became the Buddha’s search and gift of Dhamma – a contemplative’s way to go beyond old age, sickness, and death – the way to the Deathless for all sentient beings.

You can see the effect one being like the Buddha has had on many cultures over 2600 years. It’s visible in monasteries around the world and through beings like His Holiness the Dalai Lama. This aspiration for the Deathless is not weak or ineffective. It takes a lot of strength.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Q: Please explain anattā.

A: Here’s a trick question: ‘The Buddha taught there is no self, true or false?’ The answer is: ‘false.’

The Buddha’s original insight and teaching says anything that begins and ends, and is contingent, is dependently originated. There’s no essence, no personality, or no soul in it. He didn’t teach that there is a self. He taught there’s suffering, there’s a cause for suffering, there’s an end to suffering, and a path to end suffering. The teaching of anattā is to challenge the view, ‘I am this body. I own this body and these emotions. This is my family and I have control over it.’ All the self-identities that we have are a losing game. That perception is not going to set you free.

So, what do you mean when you say, ‘I am this body?’

The teaching of anattā encourages us to question, ‘Are we this body?’ This way, you start to inquire, ‘What is the body?’

When you practise ‘bodily sensations in awareness,’ you will find they’re constantly changing. Sensations come into awareness, but will you find an entity there, such as ‘a solid body’? And is there a ‘me’ experiencing ‘the body’? You may call it awareness, but is that a thing? No, it’s just awareness. If you investigate your assumptions of self, then you’ll see that they keep falling away.

Anattā is not a philosophical position or a teaching to blindly believe. The teaching is meant to lead you, rather than position you. The idea is for you to look at habitual assumptions like ‘I am a good or bad person, an old man, etc.’ Let’s say you’re meditating, and you find yourself thinking. You quickly go into self-disparagement: ‘I’m thinking too much.’ At that point, stop and contemplate, ‘Who is it that’s thinking? There’s a thought and there’s consciousness. But where is this person who is thinking too much? Let’s have a look.’ When you check, you’ll only find awareness of change, not a person.

You can apply that question of ‘who is’ to experiences and perceptions of pain, emotions, etc. For example, ‘Who is thinking? Who is feeling this pain? Who is feeling this fear?’

These questions raise awareness of whatever is. They have no answer because there is none. Use them to help you see the assumption of self is simply a construct. The thinking mind then starts to fall away.

Awareness has the capacity to know change, which becomes an intuition of peace.

You start to follow that intuition rather than the thinking processes that we tend to believe in too much. This is spiritual work, not conventional life work. We follow the intuitions of silence, and the sense of identity as mind-body starts to drop off through a kind of natural process.

These days due to the COVID-19 pandemic, you may get annoyed if you encounter people without masks. You’ll probably grumble. At that moment, a sense of self and other gets created through aversion. It’ll seem very real. If you look at that with mindfulness, then you can realise there is annoyance and there’s consciousness of annoyance. Now, who’s angry here? This is the type of lynchpin investigative work we can do around the teaching of anattā. It’s a provocative teaching because you can’t really identify with this mind and body, or your own personal history. At a conventional level, there is a ‘me,’ but the Buddha’s teachings on anattā point to a deeper reality.

Q: Will sustained meditation help manage feelings of guilt? I’m constantly nagged by the ever-wandering mind that perhaps more could have been done to lessen a sick person’s suffering. This feeling becomes stronger during meditation.

A: It’s understandable you want to do your best. But you can’t alleviate all the suffering and you’ll make medical mistakes too. I had that with my mom. Her feet were a mess in the last four days of her life. We used to bind her feet because lymph wasn’t flowing around properly, but I bound it up wrong. This caused her a lot of suffering. I only realised my mistake after 24 hours. It was a shock to me. Now that memory ended up becoming very strong. Even though I’d cared for her to the best of my abilities for nine years, that mistake was the strongest memory of those years. It was a horrible one, too. When I talked about this to some people, they’d say, ‘Oh bhante, but you were so good, and you helped her.’ That wasn’t the point, though. I felt horrible. Then I spoke to Ajahn Sucitto. He said, ‘Ah, that must have been difficult.’ That was helpful. Unless we acknowledge a person’s suffering, we are not with them. We can try to buoy them up by assuring they’ll be okay in time. But, in difficult situations, it’s good to recognise the suffering.

The horrible memory kept coming up. I refused to believe in it and continued reflecting, ‘Now, this is a memory. Memory feels this way.’ I would just bear with it. It would come up every ten minutes or so. Slowly, I refused to take a ‘self-like’ position around it.

The feeling of not having done enough is common because you always think you could do more. So, feel the memory and the pain of loss, and just not allow that to run into ‘I-making, my-making’. That kind of thinking requires discipline. It’s not just a discipline of repression; it’s a discipline of staying with the actual feeling.

Feelings of guilt or constant nagging are different modes of dosa (aversion). If you have a facility for witnessing your emotions through the heart, then you can take it to the heart before thoughts arise. Get really good at pre-thinking. When the nagging arises, you just turn to your go-to place, the heart, and feel the horribleness of that. That’s when aversion comes out. One doesn’t want to feel the horribleness of the nagging, so they go off into self-hatred, which, for some reason, seems to be more comfortable. I used to go into self-hatred, which felt good. Again, that’s what I found with this experience I had with my mom. I went back and forth in an effort to stay with the body:

Stay, just stay…How could you, Viradhammo?No, no, come back, come back, and just stay with the body.

Slowly it worked its way out and the memories became much more realistic about the good times I had with mom, about how lucky I was to take care of her and all the goodness that was around her.

I’d also ask you to reflect, ‘Is meditation about not having unpleasant experiences? Is it a pacifier? Is it a tool of distraction?’

I don’t see meditation as pacifying or managing feelings of guilt. I would see it as the liberation of feelings of guilt by making them fully conscious. I didn’t manage the fears that I experienced. They came through me because they had a life of their own. I witnessed, endured, felt, welcomed and, in the end, understood them, which wasn’t a management program. It was more like cleansing them.

Make nagging conscious and see where you can sense it in the body. Suppressing thoughts and feelings, which is an act of aversion, won’t work.

The feelings become stronger during meditation because you’re not distracted at that time. This is the difficulty of meditation. There aren’t any escape routes. If it comes up, then that’s your chance to see it fully and develop the courage to realise that this will change.

This is nature, and it feels this way.

Meditations where you can understand witnessing change as opposed to sorting out, solving, or analysing, will serve you well during times of upheaval. It is difficult to stay with unpleasant feelings, but it’s important. Luang Por Sumedho used to call this kind of meditation an emotional enema. We tend to think that meditation is blissful and peaceful. No, sometimes it’s purification. We’ve heard of Luang Por Chah’s challenges with lust. He’d go days with incredible lust coming through his awareness, which wasn’t fun. But he just endured and watched. So, be encouraged that there’s nothing wrong with this. It’s a skill to understand how to make it conscious and know it is part of your kamma and life. It’ll be helpful if you can find people who can encourage you in that way.