GLOSSARY

Pali is the scriptural language of the Theravada Buddhist tradition. Several Pali words, as well as some Thai, Japanese, Spanish, and Sanskrit words, are used throughout this book. This glossary briefly defines those terms.

ahaṃkāra

I-making.

Ajahn (Thai)

teacher.

akāliko

timeless, beyond time.

ākāsa

space.

anattā

not-self, impersonal, without individual essence.

ānāpānasati

mindfulness of breathing.

anicca/aniccaṃ

impermanent, changeable, inconstant, uncertain. The nature of all experiential phenomena.

aniccasaññā

perception of change.

ariya (Sanskrit)

noble one.

asaṅkhata

the negation of conditionality.

asubha

unattractive.

avijja

ignorance, obscuration.

bhakti (Sanskrit)

devotion, involvement.

Bhante

venerable sir (honorific for addressing monks).

bhāvanā

cultivation of mind.

bhava-taṇhā

desire to become something, one of the three types of craving that cause suffering.

bhikkhu

monk.

brahmavihāras

sublime states of mind (goodwill, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity).

chakra (Sanskrit)

centre of spiritual energy.

citta

heart and mind, active aspect of awareness.

cittānupassanā

attending to the citta, mindfulness of citta, the third foundation of mindfulness.

dāna

generosity, giving.

deva/devatā

celestial being, demi-god, spirit.

dhammavicaya

investigation, contemplation of Dhamma.

dosa

aversion.

dukkha

pain, suffering, stress, unsatisfactoriness. It may be physical or mental. The term is quite broad and includes pain; the suffering due to change and instability; and the unsatisfactoriness or unreliability of all formations.

Guru (Sanskrit)

teacher.

hara (Japanese)

soft belly, the region between the navel and pelvic girdle.

hiri-ottappa

conscience and concern.

idapaccayatā

Literally: ‘conditioned by this’. The principle of specific conditionality whereby one facet of the natural order affects, gives rise to or conditions another.

indriya saṃvara

sense restraint.

jāti

birth.

kalyāṇamitta

spiritual friend.

kāma-taṇhā

sense desire, one of the three types of craving that cause suffering.

Kamma (Sanskrit: karma)

intentional action (of body, speech, and mind). These actions ripen as results (vipāka).

karunā

compassion. Second of four sublime abodes (brahmavihāras).

kilesa

defilement, habitual attitudes of the mind that enforce obscuration of reality.

kuti

solitary dwelling, usually isolated.

Luang Por (Thai)

Venerable Father.

magga

path.

mamakāra

my-making.

Māra

the lord of death; symbol for any root or cause for a defilement or deluded mind-state.

mātikā

matrices or lists.

mettā

friendliness, goodwill, benevolence, loving-kindness. First of four sublime abodes (brahmavihāras).

moksha (Sanskrit)

liberation from the cycle of birth-death cycle.

mudita

joyfulness arising from appreciating goodness, appreciative joy, empathetic joy. Third of four sublime abodes (brahmavihārās).

nāda (Sanskrit)

‘sound’ – referring to the silence behind sounds; used as a meditation object.

Nibbāna (Sanskrit: nirvāna)

the extinguishing of the ‘fires’ of greed, hatred, and delusion.

nimitta

sign, often associated with mental images that may arise in meditation.

ovāda

exhortation.

pah (Thai)

forest.

papañca

mental proliferation.

Pāramī (Sanskrit: pāramitā)

cultivations, virtues, perfections, blessings.

phala

fruit (referring to the result that arises from the ripening of kamma).

phassa

contact.

pong (Thai)

swamp.

prung daeng (Thai)

Literally: ‘seasoning and dressing up’, refers to the inclination of proliferation, blowing thoughts out of proportion.

pūjā:

Literally: ‘act of honouring’, the ritual of making offerings and chanting to the Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha.

Rōshi (Japanese):

Literally: ‘old master’, an experienced teacher with great wisdom.

rūpa/rūpaṁ

form (or bodily form).

saddhā

confidence, conviction, faith, trust.

sakkāyadiṭṭhi

personality view.

samādhi

unification of mind, collectedness.

samaṇa

contemplative, renunciant.

samaṇa saññā

the perception of being a renunciant.

sāmanera

novice.

sammā

attuned, holistic, appropriate, skillful, ‘right’ (not opposed to ‘wrong’ but standing on its own merit, leading to the wholesome).

sammā samādhi

right collectedness, the eighth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.

sampajañña

clear comprehension, full awareness, clear knowing.

saṁsāra

The repeated ‘round of rebirth’ – the cycle of birth, growth, ageing, and death without end that chains beings to existence.

saṅkhāra/

activities, formations, fabrications, programs (by

saṅkhārā (sing./plural)

analogy with computer programs). Referring both to the volitional activity of ‘forming’ things, and the things formed. As the fourth khandha (aggregate), it is primarily mental. Deeply conditioned habitual reactions of the mind.

saṅkhata

conditioned.

shikantāza (Japanese)

choiceless awareness.

sīla

moral integrity.

sīlabbata-parāmāsa

attachment to systems and customs, attachment to rituals and techniques.

shishya (Sanskrit)

disciple.

sop arom (Thai)

know the mood of the mind.

sukha

pleasant, happy, joyful, at ease, peaceful.

Sutta (Sanskrit: sutra)

discourse, teaching by the Buddha or one of his contemporary disciples.

taṇhā

craving, desire. Literally ‘thirst’. The cause of suffering, as defined in the Four Noble Truths.

Theravada

Literally: ‘The word or speech of the Elders’.

toraman (Thai)

frustration.

uddhacca

restlessness, excitement.

upekkhā

Literally: ‘to watch over’, to observe without bias, equanimity. Fourth of four sublime abodes (brahmavihāras).

Uposatha (Thai: wan phra)

Observance Day (corresponding to the phases of the moon) on which Buddhists gather to reaffirm precepts, listen to the Dhamma, and practise meditation.

vedanā

feelings.

vibhava-taṇhā

desire to get rid of something, one of the three types of craving that cause suffering.

vicikicchā

persistent doubt.

vipāka

result (of kamma).

Vinaya

the monastic discipline. Early Buddhist scripture and subsequent commentaries referring to appropriate monastic conduct.

wat (Thai)

monastery

A note on honorifics

The words, ‘Ajahn’ and ‘Luang Por,’ are not titles; they’re honorifics used in Thailand, connotating respect, endearment, and honouring the person addressed.