INTRODUCTION*

Ajahn Viradhammo has traditionally led a week-long residential retreat each fall at the Galilee Centre in Arnprior, a small town near Ottawa, Canada’s capital, upon the invitation of the Ottawa Buddhist Society in Canada. It is a perfect place, in normal times, for meditation. The view of the Ottawa River from the century-old manor in a surround of maple trees naturally invites quiet reflection.

In September 2020, this favourite gathering of nearby Buddhists had to be cancelled and moved to the virtual world. People in Ottawa and all around the world were living through the anguish of the deadly COVID-19 pandemic. Vaccines were not available then. Governments resorted to lockdowns, and barred gatherings to control the spread of infection, as no way through the deadly disease had yet been discovered. Families were separated for months, jobs were lost, and fear of sickness and death was palpable in societies globally.

Therefore, the gravity and import of the Buddha’s teachings were squarely in front of all the participants during this seven-day virtual meditation retreat. Gathered together from around the world on Zoom, meditators, isolated in their own homes, turned their attention to Ajahn Viradhammo’s words of insight, empathy, and wisdom.

The Contemplative’s Companion is both a record and a guide of this virtual meditation retreat held during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. At that time, Ajahn Viradhammo and the organisers from the Ottawa Buddhist Society aimed to create a new virtual retreat community with solitary practitioners living everywhere in pandemic isolation.

Participants in the retreat returned, day after day, to Ajahn Viradhammo’s teachings ‘broadcast’ from his residence, the Tisarana Buddhist Monastery in Perth, Ontario, Canada. There was continuity in the teacher’s mind about what was being taught. For example, the ideas and suggestions for practice from one talk built on those expressed in a previous session. Guidance was offered and a reflective process in noble silence was encouraged. Ajahn Viradhammo’s invitation to spacious awareness permeated the retreat, and does so in this book too. In his guided meditations, Ajahn Viradhammo often uses single words to encourage the mind to tune into silence. We’ve kept those one-word themes, as they were spoken, to offer spacious opportunities for reflection.

The book’s editors decided to hold onto Ajahn’s comments such as, ‘As I said yesterday’. They remind us of how rich the process of questioning and reflecting can be over time. Readers are also invited to check their understanding of words in the Glossary (p258).

In a formal retreat, there is a gathering of stillness that steadily deepens. To begin, a chanting and meditation format is set. The Triple Gem of Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha is honoured. Participants align their principles while requesting teaching from the Elder (senior monk). Everyone listens and turns inward, in silence. The Elder’s own experience and guiding instructions inspire their efforts. Participants take up the instruction and move through the rhythm of multiple meditation periods. Eating, bathing, and sleeping are all open to awareness, as the silence deepens.

In the seclusion of a silent meditation retreat, specific instructions and experiences offered by a teacher are explored with spaciousness. They are sensed more clearly. Ajahn Viradhammo refers to this place for the testing out of the Buddha’s teachings as ‘our laboratory’.

He encourages us to learn to reflect for ourselves, to ‘stand under’ the instructions given, and to try comprehending the point of the teachings by contemplating them as best as possible throughout the day. This teaching style mirrors the Buddha’s instructions to the Kālāmas in the town of Kesaputta (Aṅguttara Nikāya 3:65, as translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi):

Come, Kālāmas, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence of a speaker, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’ But when you know for yourselves: ‘These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,’ then you should live in accordance with them.

Another thing to keep in mind as you go through this book, or the audio recordings that are available as a playlist on Tisarana Buddhist Monastery’s YouTube channel, is that the teachings offered by the Forest Sangha teachers, such as Ajahn Viradhammo, are spoken contemporaneously without notes. In that way, the talks are a response to the needs of the time and listeners. But, as you’ll discover, the themes are universal because the very nature of Dhamma is akāliko (timeless).

Let us begin The Contemplative’s Companion (or your retreat, if you’re intending on doing one while reading this book) as was done at the retreat, and as would be done at any Theravada Buddhist gathering, by requesting a Dhamma talk from Ajahn Viradhammo with these traditional words of respect and devotion:

Brahmā ca lokādhipatī sahampatiKatañjalī anadhivaraṃ ayācathaSantīdha sattāpparajakkha-jātikāDesetu dhammaṃ anukampimaṃ pajaṃ

The Brahmā god Sahampati,Lord of the world,With palms joined in reverence, requested a favour:‘Beings are here with but little dust in their eyes,Pray, teach the Dhamma out of compassion for them.’

RATANACAṄKAMANAKAṆḌA SUTTA, BUDDHAVAṀSA, KHUDDAKA NIKĀYA

*This introduction is from the Ottawa Buddhist Society in Canada.