MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH SOUND

We’ll sit, lie, walk, or stand for about 45 minutes. Get yourself into a good posture.

Last night, I was talking about tuning into the present moment. I like to use sound. So, listen to sound. Tune into it. Oddly enough, you also tune into silence because, in the sound, there is also the silence of knowing. Savour or appreciate the silence of knowing by just listening to sound.

Then try to evoke the feelings of kindness or affection. One way to do that is to bring attention to the centre of your chest. Feel the breath rising and falling at the chest. Keep savouring the silence of knowing.

On the in-breath, think of someone dear to you. Name them on the in-breath. On the out-breath, wish them, ‘May you be well.’ Let their image and name trigger affection in you. Tune into that sensibility and empower it by saying, ‘May you be well.’

When that attunement with affection or kindness becomes strong and steady, let it be the tone of your awareness.

Continue to be aware of the breath with that attitude of kindness until the end of the session.

It’s interesting to practise for an hour, two hours, or longer than that. It’s not a matter of wilfully sitting for long periods of time. Young monks do that; they try to clock in as many hours of formal practice as possible. It’s not a matter of clocking in the hours.

Luang Por Chah would say, ‘Water buffalos can stay still for eight hours.’

What is important is the quality of curiosity, of investigating what’s happening during long periods of non-distraction. So, see if you can bring that quality of curiosity into your meditation.

RECEPTIVE KNOWING

On the ridge of a mountain, you naturally have a visceral sense of space. That experience will help you tune into a feeling of spaciousness. A centre like Galilee, which is dedicated to holding retreats and designed to encourage contemplation, is also helpful for tuning into that sense of space. If you are in New Delhi, New York, Toronto, or another busy city, you might not have the ideal conditions to tune into spaciousness. What do you do then? What do you do the rest of the time, when you are not in retreat, which is much longer really? Is there a way to tune into this feeling of spaciousness without a supportive physical environment?

We are where we are. Our theme or the project is ‘knowing’ and developing acceptance in the midst of where we are and tuning into something wholesome and good.

Meditation is difficult. Although we call this a virtual retreat, our experience is very real. It is in real time, with a real body, mind, and conditions. One of the problems the Buddha points out, which I think is important, is resistance or vibhava-taṇhā in Pali. It is a kind of craving. This desire to not have, to get rid of, to repress, to deny, or to disassociate is a direct cause of suffering. It is the ‘not wanting’ part of our minds. It is different from hatred and aversion. It is deeper than that.

This sense of resistance is often strong in good-hearted people because of our pursuit of ideals. We want to live a good life without harming others. When seemingly harmful impulses or negative, ‘not-ideal’ thoughts arise, we quite often resist realising them.

Instead, we feel discomfort and indulge in self-disparagement, self-criticism, or self-judgement. The whole situation becomes complex.

Spacious, awake

Last night, I was suggesting the word, ‘affection,’ which I really like. In some way, we are all trying to tune into goodness, spaciousness, and this sense of affection or mettā bhāvanā. If we can tune into affection even when we’re not meditating – as a way of considering and being with life – then we can approach the negativities that arise in consciousness with the same sense of openness and affection, rather than resistance.

There is nothing wrong with aversion or negative thoughts. This is what the mind does. The habit is conditioned. At the same time, there can be resistance to having the aversion, a fear of aversion could overtake you, or you simply do not want those habitual aversive thoughts. It is skilful to understand that the arising of aversion in the mind is not wrong. It is just an old habit that is coming into consciousness. Use awareness to cultivate a larger perspective on it. Contemplate a sense of spaciousness and openness. Use Luang Por Sumedho’s insights of, ‘it all belongs,’ and ‘it’s like this.’ This awareness practice allows thought to be as it is – without making it into a problem. Thoughts arise and cease, as is their nature.

There will be a sense of unease and resistance if you don’t cultivate a way of tuning into spaciousness. You’ll experience an internal struggle between the desire to either be that which is deemed to be good or ideal and wanting to get rid of the bad or that which you don’t want. This is not optimal. Buddhist meditation helps develop trust in awareness. That’ll help you to tune into old, conditioned habits of resistance and break free by accepting them.

Not your nature

On a moral level, we restrain ourselves from harming others and ourselves. There can be restraint in body and speech. In terms of habit, the mind can produce negative thoughts, but it’s not wrong. It is not really your essential nature; it is just the way the mind has been conditioned.

It is not wrong for a tree to get knocked down by lightning, as nature operates in that way. What is of value is the awareness, or witnessing, of this movement that takes you to something beyond the natural phenomena.

Noticing natural phenomena can bring a sense of relaxation and ease into your mind. For instance, it is deemed helpful for monks to live communally as a sangha at the edge of a village or in the forest, rather than in the middle of the town. While this practice is encouraged, it’s not liberating. The helpful setting is not liberating if it is not ‘seen’. The clear blue sky is spacious, uplifting, and beautiful to me. It creates in me a wholesome effect. If I’m attached to the beauty, then I will suffer when staying in a different environment. On the other hand, if I understand that the beauty and wonder of nature are things I can appreciate and know for what they truly are, then I am able to go to that knowing rather than the object. In this way, the object is bringing me to a sense of realisation that there is, in consciousness, this deep sensibility and silent knowing, which I can always access. Knowing does not depend on the blue sky because knowing is about my mind. It is about consciousness.

In meditation, tune into the sense of space, silence, mettā, affection, or goodness. Then try to make that attunement to goodness and spaciousness stronger.

It is a noticing and a sustaining of something wholesome and good rather than a forceful conquering of things or a wilful becoming.

This is not an intellectual process. Rather, it is about waiting, tuning in, and bringing sensitivity to silence.

On this retreat, I suggest you do not try to figure out anything. Give yourself a break. Forget about it. See that in the trusting of awareness, and in the patience and receptivity of awareness, truth is revealed.

When I say truth is revealed, you may think, ‘Oh, I’m going to get some revelation. My head’s going to burst open.’ Now, that is another Dhamma talk. Whatever language you use, you run into this problem of becoming, creating a future state (bhava-taṇhā) and getting rid of (vibhava-taṇhā).

The awake or aware mind is not becoming anything or trying to get rid of anything.

I am hoping to persuade all of us, including myself, to come to that important middle ground where the movement is not who we are. Rather, we are the silent knowing of that movement; the compassionate knowing, allowing that movement.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH EXPERIENCES

When meditating, how do you remind yourself about the way things are? I use sound. By just listening to sound, presence becomes obvious, so go ahead and listen to sound.

Notice that within the sound, there is also the silence of knowing, so tune into that.

You are not trying to become anything, and you are not resisting anything. Tune into that way of being. Also, you are not consuming anything. You are not absorbed into thought or experience per se. You know experience.

This is the awake mind; the state of non-becoming and non-resistance.

You could either spend the rest of this meditation in that simple mode of listening, or you could localise your attention. Pick something that is a bit more concrete. For example, you can localise your attention on the breath. But notice the knowing is still silent.

Your engagement with the object of meditation is not intended to attain anything, but to simply know the feeling of breathing.

If you are feeling sleepy or dull, you can sharpen the focus by breathing deeply and more energetically.

It is fruitful to start meditating with an attitude of kindness. So, bring attention to the centre of your chest. Feel the rise and fall of your breath. Then imagine and name someone dear to you on the in-breath. On the out-breath, wish them, ‘May you be well.’

Now the awareness is in tune with kindness. Remember, you are not trying to become a kind person – because you already have that as a possibility.

You can refresh that kind attitude by wishing other people well until that note is clear in consciousness. Then you can let go of the names and people. Just be with the breath with an affectionate sensitivity and a kind regard. You can sustain that note for long periods with the breath. Breathing becomes a way of collecting and composing the mind: One in-breath, one out-breath, collecting and composing, and so on.

Stay with this attitude of kind regard or mettā for the rest of the meditation.

AN EVEN INTERCHANGE

When I initially used to teach mettā bhāvanā, it was with the usual lists you find in the texts. You move through a list of living beings – first, the ones you love, then those who evoke neutral feelings, and, finally, the people you might be averse to. In 1999, I was teaching a retreat in Auckland, New Zealand. At that time Belgrade, Serbia, was being bombed in the horrible Kosovo War. One day, I introduced mettā bhāvanā. Two of the practitioners were compassionate, loving, and caring women. I asked one of them, ‘How’s the sharing of mettā going?’

She responded, ‘I can’t do it. I can’t cover everyone.’ She had a big family with lots of children and aunties. She was trying to cover everyone. Her understanding was that she had to give equal mettā to all of them, and she could not fit them all into the 45-minute sitting. The other woman was imagining the people who were suffering due to the war and was trying to send mettā to heal them. She was crying. While these were kind thoughts, they were not the practice’s intention.

Sometimes, mettā bhāvanā gets conflated with prayer. Sending mettā to whoever you want to is fine. It is a nice way of thinking. I’m not rejecting the idea of sending mettā. Rather, I am suggesting that once we are in tune with the open heart – filled with affection and appreciation – we abide with that attunement. When we go out of tune or are on a different note (e.g. self-disparagement, harsh judgements, or fearful prospects), we can more easily return to open-heartedness – or try to remember that attunement. This isn’t prayer.

Certainly, beings have radiance. I remember a lay friend once telling me how, when she walked near Luang Por Chah, she could feel his mettā and love as a vibration. I am not dismissing the energetic possibility of human radiance or the idea that I am someone praying for someone else. To me, mettā bhāvanā is about cultivating a way of presence, an even interchange. It is not conflicted by separation or alienation, which is a result of the feelings of aversion, fear, and greed. Mettā is fuelled by affection, appreciation, and compassion. It is the way to go beyond boundaries of an ego and self, and all of that from which we suffer. It is not a sending out, but more a remembering of something that is not foreign to us. We all know affection. We just have to look at a picture of someone dear to us to know it.

Now, how can we return to that in meditation? We can do it quite deliberately like an exercise, as described in the previous meditation (p49). That creates a kind of vibration or knowing in consciousness. When we encounter complexities, we can pick up on the different ‘note,’ be it fear, criticism, or another negative feeling.

It’s helpful to remember that those notes are neither right nor wrong. We go to thought a lot. Affectionate awareness helps us bypass inner arguments and come to a wholesome place by knowing the mind is the mind. This is called citta sampajañña or cittānupassanā, the third foundation of mindfulness. You know the mind is the mind. You also understand that you can learn what is skilful and unskilful by training and cultivating the mind. We can train to be present in complexity and to remember to return to an even interchange. In this way it becomes a constant presence in our lives. We can touch that ‘knowing’.

What happens then? The tendency to move away from negativity and resistance will reduce. The openness of the heart is very effective. Again, this is not sentimental. It is hard work. It is very subtle and interesting. It is not a wilful attempt to become enlightened, which is a disaster; take it from me. An open heart is interesting, kind, beautiful, and pleasant. How else are we going to sustain this work of inner understanding?

There is a lot of ‘warrior’ attitude in Buddhist circles; you’re fighting pain, defilements, or Māra (the lord of death; symbol for any root or cause for a defilement or deluded mind-state). This language is quite masculine. I tried that in the early days because I was wilful, but it did not make me happy. It ruined my knees, among other things. You can be determined, but it does not have to be harsh or self-disparaging. It can be a type of careful diligence in kindness and sensitivity.

THE HINDRANCE OF TORPOR

If we had been at the Galilee Centre now, we would have had lunch, coffee, perhaps a snooze or a walk, and then sat for meditation. About half of the meditators would fall asleep. There is a real challenge to post-meal meditation. It can be soporific. One of the challenges to meditation is dullness. The best antidote is probably a change of posture. At the monastery, if dullness arises during meditation, a monk can step outside and do walking meditation. Obviously, if you are really exhausted, sleep.

As a hindrance, dullness can become insidious and a habit. If dullness is coming into consciousness, there isn’t enough body awareness, and your attention is preoccupied with thought. It is a particular kind of ‘oatmeal thought’ – very thick and dulling. The body responds with little or no vitality. The whole posture collapses and you’re nodding off.

One needs to establish enough samādhi or presence to get into the ‘game’ of knowing what your body is doing. We can do this by establishing a strong sense of the neck and spine, getting in touch with the body, and bringing attention quite deliberately down to the hara (the soft belly area). Awareness of posture brings you into breathing from the hara rather than being in your head. After establishing the posture, inquire: ‘Where is the nodding taking place? How does that arise in consciousness?’ If you can see the arising of dullness, then you tend not to get reborn or lost in it.

Pain is easier to deal with because it keeps you awake. Dullness just takes you to another universe, away from the present moment. If dullness is constant, inquire into it, and do not try to get rid of it. Ask yourself: ‘Why can’t I be aware of the hara? Why can’t I be aware of the chest? Why can’t I be aware of the whole spine so much so that I’m not even aware I’m nodding off?’

During one retreat, I suggested meditators video themselves to see what’s going on, as everyone has a camera now. It’s an interesting exercise. If you are restless and shifting all the time, then you’ll notice: ‘Wow! Look at that! I’m shifting every five minutes.’ Shifting postures during meditation is neither illegal nor a moral issue but it is uddhacca (restlessness or excitement). You may also notice that you’re nodding off during meditation.

Stillness of the body is an interesting object of awareness, whether you do lying or sitting meditation. The body isn’t held rigidly with an attitude of wilfulness. There’s simply a deep sense of stillness in the body. Now, how do you do that? That becomes a way of inquiring into the posture and the energy that is being produced.

Inject optimism into meditation

I spoke earlier of approaching meditation with an attitude of affection or kindness. In the Visuddhimagga, a fifth century encyclopaedical commentary on Theravada Buddhism by Venerable Buddhaghosa, classical meditation is talked about in an interesting manner. The first step in the meditation process is to pay homage to the Buddha. In a bhakti (devotion) culture, you bow three times to the Buddha image or stupa with a sense of veneration. This act brings up a lot of optimism in me because the Buddhist teaching doesn’t just talk about suffering. It also points to the end of suffering.

The Buddha’s realisation is profoundly optimistic. We human beings have the possibility to end suffering. Now you can see how paying homage to the Buddha could introduce into your meditation a sense of optimism. We Westerners don’t have a bhakti culture. Malaysians, Sri Lankans, and people from countries where Buddhist culture is mainstream have that reverence. We tend to be more secular and cynical. So, how would you cultivate bhakti? Is there value in that for you? Obviously, I have been a monk for a long time, so it is easy for me to bow to a Buddha rūpa (form) and bring up a sense of gratitude for the Buddha’s enlightenment. I also extend this sense of reverence and gratitude to my teachers.

In the book of his teachings, No Worries, Luang Por Liem, the abbot of Wat Nong Pah Pong, the monastery founded by Luang Por Chah in Thailand, said he would set up his meditation cushion facing his teacher (Luang Por Chah), wear his triple robes – the full monastic attire – and bow to Luang Por Chah three times before beginning his practice. I remember Luang Por Liem’s kuti was nearly 200 metres away from Luang Por Chah’s with a fair amount of forest in between.

There was a formality in Luang Por Liem’s approach to meditation. I suppose he was bringing forth this beautiful quality, however you want to describe it, of the heart.

Then, as it says in the Visuddhimagga, the practitioner does mettā bhāvanā, which brings up the heartfelt qualities of gratitude and kindness. This preparation creates a wholesome way of observing your object of meditation because it is suffused with warmth, optimism, and beauty. The book recommends us to then pick up the object of meditation. That’s why I was suggesting that you first go to the heart centre and allow kindness, appreciation, or affection to become conscious. Get that going first. Then pick up the object of meditation with that kind, affectionate attitude. This way, there is a sense of pleasure and beauty, and it’s easier to meditate. You may still fall asleep. What do you do then? What would Luang Por Liem do? Well, for one thing, change the posture and recognise dullness as a hindrance. Just know that it’s difficult to stay in the ‘game’. Do standing or walking meditation if you’re feeling dull.

Stop meditating

We can do many things to address sleepiness. I would say, the secret is around the spine. If you are sleepy, you must basically make a determination to stop meditating because it is not working. You have to look around and stop doing what you’re doing. Again, just know what’s going on in a very mundane way. Try to keep your eyes open, set up a posture and then make your meditation an investigation into what happens when sleepiness arises. Where does the attention go? What kind of thoughts are arising? What’s happening in the spine? Sustain this inquiry until you know sleepiness.

You can also try to lift your spine. I developed a method of putting a lot of energy into the small of the spine, pushing my hara forward and imagining my head being pulled upward to the ceiling. That gave a good yogic stretch to the spine and brought a good flow of energy. I combined that with deep breathing. Then I settled into the meditation posture. This way, I had a platform from where I could see how I lost balance and fell into dullness.

When there was a relapse, I would tell myself, ‘Okay! Get the posture established. Open the eyes. Stop meditating. Do something very coarse and obvious.’ I would breathe very deeply, then go back and set up the posture until I figured out how dullness worked in my meditation. It probably took me a year to figure that out. From then on, I was much more aware of the arising of dullness in the body. I also had an antidote to the problem.

You can’t just wilfully get rid of these hindrances. You have to understand how they work. It is not a matter of getting rid of sleepiness. Aversion to dullness doesn’t work. You will fall asleep if you try to get rid of it. It is like taking an interest in something boring. Life is often boring, isn’t it?

HOMAGE TO THE BUDDHA

[Handa mayaṃ buddhābhitthutiṃ karomase]

[Now let us chant in praise of the Buddha.]

Yo so tathāgato arahaṃ sammāsambuddho

The Tathāgata is the Pure One, the Perfectly Enlightened One.

Vijjācaraṇa-sampanno

He is impeccable in conduct and understanding,

Sugato

The Accomplished One,

Lokavidū

The Knower of the Worlds.

Anuttaro purisadamma-sārathi

He trains perfectly those who wish to be trained.

Satthā deva-manussānaṃ

He is Teacher of gods and humans.

Buddho bhagavā

He is awake and holy.

Yo imaṃ lokaṃ sadevakaṃ samārakaṃ sabrahmakaṃIn this world with its gods, demons, and kind spirits,

Sassamaṇa-brāhmaṇiṃ pajaṃ sadeva-manussaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedesi

Its seekers and sages, celestial and human beings, he has by deep insight revealed the Truth.

Yo dhammaṃ desesi ādi-kalyāṇaṃ majjhe-kalyāṇaṃ pariyosāna-kalyāṇaṃ

He has pointed out the Dhamma: beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle, beautiful in the end.

Sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ kevala-paripuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahma-cariyaṃ pakāsesi

He has explained the Spiritual Life of complete purity in its essence and conventions.

Tam-ahaṃ bhagavantaṃ abhipūjayāmi tam-ahaṃbhagavantaṃ sirasā namāmi

I chant my praise to the Blessed One, I bow my head to the Blessed One.

[bow]

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH THE BODY

How do you feel now? It is very warm in this south-facing room. I’ll use that as my beginning: ‘This is the way warmth feels. The body feels hot.’

You are awakening. In that awakening, you will also notice the silence of knowing how you feel.

Listen to sound, and then the body. How does the body feel? How does breathing feel?

Now, let’s bring up a sense of kindness. Go to the centre of the chest. Breathing in, wish yourself, ‘May I be well.’ Breathing out, wish, ‘May all beings be well.’

Let’s do something more extreme by expanding the breath. So, breathe more deeply. Take a long breath in and a long breath out. Try to make the in and out breaths an even length. Take a nice, long breath in. Make the out-breath smooth. Notice that when the mind’s a bit lazy you don’t want to do that. You do not want to sustain that. You want to come to a normal breath. Again, take a long breath in and a long breath out.

Now let’s stretch the spine. Take a long breath in. On the out-breath, stretch the upper half of the spine up through the head to the ceiling. Take a long breath in and stretch up on the out-breath. This opens your chest. The back of your neck is also straightening. It is quite extreme, but not in a hurtful way. Try to sustain that tall posture on the in-breath. Again, long breath in and stretch up on the out-breath. Basically, you are just feeling the upper spine rise to the ceiling. The chest is very open.

Stay with the long breath. Then do the same thing with the lower spine, so you can feel the intercostals moving and the bottom pushing into the cushion. Take a long breath in. Push and stretch down like the roots of a tree on the out-breath. Now both ways, stretch up while taking a long breath in and push down on the out-breath.

Let go of that and breathe normally.

Now, you have a sense of a straight, tall spine. If you are prone to dullness, then inquire: ‘How does the spine collapse? What happens then? What kinds of thoughts are there? What happens to the chin, arms, hands, and small of the back?’ So now the brightness of the mind is inquiring, and the calmness comes from noticing the end of the out-breath.

Breathe in and out. Don’t rush the in-breath. Stay with the end of the out-breath.

Dullness quite often manifests at the last part of the out-breath. To address that, you can try noticing both the spine and the end of the out-breath.

If the energy level is fine, then contemplate composure and collectedness at the end of the out-breath.

Let the in-breath come by itself. You are collecting, composing, staying present, and being the knowing.

Okay, there are lots of ideas to use. See what works for you.

METHODOLOGY OF RENUNCIATION

It seems to me that the open heart responds to life appropriately. It is not about gratitude, affection, or appreciation. It is just open. If there’s beauty, there’s appreciation. If there’s pain, there’s compassion. There is no desire because the open heart is fulfilled. It is peaceful and connected to the way things are. It is not alienated by fear or aversion. The open heart is also imbued with goodwill. This state is described as the four brahmavihāras.

Of course, the intellect wants to chop it up: What is gratitude? Is it the same as affection? So on and so forth. I would say they all function as one piece. For me, the attitudes of goodwill, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity are the attitudes of freedom. So, moving towards them, remembering them, cultivating them, or abiding in them – whatever language you want to use – seems important to me. They are connecting us to goodness that’s already present.

Earlier, I explained how I use pictures to cultivate open-heartedness. Looking at the pictures of my mom, Luang Por Chah, or the Sangha reminds me of the open heart. I just keep looking at the pictures and remembering the open heart. Over time, open-heartedness becomes normal – a way of life. When the heart closes because of the arising of an abnormal (e.g. criticism, judgement, or fear), then I can recognise it: ‘Oh, wait, wait, wait. What’s happening here? What’s going on here?’

One and the same

I used to chop it all up, but it now seems one thing: an open heart. It is a dynamic energy form that responds in an appropriate way. It does so because it is available for response. If I am preoccupied with worry about the monastery, my latest woodworking project, or something else, then I’m not available to respond. My heart’s not open.

My teaching methodology, I suppose, is: Can I help and persuade you to get to a state of open-heartedness, and let it take care of itself? I remember leading a retreat in Toronto where we were doing the classical form of mettā bhāvanā, which is sending goodwill to people in a sequential manner. One person said it was intellectual. I said, ‘Okay, how about gratitude? Try that.’

‘Alright,’ they said. ‘I can do gratitude.’ Same thing, right?

We all have the ability to be grateful. It’s not exotic and, for sure, not foreign. But how do you get there? How do you remember that? The open heart indeed becomes a platform for freedom from all kinds of ‘selfing,’ which happens a lot.

THE BUDDHA’S SEARCH

I’m going to combine my response to these three questions from retreat participants:

What is the object during walking meditation? Is it bodily awareness, movement of the body, breath, a mantra, mettā, or awareness, or all of that?

I felt more restless than usual during a meditation session. Is this normal? This is my first retreat.

What does death and the dissolution of self feel like? What does enlightenment feel like?

These three questions might seem different, but to understand them, we have to go back to why the Buddha taught the way he taught or what the texts tell us about the Buddha’s question.

His inquiry was very existential. He was asking himself, ‘I’m subject to old age, sickness, and death, and everyone around me is subject to old age, sickness, and death. Is there a dimension in consciousness which is not subject to that?’

The Buddha’s question is his search. He answers the question not intellectually or by taking a philosophical position, but through realisation. In India, this is called the attainment of moksha or liberation from attachment to the whole birth-death cycle. In Indian philosophy and spirituality, then and now, consciousness is not a physical phenomenon. Western science, I think, calls it a physical phenomenon, meaning when the body dies, consciousness goes kaput. Of course, His Holiness the Dalai Lama has asked people to prove it. They can’t, but that is a whole other topic.

In the traditions of the Far East and India, and nowadays with Buddhist monasteries in the West, we are not buying into materiality. There is instead this possibility of moksha.

Buddhism and the Buddha’s teachings are very optimistic for me because of the possibility of knowing the Deathless.

The Buddha was initially reluctant to talk about this dimension because it’s subtle. Then the Buddha has the realisation, with assistance from various energies called devas, that there are beings who have but little dust in their eyes. We are those beings. Don’t take it personally though. We too have this possibility and dimension because we can reflect on and witness our experiences.

The Buddha describes this dimension as the Unborn, Uncreated, Unoriginated, Unformed, Unconditioned, the Deathless, Peace, etc. This language is very hard for Westerners to pick up because it is not commonly used in Western thought. We can understand peace though. That language fits into our thought structures.

We also have the word, ‘Nibbāna’ (cooling). This term has been corrupted now. Did you know there are nirvana nail salons and things like that? This is not what cooling is about. Words can become fashionable in popular culture and then seem silly. They no longer have the effect of deep reflective language.

If you prefer, call it a dimension, which is profoundly peaceful, or consciousness that is unbounded, or use whatever language that works for you.

Available to the Unconditioned

As I said earlier, the dimension described by the Buddha is a possibility for all of us. If my attention is always preoccupied with conditions that begin and end, such as good and bad; hot and cold; boredom and excitement; then that preoccupation precludes my availability to the Unconditioned.

What does preoccupation mean? For instance, when we feel bored, we seek excitement. In this way, we’re preoccupied with boredom and excitement. These conditions are constantly changing. They are born and die. They rise and cease. They are subject to change. You cannot find in them the dimension of the Unconditioned because they are conditioned phenomenon. They begin and end.

Gateway to the Uncreated

Renunciation means we no longer seek the Unconditioned in the conditioned. This doesn’t mean you can’t have fun. It is just that you realise fun is conditioned. At some point, you will get sick of fun and turn your attention to something else.

With renunciation, the Buddha is asking us to wait. What if you didn’t change the ‘channel’? What could be Unconditioned and Uncreated? Let’s explore this a bit. We’ve all experienced restlessness when meditating. If you’re interested in the conditioned, you would want to do something about the restlessness. You’ll probably go for a walk, read a book, or listen to a Dhamma talk. You’ll surely do something to move away from the restlessness. But you’ll just be moving from one condition to another when transitioning from boredom to pleasure. How about staying with the awareness of restlessness? That’s the key, as witnessing consciousness or awareness itself is the gateway to this dimension.

The problem with language is that when you say it’s the gateway to another dimension, it sounds like you’re going from room A to B. That’s not true because room A or B are just conditions. Awareness is both the method and the goal. The goal itself is very profound because awareness is caught up with self-view, greed, hatred, and delusion. It’s not clear yet. So, the methodology, I would say, is abiding as a witness to change.

Non-doing doing

When using this methodology, you realise that the earlier question about walking meditation (What should be happening? What should I be doing?) is a condition of doubt. Witness the arising of doubt. Know that it’s just a thought and a feeling. It arises and ceases, and you keep walking.

Regarding the question about what to do when feeling restless during meditation, you recognise, ‘Oh, this is a feeling of restlessness.’ That is what you should do, which is a kind of non-doing doing. What happens then? Well, it’ll be very uncomfortable because it is not fulfilling your desires.

Your desires are predicated on making this whole conditioned realm comfortable. It works to a certain extent, but it is always bound up with conditions, contingencies, change, and birth and death. When it changes and your desires are not gratified, you seek another object.

This partly explains why we are down on desire. It is not because desire is evil or wrong. Buddhism is not making a moral judgement about desire. It’s saying that if you follow desire, you will get certain results. For example, if you follow the desire to have sugar in your coffee, you will have a sweet coffee. If you follow a desire to kill someone, you will probably be imprisoned. So, there will be a result.

Just witness desire with curiosity; consider it as something that arises and ceases in a non-harmful manner and is not bound with self-mortification. You’re not using some straitjacket of repression to deal with it.

If you are watching restlessness as an object, you see that there’s the desire to not have restlessness. Next, if you witness that restlessness and the desire associated with it and you are very patient with it, then that takes you towards the Unconditioned or to the deep silence of knowing change.

It’s difficult. It is not easy to just sit and witness restlessness, but all of us have experienced it. When you first start meditating, you don’t want to stay for five minutes because you don’t want this. This is nuts. For some crazy reason you stick it out, and then you notice, ‘Oh, look at that.’ There is this knowing that knows the restlessness. ‘I didn’t get up and have a chocolate bar or whatever. I just witnessed, witnessed, witnessed, and now I actually feel alright. I feel okay.’

This is very true in meditation. Your meditation itself might be a downer, a piece of garbage. It may not be working. But you stick with it, and don’t follow the desire. You stick to the time you decided to meditate, and you witness this unpleasant experience called meditation. You witness, witness, and witness. When the meditation period ends, you’d probably walk away from it feeling very peaceful – because you let go of the attachment to desire. You felt uncomfortable but it was not hurtful. You witnessed the cessation of desire in a little way.

One of the ways we talk about Nibbāna or the Unconditioned is the cessation of craving – the cessation of this endless craving to perpetuate our egos, to constantly disparage ourselves, and be distracted by consumerism.

As I mentioned earlier, the project is to sustain the witnessing of change. You are walking back and forth, and you start to think about family or work. You get kidnapped by thoughts. You get to the end of the walking path, and realise, ‘Oh, this is what the end of the path feels like.’ Then you notice that the theme of the obsessive thinking is worry. You bring that up, and you say to yourself, ‘Worry feels this way.’ As you’re walking to the other end, perhaps you notice that you’re not getting caught up in the technique. Instead, you’re observing, ‘worry feels this way.’ You’re starting to recede away from the attachment and involvement with, in this case, the scenarios of worry.

I’m reminded of the seemingly catatonic state that arises during walking meditation. We once held a retreat in a Latvian school that was close to the Estonian border. It was so funny because many people in the neighbourhood had never seen a Buddhist monk.

We did our sitting meditation in the gymnasium and stepped onto the school grounds to do walking meditation. The school was in a small village with maybe ten houses. Some of the women living near the school used to cater food for the retreat. One woman would come out to her balcony and watch us whenever we did walking meditation. Surprisingly, on the third day, she yelled at us, ‘Will you do something? Play football at least. What are you doing?’

With its simple back and forth movement, walking meditation can, at first, seem strange. The whole idea of it is that it is not interesting. The methodology of Buddhism is that you do things that are uninteresting. The breath is not interesting. Walking back and forth is not interesting. So, your energy cannot come from fascination, novelty, excitement, or fear. It must come from a place of curiosity and interest in the mind itself, which is difficult. No wonder the Latvian woman was puzzled.

The project

Now back to the question on walking meditation. I suggest you are awakening to the way things are, especially knowing the moods of the mind. All you need to do to get behind the thought storylines is question yourself: ‘What’s the general tone of the mind? Is it future projections, fantasies, or something else?’ You just label it. This helps you to become more attentive to the mood when it comes into consciousness. You are not trying to get rid of it. You are trying to see it as an object. The more you see it as an object, the less will be the obsessive thinking. This habit will eventually fall away. If you perceive thought as a problem and try to get rid of it, you are still locked-in and preoccupied with the condition. I suggest you start witnessing consciousness.

It’s the same way when you get a doubt about meditation. Just know you should be doing ‘knowing,’ and that you don’t know what you should be doing. You witness the very sense of not knowing because that’s another object and mindset. You stay with the meditation object, which might be the breath – we’re using the breath because we need something to ground ourselves in, as the thinking mind can be compelling. Worry can also be compelling. Without some stability of mind, knowing can be hard to maintain. During walking meditation, your anchor can be the feeling of the feet touching the ground, but not in a super-concentrated way. Just have a general feeling of the feet touching the ground. Your mind may wander but come back to the feeling of the feet touching the ground. It is very simple. When practising breath meditation, ground yourself on something ordinary like an in-breath and out-breath, and sustain that. You witness it in consciousness. If you don’t have a grounding, then you may not have the necessary stability, and the mind will spin out.

Let go by observing

In the beginning you use complex methods like counting backwards with your breath to compose the mind. I used to walk backwards and do all kinds of crazy things. When your mind becomes more settled and practice is steady, you start to question this ‘doing.’ You realise there is too much doing in a technique-driven meditation –it’s me doing something to get somewhere.

Once you get the hang of the open-heartedness I spoke about earlier, the methodologies and techniques fall away. In fact, most meditators get tired of techniques. They get tired of always doing a, b, c, d, and e and they just let go into choiceless awareness or shikantāza, as it is called in Japanese. It is simply awareness of change. You are choosing to be awake, but not preoccupied with techniques or objects.

There is a kind of subtlety to just observing. The mind may get scattered. When that happens, you have the techniques of centring with breath or the heart and the practice of letting go with the phrases, ‘it’s like this,’ or ‘life is like this’. You get good at it with time. This is very intuitive. You have to try these things out.

Here the emphasis is on the peaceful dimension of the Unconditioned, as explained in the Four Noble Truths. This is a profound spiritual possibility for human beings. Again, how to do it? Well, look at discontent. When you are discontented, what do you do? Usually, you seek an object to alleviate the discontent, which you sometimes need to do. If you are hungry, you need to eat. If you’ve got a thorn in your foot, you need to take it out. If it is cold, you need to wear a jacket. There is nothing wrong with adjusting to conditions. Buddhism doesn’t say it’s wrong to follow pleasure. It is pleasurable to put a coat on when it’s 5 C. It’s pleasurable to have food when you’re hungry. It is nice to get the thorn out of your foot. There’s nothing wrong with that. But a lot of the discontent that we have is not biological or logical. You know that some of the thoughts, views, and perceptions, we put up with in our minds are questionable. They could be psychological feelings of self-doubt, self-disparagement, or flawed perceptions. Yesterday, I mentioned that craving or desire can manifest as resistance, vibhava-taṇhā. I was suggesting that opening the heart is a way of looking at resistance.

Guilt vs. remorse

I’m reminded of a statement by a Nepali lay student. She had never contemplated the difference between remorse and guilt. For me, remorse is a form of conscience, which is based on compassion. In Pali, we have the term, hiri-ottappa (conscience and concern). We usually feel this sense of remorse because of wrong speech. We would say something cruel to someone, put them down, or utter something along those lines. Later, we’ll have the thought, ‘Oh, I wish I hadn’t done that. I wish I hadn’t said that. Why did I do that? I didn’t have to do that.’ When I wake up to remorse – which is felt in the heart centre – I remind myself to be careful in the future. Compassion is present in that moment. If I didn’t have feelings of remorse, then I would be a monster or a sociopath. So, remorse is a necessary part of being a human.

Guilt is the opposite of remorse. It, to me, does not come from compassion, rather from hatred. Guilt isn’t in the heart. It’s in the head. It is like self-disparagement. For example, I could be self-disparaging with these statements: ‘I’m a bad monk. It’s been 40 years, and I’m still doing that.’ This kind of mindset is not loving. It is inflated with a sense of ‘I’ and is based on anger and aversion. While the suffering around guilt can seem very real, it’s due to cultural influences and familial relationships.

How do you notice the difference between remorse and guilt? Well, one is in thought. For example, I’m hammering away at myself – ‘I shouldn’t, I shouldn’t’ – for doing something. That thinking is an engagement with an idea. I am attached to a condition. What would disengagement from that condition feel like? It would not be more thinking. That’s the problem we often have. We get into inner arguments: ‘I shouldn’t have said that or done that. Yeah, but I needed it. No, I shouldn’t have done it.’ These horrible arguments keep going on. These types of thinking are caught up in conditions.

How do you bypass that kind of arguing with yourself, commenting on the argument, and then judging the argument? How do you get past that? Go to the heart. Don’t go to thought. When I’m caught in feelings of guilt, I understand these feelings have been culturally conditioned into me. I also know I am trying to practise sīla (moral integrity) and am a responsible person. All of us are similar in that way, and yet, the conditioning keeps coming up. What to do about that? The project is to disengage from that guilt feeling – not through thinking but through body awareness.

What if you went to the heart and identified guilt: ‘That is guilt. That is thinking. That is ego thought.’ Examine where it is in the body. This is why body meditation is helpful and interesting in Buddhism. When you notice these formations of self-criticism and self-disparagement in the body, you realise they’re not remorse or compassion. It’s different.

We all have that baggage. We usually end up distracting ourselves or thinking about it. But during a body-sweeping meditation, we process it.

It is important for that material to come into full awareness. Our intention would be to cultivate non-grasping of these materials or non-attachment to them by witnessing them as changes. Where else could you possibly witness them as change but in the body? It can be very unpleasant. It can also be mixed up with feelings of fear or lack of self-worth and result in a yucky feeling in the heart. But that’s fine. We didn’t sign up for pleasantness. We registered for the project, which is to realise the Unconditioned.

The guilt condition is very difficult. I could bear with it when I contemplated, ‘What does it feel like as a changing condition?’ Initially, my desire mind and conditioning went into thinking and self-disparagement or finding a distraction. Instead, I told myself, ‘No, this is important.’ I allowed the painful feelings to arise and become conscious. As Luang Por Sumedho would teach, consciousness is the escape hatch.

These arisings are uncomfortable. You bear witness to them as they change. It might seem hopeless. Then, one hour or two days later –however long it takes – you feel this incredible peace. You did not construct that peace by running away from it, but by witnessing something very difficult. That is the idea of purification, which is there in all spiritual practices.

Often a meditation session does not have that dimension of purification. It can be about staying awake or trying to stay in the room. Most of it is like that, I think. Every now and then, though, there are powerful triggers. While remorse for me is a good feeling, it’s not apparent. It’s easier to think thoughts of guilt and self-hatred than to feel remorse because that would be like, ‘Oh, I hurt that guy. I don’t want to be there, feeling it.’ When I decide otherwise – ‘No, I am going to feel it’ – the heart warms up and opens.

The initial response is to go to hatred. In a strange way, it’s comforting to beat yourself up. Yet, it doesn’t work. It doesn’t clear the heart because it’s hatred. Hatred begets hatred. Love begets love. It’s a cliche, but it’s true.

Returning to the questions, if you understand the project, then what’s important is not the emotional-physiological experience but your capacity to notice change. In the difficult bits of boredom or whatever the case, if you can notice change, then you strengthen that capacity. The gateway to the Deathless becomes more and more apparent. You did not go into the ‘fire.’ Instead, you were able to witness it.

QUESTIONS & ANSWERS

Q: Could we translate affection as attentiveness, or do you suggest that affection incorporates other qualities?

A: I think I use the word, ‘affection,’ because, from my own experience, attentiveness was unfortunately conjoined with control, which was linked to getting rid of. If you are getting into the subtlety of non-grasping, then attentiveness has the same sense imbibed in Luang Por Sumedho’s phrases of ‘it’s like this,’ and ‘it all belongs.’ I know, these phrases may sound like a condoning of things. But ‘it all belongs’ means, ‘it’s here now.’ Now, how to accept it and not run with the foolishness of it?

When attentiveness is clear, it both knows and accepts. When it’s unclear, it knows but tries to control or eliminate. When something comes up in that subtle state, you can get judgemental. It happens quickly. This is a subtle version of vibhava-taṇhā, the desire to get rid of, and not allowing things to be just as they are. The gross kind of vibhava-taṇhā is visibly apparent because you know you’re really repressed or something like that. ‘It’s like this’ is an awakening statement. The way to approach ‘it all belongs’ is to have a kind of agenda in the back of your own practice to sort out the good from the bad. This is the work of morality, right speech, and non-attachment. But when things come up, they come up. If I feel judgemental of someone and that judgement arrives in consciousness, it is vipāka (a result of) kamma. There is nothing good or bad about it. If I just know it as that – by witnessing change – then it ceases.

How to elevate or strengthen that witnessing of change? Affection might sound too strong for you. To me, if the heart’s open or when there is open-heartedness, then the reaction to this rejection (e.g. a negative judgement) becomes apparent. The negativities come up and they’re not threatening. It’s just the way they are. So, jealousy, fears, worries, or fantasies are not a threat. They are just phenomena that come and go. So, for me, the opening of the heart and the emphasis on that can get you to the place of non-desire – which means you can be with both the negative and positive.

Contemplate these questions: What is attentiveness? What is that as an attitude? Is it an inclusive kind of thing or is it exclusive? What’s going on?

When a negative state of mind arises, if you can include it, not get preoccupied with it, and see it arise and cease, then you see the logic of the Buddha’s emphasis on anicca and change, and on Luang Por Chah’s reflection on change. You can know the phenomena in its arisen state, in its enduring state, and in its cessation. You would have maintained non-grasping awareness, which is the doorway to the Unconditioned.

Some conditions are particularly sticky, and they have hooks that draw us in. Those are difficult.

The Buddhist emphasis on change isn’t just about a changing world or a new economic situation. It is a deeper consideration. It is at a phenomenological level where you sustain awareness of change because that takes you to deep peace of the mind.

Everyone knows the world is changing. It doesn’t take a Buddha to know that night and day change or that economies and governments change. It must be more profound than that. So, what is it? It is that witnessing consciousness, which knows the arising of self-doubt and all other conditions.

As a teacher, I often wonder, ‘Did I get anything across, or did anyone understand that?’ But then I realise, ‘This is what not knowing is like.’ Sometimes I’m tempted to ask other monks if the talk was good. I try not to do that because I know it is just coming from self-doubt.

The mind wants reassurance that the talk was good: ‘Please tell me it was a good talk.’ But it is so much better for me to just be aware that this is a feeling of not being sure. Then I’m in the witnessing of change. If I witness this feeling of not being sure, then self-doubt comes up and ceases, as it is just a condition. Next there will be happiness because of non-grasping. So, you need to understand the project. All methodologies like mettā bhāvanā, asubha (unattractive) bhāvanā, walking meditation, dāna (generosity), and sīla come under it. When you get that, the whole thing makes sense.