YOU CAN’T PUT AN END TO THINKING BY THINKING

Sometimes we feel our aversion towards a person or situations is justified. While we don’t condone things that we strongly and morally disagree with, we unwittingly create, in the mind, the tendencies towards aversion or righteous hatred by entertaining them as justified causes.

So, how does one live without endorsing things that feel wrong while avoiding the worldly dhammas of hatred?

In our culture, this aversion or righteous indignation is justified. But it’s still your mind that is getting angry, so be careful. When someone was righteously indignant, Luang Por Chah said, ‘Tuk dae mai jing, jing dae mai tuk,’ which in Thai means, ‘It’s right but it’s not true. It’s true but it’s not right.’ I might feel indignant about something, and everyone might agree that I’m right in feeling that way. But my heart may be full of aversion or delusion, so it’s not right.

If anger or indignation comes from a strong sense of self and other, then that will create more anger or indignation in your mind, which will manifest in other areas of your life. To keep the heart open within the stupidity and cruelty of the world requires equanimity.

The world is sometimes a Mary Oliver poem. More often than not, it is a crazy place. You really want to protect the mind because it is a delicate space that easily picks up material, toxic or otherwise. You can be affected negatively by offensive, toxic experiences, so safeguard the inner space. That’s the idea of indriya saṃvara (sense restraint), which is an important part of our monastic life. Indriya saṃvara doesn’t mean you can’t have fun or do things that bring joy. It’s just that there is a sense of: ‘What kind of information am I putting into my mind? How skilful is that going to be for my future?’

If you find yourself involved in information that is upsetting, and it consequently keeps rebounding in your mind for hours, then see how you can lessen exposure to that kind of messages. Sometimes you can’t. Someone in your family may thrive on expressing righteous anger. In those instances, use a mantra to ground yourself. The mantra can be, ‘May I be well. May you be well.’

It concerns me that we can take in toxic material easily. A lot of young men watch pornography, which is easily available these days. It is very destructive for the spiritual life as well as for relationships. We need to be wise in how we choose to participate in society.

Cultivating a wholesome go-to

I talk a lot about the open heart as it seems to me a straightforward pathway to freedom because it bypasses the whole proliferation of thought we get caught up in. We can be arguing about something, saying we shouldn’t be like this or trying to resolve things through thought. Too much is invested in thought, and it increasingly seems to be a go-to place for people. While thought is useful for functional purposes, it can be an impediment to liberating the heart.

In my spiritual life, I’ve cultivated an alternative go-to. When I started meditating, I tried solving everything, all the time, through thought. Then as a layperson in Amsterdam, I had the insight that you can’t put an end to thinking by thinking. It was a profound realisation for me. Of course, you can’t resolve inner conflicts through thought. So, over the years, a part of my training was to cultivate alternate points of reference. The openness of the heart became a useful, pragmatic tool and a joyous place to abide. This cultivation took a long time due to the habits of analysis and self-disparagement. For example, I used to think that if I can do something well, then everyone else can do it better. I’ve gotten into trouble with that because there are some things that I can do better than others.

I would argue with myself:

No, I’m not; Yes, I am; No, I’m not; Yes, I am.

This sort of thinking was just a habit. Yet, these habits that we have are very believable, aren’t they? They kind of whisper in our ears, and as I had discovered in Amsterdam, you can’t ‘think’ yourself out of these habits.

When I first started practising, I would try to go to my object of mindfulness, the breath. That didn’t work. It made me think more. I didn’t realise then I was averse to thought and was hanging on to the breath to get rid of thinking. But then I noticed thought. I saw it as mental proliferation. I learned to shift my attention mindfully and dwell on another part of experience, which is the heart. Now, that to me is awareness.

Awakening to thought and then shifting attention is different than trying to get rid of thinking.

When you have the awakened sensibility of ‘thoughts are like this,’ then you can shift to another sense door like the heart. This shift is done in full awareness, rather than as a reactive response to a horrible thought.

It’s easy to talk about this but distinguishing ‘what is’ without unconsciously slipping into trying to get rid of negativities can be insidious in meditation. So, that’s why I mentioned the idea of non-resistance. ‘It’s like this’ even though the thoughts may be horrible or boring. Reflect, ‘Oh, boring thoughts feel like this.’ Even that label is kind of negative, isn’t it? So, cultivate a wholesome go-to, focus on the language, and simply contemplate, ‘Thoughts are like this.’

Awareness as conscious space

With the instructions around ‘this is in awareness,’ I’m trying to indicate awareness as space, conscious space, You’ve all heard me say, ‘There is sound and there is bodily sensation. Sound is changing.’ As soon as I perceive sound as changing, witnessing becomes stronger. If I’m pursuing the quality of sound, then concentration sharpens. But what about awareness?

Concentrating on an object is fine but I found it constricting. The language of space was much more freeing.

The first time I visited Canada after becoming a monk, I heard the Bob Dylan song, The Times They Are A Changin’, at a store. I just fell in love with that song. I hadn’t heard Bob Dylan in a decade, so that was very attractive. On the other hand, the sound of someone scratching their fingers on a chalkboard would be unattractive.

Awareness is the capacity to not be drawn to the quality of the experience, but simply knowing it as movement or change.

You can see how important that is in liberation. The realisation of transcendent peace is not a function of beauty, ugliness, attraction, repulsion, or a song you love. It’s something deeper.

Witnessing, again and again

In 1977, I was living at the Hampstead Buddhist Vihara in London, UK. The vihara’s shrine room was on a busy street and right across from a pub. A rock band used to practise in the pub. The vihara was an old Edwardian building with 11-ft tall windows that didn’t have double glazing, so it was cold and noisy. One day, Luang Por Chah led us in meditation. He said, ‘You think that noise is bothering you. Stop going out there and bothering that noise.’ It was such a good teaching because the noise was just doing what it does. But the desire mind was saying, ‘Oh, be quiet. We want to meditate.’

Quite often we’re bothering the sense experience that’s coming into consciousness. So, keep coming back to this simple witnessing, again and again.

Do you have a go-to, such as spaciousness or an object, that reminds you of witnessing? If so, then you’re not holding onto an experience. Rather you’re able to come back to witnessing.

Sound of silence

I use the heart a lot. One of Luang Por Sumedho’s recommendations is to use the sound of silence. When the mind gets very spacious and open, you notice a kind of electronic buzz in the background. It’s called the nāda-sound (of mental silence) in yoga and it’s there all the time. Noticing this sound of silence is a good way to relax the mind into a spacious, empty (though not empty of vitality), silent, and open state. If you notice that nāda-sound, then see if you can abide with it. The language of space or sound of silence indicates that awareness is not just concentrating on an object. Abiding in that is a sign of non-grasping.

Awareness has the capacity to accept all things and let go of all things.

The Tibetans are very good at teaching space or ākāsa meditation. They live high up on the ridge of mountains with unobstructed, clear, and expansive views of the sky. I think the spacious aspect of our meditation practice is more enigmatic than, say, focusing on the out-breath, which is a concrete thing. Experiment with this suggestion, ‘What would space mean here?’ Now, don’t try to figure it out, as it’s intuitive.

With space, openness, and the witnessing of change, you have a lovely abiding for your practice.

A GARLAND OF MARIGOLDS

This morning, a lay friend brought a handmade garland of marigolds for the shrine. This way of expressing devotion is uplifting and common in Asia, but not practised a lot here by Westerners. Bhakti is a beautiful way of bringing up a sense of devotion, aspiration, and gratitude for the Triple Gem and humankind’s opportunity to awaken. At home, you can have a shrine and decorate it with flowers and candles. The shrine can be in the room where you meditate. You wipe dust off the Buddha images regularly and keep the place clean. This way, it becomes a place of reverence. While we may aspire to have reverence for everything all the time, today, this garland of flowers is a simple expression of deep devotion.

THE PAGE RATHER THAN THE PRINT

We’re almost midway through the retreat. I’m reminded of Luang Por Chah’s ovāda (exhortation), ‘If you want to meditate, meditate. If you don’t want to meditate, meditate. If your meditation makes you peaceful, accept it. And if your meditation doesn’t make you peaceful, then accept that too.’

Remember a meditation retreat is not about interesting experiences. If this was a symposium, then the organisers would be busy organising entertaining speakers and lectures on, say, bio-feedback and mettā bhāvanā. There may be panel discussions on social justice issues and the ‘Buddhist escapism called monasticism’. We might also have a fireside chat where someone is making me justify my existence. That would be exciting and interesting.

However, the schedule in a retreat is the same every day. We do try to create a good environment, though, which is important.

The whole point of a retreat is not to create interesting experiences. Your meditative experience may be fantastic, but the focus of a retreat is more on the blank, white spaces of a page rather than the printed words.

What is Luang Por Chah’s admonition pointing to? Engagement with the world of interest and boredom is one of seeking something. In a retreat, we’re not seeking any kind of experience.

We’re just noticing that in the awareness of change, irrespective of the quality of the experience, there’s peace. Whereas in situations where you are trying to attract interest, you’re not looking for peace, rather stimulation (which is fine too, but quite different).

In monasteries, we don’t change the language of the chants or the chanter. We don’t try to have more interesting events. It is the same thing, day in and day out. This would be boring for people who seek fascinating experiences. But if you’re a contemplative, then you just begin to watch like and dislike. It’s no longer about the seeking of likable or dislikeable experiences or getting rid of them. It’s rather the abiding with this whole movement of experience. That’s the kind of thing we do in a retreat.

It is important to bring into full awareness thoughts like, ‘Well, that’s enough. Let’s do something interesting;’ ‘I’m not getting anywhere;’ or ‘I could be doing something useful.’

Going beyond experiences

The idea of a retreat is to trust in the structure of the retreat rather than in the structure of your thoughts and what the mind is creating around the retreat. Obviously, if something’s going on in the family, you must take care of it. You’re not passive in a foolish way. In monasteries, you give up personal preferences for the routine. You have pujas in the mornings and evenings, work periods and private time. You do the same thing every day. There’s no way you’re going to like it all the time.

So, if you want to meditate, mediate. If you don’t want to meditate, meditate. Then your meditation goes beyond, ‘Oh, I feel like meditating today. That’d be nice;’ or ‘I don’t think I’ll meditate today.’ That kind of attitude to practice doesn’t give you strength because it’s based on comfort and desire. You may feel like you don’t have energy in the morning, but you resolve to attend the morning meditation. You use the time to look at boredom. Going beyond the experience gives you strength.

Most monks get fed up with Pali chanting. They’d rather hear The Grateful Dead or some other music. But then the chanting inspires them. When 100 monks are chanting, you end up in tears because it’s uplifting and beautiful. What could also happen is that you live in a monastery with four tone-deaf monks, and you hate it. These are the kind of experiences one has, but ‘it’s like this’. Hating the chanting ‘feels like this,’ and inspiration ‘feels like this’. The mind is not at peace because of inspiration or disappointment.

A peaceful mind is that which can abide in the movement of experience.

It’s the white of the page rather than the quality of the print. That’s why a long retreat is helpful. If you’re starting to negotiate with yourself about why you should be doing something else, I suggest you stick to the program, and see what happens. You won’t know until you persevere.

The feelings of not wanting to meditate, thinking you’re not getting anywhere, or that your meditation is not very good are not extreme emotions like anger or fear; they’re just haunting doubts. Try to make them conscious. Then you’re in the witnessing mode. You’re on the page rather than the print. Keep coming back to that. The results aren’t apparent immediately. You will slowly begin to intuit that silence is the witness, stillness is the witness. The Unconditioned is somehow in the witnessing rather than in the experience. You intuit that and become naturally interested in it. But if you move on any impulsive interest, or with boredom, away away from the suggested structure, then you lose the opportunity to witness.

Having said that, you don’t want to wilfully push yourself. So, if you’re feeling like you must stay on the retreat and must do this, then that’s not really the awakened mind. It’s again the ego mind, which is well motivated, but not awakened to the feeling of ‘I have to do this’. It won’t give you insight. It won’t give you peace. You might make it through this retreat, but you may never want to do another one for the rest of your life. That’s the downfall of wilfulness, which isn’t conjoined with wisdom. We’re using will power to do this retreat but it’s not blind or unhappy; the idea is more around curiosity. In each meditation try to make conscious, ‘What’s going on now? How do I feel about this moment? How is it?’ You then work from there, from the way things are.

Choiceless awareness

In the last few talks, I’ve been suggesting various perspectives you might use. Too many approaches can be confusing and you may not know which one to follow. To review, experiment with an object like the breath or the heart to know how to localise your attention, ground yourself, and compose the mind. This is important. It’s also necessary to develop the capacity to let go of the object and be in choiceless awareness – just being with the flow of life, coming and going.

In my experience, some people don’t like breath meditation because of control issues. It doesn’t work for them. If that’s the case, my suggestion would be to open the mind. Try choiceless awareness. Experiment with the sound of silence.

Others find that they get too lost in thought. So, they need to compose and collect their minds on something.

Many know how to do both. I don’t know what works for you, but if you understand these two perspectives, then you can experiment with them.

Enriching the practice with faith and energy

The sound of silence was Luang Por Sumedho’s go-to reference point for letting go. He heard that sound as a sāmanera but dismissed it. In 1977, when he was walking on the busy Haverstock Hill Street in the UK, the sound of silence suddenly came very strongly into his consciousness. He started to use it like a touchstone consistently, as a reminder to non-grasping, space, and awareness. He did that for many years before teaching it. If you notice that spaciousness, then you can develop it. You’re still engaged with the world, though, doing what you must do.

Luang Por would train himself to return to that sound in the middle of activities, such as when he was riding the Tube (underground rail system) in London or during a committee meeting. People thought he was zoning out. He was just aware of the sound of silence. He would use it all the time while being a diligent abbot, good friend, and a great teacher. He was always working on his own ‘project’.

Space is another touchstone that can bring you back to remembering what you already know. Is there something else that would remind you of the awakened mind? The page rather than the print? That would be very helpful, wouldn’t it?

Sometimes people use mantras. I used ‘infinite patience, boundless compassion’ for two years. It was helpful – although those two years weren’t filled with infinite patience and boundless compassion! However, the idea is that through recollecting a mantra, the practice becomes enriched with more faith and energy. So this was a good phrase for me to keep making conscious. It wasn’t parroting. It was a recollected phrase, arising from insight. It helped my mind avoid getting caught up in the text and abiding in spaciousness.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH THE WAY THINGS ARE

The text and print on the page are sound, bodily feelings, thought, emotion, smell, and taste. The awareness, witnessing, or the knowing is the blank space on the page.

Be the knowing.

Use a sense object to remind you of the knowing. So, if you listen to sound, then that reminds you of the page.

The page has no real qualities; it’s not big or small. It’s just knowing. The project is to sustain that knowing of the way things are for long periods of time.

How might you do that?

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Q: Do you teach suttas? How does one formally study them?

A: I don’t teach suttas. I don’t have the gifts of scholarship or language and I’m not very good at that. I’m sure you’ll find the structures online. Luang Por Sumedho always recommended to us The Word of the Buddha by Nyanatiloka Mahather. It is a compilation of references to the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path. It has little Pali stanzas describing the Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path as well as some commentary. My first teacher warned me to be careful of the commentaries, so I just looked at translations of the original text.

In terms of study, I’ve been trained to use the Four Noble Truths as the backbone, and then contemplate the Noble Eightfold Path. For instance, you can look at the various aspects of right understanding and really get your head around them. That’s very helpful.

I’ve found that some people who are interested in Buddhism but haven’t done a formal study practice can get confused between psychology, mystical Christianity, Rumi, and Tibetan Buddhism. That is because they have a whole overlay of good ideas but lack a consistent intellectual framework or a coherent use of language. Sometimes they fall into doubt because they’re using different paradigms from various streams of philosophies and teachings. For example, the word, ‘emptiness,’ I think, is used differently in Mahayana and Theravada Buddhism. One reads a text and can take emptiness to mean the same thing across the board. All teachers are wonderful and while there is value in figuring out the Theravada terminologies and meanings, it is by no means setting out a fundamentalist position.

The point of knowing the model is for you to have intellectual clarity.

For me, that occurred in India in 1971-72. It was a transformative year for me. I came across J. Krishnamurti’s teachings, which opened my mind to experiences I’d had as a child. A month later, I met Venerable Bhikkhu Ñanasuci. He was a smart person and a good friend with a strong memory of the suttas. He walked me through some of them, such as the teachings on dependent origination. Due to his instructions and inspiration, I eventually determined to become a monk. He was rigorous about language and the use of terminologies in Theravada Buddhism.

If you want to learn suttas, please do so, but don’t consider it as an encyclopaedic exercise. Studying suttas is not about an endless accumulation of knowledge, as it can lead to doubt. That was my experience, at least.

The Buddhist ‘project’ is to understand why the Buddha talks about this and that, and how these ideas lead to the unshakeable deliverance of the heart. Study may help to reduce intellectual doubt. You will still experience self-doubt as an emotional quality but getting your head around the Buddhist project is helpful.

The Buddha was an excellent teacher. It took me a long time to assimilate the teachings because I don’t have the memory of an academician.

I had an interesting incident with Luang Por Sumedho once. During a Dhamma meeting, an audience member asked him the meaning of a commonly used Pali word. Neither of us knew the meaning! When you’re a young monk, you diligently study the teachings. In time you begin to understand the project, and the analysis falls away. There’s still a lot of work to do, but you understand the project.

My early years were filled with lots of study. Then, I had the good fortune of living very close to Luang Por Sumedho for five or six years, taking care of him and listening to his teachings all the time. My education was primarily through the oral tradition rather than by reading scriptures. But I did have that basis of the Four Noble Truths and the intellectual structure around them. Most monks are speaking with those teachings in mind although they might not explain them intellectually. Usually, a Theravada monastic’s reference points are those structures. They could be trying to pitch it in contemporary language and therefore refraining from using Pali words. But if you have an intellectual understanding of those structures, you can grasp the intention of the teaching. I try to use different phrases because words tend to lose their contemplative aspects when people hear them repeatedly. The Buddhist teachings are reflective. They are like a mirror that help you see what you’re doing in terms of your spiritual practice vis-a-vis what the Buddha is suggesting.

Buddhism, or any spiritual tradition for that matter, fails when it turns into a fundamental belief system of, ‘only this is right; nothing else is true.’ This is a type of superstition. A lot of pain and craziness arise in the world due to such rigid beliefs. That’s why people get turned off by religion.

Fundamentalism is the wrong way to go. That is attachment. If you have no intellectual structure, you can be confused by the use of language in different traditions. Once you have understood a structure – Theravada for me – you can use it to reflect on other spiritual teachings. For example, I have reflected on Tibetan Buddhism, Rumi, Advaita Vedanta, and Thomas Merton (a Roman Catholic monk). Sometimes, I do not understand what they are explaining or what they’re pointing to. But I enjoy my own Buddhist understanding being challenged by the writings of other spiritual teachers whom I respect. My own intellectual structures give me a way of considering what those teachers are offering. It’s not that I believe or disbelieve what the other traditions are saying, but I try to use them as a way of enriching and strengthening my own capacity for reflection and contemplation.

Q: While doing sitting meditation, I experience a lot of tension in my face, shoulders, and upper back. How can I release that tension?

A: This is very common. One of the ways, of course, would be to do yoga nidra because you don’t have to hold the body up in that sitting posture. Do it when you’ve got lots of energy, as it’s not an aid to falling asleep. That is not what you are trying to do. Check, ‘Is there tension in the body? What’s going on?’ Then do the sitting meditation. Contrast is good, as it helps you perceive the situation more clearly. You can also compare your experiences. Be curious and try to find the difference.

Quite often, the desire to fix arises in meditation. You can get caught up with trying to fix the posture and bodily tensions. Just see how that whole fixing part is itself a type of desire.

Somehow you must leave it alone. One way of doing so is by engaging in whole-body awareness – seeing the body and different body parts in awareness. As I suggested in an earlier meditation (p60), notice the mouth, eyes, etc., are in awareness. Sense that the body is in awareness rather than awareness being in the body. This exercise can be helpful.

You could also go for a walk or have a biscuit. Just change the whole program. It’s similar to craft. When I’m working in the wood shop, if things are not going well, then I step out, go for a walk, watch the deers, etc. The principle is the same. So, do something different. Then come back and see what’s happening. Walking away from things can be skilful. This allows you to compare experiences. You get a sense of the desire to fix things. This is again a skill in the contemplative’s craft. Ask yourself, ‘What’s the desire here? Where is the desire? What does the desire feel like?’ You are then in the teaching of the Four Noble Truths.

It’s a kind of inquiring into, rather than trying to let go of pain: ‘What do I want here? Where’s the wanting here?’ Then wait and see if you can observe the desire. That inquiry process will guide you to understand the real suffering in this situation. Is it the pain, tension, or constriction? Is it not wanting the pain and instead wanting something else?

If you apply the teaching of dependent origination, then you can see the pain dependently originated from attachment to desire. You then look at that. You’re always going back to the Four Noble Truths as your contemplative tool. This basic inquiry is fruitful. It will give you some insight into the experience. Of course, if it’s too tough, walk away and try later.

Q: As a young child, the seeds of who I should be (doctor, more like my brother, etc.) were baked into my consciousness by my parents. When meditating, I can see the ocean’s waves from the shore and observe doubt as doubt. Yet, off the cushion, it is my nagging-in-the-shadows companion. How do you work with doubt outside of formal practice?

A: Doubt is not uncommon. My problem was fear, so I would ask, ‘Is there an underlying fear?’ Just inquire, ‘What’s the underlying energy?’ Quite often, these things are grounded in fear, which is a huge part of our psyche. Then there are the overlays of personality to deal with the fear as well as living in society in the way we’ve been conditioned.

First of all, whenever you feel fear, anytime at all, get to know it bodily: ‘Where is it in the body?’ In time, you will get good at recognising fear as a bodily function.

When these self-narratives of ‘I should’ come up, see if there’s a bodily component to them. Are they familiar? Have you sensed them before?

If you get good at recognising this in situations that aren’t too demanding, then you can slowly begin to understand these bodily experiences in more constricted and complex times. You develop awareness in the non-complex parts of your life, and then bring it in naturally into the challenging issues.

In my experience, though, it’s quite often not a problem of doubt, which, for me, is more intellectual. For example, what is emptiness in Theravada Buddhism? So, the thinking, analysing, as well as the trying to always get the right answer and never getting a response that’s good enough, creates more doubt. Perhaps your experience is more like fear that’s been conditioned societally and by family, and which is now manifesting. You work through that by getting really good at awareness of the body and the heart chakra. You want to develop a certain level of awareness about the bodily sensations in your guts, heart, etc., so that you can multitask in terms of awareness. You want to get this second-level awareness of bodily feelings, so that when you face complexities, you’ve always got that going. All constrictions will become obvious and you can stay with it, even in social situations. You’re staying there with it and getting to know it. This breaks the attachment because you’re not believing in the thought pattern.

If thought patterns come up about a perceived inadequacy, just say to yourself, ‘Oh, this is what inadequacy feels like.’ Keep coming back to that statement and holding it in your body. But don’t expect the feelings to disappear. It doesn’t work that way. It’s about entering into the feeling of inadequacy or self-doubt. Over time, you get good at recognising the thought patterns.

This is the work, because you’re taking responsibility and not mentally proliferating about the doubtful thoughts. If these thought patterns got conditioned over 20 formative years of your life, it’s going to take a long time to liberate it from consciousness. Be very kind and acknowledge, ‘This is not easy but it’s good work.’ It takes a lot of compassion and patience, so be gentle. Good luck.

Q: How do you prepare for death and the last stages of life? What Buddhist practices, chants, and Theravada rituals are helpful?

A: If you think consciousness dies with the body, then dwell on the good work you’ve done and the loving relationships you’ve had.

In the last few years, several friends of the monastery with terminal cancer have asked me, ‘I’m on palliative care now. How do I do dying?’

My response has been, ‘What do you think consciousness is? Do you think it gets snuffed out with the death of the body? Do you perceive it as a material element or not?’

All these women have said, ‘No, I don’t think consciousness is a physical phenomenon.’

Then, I ask them to reflect, ‘What do you think happens to consciousness at the death of the body?’

‘I don’t know’ would be an honest answer, but what would be the best way to explore that question when you’re dying?

It would be through mindfulness and awareness of the present moment.

When you’re talking to someone about death and dying, you must use the language and religious philosophy they follow. Understand their philosophical or religious backgrounds. Do not argue about it. Rather, think how you can use that model of consciousness and concepts about birth and death to make that person happy and contented. Don’t try to convert them, because that would be oppressive. Engage in this with the attitude of not knowing the person – even if you think you know them. Maybe you don’t know where they stand on these issues. Get a dialogue going and earn their trust first. Your own intuitions will then kick in and, usually, guide you well.

When my mom died, I asked my brother to delay the mortician’s arrival because I really wanted to be with her body. I washed her body, got her dressed up nicely and laid her out beautifully on the bed. I just wanted to be a part of the process as much as possible. Some of my lay friends came. We chanted, which was powerful. Then I turned off all the heat. My mom died in March when the average temperature in Ottawa (Canada) is around –5 C. I opened the windows in her room and sometimes slept on the floor. After 36 hours I became tired, as I was organising the funeral. My brother asked the mortician to take her body away. So, as a monk, obviously, I knew the chants and rituals. I had reflections that I could do, which was lovely. I also had an association of friends who could join me.

I’ve been to hospice to visit friends a few times. I typically chant when I’m there, which is calming for my friends. If you have a history of chanting, and have fond memories about it, then it’s going to be helpful to hear the chants when you’re dying. It is peaceful, and the patients relax.

In Asia, families have recordings of protective chants, which are played to people who are on their deathbeds. It is said to be soothing.

During hospice visits, I’ve found that even if a person doesn’t have that background, they like hearing the chants because it feels wholesome and good.

There are no must-do rituals in Buddhism when a person dies. We think the momentum of a person’s life creates the next possibility. The rituals are more for the living. Superstitions can creep into cultures and people think a ritual must be done in a certain manner. It is usually a function of fear.

I’ve seen interesting funerals in quasi-Buddhist settings. I remember the funeral of an Asian woman in New Zealand. She was part of an Indonesian music band and an Italian renaissance dancer. She loved poetry too. Her funeral was fascinating. Lovely music was played as we entered the chapel. Her ex-partner and son read poems. Then, two people performed an Italian renaissance dance routine up and down the aisles. I spoke and we did some chanting. We ran over time by an hour, but all the attendees were happy. A funeral doesn’t have to be traditional. It can have different elements. The most important part of a funeral for me is the reflective portions of the service. These days, people don’t want to talk about death. They only want to celebrate a person’s life. A funeral is an opportunity for us to reflect on death and consciousness, which is very important.

Q: In these times, there’s a lot of disruption, fear, and pain. I believe that belonging to a sangha is important, but we cannot meet in person. So, what are the qualities of a good, beneficial virtual sangha?

A: A good friend is one who raises your spiritual game. If a friend allows you to whine and complain as well as starts complaining, then they’re not a spiritual friend. Instead, they’re an ally of stupidity.

A kalyāṇamitta would make friends more aware of their moaning, complaining minds. A sangha’s attitude should be: ‘How can we take this to the liberation from suffering rather than moaning about the world?’

It is good to have in the sangha people who aren’t afraid to bring Dhamma into the discussion and take personal responsibility, but not in a sermonising manner. It would be offensive to dismiss members’ concerns. Encourage people who are like-minded and can really listen to others.

Now, how do you determine what you need in a kalyāṇamitta and how do you go about getting that? Monks need samaṇa saññā, which is the perception of a renunciant. That’s very powerful. I’m inspired by monks living diligently. A sloppy monk, who is indulgent in speech, etc., won’t be a kalyāṇamitta. Hopefully, we raise his game in some way.

Morality, diligence, social responsibility, right speech, etc., are the signs of spiritual life. This ensures encouraging and inspiring social interactions. What’s the point of a group of people indulging in a moaning session about the death of the planet or something ominous? The sangha’s goal would be to keep Dhamma as the focus of conversations. Study groups are good, too, as well as spaces to discuss issues like financial security, parenting, and education from a Dhamma perspective. Look at helping people out with pragmatic stuff because we really need friends in difficult times in whatever ways that might be.

Q: The Buddha taught us to be compassionate and offer mettā to all beings. Can we offer compassion for beings, such as public figures who may be immoral or cruel, while simultaneously disliking them or their behaviours? What are the implications if we withhold mettā or karunā (compassion) because of a dislike?

A: I don’t perceive the teaching around mettā in that way. I sense it more as an energy system within me. When the heart is whole and functioning without the interruptions of egotism, it’s always open and available. If it closes with hatred, it would be to the detriment of those who are close to me and myself.

Now, the critical commentary about foolish and dangerous people is the socio-political part of my life. In that realm, I can strongly say what’s wrong. But is mettā bhāvanā something you offer to one person, and withhold from another? That doesn’t compute for me. The heart is either open or closed. I don’t want to occupy my bandwidth with hatred. This doesn’t mean I approve or condone the foolishness in the world. If I have some power, I must act to resolve that problem.

Protecting our minds from following hatred seems like a logical thing to do. At the minimum, the practice of mettā is not dwelling in aversion. It doesn’t mean you like or even love a person. It’s simply not dwelling in aversion. His Holiness the Dalai Lama, Nelson Mandela, and Dr. Martin Luther King rose to the occasion; they refused to hate. Nelson Mandela refused to hate the people who imprisoned him. His Holiness the Dalai Lama refuses to hate the Chinese. He’s not naïve. He’s very active politically.

It’s also not about others. It’s about our hearts. If we’re perpetuating aversion towards others, then somehow, it’s going to come back into our lives. At some point, it would get triggered. There’s always a price to pay.

We’re not doormats, though. To call evil, evil, is correct. We have to be able to say, ‘No, that’s wrong. You cannot do that.’

In Buddhism, there’s the conventional reality of evil in the world and the transcendent heart. Both are important.

Q: May I use my tinnitus as a nāda practice?

A: As far as I know, tinnitus can be of varying degrees of intensity, so be careful. If you’ve got a way of being at ease with the tinnitus, then leave it as is. It is important to be at peace with it.

Q: Fear, panic, and body pain have been arising in my practice. They arose after months of tranquility. I have been allowing it and sensing the peace around it. What else will be helpful?

A: Firstly, get a good physical check-up. Make sure the system is okay. Then make it a challenge of getting to know fear and panic and the desire around them. With these emotions, the problem is the desire to not be afraid and panic. It might seem counterintuitive to welcome fear and panic but do so without putting yourself in dangerous situations. It’s a very hard thing to do, but this way, you’ll see the desire to not have these emotions. Abide as a witness and see what the underlying desire is. Just look at fear; not the energy or the desire not to have the fear. Once you get a handle on that, you realise, ‘Yes!! It’s about welcoming.’ That’s where mettā bhāvanā comes in.

Mettā bhāvanā or compassion is the allowing of fear to be an object in awareness.

Thought will spin you out. Your goal can then be to not go to thought.

Go to the body and look at the craving to get rid of thoughts. Tell yourself, ‘It’s okay. You [thoughts] can come and stay all day.’ It’s hard to navigate that. But, when people have extreme situations, that changes them. Check it out on all levels because who knows how these things work.

DEPENDENT ORIGINATION

Avijjā paccayā saṅkhārā.

With ignorance as condition formations come to be.

Saṅkhārā paccayā viññāṇaṃ.

With formations as condition sense consciousness comes to be.

Viññāṇa paccayā nāma-rūpaṃ.

With sense consciousness as condition mentality-materiality comes to be.

Nāma-rūpa paccayā saḷāyatanaṃ.

With mentality-materiality as condition the six sense-spheres come to be.

Saḷāyatana paccayā phasso.

With the six sense-spheres as condition contact comes to be.

Phassa paccayā vedanā.

With contact as condition feeling comes to be.

Vedanā paccayā taṇhā.

With feeling as condition craving comes to be.

Taṇhā paccayā upādānaṃ.

With craving as condition clinging comes to be.

Upādāna paccayā bhavo.

With clinging as condition becoming comes to be.

Bhava paccayā jāti.

With becoming as condition birth comes to be.

Jāti paccayā jarā maraṇaṃ soka parideva dukkha domanass’upāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.

With birth as condition, then old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair all come into being. Such is the origination of this entire mass of suffering.

MAJJHIMA NIKĀYA 115.11, SAṂYUTTA NIKĀYA 12.41, AṄGUTTARA NIKĀYA 10.92.

CAUSE AND EFFECT

Dependent origination is one of the first teachings Venerable Bhikkhu Ñanasuci helped me understand because it is complicated. I’ll try to keep it simple. Dependent origination is about conditionality; cause and effect. It comes from idapaccayatā, which is a simple formula of causality. It means, ‘with this, there’s that; when there’s not this, there’s not that.’ When the light switch is on, there’s light. When it is turned off, there’s no light. This is an example of simple causality. You could extend that causality. I can read the text in front of me because the light is on, thanks to a working light bulb and an active power grid. Dependent origination is just the way nature is functioning. It’s around us all the time.

The most important question in the teaching of dependent origination is, ‘What’s the causality of suffering? How does it arise and cease?’

Dependent origination is a complex formulation with 12 parts. It begins, ‘Avijjā paccayā saṅkhārā’ (With ignorance as a condition, there are formations). Avijjā doesn’t mean lack of knowledge. Luang Por Sumedho’s phrase, ‘taking it personally,’ would be the best way to look at avijjā.

Let’s say I’m an 85-year-old grandfather with two children and four grandchildren. It’s my birthday, and I’m away from my family. I’m hoping they’ll wish me a happy birthday, but they forget to call. I feel terribly disappointed. So, my disappointment is dependently originating on all that came before it. If I attach to the disappointment, then the mind starts to spin self-thoughts around it: ‘They don’t love me anymore. They had an accident. It’s not fair. I sent them so many presents last year. They’re old enough to write to me.’ These self-narratives would be examples of bhava (becoming) and jāti (birth) in the dependent origination cycle.

In this scenario, I’m a sensitive person expecting something, and I feel disappointment. The craving is not to have that feeling of disappointment, which has been conditioned by my expectations. If I don’t see the cause of my disappointment – the craving – then I’ll jump into the situation with self-view and run with it. Thus, there is rebirth. That’s one way to think of rebirth. There’s rebirth of a person in thought and in emotions that run for the next day or three. To stretch this further, imagine that the family finally calls with the terrible news that their house had burned down. Chances are that since I’ve hated them for two days, I will start to feel guilty. So, with disappointment as a condition, there is hatred and with hatred as a condition, there’s guilt.

The call would be an example of contact (phassa) in the wheel of dependent origination. This contact conditions the feelings of guilt and hate as well as the thought, ‘I’m a terrible grandfather.’ Clearly, I’m suffering with guilt and self-hatred.

What’s the way out? First and foremost, do not take it personally. See disappointment as a natural phenomenon, which has arisen because of expectation. It’s a chain of causality in nature. That’s very hard to do. If possible, see this birth of a sense of a person as an object. Watch that in meditation. For example, you can see the regret you have about having done something last week, the resentment over what someone did to you, or your worries about the future as being just regrets, resentments, and worries. If the sense of self gets wrapped up in these emotions and you run with I/me/mine thoughts, then those thoughts condition rebirth. That’s the cause of suffering.

The first step in breaking the cycle of birth and death is to see feeling as feeling, contact as contact, craving as craving, and not go to the attachment. This is difficult in the midst of it all. Let’s say a child said, ‘I hate you.’ That would hurt, but you’re mature enough to not believe the statement. It breezes through you, and it doesn’t lodge there as any kind of self. It could go the other way too. The hurt gets lodged in the body, and thoughts come up: ‘It’s a terrible child. I’m never going to talk to them again.’

Feelings (vedanā) arise from contact. They can be pleasant, unpleasant, or neither pleasant nor unpleasant. The Buddha’s teachings have made it clear that you’re in trouble if you’re just looking for pleasant feelings – because it does not work that way. You can start to move away from riding the waves of pleasant and unpleasant feelings and move towards equanimity and peace. The birth-death cycle is broken by doing that.

The Buddha realised there is something that’s not part of that birth-death paradigm; something which is Unborn. As soon as you put it into words, it sounds like a thing you must find. The language is very difficult here. His realisation of the Unconditioned, Uncreated, Unoriginated, Unborn, the Deathless, Peace, the Harbour, or the Island – all those words are like the trick question I keep asking, ‘Does everything change?’ No, because Nibbāna is not about change. Dependent origination is key to understanding this spiritual dimension.

Another way to approach dependent origination is by understanding saṅkhata and asaṅkhata. Saṅkhata means conditioned. Venerable Thanissaro Bhikkhu describes it as fabricated, built, and made up of things. On the other hand, there’s the Unfabricated, Uncreated, or Unconditioned. It’s not built of things. It’s not dependent on things. Now, this is very mysterious. It’s a challenging thing to talk about. The aim of the Buddha’s realisation is not a trivial example of conditionality, but to realise the Unconditioned. That’s the project. The logic is that if you’re trying to find peace in that which is conditioned, you’ll always be disappointed. While conditionality is important to understand, we’re trying to discover asaṅkhata (the negation of conditionality). If you understand the nature of relative and conventional truths, and societal responsibility through the lens of conditionality, then you’ll create the conditions most suitable for your well-being as well as for the well-being of others.

You use conditionality at the worldly level. But your spiritual practice is at the level of non-grasping. How? Let’s use the earlier grandfather example. He feels disappointment and realises it’s painful. But there is a way to not get reborn as a disappointed grandfather. He bears witness to the changing nature of the unpleasant feeling as well as to the unfulfilled desire to not have disappointment. He welcomes the painful feelings – ‘it’s like this’ – and begins to see the cessation of wanting and craving.

That’s one of the ways to talk about the Unconditioned. It’s realised through the cessation of the mind going out into objects and the objective world.

Dependent origination is not a very complex teaching, but it can be formulated in a challenging way. The nub, for me, has always been, ‘Why did the Buddha teach?’ He taught because he had this realisation. Now, what does that mean in my own search for freedom and social life? I live in dependently originated circumstances. It can’t be any other way. But then my curiosity is about the Unconditioned. So, I can see that my desire to have sense experiences in a certain way is the problem. I remain as witness, while the object of desire arises and ceases. I begin to realise the Third Noble Truth: The cessation of craving is the realisation of Nibbāna, the peace of the mind that isn’t contingent and dependent on a conditioned phenomenon. So, you have both operating. How could it be otherwise? This body is dependently originated, and it will die.

Here’s a Buddhist joke for you: ‘Why am I sick?’ ‘Well, because you were born.’ Jokes aside, that’s the ultimate medical condition, and it’s true. It’s also true that I can do something about my sickness before I die. That’s where dependent origination comes into the picture.

SPECIFIC CONDITIONALITY OR IDAPACCAYATĀ

Iti imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti,imassuppādā idaṃ uppajjati.Imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti,imassa nirodhā idaṃ nirujjhati.

with the arising of this, that arises.

When this does not exist,

that does not come to be;

with the cessation of this, that ceases.

MAJJHIMA NIKĀYA 115.11, SAṂYUTTA NIKĀYA 12.41, AṄGUTTARA NIKĀYA 10.92.