MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH MEMORIES

When I was at Chithurst Buddhist Monastery, Luang Por Sumedho used to start his retreats by saying in his deep, booming voice, ‘The past is a memory. The future’s unknown. Now is the knowing.’

This statement was always an encouragement to come back to the basic principle of present-moment awareness. Making that intention itself is huge. Regardless of the technique you’re using or what’s going on emotionally, physically, or environmentally, now is the knowing.

Luang Por’s instruction is simple, yet we always need to remind ourselves of that.

How is it now?

Well, it’s like this.

Know it as feeling, sound, conscious presence. Of course, sustaining that knowing of the way things are moment by moment is the challenge.

There’s nothing to achieve. It’s more like remembering: ‘Life is like this now.’

THE BUDDHA’S WORDS ON LOVING-KINDNESS

[Now let us chant the Buddha’s words on loving-kindness.]

[This is what should be done]By one who is skilled in goodnessAnd who knows the path of peace:Let them be able and upright,

Straightforward and gentle in speech,Humble and not conceited,Contented and easily satisfied,Unburdened with duties and frugal in their ways.Peaceful and calm, and wise and skilful,Not proud and demanding in nature.

Let them not do the slightest thingThat the wise would later reprove,Wishing: In gladness and in safety,May all beings be at ease.

Whatever living beings there may be,Whether they are weak or strong, omitting none,The great or the mighty, medium, short, or small,The seen and the unseen,Those living near and far away,Those born and to be born,May all beings be at ease.Let none deceive another

Or despise any being in any state.Let none through anger or ill-willWish harm upon another.

Even as a mother protects with her lifeHer child, her only child,So with a boundless heartShould one cherish all living beings,Radiating kindness over the entire world:

Spreading upwards to the skiesAnd downwards to the depths,Outwards and unbounded,Freed from hatred and ill-will.

Whether standing or walking, seated,Or lying down – free from drowsiness –One should sustain this recollection.This is said to be the sublime abiding.

By not holding to fixed views,The pure-hearted one, having clarity of vision,Being freed from all sense-desires,Is not born again into this world.

GATEWAY TO THE UNCONDITIONED

In The Buddha’s Words on Loving-Kindness, the Buddha suggests that the person who is skilled in goodness is ‘humble and not conceited.’ The last stanza of that chant is:

By not holding to fixed views,The pure hearted one, having clarity of vision,Being freed from all sense-desires,is not born again into this world.

This may sound nihilistic, but the world in this sense is the world of your perceptions and conceptions. For instance, it was reported that last month was the hottest in recorded history. Yes, the conventional world is very hot, but the way we perceive or conceive that is different for all of us. Everyone’s world is different. It’s the same temperature, but the inner world of conceiving and perceiving is unique to an individual. That’s how the Buddha would talk about the world.

It’s always helpful to remember that in Buddhism there’s a teaching about conventional reality as well as a teaching about looking at reality as a flow of events arising and ceasing in awareness, the ‘knowing’. Both teachings are important. The conventional truth is that there is a sense of me, as a person or individual, living with my responsibilities, different kammas, national identities, literary preferences, tastes, aesthetics, family history, etc. That’s at the level of individuals and it’s certainly real. This is the world in a conventional sense. One has to live skilfully in the conventional world. It’s the realm of morality, social responsibility, and political action.

The other way of looking at the world is inwardly, in seeing the arising and ceasing of perceptions and conceptions according to conditions. This is the only time we use the word, ‘anattā’. We don’t use anattā in the conventional, ‘worldly’ way because it wouldn’t make any sense – try telling the airport officer who’s checking your identity you’re not the person in the passport photo! You’ll probably be detained. It can get totally silly. The teaching on anattā can be confusing if you don’t understand this distinction.

Inner, outer worlds

This ‘inward’ way of looking at the world is important because that’s where phrases like ‘humble and not conceited’ begin to gain significance.

The word ‘conceit’ has a broad scope in Buddhism. It’s not just the conceit of narcissism or arrogance, but also the conceit of self-identity. To believe, ‘I am better than you;’ ‘I am worse than you;’ or ‘We are equal;’ is a conceit. ‘I am’ is a conceit.

On a conventional level, there are differences of skills and talent. Someone may be better than me at, say, making spreadsheets. What’s the big deal in that? If I identify or take an identity with my successes or failures (e.g. ‘I am …’) and then get attached to them, that would be a conceited view of self. This conceited view is problematic and will cause suffering.

You can see that when you hold on to fixed views – such as ‘I am one way and you’re that way’ – you could end up judging someone. Your judgement might be quite accurate in terms of worldly dhammas but to hold it as a viewpoint and indulge in aversion or arrogance is obviously suffering.

‘I am old’ is a conceit if I hold on to it. Now, how would I hold on to it? Well, I could hold on to it by creating thoughts of self-pity or holding on to fears of old age or some preferred body image as I age. These are forms of attachment to a self-identity. Whereas, if there is the humility of simply witnessing the ageing of the body as a function in nature, then there is freedom.

You’re always working at two levels – conventional and transcendent. The body needs to be taken care of, clothed, and fed, but not through vanity or conceit.

Conceit is always the sense of identity with this body, with my emotions, etc. Humility is the letting go of these endless self-identities and living in a responsible way. It’s very hard to do that.

When you come to the sense of witnessing or knowing change, then you see that your real home is not this body.

The idea that you’ll never get sick or old is dumb and silly. When people who don’t have a reference of awareness fall sick or age, they get trapped in all the self-identities – negative or otherwise – that come up, which is tragic. Practising with sickness is an important part of liberation. As this body ages and gets sick, you just witness, ‘sickness is this way.’ Then you have refuge, rather than identity. Yet, on a conventional level, we have to go to the doctor. It’s so important to operate at both levels.

Another way to reflect on the phrase, ‘humble and not conceited,’ is to investigate: Why should the world fulfil my desires? Why should the world operate the way I want it to? Why should the world be just? Well, you may think it should be just because that’s right. But why should the world be this or that? As you know, it’s not; it’s simply this way.

The conceit of desire (e.g. my desires are really what’s right in this world and that the world is wrong) is just a dumb way to approach life.

Of course, on a conventional level, there are expectations. At the monastery, I have social expectations of other community members, and they have similar expectations of me. Those are the social contracts we have. If someone goes against the contract, they’re reprimanded, ‘No, you can’t do that.’ That’s at the societal level. At the inner level, if I want everyone to be harmonious all the time and agree with me, then that’s conceit, and I will suffer by holding onto that view.

I do my very best to bring harmony and be amiable. I fail sometimes but am successful at other times. The most important thing is that I don’t hold a fixed view of how it should be. There’s this kind of humility of adaptation and yet, a responsibility for the conventions I live by. Both conventional truth and transcendent truth are important. If you just take the ‘flow of consciousness’ approach –it’s just this way and it’s anattā – then you could excuse all kinds of behaviour: there wasn’t a killing because no one was there! It could get stupid that way. On the other hand, if you have an agreed convention that honours morality, ethics, and social responsibility, then although the world will never be perfect (no matter how hard you try), you have done as much good as possible. The transcendent teachings bring you to inner peace. The teachings on conventional responsibilities bring peace to the world. You need both to operate together.

The real home

Returning to The Buddha’s Words on Loving-Kindness, I would interpret ‘born’ in the sentence:

By not holding to fixed views, the pure hearted one, having clarity of vision, is not born again into this world

as this sense of egotistical birth through thoughts, emotions, and experiences. It’s actually freeing not to create or embellish a fixed sense of self.

The other way of thinking about that sentence is rebirth. Thoughts like, ‘this world sucks and I’m out of here; I’ve had enough,’ can make the phrase sound nihilistic. That’s not a happy state of mind. That thought is another kind of conceit: I am someone who was born and doesn’t want to go through birth again. The thought may be valid, but you don’t even want to have the conceit that ‘I was born’. Now, that’s pretty radical. The body was born. The body will die. But is that my real home or my real identity? Who am I? What am I?

Consider the idea of enlightenment. It is about the Unborn, not the eternal. It’s not about a person living for eternity. That sounds boring, to say the least. Enlightenment, at least in the Buddhist context, is not about the personality or body. It’s about: What is awareness? Why is it always there? What’s that about?

This way, the reflective mind turns away from the changing experience, not out of rejection, but with curiosity.

The mind goes into the world of experience due to desire, which is natural. There is nothing wrong with wanting experiences. But there comes a time when one gets tired of going out into the objective world. You begin to turn inward, contemplating: What is awareness? What is consciousness?

These questions cannot be explored through thought because thought is still an object. It is contingent, conditioned, and it is born and dies. One begins to understand silence is necessary for that exploration. There’s also the need for intellectual humility to realise you cannot contemplate silence through thought. You begin to let go of thinking, but not by repressing it. We do that a lot. Rather, you get so tired of the thinking mind that you realise thought cannot be the way. While thinking is useful for solving problems, it’s not meant for contemplating the Unconditioned.

Thought needs to be known as an object rather than being the driving force of the subject. That’s the problem we face. Luang Por Sumedho’s teaching of noticing the cessation of thought is helpful in these instances.

The ending of thought

Cessation, such as the end of an emotional turmoil, the end of a day, the end of a retreat, or the end of self-thought, is an important contemplative theme in Buddhism. These ‘ends’ are the gaps in which rebirth, or the birth of the self, takes place. It is skilful to have enough acuity and attentiveness to first, notice the ceasing of a thought, and not pick up another object, or go out into objective experiences of mind-body – and secondly to abide as a witness. As meditators, we’re habituated to notice thinking and trying to force attention on the meditation object in order to stop thinking. There’s this sense of me trying to do something to become something. We’ve never really awoken to the feeling of no thought.

Create the intention to notice the end of thought and play with that. You can experiment. For example, think intentionally, ‘I – am – fabulous;’ ‘I – am – an – old – man’, etc. And pause between each word. In that pause, you’ll only find consciousness of sense experience. ‘I am fabulous’ is only a thought, but it can seem very real when it’s driven by emotions.

Luang Por Sumedho had an interesting exchange with a woman when we were living in Hampstead, UK.

She told Luang Por, ‘I’m a horrible person.’

‘What have you done?’ asked Luang Por.

‘Well, my daughter just had a child. When I saw the baby, I wanted to poke the child’s eyes out. I ran away,’ she said.

‘Did you do it?’ asked Luang Por.

She said, ‘No.’

‘So, what’s the problem?’ asked Luang Por.

The problem was that she had taken the fixed view she was an eye-poking granny, and hence horrible.

Luang Por told her, ‘Well, you didn’t do it. It’s just a weird thought.’ All of a sudden, she could see that.

Without going into a lot of analysis, there was actually nothing evil about her thought. It was neither good nor bad. It was weird, but there was no reason for her to feel guilty. It just came up; she obviously didn’t wake up in the morning and determine, ‘Let’s think that.’

The arising of something that seems evil is not your fault. You’re not wrong for that. The key is not to act upon it; don’t go there. Who knows where these thoughts come from.

Our goal must be to develop a willingness to notice that all kinds of bizarre things can come up in our experience of memory and to keep sīla. Her reaction was natural, but it wasn’t her fault.

Compassion or acceptance allows for the most bizarre, cruel thoughts to come up, but it’s not you. It’s not who you are.

If a feeling or memory comes up, make it conscious. Maybe exaggerate it a bit and see what it feels like. You’ll notice there is no essence to that feeling or memory. It’s an emotional feeling driving thought. That realisation brings you to the end of thought and the end of that kind of ‘selfing’. This way, you’re using the obsessions of thought to make yourself more mindful. For instance, your mind is caught up with some kind of guilt. Notice the guilt, and say to yourself, ‘I am terrible.’ Then stop, and notice, ‘Ah, it’s like this now.’ This way, you use the obsessive thought to propel yourself back into the present moment. Over time, you’ll become better at noticing the end of thought.

As you notice the end of thought, you notice that personality view is a thought. It eventually ceases, leaving only knowing. The reference becomes more and more on the knowing – consciousness, awareness, or whatever you want to call it. You know that’s always present. That is the gateway to the Unconditioned.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH RESTLESSNESS

When you start to feel restless and look at the clock wondering when the sitting will end, a sense of self is born. You feel uncomfortable. There’s the desire to get out of the discomfort, and there’s the idea of time: ‘I have to sit for another 20 minutes. Should I continue or not?’

The sense of self arises as thought and you can notice it as an object.

You can ask yourself, ‘How much longer do I want to sit,’ and then stop. This way, you’re making conscious the restlessness.

Going back to the idea that the flow of consciousness is in awareness, listen to sound. Notice it changing, and just taste the flavour of knowing stillness.

You are not trying to get something here. Rather, you’re noticing. Feel your hands. Notice that the feelings in the hands are in awareness.

Awareness and knowing are constant and the objects, sights, sounds, memories, and thoughts are changing. Desire wants to go out and change the objects or gets caught up with the objects, usually through thinking and remembering.

Witness objects as changing and begin to reflect on the unchanging awareness. As Luang Por Sumedho would say, ‘Be the knowing.’

Once you understand that principle you can choose an object of meditation to sustain knowing the way things are.

DHAMMAVICAYA VS. CONVENTIONAL THINKING

Conventional thinking could be mulling over one of the teachings by the Buddha, wondering what it means. You’re in a speculative, intellectual mode.

Dhammavicaya (investigation of mental states) is one of the seven factors of Enlightenment. It is the inquisitive part of our contemplative life where we can inquire about some aspect of Dhamma, but always in relationship to our own experience. That’s important. You don’t regard the Dhamma as a thought structure that you think you understand or is unconnected to real life and real time. If I say something abstract that you can’t see in your own life, then it’s not a truth that edifies you. You may or may not believe it or find it interesting – but it doesn’t really edify until it clicks with your experience.

How to use dhammavicaya

Stimulated by a suggestion from a teacher or teachings, you observe and explore the word or phrase. If the teacher is talking about resistance, you can explore, ‘What do they mean by resistance?’

You could simply say the word or phrase that’s caught your attention and quietly notice how it resonates with you. It’s a quiet observation. You’re not just thinking about it. It’s a way of focusing quiet attention on some aspects of your dhammic experience. The classic contemplation would be, ‘Why do I suffer?’ You could analyse it: ‘I suffer because of x, y, and z.’ But that wouldn’t be the same as experiencing ‘what is suffering’ in real time and real life. The question itself makes you conscious of the problem at hand. Then you start to just watch – and maybe you get some insight. That insight comes from silent attention.

I would encourage all of us to think less because we easily go into doubting and thinking, doubting and thinking, doubting and thinking. This cycle is common where you’ll ask yourself a question and then answer intellectually. You won’t see that the problem is you keep asking yourself questions. You create a question, which isn’t necessarily about your existential experience. It could just be, ‘I wonder what that means? I wonder how rebirth really works?’ Then you’ll think about it. You’ll create a doubt, and you’ll think – because we’ve all been encouraged to believe answers are the solution. The mind can easily go from doubt to answer, but it’s just caught in a loop of thinking. That’s not dhammavicaya. It’s thinking, plain and simple, so be careful of that.

Often, people ask intelligent questions, but they are always driven by a habit of doubt. They’re not able to see that doubt is a type of mindset. Once you know it as a mindset, you’re fine. You don’t have to go to thought. That’s an important realisation because you tend to not be able to get out of the thinking realm or you give too much credit to thinking. This is not a dismissal of thinking. In the ordinary world, if something is not working, you try to find a solution. You need to think to do that. But spiritually, beginning to incline towards the silence of the mind is the most skilful thing to do.

Knowing stillness

Language can help you tune into that stillness. If I describe breath meditation as mindfulness of the breath, I tend to emphasise the breath. Whereas with, ‘still knowing with breathing,’ I’m emphasising the still knowing. It’s a different way of ‘tuning in’ for me. Maybe this way of using words doesn’t make a difference for you, but it does for me. That’s how I like to train myself.

If I can cultivate still knowing all the way to the end of the out-breath, then I could try to use that in more complex situations like annoyance.

You’re usually going to thought when annoyed: ‘Why don’t they stop doing that?’ or ‘I shouldn’t be like this.’

Instead of thinking, how about still knowing? You’ve tried it with the breath, so why not use it with an emotion? Annoyance is not still. It’s vibratory. It creates pressure and tension in the body. But the knowing, what’s that? Where’s the knowing within a negative experience?

You could do this kind of practice with death (still knowing with the body falling apart), sickness, or beauty. Beauty’s very good to use. The stillness is obvious when you’re looking at nature like the vast night sky or a lake. The sky and the lake are pointing to the stillness rather than us needing nature to experience stillness.

Where could that still knowing come in the contracted, more ‘in-your-face’ parts of our lives? Obviously, that’s more difficult. Still knowing would be an interesting exercise to practise at the dinner table, or while waiting for a bus or shopping. Now, this doesn’t mean you’re becoming catatonic. You’re continuing to function, but now you’re working from a place of awareness. The emphasis is always on the knowing. If you get conversant with that and do it a lot, then that practice is 24/7. It’s not restricted to the object of meditation. The object hopefully facilitates that.

The language of ‘awareness with’ rather than ‘of’ has been useful for me.

When negativity comes up, we’re trying to think it through. We get glued into the negativity and don’t let it go. We think we must fix, understand, or analyse it. While that can be tremendously important if there are issues of repression, sometimes we can get attached to that kind of mood out of good intentions. A more skilful option would be to determine, ‘I’m going to practise knowing, say, horribleness.’ That takes a lot of space. It may seem like you can’t do it, but you actually can, if you play around.

Most of us understand our neuroses, so there’s no real need to analyse them. Our culture sometimes over psychologises things. While Western psychology is fantastic, it has created a need in most of us to always figure stuff out or analyse it. This means, we’re constantly engaged with objectives and objects, and not the ‘objectless.’ Some people think that letting go is a form of repression – you have to express it by ‘punching the pillow’ or something like that. You don’t have to do that. You don’t have to follow the thoughts. It depends on what you trust. I trust in awareness working things out.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH BREATH

How does the end of the out-breath feel?

Practise receptive awareness by using sound: ‘Sound is like this.’

There’s the still knowing.

Notice you’re not searching for something, but you know it is.

Feel the breathing of the body.

Feel the end of the out-breath and notice the still knowing.

Establish the stillness of knowing and ride it all the way to the end of the out-breath.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Note: Ajahn gives a combined response to the below two questions.

Q: A few days ago, you used the image of writing words on paper, saying the paper is like awareness, always there and available, though the words may change and move around. I found the image very useful to switch from chatter in the mind to white, clear spaciousness. Would you say the words etc. were in nature the same way as feeling tired or hungry? I can see it’s natural for words and thoughts to arise, but is there a difference between this and natural physical states? Many distinguish between nature and culture. Anthropologists talk about it a lot, but in this, it seems culture is just a part of nature. I will think about this for some time, but for now I am enjoying the white paper. Thanks.

Q: How does one deal with stupidity in the world with moral skilfulness? A quote that speaks to my heart is, ‘All it takes for evil or harm to continue is for good people to do nothing.’ How do we do something in a skilful way that does not hook our mind into saṁsāra?

A: In nature, anything that arises is natural, but it’s conditioned in different ways. The biases and prejudices we might experience as human beings are natural. Their causes and conditions can be familial, cultural, etc. They arise because of natural causes.

It’s quite interesting what anthropologists say about the mind. I’m reading essays by Toni Morrison to get an idea of the cultural biases that come through literature. She’s a good literary critic. She shows how Black people are misrepresented, and that’s really edifying for me on a social level. But that to me is more the work of compassion at a societal level. The work of liberation is spiritual to me. It has to do with quietness and the silence of the mind.

The paper analogy is important for me. I’m always trying to be socially informed, but not get burnt out by the information. I want to protect my mind because death is close. Information can be toxic. You just pick up enough information to be informed, and not be over-stimulated by it.

As you get older, your inclination is to less excitement, less information, less filling of the mind, and more space and silence. Who wants to party at 73? Can you imagine going to a pub at that age? For me, that would be torture. There’s a kind of natural inclination to spiritual life as we age. We are very fortunate because we are Dhamma practitioners, and we have a path, tools, kalyāṇamittas, literature, meditation, and study groups. It’s really good kamma to be able to have that. Use this opportunity of ageing, if you are materially secure, to develop your spiritual practice as well as to be available to society in ways that are wise. It’s okay if no one is listening to you because your refuge now is in the heart.

It’s also very important to know how the mind works and the biases that are closing our hearts. We need to be quite careful with that, especially if the culture is promoting hatred. You can approach those frameworks of perception and bias by simply going to the open heart. Just get to know that these biased perceptions, such as guilt or hatred towards oneself or others, are closing the heart.

If you really work with negative emotions like fear and liberate them, then goodness can manifest in ways that are not blocked by biases and prejudices.

In Buddhism, the world is made up of six senses (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind). All those structures of perception need to be known.

I had an interesting encounter in Ottawa, Canada, once. We were shopping for sewing machine needles. There was a hijab-clad woman at the store. We started chatting, and she was hilarious. She was a very funny woman. I found that surprising. I realised I had a biased view that people with hijabs must be serious. I didn’t know about this bias until it came into consciousness. Since my heart was open, I enjoyed talking to this person.

I think if the heart is open, you’ll be able to notice the hidden biases and be with them because your focus is the person and not the perceptions. I had that insight when I was a layman. In my early 20s, I was visiting Morocco. I had these strange ideas about Third World countries. In Morocco, I saw good people, happy people, depressed people, as well as bad people, but they were all just people. That was an important insight.

In 1977, when I visited Toronto, I noticed a lot of hatred towards the Hare Krishna Group because of their wrong deeds. I got tarred with the same brush. During my walks, people would yell things like ‘get a job’. A man spat on me. It was quite ugly. People assumed I must be crazy because they projected their perceptions about the Hare Krishna group onto me. People would look at me like I was an insect. I felt like a pariah in my hometown. The late Venerable Anando and I would go on alms rounds every day. We didn’t get food, and after a while we were afraid because we knew we’d get abused. But we kept at it. One day, when we were bracing for the next insult, two Italian men said, ‘Good morning! How are you?’ That was a relief. The situation changed when His Holiness the Dalai Lama became popular. Once, he was giving a Kalachakra initiation in Toronto. I attended the first three days, which were on the Four Noble Truths. It was beautiful. His Holiness the Dalai Lama invited us, Theravada monks, to the stage to chant. The event was an hour’s walk away from my mom’s place. When I was leaving the event, people honked their horns in appreciation: ‘Good on you mate!’ They weren’t abusing me, which was nice.

Luang Por Liem is totally free of biases. He once said, ‘People are just people,’ which is brilliant. We don’t have to deconstruct our biases. I think things will work out by keeping the heart open, noticing the biases and trying not to respond from a fearful place.

Once, Nick Scott and I travelled from Warsaw to St. Petersburg. It took two-and-a-half months. We flew to Warsaw and decided to use local buses or walk the rest of the trip. We walked a lot in Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia. One of the things we decided was to call the ‘weird’ people who test our compassion, ‘Indra’. Indra is the warrior king of the devas. He is also a trickster in Hindu mythology. It was really interesting. When we encountered the ‘Indras’, we’d just be open to the person. We’d be cautious and streetwise, but open. It was a fun way to travel.

In terms of the question on thought and mind, we need to understand that at the level of human interaction, we want to do as much good as possible and as little harm as possible. The amount you can do depends on your age, available resources, your character, and vocation. My vocation is not social work, but I have been able to contribute something to society, which feels okay. When I was studying at the University of Toronto in the sixties, there were a lot of radical, anti-war demonstrations. Everyone seemed angry and even violent. I didn’t want to be a part of that and chose a different vocation.

At the minimum, as individuals and human beings, we’re ensuring every interaction is based on compassion and kindness as much as possible. Then, there’ll come a time in life when you have to leave all types of proactive engagements to other people. This is the model in India. When you’re younger and you’ve got lots of energy, time, and resources, you’re active in society. When you retire and children are old enough to take care of themselves, you prepare your mind for death. Of course, death can happen tomorrow or 20 years later.

These post-retirement years of mental stability and health, even though the body may not be in its prime, are very important for spiritual practice. To not engage with confusing issues is a good thing. There was a time and place for that. You did the advocacy work as a youngster. Perhaps, it’s time for something else. An elder who is wise, available, has the capacity for compassionate listening, and is not caught up in worldly, everyday issues is a valuable being in society.

Do consider what retirement means to you. Surely, it’s not just improving your golf score. Take the quietness of the mind as a serious issue.

One way to deal with the evil in the world is not to get stressed by it. Protect the mind and bring it to loving-kindness and stillness. Know your limitations. Don’t get burnt out. My suggestion is, ‘less, not more’.

In my own life, I determined that I’ve got to sort out my own mind first. How can I have a family or be a social activist if I’m still fraught with fear? So, I decided to go to a monastery. As situations arose later in life, I had enough resources to share. That was a natural evolution. You have to give yourself time to do the undergraduate work of the heart. It involves learning about meditation, understanding your own mental makeup and transcendence, and how to incline the mind towards it. A retreat such as this is helpful. In monastic life, we give junior monks time to get their head around the Buddha’s teachings and the workings of their own heart. They typically teach only after ten years.

If you have or almost have grey hair, consider the spiritual life. It is not a running away from conventional life but putting into the conventional world wise beings who eventually have some influence.

Q: If awareness can exist without material, why do we need this body to realise the Deathless?

A: Well, you have no choice. You’re incarnate in a body, and you suffer. The Buddha asks, ‘Why do you suffer?’ And he offers a teaching. So, it’s just the way it is, isn’t it?

Q: When this retreat ends, I plan to sit virtually with a sangha at the Toronto Zen Centre on weekdays. I feel it’ll be helpful to practise with a group, but it’s a different tradition with their own set of rituals. Also, should I sign up to receive private teachings from the rōshi?

A: Join in the rituals. They’re great fun. Wherever you are, be it a church or a Zen temple, join in and try to get the feeling of what the rituals are. Or just watch like an anthropologist. That’s what we tell guests who are shy of our tradition. They’re uncomfortable with some rituals and conventions like bowing. We tell them to just be like anthropologists and watch. When you go into someone’s spiritual home, you want to find out their rituals and be sensitive to them: ‘How do I be polite in this environment? What is communion in this particular situation?’ You have to be very mindful. Find out where they leave their shoes and how they conduct formal meditation sessions. That’s a beautiful thing to do.

The relationship with a rōshi is personal and important. You first have to build trust with the teacher by basically interviewing him. You want to make sure the teacher has a strong moral foundation with impeccable credentials, as they have a lot of power. In the past, there were a lot of problems in Western monasticism, where people misused that power. It has improved now. It’s a much more gracious and mature time. Twenty years ago, people were a bit more naive about what a teacher could or couldn’t do. As for us in Theravada, we have strict guidelines around money and relationships that protect both the laity and monks.

When ‘interviewing’ the teacher, ask for their opinion about your practices. If they offer positive feedback, then they’re tuning into your own practice, picking up who you are, and encouraging you in ways that make sense to you. This means the teacher is listening to you.

Q: Is it meaningful when I experience visual objects in the mind during meditation? I sometimes see a ball of fire or energy. It just comes as I’m sitting, with no emotions, words, or clear meaning. Sometimes I experience the faces of teachers too and that often comes with warmth and feelings of tranquillity and hope.

A: If your project is awareness, and you begin to sense the silence of that, would the light imagery or nimitta help you? Could you hold that imagery as an object of calming, or would it excite you? Would you get lost in it? You could be fascinated by the nimitta or become very tranquil. You must be careful when absorbing into an object like a light image, as you could become dependent on it and think that awareness is a kind of absorbed meditative experience just like a trance.

Awareness is not dependent on deep states of tranquillity. We’re interested in a sustained knowing of the way things are for long periods of time. If the images are just coming and going, then see if you can stay calm, allow it to be what it is, and not get caught up in too much thinking about it. If it comes a lot, experiment with holding it in your mind. See what happens. But don’t create a self around it: ‘Oh, I’ve got this.’ Don’t create doubt around it: ‘What is that?’ Just acknowledge that it’s a phenomenon that has arisen. It is as it is. It might or might not have a calming effect. But the project is sustained stillness, awareness, and composure with the way things are, which allow you to contemplate phenomenon and life experiences.

It is skilful to bring up the images of teachers. I visualise and imagine Luang Por Sumedho. When his image comes into consciousness, it’s beautiful and lovely; the heart is filled with gratitude and warmth. That’s a skilful way of developing open-heartedness.

It’s not just about one relationship, though. It’s about all beings all of the time.

People have strange experiences during meditation like feeling their body is 10ft tall. It’s important to understand if these types of experiences are composing or exciting the mind.

If you had an extraordinary experience, then are you spending the next five sittings trying to repeat that? You’re in trouble then because you’re in time. There was the past: ‘I really meditated very well that day. I’m a basket case now. I need to get back.’ Now you’re stuck in time. You have desire, you have self, and you also have the whipping afterwards when you felt like you ‘failed’.

All meditators have these experiences. The holding of tranquillity as something we want to repeat is a big stumbling block for people because it can be addictive. You experience a beautiful feeling. But if you spend the next six months trying to get back that feeling, then you won’t see the desire to get or the desire to become. You may also judge your present moment as pathetic.

Luang Por Chah said, ‘If your meditation makes you peaceful, then accept it. If your meditation doesn’t make you peaceful, then accept it.’

When it is tranquil, ride with it. When it changes, you acknowledge: ‘Well, it’s supposed to change.’ If there’s restlessness, accept it: ‘Restlessness feels like this.’

That’s the movement to transcendence.

I’m not dismissing deep states of tranquillity but be careful. If you hold onto that side, then the other side is going to plague you. We’re trying to be ‘side-less’.

When meditation has a lot of tranquillity, it’s nurturing and energising. It gives you a lot of inspiration. The difficulty is to not hold on to it and not try to get it back. That’s why they say, ‘Whatever happens in mediation, give it all up.’ This is the idea of sharing merit. Give all the goodness that came from your meditation to everyone all over the world. It’s hard to do, though. So, when it is peaceful, say, ‘Thank you.’ When it’s not, say, ‘The practice shouldn’t change because awareness is unchanging.’

You always move to the Unchanging, rather than to the duality of experience.

When Luang Por Liem experienced exalted states of mind, he didn’t hold onto them. He simply accepted them: ‘It is as it is.’ It arose and ceased. Now, of course, there’s no arising or ceasing of experiences for him. How did he get there? By not creating or holding onto anything.

Q: The end of the out-breath does indeed seem to be an interesting place to hang out. I’m noticing a lot of stillness there, and conversely, a bit of upheaval. It occurred to me that hanging out here is a practise for my final out-breath. I found this thought disturbing at first, but in fairly short order, it seems to be becoming a place of comfort.

A: Yes, I contacted a lot of fear there myself. Fear is an important human predicament. It was essential for me to understand it deeply, not at the level of thought, but at the hara level, in the stomach, and the heart. I also had to liberate it from the conditioned nature of my sense of self. A lot of that came about through this capacity to just allow the out-breath to be what it is. Sometimes the out-breath is like an incredible, deep yawn felt in the hara or like a queasy tension. The natural reaction is wanting to do something, but I’ve learned not to let it go to thought. Fear is there, but it has no narrative or story. It’s just conditioning. I don’t have to do anything about it; just accept and let it be. Once you let the out-breath be as is, you may notice that the body is tense on the in-breath. Now, what’s that stress all about? That would be an interesting contemplation.

The out-breath is also the place where you get kidnapped by thought, plans, etc.

When you make the out-breath a ‘project,’ you tend to be with the body more. Also, if you pay attention to a bodily component for 45 minutes or more over six days, you can imagine how beneficial it’ll be in ordinary life because you now have a subconscious movement of attention. Say, you’re in the marketplace where ‘something’ is happening. At that time, some of your attention is going to be on the out-breath because you’ve been training to notice it. This is fabulous because you now have a way of processing things that were triggered by complexities you might not have experienced in a retreat. Attention is no longer just in thought or personal relationships. It’s deeper. Observing the out-breath is also calming and peaceful. But it’s not a trance. You’re fully open, awake, and with life as it presents itself.

Q: How do I reach out to someone who I see as my teacher and hope I might be received as their student?

A: In Theravada Buddhism, senior monks are teachers for anyone who wants to come. We don’t set up personal relationships, but if you come to a monastery and meet one of the senior monks, then they get a sense of your story and the kinds of things you are learning about. That would be one way to establish a relationship with a monastic. The monk knows you and you don’t have to repeat your story every time. It’s a natural occurrence in monasteries. The duty of monks, especially of abbots, is to always be available to the laity because that’s how we serve society. A lot of people come and talk about their practice. I get to know them, and they’re very good friends now. But there isn’t a guru-shishya (teacher-disciple) relationship like you might find in Tibetan Buddhism. Theravada teachers don’t give much direction in terms of what you should do with your life. We’re not therapists. We don’t have the skills to help a person with PTSD, marital issues, etc. The conversations are about Dhamma. We try to view any problem a layperson may be experiencing in terms of greed, hatred, and delusion, or through the Four Noble Truths.

Q: I find it very helpful to let the mind rest in the knowing rather than the object of breathing. Will the parallel be awareness of space in vision, or awareness of silence around sound if all of these practices have the effect of stopping the mind and opening the heart to silence with deep tenderness?

A: Yes, definitely. Awareness of space is an intuitive one. Space is a common analogy. It’s similar to the example of print on the book and the page of the book. In a room, when you take your attention away from objects, you begin to see consciousness, awareness, space. From that you can understand the craving for objects is the wrong place to look for peace.

The abandonment of the strategies of craving is very important for realising the Unconditioned.

Also, is the space here different than out there? You realise it’s the same. You get a sense of what awareness, space, or knowing mean. These are really interesting parts of our spiritual life. We get past our emotional baggage and the mind begins to quieten.

As you age, go for simplicity rather than complexity. What could be simpler than space?

We can’t teach that to minds intoxicated with objects. You have to teach moral integrity. As your attention gets refined, even the doing of meditation objects becomes too coarse. You can relax away from that and notice space. But this isn’t a case of being spaced out. You’re very conscious in choiceless awareness. You’re choosing to be present and open, but away from objects.

Q: During meditation I seem to give instructions or reminders to myself like ‘I am aware’; ‘Let go’; and ‘I am grateful.’ Thus, I’m always talking to myself. Is this okay to do throughout the meditation?

A: Yes and no. My first teacher, late Venerable Bhikkhu Ñanasuci, once asked, ‘What’s the word the Buddha would have used the most?’ Well, you truly can’t know the answer to that question. Similarly, it kind of depends on the make-up of your mind. If you’re an obsessive commenter with a machine gun of comments, then it’s probably not good. But if you know how to coach yourself with language, that would be great. For instance, popping in the word, ‘grateful,’ eases your heart and you abide as gratitude for a while. That’s a really good use of right thinking. You’re using it correctly. So, it depends on habit and the result. Also, you want to taste the silence of no thought and have an aptitude for that.