MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH BECOMING

As I’ve been suggesting, it’s helpful to awaken to the mood of the mind right from when you get up in the morning. It doesn’t take the thinking mind long to create a self and others as well as a past and future. The whole world is born into consciousness through thought, through self, and through mood. You can know that as an object. When you do, you start to touch the silence that’s behind the world.

So, what is the mood of the mind? This isn’t a judgement. It’s an awakening. Then tune into silence by listening to the sounds around you. In the listening, you also hear the silence, don’t you? Since you’re tuned into the present moment, you know the way things are. It’s very simple, isn’t it? The habits of thought and of becoming as well as all the wanting and not wanting make life complex. Awakening to them is very simple.

Creating affection is a pleasant thing to do. So, make conscious someone dear to you. Realising, naming them, bringing them to mind at the in-breath, and feeling them at the heart: ‘May they be well.’ What a lovely thing to do, isn’t it? It’s like a giving. Then you keep tuning into the silence, affection, and gratitude.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Q: How do you fulfil your social responsibilities and act skilfully in the face of worldly injustices?

A: First off, protect the mind from anger and righteous indignation – because we are cultivating something deeper than what’s happening in the world. If you’re really interested in getting angry, then go for it. If that’s what turns you on, then be angry. But how effective or profitable is that? One wants to guard against righteous indignation and anger (which could be justifiable) because that’s been very destructive in human society on all ends of the spectrum.

Can one be engaged without being angry? Is there some logic in being engaged without being angry? Does that make sense or is anger a necessary part of being engaged? Is being enraged an essential part of effective action?

When I was studying at the University of Toronto in the mid-1960s, there were anti-Vietnam war protests on campus. Jerry Rubin, a radical left dissident, and part of the Chicago Seven group that was arrested for sedition during the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, USA, once spoke at the university. He had the Viet Cong flag around his neck at that time and incited everyone to extreme anger. I was against the Vietnam War, but I didn’t want to be angry or self-righteous. I preferred to cultivate inner freedom and participate wherever I could as peacefully as possible.

My question isn’t how much you engage in social activism, but does anger facilitate peace? Does an angry person serve peace in the world? You may think living a peaceful life as a monk is not really going to stop the downward trend of societal corruptions and similar issues. If so, in an ideal situation, social activism can become your vocation. Dr. Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela, and His Holiness the Dalai Lama can be described as social activists. They also took up the spiritual challenge of remaining loving in horrible situations.

Can you do social activism without becoming angry? That would be an interesting exercise. If you’re intent on social activism, then pick up the cause where you might have some power, societal connections, and resources to create change. You use that ‘vehicle’ to understand and liberate your heart from anger.

It’s way too easy to blame your anger on other people. We can find lots of things in the world to hate. As American novelist Toni Morrison said, ‘Goodness is difficult.’ It’s not easy to do social activism as a spiritual practice. But it’s an interesting challenge.

Whatever you choose, always be responsible for your own mind and heart – and keep moving towards compassion. I chose monasticism as my vocation, but it was not to run away from social responsibilities. I felt the need to do the ‘undergraduate work’ of training the mind. Things have evolved from there, and I’m here now.

Hatred vs. anger

There is a difference between hatred and anger. Hatred is pernicious and destructive for the individual and society.

Anger is also problematic, but someone could just flare up and be without hatred. It could be an aggravation of something in life. Anger is habitual. Some people are very passionate that way, and anger is a quick, volcanic arising. But it’s socially awkward to have people angry all the time, to say the least. It can certainly be painful because we often direct anger towards the people closest to us, which is tragic. So, anger must be addressed. You have to patiently work on not believing in it and not going there, developing awareness about how anger manifests in the body as well as being willing to ask for forgiveness. But there is a massive difference between held, visceral hatred and the flaring up of anger.

Ajahn Bodhipālā, who resides at Amaravati Buddhist Monastery, UK, is originally from Cambodia. She was in Cambodia when the Khmer Rouge took over. She witnessed the violent, horrible deaths of several family members. Then a layperson, she fled to the United States where she had a successful career as a computer programmer. She carried a lot of hatred for the Khmer Rouge. She developed a practice of visually torturing Khmer Rouge soldiers. She would constantly imagine cutting up the soldiers with a razor to the smallest pieces possible to inflict the most amount of pain. She eventually realised the hatred was destroying her. She went back to her Buddhist roots and began to practise mettā bhāvanā to develop the forgiveness capacity. It took a long time to move the heart from hatred to forgiveness. Eventually, she returned to Phenom Phen, the capital of Cambodia, where she established a refuge for abused women. She did the most stunning act then. She visited a nearby village where Khmer Rouge soldiers were residing. She asked them for forgiveness for all the hatred that she had previously ‘directed towards them’. The soldiers cried, and they asked for forgiveness too. This is an example of the spiritual or inner transformations we are capable of as humans.

Now, forgiveness is not condoning. Just like his Holiness the Dalai Lama, don’t allow the mind to go to hatred.

Q: How do you hang out more in the silence at the end of thought?

A: You start by noticing the tendency to get rid of thought and then making conscious the end of thought more and more. In that moment of noticing, try to create a positive perception of, ‘this is it; I don’t have to go anywhere,’ instead of, ‘oh god, I’m thinking too much’. The shift from thought to the object of meditation happens very quickly. Also, this critical judgement is not analytical; it’s just a reaction to thought. But it’s not coming from awakening; it is due to resistance and rejection. So, make conscious the end of thought by doing the exercises we’ve been doing in this retreat. Just say, ‘This is it.’ Affirm it. Make it important: ‘That’s it. I don’t have to do anything else.’

You keep doing that. It may take 20 years but keep doing it. It’s very, very subtle. The desire to get rid of thought will surely lessen.

Once you have a taste of the nectar of silence, you will incline towards that. However, old habits will be there. This is the frustrating part of the contemplative life. Even though you have insight, the power of habit will overwhelm it.

There are many situations in life when we have to wait for things to happen, be it a traffic jam or a medical appointment. You have nothing to do in those moments but wait. Usually, when there’s nothing to do, we want to do something. You’ll probably browse magazines, scroll through your emails, or do something else. Well, why don’t you do nothing? Why do anything when there’s nothing to do? Just sit there and abide in witnessing. You realise the mind wants to do something. That’s the movement of thought and of becoming and doing. While it’s okay to read and answer emails, notice the tendency to do something. Make it conscious: ‘Oh, there’s nothing to do.’ Then listen to the silence. Take these little opportunities that exist in life. Obviously, the more you introduce them into your day, the more silence will become conscious.

We’ve got a lot of ‘horrible toys’ to fill the mind. There’s this constant going out and consuming. That’s what a consumer society does. We might not be consuming gross material objects, but we are imbibing a lot of information. The mind does like to go out a lot. As Luang Por Dune says:

The mind going outside is the cause.The result of the mind going outside is suffering.The mind knowing the mind is the path.The result of the mind knowing the mind is the end of suffering.

You know the mind, you know knowing. The more you intend that, the more it’ll happen. I don’t know any secret, quick methods that would work. I tried drugs, which didn’t work. I messed it up even more, so I don’t recommend that. A lifestyle that is non-distracting and doesn’t stir the mind a lot helps in that way. The sense of silence then becomes more obvious.

Q: I’ve been finding ‘the still knowing of’ very useful, experimenting with bringing up worry or fear into the still knowing and abiding there. Also, with discomfort in my knees and seeing that the still knowing of the pain allows it to be as it is, there’s less resistance. I wonder about experimenting with half-open eyes as in the Zen tradition to help transition into life generally. This morning, I meditated looking at the light forming in the trees in front of me. I worked with abiding in still knowing and bringing up worry. I wonder if this might be a good method for me to expand the practice into the less beautiful parts of life.

A: Yes, that’s the kind of experimentation you want to do. We all have our own life programs that we’re working with both in terms of conditioning and social situation. When we experiment, we’re able to figure out if it works.

So, how can we bring this into all of life because this should be 24/7. What’s the point of experimenting if it’s just limited to the zafu?

The intuitions that make something an everyday part of life are important and fruitful. Also, that kind of experimentation can be effective because it’s personal and about one’s own situation with an understanding of the basic principles. Luang Por Chah would say, ‘Always question yourself,’ not just intellectually, but also by looking in this way.

Beauty helps too. The Buddha said monks should live in forest environments. But am I dependent on the environment? Do I have to live in a monastery or a beautiful place or can I practise in a more raucous place? Practice has to be the same whether we’re in the forest, a beautiful place, the airport, or the office. The environment is incredibly helpful, but the practice should be the same in all environments. That only makes sense. Otherwise, it’s not transcendent.

Q: When all else fails in my meditation practice, I turn to mettā, so I really appreciate your reflections on the mettā chant (refer to The Buddha’s Words on Loving-Kindness, p193). However, when asked about sending mettā to individuals, your answer suggested this is not the intention or the method. It is about openness, oneness, and knowing the feeling in the heart. I have been sending the energy of mettā to individuals. Please clarify the mettā practice.

A: When I am at a store, I don’t send mettā to passers-by. I just keep the heart open. If the heart contracts because of something, then I can sense that. I never learned this way of sending mettā. In Thailand, where I trained, it was about the development of the pāramī of mettā, the development of energy, and the development of the heart. I use imagery and phrases like ‘Luang Por Sumedho’ on the in-breath and ‘may you be well’ on the out-breath. You could say that’s sending mettā, which is fine, but these are just verbal strategies. What matters is, ‘Does it work for you?’ If yes, then don’t worry about the language.

It is beautiful that we human beings can enter into that kind of relationship, but I don’t like sending mettā to myself deliberately. If there is self-disparagement or aversion to others, then the heart is closed. If I stay centred with an open heart, then when self-criticism starts to ramp up, I can sense the constriction in the heart.

It’s not about sending mettā to myself. It’s not around the energy of self and other. It’s not in the model of self and other. The model of flow of consciousness is the model that’s governed by dependent origination. With this as condition, that arises. When there is this, there is that. The social aspect of Buddhism, the part we call conventional truth, is the model of self and other. I’m using the model of dependent origination where the sense of self and other is a perception that comes and goes, and I’m moving towards the emptiness of those perceptions with an open heart.

Q: Is there a reason or a purpose for the accumulation of pain in the legs and back when sitting cross-legged?

A: You’re probably not used to sitting cross-legged for several hours. During my time in rural Thailand, most of the houses had no beds, chairs, cushions, or any type of furniture. The monks were used to sitting on cloth mats. If you grew up in that kind of environment, then sitting cross-legged is natural and there’s not much pain. If you’re not used to sitting cross-legged, then obviously your muscles aren’t developed for that. The pain could also be related to an injury or old age. You can work towards getting the body in shape for sitting by consulting a good yoga teacher.

There’s no purpose to pain, but you can use it to learn to peacefully co-exist with pain, but not to the extent that it hurts you. The older you get, it’s not about staying in shape, but about keeping ‘this thing’ on the road. You don’t want to wreck your back or knees.

The cross-legged posture is very grounding. A tall spine is good for meditation because the energy flows freely. It takes time to develop the posture. If you want to develop it, then maybe start with 30 minutes on the floor and 30 minutes on a chair. Move into it gently instead of hurting yourself. Then learn to abide peacefully with the discomfort. The pain itself becomes a teacher around resistance. Having said that, one of the problems I faced was wilfulness. I was wilfully trying to not move, which was unwise. I wasn’t reflecting on pain. I learnt that eventually.

Pain is just a big part of being incarnate in a body. Meditators with chronic pain learn a lot about it. They develop skilful means of being at peace with pain. You develop the ability to notice the desire to move and be free of pain. You learn to let go of that and be at peace with unfulfilled desire.

Q: Do you fear death?

A: Well, not today. Tomorrow maybe; I don’t know. The question is quite abstract. A more useful one would be, ‘Can I abide in peace with fear?’

Fear manifests in all kinds of ways. If I understand fear and I’ve learned how to release it, then when it arises, the refuge is not in the emotion, but in the knowing. The fear will arise, stay for a while, and cease.

Q: Do monks always eat at set times?

A: Our eating regime is not moral. You must understand that all of our rules aren’t around morality. Most of them are around organising monastic life and sticking to values of simplicity, renunciation, and sense restraint. Monks don’t marry. Now marriage is not immoral, but can you imagine a monastery of 50 monks and families? It wouldn’t be a monastery anymore. It would be a commune with different principles of organisation. The Buddha suggested developing a monastic life, which is very simple and without distractions. Music can be very spiritual and isn’t immoral, but we don’t have a big music collection because that would just be another avenue to go out into the objects of the world. The principle of monasticism is that it’s the transcendence of the need for objects. Simplicity really helps in that respect. If a monk is restless and has no avenues of distraction, then they have to look at the restlessness. They abide with it and understand this kind of drawing out into objective experience.

People will equate rules with morality, but it’s not that. You probably have some rules in your home to help everyone live together harmoniously. It’s the same principle in monasteries.

Q: When feeling lots of anxiety or fear of contracting COVID-19, how can you meditate especially with the pain or not being able to breathe?

A: Develop strength of awareness in the ordinary and in safe situations. You can gain insight and understanding in those circumstances. When life becomes complex, you have some tools, foundation, and a momentum of awareness and insight, which will serve you well.

If you’re absorbed in breath meditation, then it’ll be challenging not to be able to breathe. But if awareness is your practice and you can’t breathe due to a panic attack, can it be possible for awareness to know panic?

You can prepare for death, sickness, and pain by being aware now of little pains and annoyances.

The future is unknown. Now is the knowing.

Q: As I rest more in knowing and try to bring that to my daily life, there seems to be a lessening of will and motivation for my usual activities. I do what needs to be done and try to bring the knowing mind to that but there certainly seems to be a dropping away of motivation in many areas.

A: This is very common. The basic sense of going out into objects is no longer interesting. You don’t need to do that anymore. You prefer to rest and abide in the beauty of the peaceful mind. But it’s not passive or dysfunctional. This is actually the brightness of being. It’s very awake and it’s a skill to abide in non-desire, non-becoming, and non-resistance. Abiding in that is very fulfilling. Yet, when there’s need, we will respond instantly without any hesitation. So, this is, I would say, a good sign. Society might think you’re losing the plot here, but this is not passivity. Passivity is bad when it goes to thought. The thought then just spins around in self-narratives and downward spirals of depression. Instead, this is about abiding in stillness and peace because it has that fulfilment of non-desire. The thing about desires being fulfilled is that they perpetuate more desires. Whereas with cessation of desire you no longer need to fulfil desires. Yes, we have biological and social desires of what we’d like to affect with family and friends. But as the need for objects falls away, the taste of peace becomes more pleasant and interesting than the taste of movement, excitement and interest. You become interested in peace, I suppose, so, savour that.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH PERCEPTIONS

Awakening to the way things are – simple, isn’t it?

Thought makes it complex. So, come to the simplicity of knowing.

What language do you use to stay there? As I was saying earlier, ‘This is it.’ This knowing is the goal.

You can create, in some way, pleasantness and affection in the heart – welcoming the breath and even curiosity of the out-breath.

Whether it’s affection or curiosity, both are aspects of awakened knowing. With curiosity, you’re not trying to get an experience. You’re simply looking at your experience right now. For instance, you’re looking at the end of the out-breath just like a scientist would be looking at lab procedures.

Affection is both warm and an attitude that helps you sustain this capacity for awareness.

These are the general principles. You can agree or disagree with them. If you find them helpful, then find ways to keep introducing these simple principles into your meditations.

TRUST IN AWARENESS

It’s our final evening. As I always joke, if it was a terrible retreat and you’re happy, or if it was a good retreat and you feel sad, or if it was an indifferent retreat and you feel indifferent, then know time is a feeling. Scientifically, time is considered an absolute, but I think there are different opinions about that. Time is a felt thing. If your meditation went really well, it must have felt short. But, if it was horrible, then it could have been eternal hell. Whatever you feel now – happy, sad, or in-between – the awareness is timeless. Awareness, consciousness, presence, or knowing is pure and mysterious, but you know that you know this ineffable presence of knowing. It has no quality or shape. It’s not square or round. It doesn’t have a haircut. It’s a mystery and yet, you can abide as the knowing. It’s not hidden in any way.

Sadness at the end of a retreat or happiness at the end of a sitting are the qualities that we experience. We respond to them because we are biological and emotional beings. But is that the only thing there is? Is this endless response to stimuli, pain, and pleasure the only thing there is? The Buddha said no. There is an alternative to pleasure and pain, and that’s the transcendent silence of knowing the way things are.

Intuitive awareness

The title of one of Luang Por Sumedho’s books is Intuitive Awareness. It’s a phrase he was using a few years ago. I didn’t pick up on that phrase in the beginning. I wondered, ‘How do you explain this?’

If you have a rigorous intellectual approach, then words have specific meanings. While this may be true, the idea of a reflective teaching is not to nail down the exact, ‘eternal’ meaning of a word. The word is simply just trying to get you to look at life in a certain way, so you understand something about it. Over time, you accumulate wisdom through reflective understanding of the Buddha’s teachings and become less and less confused by conditions. It’s a confidence that is not based on some kind of Buddhist intellectual fundamentalism. While it can be helpful to be knowledgeable about some ideas, it’s simply at the intellectual level for me. The confidence to know the path existentially and emotionally is the meaning of ‘intuitive awareness,’ as described by Luang Por Sumedho. You intuit that’s the way to go.

The awakened mind is a simple thing. These days, we hear the phrase, ‘uncertain times,’ a lot. When haven’t we lived in uncertain times! It’s weird and uncertain now, but what is certain is that you know it feels uncertain. The only liberation from uncertainty is knowing that it is uncertain.

Luang Por Chah constantly stressed the ‘uncertain’ theme. If you take it in a social context, you can get really afraid. Global warming, pandemic, wars, and political strife are all causing uncertainties in the world, and if you really proliferate on them, you’ll be very worried. But that’s not what Luang Por Chah is saying. He’s asking us to look at the feeling of worry as something that is coming and going; look at the feeling of uncertainty, which is coming and going; and look at the feeling of time coming and going.

In Buddhism, this practice is called aniccasaññā (perception of change). This perception is always possible. After this retreat, you may feel inspired or want your money back. Two weeks later, you may wonder about what you heard on the retreat. At that moment, you can just say to yourself, ‘I don’t know what he was talking about,’ and you’ll be on the path again. This is the beauty of it; it’s always there. The issue is not so much about understanding the teaching, but about trust.

Faith

What do you trust spiritually? What do you have faith in? Do you have faith in dogma? We’d like to stay away from religious fundamentalism because we feel it’s conceited, aggressive, and patronising.

You can have faith in material things like car brakes and your insurance policy, but what does faith and trust mean spiritually? When push comes to shove, what do you do? Worry? Then, there’s a faith or trust in worry, a habit of worry, or the kamma of worry.

So, one needs to make conscious the intention to trust in awareness.

You have to do that consciously and deliberately because the other parts of our habitual conditioning click in very quickly. Hopefully, due to a safe and wholesome environment, you have a chance to develop a sensitivity to awareness of the way things are during this retreat.

In situations that are not dangerous, when you feel vulnerable and your fears or worries come up, you can begin to trust in awareness of vulnerability rather than running with thoughts of worry and fear.

Much of the popular press is stimulating lots of fear in our minds. There are surely things to be afraid of, but the sense of being vulnerable is an important human condition to begin to make conscious in a safe place.

Knowing vulnerability

There was a question about austere practices that monks adopt. Well, I could fast for ten days with just water, or I could go without sleep. I did them, but that was only through will power. The real austere practice for me was being vulnerable and in situations that I did not feel comfortable. I was safe though. In those vulnerable moments, the ego mind would come up. There was fear, worry, self-doubt as well as the wanting to be liked by others. If a person I wanted to like me looked at me sullenly, then I’d worry about them. This happened to me once. I later found out that they had influenza, and it wasn’t about me.

The proliferation of mind that takes place with vulnerability and self-doubt is a huge part of our suffering.

How do you liberate the mind from that? A lot of people do it by developing skills, but sometimes they are just a cover up. There are people who are powerful, but still vulnerable. Yes, we need to deal with the sense of not knowing and not being sure about the future functionally, but emotionally bearing witness to vulnerability is the way to liberate fear from the heart. If you have PTSD, then you’ll need professional help. But, for most of us with our average garden variety neuroses and vulnerabilities, this makes a lot of sense. Certainly, I found it helpful.

Offering goodwill and kindness

In our culture, there’s a lot of self-disparagement, self-criticism, and idealism. A sense of self is created from ideals – the shoulds and shouldn’ts – that have been inculcated into the mind whether it’s around being a man, woman, mom, or dad. A lot of self-criticism, guilt, and lack of self-acceptance stems from that conditioned idealism. In this way, attachment takes place in our cultures. We can be very smart and clever about these issues. But this isn’t an issue of the intellect, rather the heart. What works for me is somehow bypassing the endless analysis and getting to the root of the problem. It is both a visceral and conditioned result in the heart.

Sometimes, Buddhism and meditation can adopt a warrior-like tone. For example, we often hear of killing the kilesas. I question whether that works – because it’s imbued with wilfulness and becoming. Whereas, when you feel vulnerable and fears are coming up, it’s an opportunity to witness the way things are. This witnessing of vulnerability is a kind of self-love because you are no longer rejecting it or pushing away the feelings and demanding that you be some ideal that you think you should be. This willingness is mettā bhāvanā.

Mettā bhāvanā is not just a dualistic way of sharing feelings of loving-kindness with others. This active experiencing of mettā is profound. In this way you are not dwelling in aversion. You’re offering goodwill and kindness to that feeling of vulnerability. As Luang Por Sumedho said, ‘It all belongs.’ It is an open-hearted acceptance of the way things are. It’s far from a narcissistic love.

It seems to me that awareness and goodwill must be conjoined. It’s not like you do one and then the other. The whole path is really one in that way.

We use language to compartmentalise things, but is not the open heart simply a dynamic availability to all of life, which then responds to all of life according to the circumstances?

So, if there’s pain, there’s compassion. If there’s beauty, there’s joy. There’s no desire because the heart is fulfilled. There’s peacefulness and equanimity because there’s no desire. The equanimity isn’t cold. It has a kind of openness. How do we come to that?

As they say in one tradition, ‘Trust in Allah and tie your camel.’ So, having tied your camel – such as paying your insurance bills and making sure you’ve got enough food to ride out the snowstorm – you want to be able to enter into those difficult states of consciousness because that’s where the sense of self, distraction, and blame get born. In the witnessing of that and the allowing of that, the separation of ego and consciousness begins to fall away, and compassion begins to manifest. This is not a deliberate act. It’s more like the naturalness of the heart, which is liberated from fear, greed, hatred, and delusion. It’s nature; it’s not like you have to do it. His Holiness the Dalai Lama isn’t doing it; he just is it. He is a Bodhisattva.

A lot of my suffering has been that sense of vulnerability. For instance, when teaching, you are out there, just ‘naked’ on stage, and raw emotionally. Plus, you don’t have a textbook to guide you or a back-up person. You feel vulnerable during the early days of teaching, at least I did even though the environment was safe

Actually, being vulnerable in a safe place was the best austere practice I could have. Feeling doubt and fear and not just riding over them in an intellectual manner, but being in the midst of that, bearing witness, and then seeing what kindness is in those moments was powerful. It’s incredibly powerful over a long period of time. The calmness then comes naturally. The openness comes naturally.

Freeing the heart

Meditation can be viewed as an accumulation of calming states of mind. But it can be a purification too. Meditation can be viewed as a willingness to bear witness to the arising of difficult states of mind and a cultivation of open-hearted awareness around them. These are powerful things to do.

As long as negative things are haunting our minds, we will want to free ourselves from them. These negative feelings are not a mere blip in consciousness. They’re powerful stuff. These resultant things that come through us carry a lot of energy. You may or may not know why you’re experiencing a certain emotion. While it may be helpful to know the ‘why’, a lot of times it’s not important. You have enough sensibility to know what this feels like. The more you can witness that, I think the more the freedom becomes apparent. Now, that’s not an issue of control. For me, it’s an issue of awakening.

If the heart trembles too much and is too shaken, then you just get distracted. So, you need to learn to calm the mind. But you don’t want meditation to become a precious experience: ‘Leave me alone, I’m meditating. I’m precious now, you coarse thing.’ That’s not the spirit of it. You don’t want to go there because that’s boring and not freeing. So, find places of calm in your own mind and environment. As you enter into the complexities, reflect, ‘What is it that doesn’t change?’

At the end of a retreat, it’s important to let go of everything. If you think you might lose this peace tomorrow, you’re right. I guarantee it. It’s supposed to be that way.

So, if the mind has become calm, great. Get good at that if you can. But realise if it’s circumstantial, then it’s not freedom. Awakening to the way things are is not a circumstance. It’s not about good or bad weather. It’s transcendent.

Now, back to what I asked, ‘What do you trust when push comes to shove, and the volcano starts to erupt?’ If you can trust in awareness, then you’ve got the path to freedom.

Homework

I have homework for you. It’s very simple. Look at vibhava-taṇhā for a year. This is the way to deepen Dhamma practice. You take a little bit of the Buddha’s teaching and apply it.

We have a lot of resistance to the way things are, be it physical pain, family strife, our own emotions, state of the country, etc. Trying to get rid of thought or an emotional state to get another state are all resistance. If we don’t understand resistance and are constantly reacting to it, then we haven’t understood one of the three types of craving.

According to the Buddha, there are three kinds of craving – sense-craving, craving for a future state, and craving to get rid of.

Determine to watch resistance and create tiny reminders like leaving a note on your fridge or desk. Every time you resist, use language like ‘this is what resistance feels like’ to understand the craving. This way you’ll get past the reactivity to that mind state. Knowing resistance doesn’t mean you condone things, or you don’t disagree with people. It’s not about the way you engage socially, but how you react inwardly. You could also use the word, ‘non-resistance,’ and then watch resistance. You just keep watching that. This is called dhammavicaya.

Once you awaken to resistance as an object, you’re starting to let go of craving.

Sometimes resistance has a biological necessity. For instance, if your leg hurts, then move. There’s nothing right or wrong about it. For the next year, you’re working to understand resistance as a mind state. It’s easy to intellectualise the teachings. But, this way, you take just one little bit of your mind and consciousness and use the teaching to understand and observe the mind. That’ll bring you into awareness. You’ll be looking at the way the mind works rather than getting caught in the storylines. You’ll also be reflecting on how the mind works. This way, the ability to reflect on your own conscious experience gets better and more refined.