FOREWORDA RUG FOR THE RAFT

I have a rug in my kuti that Ajahn Viradhammo wove and gave to me before he left Britain in the 1990s. It’s a treasured possession – which says something, as my renunciant and itinerant lifestyle means I can’t have many possessions. So, I’m glad to notice that lately Ajahn Viradhammo has taken up weaving again at Tisarana Buddhist Monastery. This was after years of serving the Sangha, building monasteries, offering teachings – and as a craftsperson’s touch, creating furniture for the monastery.

There’s something about weaving that is analogous to the process of Dhamma transmission. It’s about taking threads of experience carefully and weaving them together into a solid and unified whole, according to certain guiding principles. In each craftsperson’s hands, the threads and the weave have a personal and authentic style, and unique forms and patterns may arise – but they are all harmonious, carefully knitted, and form a Dhamma vehicle that inspires and carries us.

Of course, words are the obvious stuff of those threads, but words don’t stand alone: the wise ones arise from the heart, are fashioned by the mind, and delivered at the right time. Being drawn from the heart, true threads of Dhamma go directly to the heart of those who listen. And when they land, they open, not more words, but a felt clear silence. So, a true teacher is not dazzled by words or fascinated with patterns of logic and rhetoric. Nor do they seek to dazzle others. They use what is needed to encourage those they are addressing, to settle, take in what’s being presented, and see for themselves what is revealed.

In the early days of our ongoing friendship, Ajahn Viradhammo and I lived, worked, and meditated together at Cittaviveka Monastery in West Sussex, UK, the first overseas branch monastery of Wat Pah Pong. Along with the rest of the community, we’d gather after puja each morning for breakfast in the one room that had a solid floor and a fire. Luang Por Sumedho would preside over the meeting. After the tea and porridge had been passed around and consumed, and the day’s duties allocated, Luang Por would normally offer a Dhamma reflection. There’d be a pause and then the work meeting would begin.

The meetings, and the day itself, were saturated in the uncertainties of a fledgling community dealing with its own emotional lurches, as well as with the limitations and needs of the physical situation. We had limited skills, and minimal financial support to do the rebuilding of this nearly derelict house in the unpredictable English weather – so there was a lot of discussion, views, and speculations around everything: if we did this … or maybe we could do that … or maybe it wasn’t possible to do this. Meanwhile, time was passing. Ajahn Viradhammo didn’t have a lot of opinions. He would listen, always listen. He was good at that. And at avoiding proliferation. I think that’s what people respected about him, and still do. But after a while he’d stop the discussion with a few well-placed words. One of his conversation-stoppers that I remember was: ‘If my granny had wheels, she’d be a bus.’ After a comment like that, people would pause, pick up the hammers and shovels, put on the work boots, and just get on with it.

Maybe realisation is like this; it’s elusive because it’s so immediate and personally experienced that it’s beyond words, strategies, and theories. Yet, it relies on such guides to steer this fickle heart towards its own understanding. In this respect, the Buddha likened his Dhamma to a raft – a simple, yet sturdy vehicle to cross the floods of greed, hatred, and delusion. And yet, not to be hung on to. Well, here’s another piece to make the journey more comfortable – a book that carries a retreat, in which the threads of kindness, integrity, mindfulness, and discernment are woven to guide the heart through days of introspection. Woven lightly, with love.

The weaver is well-practised and generous. Other willing people have taken his spoken words, and snipped and combed them into a text. Sādhu!

May this offering of pointers and encouragements carry you to your own realisation.

Ajahn Sucitto