A WHOLESOME START

In Theravada Buddhism, certain formalities have been ritualised. A meditation retreat traditionally begins with laypeople requesting the Three Refuges and Five Precepts from the teaching Elder. These seeming formalities are in fact important reminders to all participants of the shared truth and reciprocity in their spiritual path. It also reminds us that there is true happiness and peacefulness in leading ethical and virtuous lives.

THE THREE REFUGES

In Buddhism, the Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha are collectively considered as the Triple Gem that protects and guides us on a wholesome path. It is a convention to take refuge in these pillars of faith before observing the precepts. So, we take refuge in the historical Gautama Buddha, his teachings (Dhamma), and his disciples (Sangha) who are leading wholesome, virtuous lives. But this is not a mere act of sentimentality. Reciting the chant together is a beautiful exercise in recollecting wholesome qualities and the teachings. Taking refuge in the Buddha can be seen as remembering the potential in all of us to awaken to how things are, just like the Buddha. Similarly, taking refuge in the Dhamma can be considered as a skilful reminder of the truth that awareness is apparent here and now and is timeless. Taking refuge in the Sangha indicates our commitment to lead virtuous, harmless lives.

Following the refuges, a layperson, on behalf of the group, requests the monastic to offer the precepts, a set of five or eight moral principles. These principles remind us, in a formal way, of the lifestyle and spiritual work we have taken on.

The five training principles, in brief, are to refrain from: harming living creatures, taking that which is not given or stealing, sensual indulgence, unkind or false speech, and intoxication that leads to heedlessness.

The traditional interpretation of the third precept – Kāmesu micchācārā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi – is, ‘I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct.’ I prefer to use the term, ‘sensual indulgence,’ to broaden the scope of this precept, making it applicable to all aspects of the sensual world. Linguistically, kāma refers to any kind of pleasure, enjoyment, and desire. It is usually accompanied by an emotional longing. In Theravada cultures, kāma has, over time, become restricted to sexual desire.

I trained in Thailand and have many Sri Lankan and Asian friends who are deeply connected to Buddhist culture. They relate earnestly and beautifully to the ritual of taking precepts, especially when it is done in a communal setting. The moral principles are lovely to recite together. However, if you are from a Western secular background and unfamiliar with these practices, do not worry, as they are not necessary. There is an inherent beauty in rituals when they are offered with a sincere heart, rather than being a forceful recitation of a cultural artefact. While you do not need my permission to observe precepts, the heartfelt requesting and taking of them is a beautiful custom for moral beings to share. It gladdens the mind.

There is, in this group ritual, a recognition and a formal sense of determination that all of us who are participating in this retreat, are going to undertake to live in a way that is respectful of each other, kind to each other, and honest to each other, as well as live with a sense of restraint.

THE EIGHT PRECEPTS

Typically, when we attend a retreat or visit a monastery, we undertake the Eight Precepts. In that instance, the third precept focuses on celibacy instead of fidelity:

Abrahmacariyā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from any intentional sexual activity.

The sixth precept is about abstaining from eating at inappropriate times.

Vikālabhojanā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi.

I undertake the precept to refrain from eating at inappropriate times.

Both celibacy and limiting food consumption to certain periods of the day are not concerned with morality. These precepts stimulate awareness of renunciation and ‘non-distraction’.

The idea behind the sixth precept is to refrain from using food to distract yourself from boredom or disinterest with the way things are. We train ourselves to use food as a nutriment to take care of the body rather than as a distraction. In that way, the sixth precept is designed to simplify our lives.

Calmness in restraint

Due to current health advisories, you are attending this retreat virtually from your own homes. You all must individually balance your responsibilities towards your family and participating in this retreat. It’s easy to attend if you are on your own. However, if you are living with other family members, remember they are important too. You don’t want to ‘weird them out’ by only eating dark chocolate or cheese in the evenings. In that case, restraint would be to set boundaries. For instance, you can determine to follow a retreat schedule and eat only at specific times or within a certain period. When you’re outside this suggested schedule, watch the desire to distract yourself with food. While it won’t be morally wrong to eat after midday, the Eight Precepts are designed to help calm and settle the mind. You are training yourself to refrain from reacting to impulses of restlessness.

The same idea applies to entertainment, which is discussed in the seventh precept:

Nacca-gīta-vādita-visūkadassanāmālā-gandha-vilepana-dhāraṇa-maṇḍana-vibhūsanaṭṭhānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi.

I undertake the precept to refrain from entertainment, beautification, and adornment.

Today, you have access to a lot of media. Some of them are good, while some are unwholesome and horrible. During this retreat, try to not let the world of media stimulate your mind. Notice that whatever grabs your attention on those screens are compelling, but nonetheless distracting. Again, watching TV or YouTube is not a moral issue, but at some point, especially on a retreat, you want to look at the desire to distract yourself.

There’s nothing right or wrong about distractions – but notice this type of energy that keeps you pulled into the world of experience. When you notice the desire to step outside the precept or boundary, you can be fully conscious of that pull of sense experience without trying to get rid of it. In a witnessing posture, you can see the distraction as a desire. Your mind will start to calm down as the noticing deepens.

Let me add a note of realism. You may not be in a position to avoid all forms of media during this virtual retreat. For example, if you are a doctor, you’ll need to answer emails from patients. Just consider how you can reduce distractions on this retreat.

Sense experience is neither right nor wrong. When you’re in nature, the tall trees, the clear skies, or the movement of squirrels can be calming and uplifting. These types of sense experiences neither agitate the mind nor leave a lot of residues.

Skilful engagement with sense experiences can lead to calm. Unskilful engagements can cause agitation. When I hear people talk about politics, their stress is apparent. Why discuss it? What is the point of the discussion? I guess you must be informed, but do you really need to be so politically informed?

A lot of toxic stuff can come into the mind from all kinds of sources, so protect it. Fill your mind with wholesome thoughts. For this seven-day retreat, adopt a monastic lifestyle in your home, if you can.

REQUESTING THE THREE REFUGES & THE FIVE/EIGHT PRECEPTS

[After bowing three times, with hands joined in añjali, recite the below]

Mayaṃ Bhante tisaraṇena saha pañca/aṭṭha sīlāni yācāma Dutiyampi mayaṃ Bhante tisaraṇena saha pañca/aṭṭha sīlāni yācāma

Tatiyampi mayaṃ Bhante tisaraṇena saha pañca/aṭṭha sīlāni yācāma

We/I, Venerable Sir,

request the Three Refuges and the Five/Eight Precepts.For the second time,We/I, Venerable Sir,

request the Three Refuges and the Five/Eight Precepts.For the third time,We/I, Venerable Sir,

request the Three Refuges and the Five/Eight Precepts.

TAKING THE THREE REFUGES

[Repeat, after the leader has chanted the first three lines]

Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa

Homage to the Blessed, Noble, and Perfectly Enlightened One.Homage to the Blessed, Noble, and Perfectly Enlightened One.Homage to the Blessed, Noble, and Perfectly Enlightened One.

Buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi Dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi Saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi

To the Buddha I go for refuge.To the Dhamma I go for refuge.To the Saṅgha I go for refuge.

Dutiyampi buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi Dutiyampi dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi Dutiyampi saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi

For the second time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.For the second time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.For the second time, to the Saṅgha I go for refuge.

Tatiyampi buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi Tatiyampi dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi Tatiyampi saṅghaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi

For the third time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.For the third time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.For the third time, to the Saṅgha I go for refuge.

[LEADER]

Tisaraṇa-gamanaṃ niṭṭhitaṃ

This completes the going to the Three Refuges.

[RESPONSE]

Āma bhante

Yes, Venerable Sir.

TAKING THE FIVE PRECEPTS

[Repeat each precept after the leader]

1Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.

2Adinnādānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.

3Kāmesu micchācārā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct.

4Musāvādā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from lying.

5Surāmeraya-majja-pamādaṭṭhānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs which lead to carelessness.

[LEADER]

Imāni pañca sikkhāpadāni

These are the Five Precepts;

Sīlena sugatiṃ yanti

virtue is the source of happiness,

Sīlena bhogasampadā

virtue is the source of true wealth,

Sīlena nibbutiṃ yanti

virtue is the source of peacefulness –

Tasmā sīlaṃ visodhaye

Therefore let virtue be purified.

[RESPONSE]

Sādhu, sādhu, sādhu

[Bow three times]

TAKING THE EIGHT PRECEPTS

[Repeat each precept after the leader]

1Pāṇātipātā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.

2Adinnādānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.

3Abrahmacariyā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from any intentional sexual activity.

4Musāvādā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from lying.

5Surāmeraya-majja-pamādaṭṭhānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi

I undertake the precept to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs which lead to carelessness.

6Vikālabhojanā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi.

I undertake the precept to refrain from eating at inappropriate times.

7Nacca-gīta-vādita-visūkadassanā mālā-gandha-vilepana dhāraṇa-maṇḍana-vibhūsanaṭṭhānā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi.

I undertake the precept to refrain from entertainment, beautification, and adornment.

8Uccāsayana-mahāsayanā veramaṇī sikkhāpadaṃ samādiyāmi.

I undertake the precept to refrain from lying on a high or luxurious sleeping place.

[LEADER]

Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāni

[RESPONSE]

Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāniImāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāniImāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāni

I undertake these Eight Precepts. I undertake these Eight Precepts. I undertake these Eight Precepts.

[LEADER]

Imāni aṭṭha sikkhāpadāniSīlena sugatiṃ yantiSīlena bhogasampadāSīlena nibbutiṃ yanti Tasmā sīlaṃ visodhaye

These are the Eight Precepts; virtue is the source of happiness, virtue is the source of true wealth, virtue is the source of peacefulness –Therefore let virtue be purified.

[RESPONSE]

Sādhu, sādhu, sādhu

[Bow three times]

THE LANGUAGE OF REFLECTION

The Buddha’s teaching is a reflective one. It is not a doctrine to blindly believe. While blind belief is fine, it isn’t liberating. So, how can one reflect on the teachings?

Imagine two people arguing about the meaning of the word, ‘dukkha’. One person translates it as ‘suffering’ while the other understands dukkha as ‘stress’. These terms are merely conditioned definitions.

Language is tricky. Sometimes spiritual or doctrinal language can result in people taking seemingly opposing positions. Take the above example, dukkha is ‘suffering’ to person A but means ‘stress’ to person B.

Arguing about historical or linguistic accuracy can be a red herring. It can take us away from contemplating and understanding the dukkha in our lives.

When teachers offer words for reflection, listeners may know the word and even its meaning, but they sometimes stop there. You can better understand the word’s value by pausing and reflecting inwardly.

Here’s an example of how we tend to use language. Just before this meeting Venerable Amarasiri (a resident monk at Tisarana) and I were thinking about the word, ‘virtual’. It seems virtual comes from the term, ‘virtue’. Isn’t that strange? Then we tried to find the connection between virtual and virtue. We did find a definition for virtue and the connection between the two terms. The whole exercise was very clever, but it wasn’t really Dhamma because it was not reflective.

Listening with the heart

The reflective capacity we are developing takes the words of the teacher and consciously brings them into our personal experiences. My words may have a different connotation to you. For instance, I may use the word, ‘virtue,’ to describe morality, but to you, ‘virtue,’ may mean something else. Hence the finer points of tone and spirit of the language are worth noting for reflection. Contemplate: ‘What are they talking about, really?’ Focus on the tone, the spirit of the talk and, of course, the meaning of the word(s).

Luang Por Chah would describe this process as listening with your heart. Don’t listen with your head. When listening to Dhamma, the head sometimes goes into a critical, judging, or analytical state. Whereas when listening with the heart, you are open and freely allowing the ideas to come in. It is a receptive experience. With a receptive heart you can contemplate: ‘Where does that idea fit into my understanding of my spiritual practice?’

Attunement

I was listening to a podcast this morning on the rebooting of the education system in South Carolina, USA, during this pandemic. The podcast host highlighted that everyone – teachers, government agencies, children, and parents – were finding it difficult to go back to school after a long closure due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It’s indeed a complex problem. When the host had to take a break, he said, ‘Stay tuned, I’ll be back after the break.’

The phrase, ‘stay tuned,’ caught my attention. That is a good way to look at meditation.

Meditation can be like tuning into something or staying attuned to something. I find this language more helpful than terms suggesting concentration on an object.

Tuned into what, though? I would suggest something wholesome and good that brings happiness and pleasure into the heart. So, tuning in and staying that way for long periods of time would be sammā samādhi (sustained attention on suffering and its end).

In my own practice, I typically tune in with a word. I have a lexicon of reflective words that help me attune to that which is wholesome in the heart.

For instance, I’ve been tuning into ‘affection’. It is a beautiful word and rich in meaning – not intellectually, but in sensitivity.

One of the ways I attune to affection is by looking at the photos and statues in my room. I have pictures of Luang Por Sumedho, Luang Por Chah, my first teacher, Luang Por Liem, pictures of the Sangha, Sri Ramana Maharshi, Jean Klein and many others. They’re all very meaningful to me. When I look at a photo of someone dear to me – be it my mom or teacher – feelings of gratitude and affection arise in the heart. In that moment, I’m not thinking. Instead, I’m tuning into the wholesome feelings in the heart.

I can sustain these wholesome qualities of affection and gratitude both by looking at the photos and abiding with the heartfelt qualities they evoke. When I’m bored, I’ll look at Sri Ramana’s or Luang Por Chah’s photos or light a candle for my mom. This exercise always helps me tune into affection, which is a wholesome feeling.

Tuning into affection

Affection is different from sentimentality, which can become exaggerated and nostalgic. When I’m gazing at a photo of Luang Por Sumedho, I’m neither wishing he was here nor missing his physical presence. Affection is not a thought. It is rather felt in the body. It is a wholesome form of energy or vibration. We could describe this as a note to tune into.

I tune into that note a lot during meditations as well as when observing nature. There is a lot of beauty around me, which can evoke that same sense of wholesome affection. Unpleasant feelings or emotions, such as fear, aversion, or self-disparagement, are also strongly noticed as they arise within this familiar energy field of wholesome affection. At that moment, if I can return to tuning into affection, then the aversive thought or negativity, by contrast, is known and loses its power.

As the practice deepens over time, you will appreciate abiding in the still, loving, caring note of affection. Also, this contrast between negative and wholesome feelings will become sharper. You will be able to give negative thoughts and feelings space to fully manifest as well as attend to them without any distractions.

We can offer something in return

Most of us are guided by and can suffer from a high sense of idealism, as we’re all good people, and want peace and happiness. We wouldn’t be participating in a retreat if that wasn’t the case. Having said that, as soon as negativities come into consciousness, we quickly judge them as not being ‘ideal’ and try to get rid of them. We get caught up in a tussle with them. This is unhelpful.

Therefore, tuning into affection is essentially mettā bhāvanā (cultivating loving-kindness). These days, mettā bhāvanā is seen as a meditation technique where loving-kindness is extended either in four directions to all sentient beings or to different types of people. There is a sense of a self ‘doing’ mettā instead of abiding in it.

I’m trying to use a different word for mettā in the hope that it might prompt a more reflective response in you. So, consider affection. How does it manifest in your lives? Is it dependent on external factors? For instance, is your life only affectionate when you’re struck by some image or person who is kind or brings that out in you? Can you bring affection back into the world? I would say this is what meditation is trying to do for us. It is bringing wholesomeness and goodness into our lives – not only for ourselves, but also to give back to the world.

Sometimes, our actions are like ocean waves that roll into the shore and pull back sand when receding. Is that all we are? Are we just reactive?

When things are wholesome and beautiful, we are affectionate. When they are not, we can become grumpy. Fortunately, there is another way to live. We don’t have to be victims to the wave that is coming in. We can offer something wholesome in return.

Meditation brings goodness into our lives and hearts. Practice enhances and strengthens goodness. Our outward response to the world can then come from that wholesome place.

There is joy in being able to respond to negativity with the attitude of: ‘No, I’m not going to take up that tune. I don’t want to play that tune right now. Thank you.’

This is not a rejection, aversion, or a desire to get rid of negativities. It is more like: ‘Well, that’s a different tune. I’m choosing to go back and pick up the wholesome tune of affection.’

So, what note can you attune to that would take you to wholesomeness? You might call it ‘calm,’ ‘composure,’ ‘collectedness,’ or something else. Use language that is meaningful to you. This contemplative approach to meditation is different from trying to get something. You’re in trouble if you are trying to get some object or have an objective experience during meditation because you’re not in tune with the way things are.

Being in tune with the way things are is the capacity to awaken to this moment in all its complexities, whether good, bad, or indifferent. That is the basic work of the human choir as well as an individual singer. You come into and know the moment. As we say, ‘Awaken to the way things are.’

The instruction to awaken to the way things are is not facile or easy. It’s profound. The language is very elegant. As Luang Por Sumedho says, ‘It’s like this.’ This is an incredibly elegant statement. If you reflect in this way, then you are in tune with the way things are. This is the first and primary consideration of any contemplative life – be it meditative or a life of service.

In your meditations, how do you remember this moment? How does it work for you? Do you use language or imagery, or do you just do it?

From that awakening to the moment, you can begin to know the tune, vibration, and energy that is moving through you. This energy is different from the narrative you’re caught in. The storyline or the past and future kind of self that we always get involved in is not very skilled. For example, if I’m angry or irritated, or trying to achieve an ideal state of ‘non-aversion’ in my practice, then I’m preoccupied, unavailable, and not in tune with what is going on now.

Awakening to the way things are is quite difficult. It’s very different from the habitual pull of self-narrative, which is simply the thinking of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ projected onto the way things are. Being with the way things are is deeper because it is pre-thought. It helps to ‘stand under’ the present moment. It is not coloured by views and perceptions. Take anger, for instance. There’s an important difference between feeling anger and having angry thoughts about someone else.

Luang Por Chah would advise, ‘Sop arom,’ which means, ‘Know the mood of the mind.’ Is it aversion, fear, or some other feeling? Now, knowing the moods of the mind is not a judgement, rather an observation that they can persist as feelings. I’m not saying you shouldn’t feel aversion or fear. There will be times when a negative thought or mood persists because persistence is one of its characteristics.

Emotional signs of liberation

Teachers are going to be stressing on the awakened mind until you die. You must be curious forever. It’s amazing how easily we can forget the awakened mind. We know it, and yet, we tend to forget ourselves in thoughts about the past and future.

I suggest you use your meditation as a platform to tune into presence. You can then refine that tuning by cultivating a sense of composure and collectedness. How would you do that? Would blindly concentrating on something work?

We are heart beings. Our human condition brings with it emotions that are very important in a positive sense. The Buddha often spoke of abiding with the heart, which he called the brahmavihāras (loving-kindness, compassion, joy, and peace). We have a capacity for compassion, caring, and peace. These are the emotional signs of liberation as well as of a successful and fruitful contemplative life. I find the combination of awakening to the way things are and abiding with the heart very good. We can know what the heart is experiencing.

Mettā: How do you understand it?

What word would you choose to describe mettā bhāvanā? What about affection? How would that word become an important part of your meditative life?

Ask yourself, ‘How could I sustain affection? How might that work for me?’ Then take that into whatever object of meditation you use. Obviously, I’ll teach certain objects of meditation. But more than technique, what attitude are you bringing to your meditation? Is it striving? Is it one of falling asleep? Does it have affection in it? Is affection unimportant?

Affection is pleasurable. When you’re going to meditate for seven days like we’re doing in this retreat, it would be helpful if it was pleasant. Now, eating a tub of ice cream could be pleasurable, but would it be a welcome experience if you ate it for seven days?

The pleasure I’m talking about is different because mettā allows things to be as they are, which is beautiful. This way, we allow beauty and pleasure to abide in the heart. Sometimes we assume that we’re supposed to just grind it out to enlightenment. However, an enlightened heart is a happy one. Remember all the great teachers you’ve met. Do they look miserable? They are usually jolly people because mettā bhāvanā is the foundation of their practice.

The Buddha’s teaching talks about suffering and the end of suffering. It is important to remember that the teaching talks about the end of suffering, not just dukkha. Remember that there is an end to suffering. When we abide in the brahmavihāras – the wholesome states of the heart and consciousness that are based on affection, goodwill, and goodness – then we have pleasure in the heart. A happy heart has the energy to investigate and contemplate for long periods of time. So, what is pleasurable in your meditation? Of course, the body sometimes is not pleasurable. It hurts. Is there something pleasant in your attitude? Or is it one of just striving? How would you cultivate an affectionate attitude? Try looking at the photo of a loved one and reflect on the feeling that arose. Did that feel nice? Was it a great feeling? Then challenge yourself by sustaining that pleasantness for, maybe, a breath. The experiment would be to combine an attitude of goodness and wholesomeness with an affectionate regard for one in-breath and an affectionate regard for one out-breath – which isn’t sentimental. It’s hard to do. But if you could do that for a few breaths, you’re collecting and composing the mind, while your heart stays open. You won’t be controlling the mind in a wilful way. Try this experiment and see how it unfolds.

MEDITATION

AWARENESS WITH OBJECTS

Awakening, listen to the sounds around you so that you’re in tune with what’s going on now. The type or quality of sound doesn’t matter. Just be in tune with it. You’re here with it. You know that you know. Just savour the silence of knowing.

Then feel your body. Bring into consciousness the bodily sensations you’re experiencing. Consider the body that’s sitting here with affection and kindness – and stay with the silence of knowing.

You could now localise your attention. Go to the centre of your chest. Feel the rise and fall of the chest with the breath. Abide with a sense of care for this experience.

Then, introduce a picture of someone dear to you. Name or visualise the person for whom affection and gratitude arises (e.g. your teacher). On the in-breath, let that image come into your heart. A sense of affection will naturally arise. Now, just be with the breath with an affectionate attitude.