Title: Cover.cdr
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/from_topsy_turvydom_to_wisdom-2.pdf
Word Count: 10901

From
Topsy-turvydom
To 
WisdomVolume 2
Bhikkhu Kañukurunde Ñà? anandaBhikkhu Kañukurunde Ñà? ananda
From
Topsy-turvydom
To 
WisdomVolume 2

ii
From
Topsy-turvydom
to 
Wisdom
(Volume 2)
An anthology of writings by
Bhikkhu Kañukurunde ¥àõananda
ISBN 955-1255-00-3
Published by:
Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bhàraya
Sri Lanka

Long is the night to the wakeful
Long is the league to him who is weary
Long is Sa§sàra to the foolish
Who know not the truth sublime
                               – Dhammapada v. 60

iii
Copies of this book may be obtained from:
1. Pothgulgala Aranyaya
'Pahan Kanuwa', Kandegedara, Devalegama.
2. Royal Institute
191, Havelock Road, Colombo 05.
3. Mr. D. T. Weragala
422, Welipara, Thalawatugoda.
4. Mr. Anura Rupasinghe
No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy.
5. Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe
No. 26, Havelock Road, Galle.
6. Mr. S.A. Lionel,
140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara.
7. Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe
Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura.
8. Mr. M.G. Hemachandra
17/3, Onegama, Polonnaruwa. 
9. Mr. H.P.M.M. Keerthikumara
Delana, Kuliyapitiya. 
10. The Department of Public Trustee
No. 02, Bullers Road, Colombo 07.
Dhamma is Priceless!
Strictly for free distribution
First Impression - 2012
iv
Dhamma is priceless !
Strictly for free distribution
Published strictly for free distribution
All Rights Reserved
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for sale,
profit or material gain is prohibited. However, permission to print for
free distribution as a gift of Dhamma is hereby granted and no  
further permission need be obtained .
This book is available for free download at
www.seeingthroughthenet.net
Cover designed by: 
Chamith Hettiarachchi
of  Lanka on line (Pvt) Ltd.
Printed by
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd.
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila,Nugegoda.
Tel : 011 4 870 333

v vi
CONTENTS
                          
Preface
List of
Abbreviation
1. Open for Them are the Doors to the Deathless … 1
2. The Nectar 2
3. Time and Tide Wait for No Man 3
4. Taming the Bull 4
5. The Fortress 6
6. The Awakening 7
7. Be a Good Driver 8
8. Along the Precipice 9
9. The Highest Freedom 10
10. The Lion's Roar 11
11. Mark Time! 13
12. The Tug-of-War 14
13. “Attention Please” 15
14. The Target 17
15. Be in Your Element 19
16. A Radical Solution 21
17. A Tall Order ? 23
18. Ease and Dis-Ease 25
19. The Root of the Matter 27
20. The See- Saw 29
21. Narcissus – his reflections on his reflection 30
22. There is Strength in Forbearance 32
23. The Buddha's Tribute to Parents 36
24. Interest and Rest 37
Preface
(to the first edition)
This is the second collection of essays to appear under the title 
'From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom'. The essays are addressed to 
those who are attracted by the 'come–and–see' (ehipassiko) 
quality of the Dhamma having become 'wiser' about the 'topsyturvy' world they find themselves in. The main trend of the 
essays is towards that 'leading–onward' (opaniyiko) quality of 
the Dhamma, highlighting the intensely practical spirit of the 
Buddha's message to the world.
The first volume came out in 1998 as a collection of essays 
written for the Dhamma Web on the Internet – 'Beyond the Net'. 
All those essays as well as a good many of those included in the 
present volume, were written at the instance of Mrs. Y. 
Sirimanne who was the first to set up a web site on Theravada 
Buddhism under the auspices of B.P.De silva Holdings (Pvt) 
Ltd. of Singapore. It was her initiative which paved the way for 
our web-site 'seeingthroughthenet.net'.
May all those who had their share in the burden of offering this 
gift of Dhamma to the world, share in the accruing merits!
May they attain the bliss of Nibbàna!
                                       – Bhikkhu Kañukurunde Ñà? ananda   
Pothgulgala âranyaya,
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara
Devalegama
Sri Lanka                                     September 2011 (B.E. 2555)

vii viii
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
M.N Majjhima Nikàya
S.N. Sa§yutta Nikàya
A.N. Anguttara Nikàya
Dhp. Dhammapada
Sn. Sutta Nipàta
P.T.S. Pali Text Society 
About the Author . . . 
Bhikkhu K. Ñà? ananda is a Buddhist monk of Sri Lanka, 
presently residing in a forest hermitage in Devalegama. Before 
his ordination, he was an assistant lecturer in Pali at the 
University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. After entering the 
Buddhist Order in 1967 he has resided mostly in remote 
hermitages. He is the author of the world renowned book 
'Magic of the Mind' in which he compares the illusory nature of 
consciousness to a magic show. Some of his other publications 
are "Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought", "Ideal 
Solitude", "Samyutta Nikaya Anthology Part II" and "Towards 
Calm and Insight".

ix x
'Sabbadàna§ Dhammadàna§ Jinàti' 
'The gift of Dhamma excels all other gifts'
About the D. G. M. B. . . .
Rare is the birth of a Buddha in this world. So rare too, is the 
opportunity to listen to his Dhamma. This conviction has inspired many 
a devoted Buddhist to cherish the Dhamma as something extremely 
precious.
The Buddha has declared that salutary friendship (Kalyàna-mittatà) 
is almost synonymous with his dispensation. The gift-of-Dhamma is the 
link that moulds the bond of this friendship. Dhamma deserves no pricetag precisely because it is price-less.
It is in this spirit that the D.G.M.B. launched its Dhamma-dàna 
movement is 1997. Many a parched traveller on the desert path has had a 
refreshing drink of the nectar of Dhamma free of charge ever since. 
Many an enthusiastic benevolent heart seized the opportunity to 
participate in a genuine act of Dhammadàna. 
Should we always go for things that sport a price-tag? Is everything 
that comes free to us, necessarily worthless? What about the air and the 
sunshine? 
It is in point of merit that the gift of-Dhamma excels all other gifts. 
Dhamma is the nectar that quenches the insatiate sa§sàric thirst of 
beings. The gift of Dhamma is therefore of far greater merit than an 
ordinary gift of food or drink. For the magnanimous-Dhammadàna is 
for ever an unfailing source of altruistic joy.
All enquiries regarding participation in this Dhammadàna should be 
addressed to:- 
Mr. G.T. Bandara
The Settlor, D.G.M.B.,
Royal Institute, 191, Havelock Road,
Colombo - 05.
Fax : 2592749 , 2580564

21

To the all-compassionate Buddha surveying the world with his 
Buddha-eye after his attainment to Buddhahood, the world appeared 
like a pond of lotuses. In a pond of lotuses - blue, red or white - some 
lotuses grown in the water remain immersed in the water, without 
rising out of it. Some others come up to the surface of the water and 
stay at that level. Yet others rise well out of the water and stand clear, 
unsmeared by it.
Like lotuses in a pond, beings in this world are in various stages of 
their spiritual unfoldment. Some are keen-witted, some are dullwitted. Some are good-natured, some are evil-natured. Some are 
receptive to the truth, some shrink from it.
All the same, the lotuses are in the process of their growth from bulb 
to full-bloom. So too are beings in the world as they pass through the 
three grades in their Sa§sâric maturity.
I. Gratification (assâda)
II. Peril (âdãnava)
III. Stepping-out (nissaraõa)
Blinded by ignorance, beings seek gratification within the endless 
round of births and deaths. But there comes a time when they realize 
the peril in this whirling Sa§sâric 'merry-go-round'. Then they seek 
an exit from it and cry for a halt through the din of the fivefold 
orchestra – the pleasures of the five senses.
Lead me from untruth to truth!
Lead me from darkness to light!
Lead me from death to deathlessness!'
It is to them that the Buddha addresses the above assurance -
"Open for them are the doors to the Deathless. Let those 
who have ears, release faith."
"Open for them, are the doors to the Deathless. 
Let those who have ears release faith."
 – Ariyapariyesana S., M.N.

The Nectar
Have a drink - of the Nectar of Dhamma ! 
That is how we of the Buddhist world celebrate the thrice blessed 
Vesak Day.
Dhamma is the non-intoxicant drink that dispels all worldly 
intoxications and quenches the Sa§sàric thirst of beings.
The Buddha points out that beings keep running round and round the 
cycle of births and deaths, because of intoxication. 'All worldlings 
are insane' says the Buddha. Artificial intoxicants only aggravate the 
situation. They make the already mad, 'raving mad.'
Vanity and insanity go hand in hand. The Sa§sàric intoxicants that 
lead to heedlessness are fourfold.
i. The pride of youth
ii. The pride of health
iii. The pride of wealth
iv. The pride of life
Intoxicated by these conceits, beings misbehave like drunkards - 
blind to the realities of life. They come to grief sooner or later crushed 
by the relentless wheel of 'kamma', the moral law of cause and effect.
The Nectar of Dhamma, on the other hand, makes for heedfulness, 
sanity and sobriety. It refreshingly awakens one to the stark realities 
of life, and infuses conscientiousness and sound judgement. That is 
the delicious 'super-drink' that quenches the thirst of craving, and puts 
a stop to this mad careering in Sa§sàra. That indeed is the ambrosia 
which brings Deathlessness. 
'The drinker of Dhamma is ever at ease
With a mind unruffled and pleased
In Dhamma the noble saints have preached
The wise always find delight and peace.'
– Dhammapada v. 79. 'The Wise'

43

Time and Tide  –  Wait for No Man
"Life, personality, pleasure, pain
Join for one conscious moment - which lasts but a while"
The millenium, which proverbially has been around the corner, seems 
to have come at last! See the great fun and frolic at the dawn of the 
New Era! How it kindles fond hopes of prosperity and peace amidst 
wanton destruction of wealth and innocent lives to celebrate it! Are 
we really in for better times?
The moment can only yield, what the moment itself has bred. "Mind 
is the fore-runner of all good and bad mental states". Let this 
moment decide what the millennium holds for us.
We are leaving behind a century of tremendously rapid material 
progress, precipitating an equally rapid downfall in spiritual values. 
Have we anything to learn in retrospect from our successes and 
failures before the chapter is closed?
The Atlantic Ocean is believed to be the watery grave of a once 
flourishing, civilization of a great land mass called "Atlantis". That 
ill-fated continent had attained heights of material prosperity 5000 
years ago through science and technology, but moral depravity had 
undermined its achievements. Man's lop-sided development and 
mental imbalance made way for the great Deluge.
Looking back at our own achievements in the past century, should we 
not ask ourselves -"will history repeat itself?"
"That man infatuated by sons and wealth 
And steeped in the pleasures of sense
Will find himself snatched away by DEATH 
Like a sleeping village by a sweeping FLOOD" 
                                                                                       –  Dhp.v.287

TAMING THE BULL
Mind is like an unruly bull. Put in tether, it tugs and tugs and tugs - 
breaks loose and runs riot. One has to master the art of reining it in. 
Otherwise there is the risk of getting carried away by it. A wrong 
grasp of the rope leaves one with a bruised back.
The all-compassionate and supremely-wise Buddha  – the 
'Incomparable Tamer' – gives us as many as five methods to be 
applied in such a situation. The order of their arrangement is 
psychologically important. Only when the first method fails, the 
second has to be applied and when that too fails, the third, and so 
forth. The range of methods shows his breadth of compassion, and the 
particular arrangement, the depth of his wisdom. Each method is 
exemplified with a simile as a practical illustration easy to remember.
HERE ARE THE 5 METHODS :,-
(i) When in attending to some kind of mental object, one finds 
that evil unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, 
aversion and delusion arise, one should attend, instead of it, 
to a wholesome object of thought. As one goes on attending 
to such an alternative object, those evil unwholesome 
thoughts will be abandoned and the mind becomes steady, 
restful, one-pointed and concentrated.
Simile : Just as a skilled carpenter or a carpenter's apprentice would 
knock out, beat out and remove a coarser peg by means of a fine one-
(ii) If in spite of this attempt those evil unwholesome thoughts 
keep on arising, the danger of such thoughts should be 
carefully examined : 'These thoughts are in this way 
unwholesome. They are in this way faulty. They have such 
and such painful consequences'. By this method also those 
evil unwholesome thoughts will be dispelled and the mind 
made steady, restful, one-pointed and concentrated.

65
Simile : Just as a young woman or a young man, fond of adornment 
would be repelled, ashamed and disgusted with a carcass of a snake, a 
carcass of a dog or a carcass of a human being hung around the neck -
(iii) If those evil unwholesome thoughts still continue to arise, 
one should assume an attitude of unmindfulness and 
inattention.
Simile: Just as a man with eyes, not wishing to see material shapes 
that come within his range of vision, would close his eyes or look 
away -
(iv) If these still persist, one should pay attention to the 
adjustment of those thought- preparations.
Simile: Supposing to a man who is walking quickly, it occurs: 'Now, 
why do I walk quickly? What if I were to walk slowly?' Then he walks 
slowly. But then it occurs to him: 'why do I walk slowly? Should I not 
be standing?' So he stands. Then again it occurs to him: 'Now why am 
I standing? I might as well sit down.' So he sits down. It occurs to him 
then: 'Now, why am I sitting? Should I not be lying down?' So he lies 
down. Just as that man avoids the grosser posture and assumes a 
subtler one -
(v) But if those evil unwholesome thoughts still keep on arising, 
then one should clench one's teeth, press the tongue 
against the palate and pull up, squeeze and put down the 
mind with the mind.
Simile: Even as a strong man would grab a weak man by the head or 
shoulders and pull him up, squeeze and put him down.
     Whoever can train his mind to become steady, restful, one-pointed 
and concentrated by means of these five methods, is a master of the 
rambling ways of thought. Whatever thought he wishes to think – that 
he will think. Whatever thought he does not wish to think – that he 
will not think. He has cut off craving, unhooked the fetters and by 
fully understanding conceit, has put an end to suffering.
                                            – Vitakkasaõñhàna Sutta  M.N. I 118ff

THE FORTRESS
'Many a battle is fought and won at the weakest point in your 
fortress'.
When enemy forces attack a fortress, they usually aim at its weakest 
point. Sometimes they launch a surprise attack hoping to break in 
through what their spies have found out to be the weakest point. But 
if, in the meanwhile, those within the fortress have already taken 
precautions to fortify that vulnerable spot, the enemies will 
themselves be taken by surprise when they attack. Then they will not 
only be repelled but fully conquered and subjugated.
So one's weakest point could well be the starting point on the road to 
perfection. Failures are the pillars of success.
'Even as a frontier fort
Guarded within and without
So should one keep guard on oneself 
Not to let the moment slip by 
For they that let the moment slip by 
Slip down into hell – only to cry.'
                                                                 –   Dhp.v.315

87

THE AWAKENING
Yesterday  = last night's dream 
Tomorrow  = tonight's dream 
Today  = a day-dream
'Dream-like are sense-pleasures' says the Buddha, the Awakened 
One. 'Just as one would see in a dream charming parks, charming 
forest glades, charming landscapes and charming water-ponds, but 
on waking up, sees not a trace of them, even so dream-like are sensepleasures.'   
                  –  Potaliya Sutta. M. N. 
The Buddha has awakened from the Sa§sâric slumber with its 
manifold dreams of sense-pleasures. The image of the dream calls to 
our minds the illusory nature of sense pleasures. Life after life we go 
to sleep in this or that mother's womb – in this or that plane of 
existence. Our fleshly eye opens at birth – but not the wisdom-eye. 
We dream at night and wake up by day. But our day-dream continues 
throughout our lives. We usually wake up on hearing an alarm. When 
death knocks at our door we are alarmed. That is our last chance to 
wake up. That is not the time to pack-up, but to let-go. 'From all that 
is dear and agreeable, there is a separation, a deprivation, a 
change to otherwise-ness'.
                                                                  –  (M.P.S-D.N.)
 'All meetings end in partings’. 
`In a dream one meets another 
But wakes up to see him gone 
So it is with the one held dear
When he is dead and gone
                                                                 –  Jarâ S. Sn. v. 807

BE A GOOD DRIVER
If our life is a journey, the vehicle is our body. The journey is through 
pathways of movement - the four postures: walking, standing, 
sitting and lying down. It is a circuit we make everyday.
To be a good driver, one has to avoid accidents, As toddlers, we have 
had many accidents before we learned to walk upright. But to walk 
the Buddha's Noble Eightfold Path upright, we need more 
mindfulness and awareness.
We tend to be careless in our driving especially at the 'posturejunctions'. To avoid 'accidents' of slipping into unmindfulness, we 
have to be aware at the 'posture-junctions' though it is easy to be 
mechanical and impulsive in the change of postures. This calls for 
slowing down and keener attention.
Walking, he knows, ' I am walking'; Standing, he knows 'I 
am standing'; Sitting, he knows, 'I am sitting'; lying down, 
he knows 'I am lying down'. In whatever way his body is 
disposed, so he is aware of it.
Driving recklessly along the perilous routes of Sa§sâra in our 
vehicle, we have met with many accidents and deaths. So now we 
have to take at least a 'retreat' as often as we can, to learn driving 
slowly, carefully and mindfully through the four postures, paying 
attention to the posture-junctions. That way, we grow in 
heedfulness (appamâda) which, the Buddha says is the path to the 
Deathless.
'Heedfulness is the Deathless  Path
And heedlessness – the Path of Death. 
The heedful do not meet with Death. 
The heedless are as good as dead'.
                                                                        –    Dhp. v. 21
                                                      see Satipaññhàna Sutta, M.N. I 55

109

Along the Precipice
Living in the Present is like walking along a precipice. Utmost 
balancing is required to avoid slipping into the bottomless Past on 
one side, and the endless Future on the other. Both are dreadful 
enough to look into, but this awareness itself should be sufficient to 
make us stick to our path of the Present.
It is truly a Path, meant only for the 'pedestrian', narrow as it is. Once 
we are on it, no distraction should make us falter, as we proceed stepby-step. We have only five guidelines to help us – faith, energy, 
mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. 
In fact, our progress on this narrow and steep path begins with faith 
and ends with wisdom. Where the path ends, is also our journey's 
end. Then there is neither a precipice and nothing to precipitate. 
There is only a TIMELESS-PLAIN of SUBLIME PEACE

THE HIGHEST FREEDOM
Freedom and responsibility go together as a double bind. All levels of 
freedom in the world are bound up with a degree of responsibility. 
Rights and privileges can only be enjoyed at the cost of 
responsibilities and obligations. You are free, but duty-bound.
This anomaly in our worldly situation, is due to our reliance on assets. 
All assets, in the long run, turn out to be liabilities. We are bound by 
the very grasp and hold we have on them. Dependence is mutual. We 
rely on them so much that they demand from us the highest sacrifice.
But is there a freedom that is free from assets? The Buddha says: 
"YES". He described Nibbàna as the 'Assetless' (Nirupadhi). It is 
the supramundane freedom from all assets. The five Groups of 
Grasping – form, feeling, perception, preparations and 
consciousness are looked upon as assets by the worldling. He relies 
on them for his self-identity. Sa§sàric existence is an endless process 
of amassing these assets. The tragedy however, is that one can have 
no mastery over them. In fact, an abject slavery is prided on by the 
world as a petty mastery.
This petty mastery carries with it, its share of responsibilities. One is 
morally responsible for the actions issuing out of one's three doors 
of action - body, speech and mind. The karmic entanglement involved 
in it goes a long way, breeding birth, decay, disease, death, sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief, despair and all the rest of suffering implied 
by the Noble Truth of Suffering.
The way to freedom from this manifold suffering lies through the 
understanding that there is only a conceit of mastery over the five 
groups = the 'assets'. This understanding gives rise to 
disenchantment and dispassion leading to the relinquishment of all 
assets. That way one resigns this petty mastery and wins to the 
Highest Freedom that is 'Assetless'.

1211

THE LION'S ROAR
"The lion, monks, the king of beasts, comes out of his den in the 
evening. Coming out, he stretches himself. Stretching himself, he 
surveys the four quarters. Surveying the four quarters, he utters thrice 
his lion's roar. Thrice having uttered his lion's roar, he sallies forth in 
search of prey.
Whatever creatures in the animal realm, monks, that hear the sound of 
the roaring lion, are, for the most part, stricken with fear, dread and 
terror. Hole-dwellers creep into their holes. Water-dwellers dash for 
the water. Birds fly into the air.
And, monks, even those royal elephants tethered with stout chains in 
villages, towns and kingdoms – even they – burst and rend those 
bonds asunder, and voiding extrements, run helter skelter.
So mightily powerful, O! monks, is the lion, the king of beasts, over 
all beings in the animal realm – so potent, so majestic.
Even so, monks, when a Tathàgata arises in the world, the worthy-ofhonour, fully-awakened, perfect in knowledge and conduct, wellfarer, world-knower, unsurpassed charioteer of tameable men, 
teacher of gods and men, a Buddha, an Exalted One – and teaches the 
Dhamma :
Such is form, such its arising, such its passing away,
Such is feeling, such its arising, such its passing away,
Such is perception, such its arising, such its passing away,
Such are preparations, such their arising, such their passing away,
Such is consciousness, such its arising, such its passing away.
Then monks, even those gods with long life-spans, beautiful and 
blissful, long established in lofty mansions, – even they, on hearing 
the Tathàgata's Dhamma teaching, are, for the most part, stricken with 
fear, dread and terror. 'It seems, friends, impermanent as we are, we 
imagined ourselves to be permanent. Unstable as we are, we 
imagined ourselves to be stable. Not-eternal as we are, we imagined 
ourselves to be eternal. Indeed, friends, we are impermanent, 
unstable, not-eternal, and counted among the self-biassed.'
So mightily powerful, monks, is the Tathàgata, over the world 
including the gods – so potent, so majestic ….. “
                                                                                – S.N. III 84  
    
The 'Lion's Roar' is a graphic depiction of the impact of the Buddha's 
teaching of universal impermanence, on gods and men steeped in 
delusion. Their complacent belief in a permanent self is shaken by it 
to such an extent that they are `for the most part, stricken with fear, 
dread and terror.' This impressive declaration highlights the unique 
message a Tathàgata has for the worldlings caught up in the Sa§sâric 
cycle of births and deaths. It is a clarion call to wake up and see 
things-as-they-are.

1413

Mark Time!
In one's military training, one not only learns how to advance and 
retreat systematically but also to 'mark-time' on occasion. This is a 
discipline in marching on the spot  – left' & 'right', which trains 
one to bide one's time with patience and alertness.
In one's training for the battle with Màra, a meditator also has to learn 
how to 'mark-time'. Without advancing towards the future or 
retreating into the past, he has to march 'on-the-spot ' watching the 
'rise and fall' of sense-objects. 
This marking-time is called 'meditative attention' which requires a 
high degree of mindfulness and full-awareness. If one specializes 
in this kind of marking-time, one can win the battle with Màra without 
even the bother of advancing or retreating,
'

THE-TUG-OF-WAR
Usually in a tug-of-war, it is the one who has the tighter grip and grit 
that wins. One has to hold on and on, without letting go – until victory 
is assured. But there is a tug-of-war which calls for just the opposite 
kind of skill and that is one's final tug-of-war in life.
When the moment of death approaches, we heave, heave and heave to 
hold on to the last vestige of life in us – the breath. We heave only to 
sigh – or rather we heave a sigh, well knowing that the inevitable is 
going to happen. Mâra's grip is tight on the other side and he seems 
determined to pull us on to his side together with all that is ours – 
namely, the five grasping groups.
The total weight of our burden is now lying on Mâra's doorstep. In the 
very next moment we would be dragged into his gloomy den. This is a 
critical moment in which no one can lend a helping hand. Should we 
hold on and yield victory to Mâra's side ?
It is right at this moment that the opposite kind of skill comes in 
useful, – the skill in letting-go. Let go of the five bundles, and Mâra 
is sure to suffer a somersault – going head over heels. This is the grand 
finale in Sa§sâra – victory over Death. In other words, you have won 
the neck-to-neck race with Mâra by a hair's breadth.

1615

"ATTENTION PLEASE"
Attention, in the context of Dhamma, is that 'radical attention' 
which aims at getting down to the root of the matter through insight 
into its source or matrix. It tries to avoid the pitfalls of discursive 
thought which distract and becloud one's vision.
This kind of right attention goes hand in hand with mindfulness 
and full-awareness. Being mindful and fully aware, one can narrow 
down one's attention to the present moment.
In our everyday life, we rarely pay attention to the simple details of 
daily routine. Attention is always regarded as something to be 'called 
for'. We go about our routine work rather mechanically. Our 
behavior is largely impulsive. In our normal lives we feel more 
comfortable in our accustomed ruts and grooves. The hidden 
potentialities for deep insights in the simple details of daily routine 
are ignored.
But the simplest often turns out to be the most profound. One 
awakens to this truth by paying attention to the most ordinary-looking 
activities in one's everyday life, such as breathing, the change of 
postures and answering 'calls' -of-nature. Radical attention reveals 
ever new layers of fresh insight day by day in apparently insignificant 
life-situations. The range of attention extends over the Four 
Foundations of Mindfulness outlined in the Satipaññhana Sutta – the 
contemplations of body, feeling, mind and mind-objects. With 
keener attention the foundations go deeper and deeper.
The disarming beam of keen attention switched on with mindfulness 
and full-awareness, does the work of penetrative wisdom. It is 
dynamic in holding the forces of Mâra (the 'Evil-One') at bay, like a 
skilled swordsman with his parry and thrust.
Insight meditation works on the principle of accelerating attention 
to stem prolificity of thought. Normally, attention is slack in picking 
up mind-objects. The rapidity of thought is a challenge hard to meet. 
To get at the root of a thought, one has to be extremely vigilant. 
Where vigilance is lacking, thoughts simply 'bump-off'and go astray. 
So, like an expert table tennis player, one has to wield the racket of 
attention right at the point of TOUCH. 
'But those who know full well the TOUCH 
And take delight in being-at-peace 
'Tis they by their knowledge of TOUCH 
Are hanker-free and fully appeased.'
    – Sn. v. 737

1817

THE TARGET
The following daily exhortation of the Buddha to his disciples 
stresses the value of six rare conditions conducive to one's attainment 
of deliverance.
"Strive on, monks, without delay,
Rare is the arising of a Buddha in the world,
Rare is birth as a human being,
Rare is the opportune moment,
Rare is the 'going-forth',
Rare is the hearing of true Dhamma,
Rare is the association with the good."
These six rare conditions are stated here in an ascending order of 
importance.
Extremely rare is the arising of a Buddha in the world. Rare as it is, it 
is much more rare for one to be born as a human being during a 
Buddha-age. As a human being, it is still rarer to come by the 
'opportune-moment' with the blessings of the correct environment 
and freedom from physical and mental disabilities. With all those 
positive conditions on one's side, it is rarely that one is able to 'goforth' from home to homelessness in the true spirit of renunciation. 
Even if one 'goes-forth', it is not always that one gets the opportunity 
of hearing the true Dhamma that holds the prospect of deliverance 
from suffering. Granted that rare opportunity, one will still be at a loss 
without proper guidance, unless one runs into that right type of 
friendship – the association with the good. This is  the rarest raregift a seeker of truth can get.
Like the concentric colour-rings on a target, the first five rare 
conditions highlight the value of salutary friendship as the 
immediate condition for one's deliverance. The Buddha's personal 
attendant, Venerable ânanda, on whom fell the duties of a 
receptionist, once tried to give expression to his impressions of the 
value of salutary friendship.
"About the half, Lord, of this Holy Life consists in salutary 
friendship".
He hardly realized that he is modestly underestimating its value until 
the Buddha corrected him with the following memorable words:
"Not so Ananda, surely not so ânanda. Indeed the whole of this Holy 
Life consists in salutary friendship".
So one would not have scored a bull's eye on the target until one has 
secured that salutary friendship which is so essential for making a 
success of the Holy Life.

2019

BE IN YOUR ELEMENT
Whenever we are out of element we feel uneasy. We are quite at ease 
when we are in our element. The most elementary requirement for 
this feeling of ease, is the acquaintance with the four elements – earth, 
water, fire and air.
We can easily sink all differences which make us uneasy, in the 
contemplation of the four elements within and without. How much 
pride and prejudice is kept going in the world by attending to 
differences in external appearance – differences in colour, shape and 
size? All these seem petty and superficial when we contemplate for a 
moment that, after all, we are just bundles of earth, water, fire and 
air. We can sink those petty differences and unite under  the universal 
banner of  'Four Elements'. 
The Buddha has pointed out that the contemplation on the four 
elements within and without, leads to an equanimity which brings 
relaxation and peace of mind. In it, we are one with our fellow 
beings and with the inanimate world around us. Beings, as well as 
the objects surrounding us, challenging in their wide variety and vivid 
colour, fade away in the serene contemplation of the oneness in their 
essential inseparable texture. In fact, even the idea of 'surroundings' 
vanish in that basic concept of oneness and the resulting feeling of 
equanimity.
So all we need to do to get down to this extraordinary sense of  
ordinariness, is to contemplate on those parts and functions of our 
body that represent the characteristics of the four elements – 
solidity, liquidity, heat, and motion. No microscope is necessary to 
convince us of our basic texture. Our hair, skin, flesh and bones tell us 
our affinity to the earth element. Bile, phlegm, blood and sweat are 
representative enough of the water element. Hunger, fever and heat 
remind us of the fire element within. Breathing in and out, we are 
moving with the wind element.
Once this 'elementary' training is over, one can enjoy a wonderful 
feeling of ease in which even the 3-dimensional world melts into a, 
2-dimensional painting of mere colour patches – a painting without  
a framework!

2221

A RADICAL SOLUTION
The Four Noble Truths discovered by the Fully Enlightened One, 
offers a radical solution to the problem of suffering with which the 
world is grappling. The Buddha found that the problem has been 
imperfectly stated. Only the symptoms of the disease had attracted 
the worldling's attention. An effective cure has to be based on a 
thoroughgoing diagnosis. So he had to give a restatement of the 
problem 'as-it-is'.
In the enunciation of the First Noble Truth of Suffering, which is 
something 'to-be-comprehended', the Buddha was thoroughgoing 
and forthright.
" Birth is suffering, decay is suffering, disease is suffering, death is 
suffering, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair are suffering. 
Being attached to the unloved is suffering, being separated from the 
loved is suffering, not getting what one wants is suffering, in short, 
the five aggregates of grasping are suffering."
Last but not least – in short, the five aggregates of grasping are 
suffering. This, then, is the 'Dis-ease'. No doubt this is a 'bitter truth' to 
the worldling – but it is 'to be comprehended', if a radical cure is asked 
for.
What one usually does, is to 'departmentalize' this vast maze of 
suffering and search for a solution in one's departmental files.
If one is to rise above that kind of self-deception, one must be 
prepared to rise above the deception of SELF itself. 
All possible views of SELF are traceable to the Five Aggregates of 
Grasping. Form, feeling, perception, preparations and 
consciousness are the five groups which for the sake of grasping are 
conceived as compact. They are but transient heaps of processes, 
elusive and delusive by their very nature. There is only a semblance of 
stability and a conceit of mastery about them.
Since grasping, clinging or holding on to these five groups is the 
disease, it follows that the cause is craving or desire. The radical cure, 
then, is the abandonment of that very craving – the 'letting go' of it. 
The stress, tension and conflict arising out of that grasping will give 
place to the ease and bliss of Release - NIBBâNA
The Noble Eightfold Path is the Middle Way – the Golden Mean – of 
setting about the task of letting-go. One grasps, clings and holds on to 
something  out of fear. But when one is sufficiently convinced that 
what one grasps, clings and holds on to, is itself fearful, one has no 
choice but to let go. This is the conviction already implicit in the 
definition of Right View – the first step of the Path. It is stated as the 
understanding of suffering, its arising, its cessation and the Path 
leading to that cessation – all in one. Treading the Path, one 
strengthens this conviction and prepares one's mind for the final 
'letting-go'
The supra-mundane Path is perfected in four stages by the Noble 
Disciple to become a Stream-winner, a Once-returner, a Non-returner 
and an Arahant. It is like turning the wheel of Dhamma four times. 
Already as a Stream-winner, one is convinced that there is no 'I' 
outside the five fleeting and fearful groups which promise no 
security. The lingering conceit 'am' – the 'hang over' of the chronic 
sa§sàric disease – is shaken off only at the fourth round when, as an 
Arahant, one puts an end to the entire problem of sa§sàric suffering.

2423

A TALL ORDER?
"Monks, what is not yours, you give up. Giving it up will be for your 
weal and happiness. And what, monks, is not yours?
Form, monks, is not yours. Give it up. Giving it up will be for your 
weal and happiness. 
Feeling, monks, is not yours. Give it up. Giving it up will be for your 
weal and happiness.
Perception, monks, is not yours. Give it up. Giving it up will be for 
your weal and happiness.  
Preparations, monks, is not yours. Give it up. Giving it up will be for 
your weal and happiness.  
Consciousness, monks, is not yours. Give it up. Giving it up will be for
your weal and happiness.
                                                                                        – S.N. III 34
This exhortation sounds like a 'tall-order'. The five aggregates of 
form, feeling, perception, preparations and consciousness are all 
what we HAVE and all what we ARE. How can we afford to give 
them up? Here the Buddha is assuring us that if we let-go of them, we 
will be well and happy. Isn't it like telling a man who is clinging on to a 
creeper for fear of falling down a precipice, to let go of his hold?
Well, the truth of the matter is that what precipitates a fall is the weight 
of the one who is clinging on. The more burdened he is, the heavier the 
thud in landing and greater the pain and peril. But if the five 
aggregates are all what we HAVE and all what we ARE , letting go of 
them, will we be falling at all?
The above order, then, is not so 'tall' as it sounds, for in 'giving-up' we 
are only giving up our attachment to the five groups. It was the very 
tenacity of our grasp that made these a heavy burden. Letting go, is 
getting lighter. That way, we are rising above them, soaring high into 
the sky, well over the imaginary precipice and the chronic fear of a 
possible fall.
`Those who do not accumulate,
Who know fully well the food they take, 
Whose pasture is that VOID and SIGNLESS 
Theirs is the track that's hard to trace 
Like that of birds on the wing in the sky.
                                                                             –  Dhp. v. 92

2625

EASE AND DIS–EASE
The purpose of a hospital is to tend to the sick. Physicians and 
surgeons, nurses and attendants are trained for their jobs along the 
ideals of health and well-being of the society. They are duty-bound to 
bring ease to the dis-eased and as for disease itself, the well-known 
maxim is:
'Prevention is better than cure'
But aren't they really working with a contradiction? If they live up to 
that ideal, will they not run the risk of losing their jobs? If the patients 
are cured too soon, or if no patients turn up at all to fill the hospital 
beds, will not the hospital staff be faced with the crisis of 
'unemployment'? 
Should not the maxim be changed to :
'Prevention is worse than cure?'
This may seem awkward, but this is the paradox of existence which 
the Buddha faced when he 'AWOKE', one memorable Vesakmorning, to the NOBLE TRUTH: 'The Entire World is SICK!'. 
Well aware that this 'bitter-truth' goes against the grain, he at first 
hesitated to preach it. The Peerless Physician -cum- Surgeon knew 
full well, that the 'quacks' will not take him seriously. He also knew 
that the entire `hospital-staff will threaten strike- action, if he went 
ahead with his program for a TOTAL CURE. He will be accused of 
upsetting the hospital 'set-up'.
Truly enough, when he finally decided to preach, out of compassion 
for the world, and launched his supra-mundane Health Program in 
the World-Hospital, he did encounter much opposition. From the 
socio-economic point of view of those who were eager to preserve 
the status-quo, the Buddha had introduced chaos into the cosmos. 
Thrones were abandoned, armies were disbanded and businessmen 
deprived of easy-money. Slaughter-houses, taverns and brothels 
were adversely affected by his moral code. Nearer home – 'sweet 
home' – parents lost their darling children and husbands, and wives 
their ever-loving spouses – all due to the charm of the saffron robe. No 
wonder then, that there was a big outcry in protest.
"  The recluse Gotama is out to deprive parents of their sons, The 
recluse Gotama is wresting away husbands from their wives. The 
recluse Gotama is set on breaching family lines".
The Buddha met this protest with the following mild challenge:
`Thus-gone Ones of heroic mould
Lead the world on with the True Dhamma 
When they are but leaders by righteous means 
What reason for jealousy is there for the wise?
For the Peerless Healer, all what mattered was the Sa§sàric maturity 
of beings. If any being in this Realm of Death could be saved from 
repeated births and deaths in Sa§sâra, he would go all the way to cure 
him. Like any conscientious doctor, he considered it his duty to attend 
to the 'SICK' worldlings promptly, to cure them radically and to 
discharge them the soonest possible- from the 'Hospital -of- the  
World'. 
'Pursue not the meaner ends
Have no truck with heedlessness 
Go not the way of wrong views
Be not a booster of the WORLD!'
                                                                           –   Dhp v.167

2827

THE ROOT OF THE MATTER
"Wrong view, I say, is the biggest fault".
We might wonder why the Buddha makes such a serious statement 
about views when we are fully entitled to our views and opinions. 
Granted that freedom, however, we can't deny the fact that all our 
faults stem from a wrong view of things. This is the root of the matter.
When a seed is planted, its roots suck in moisture and nutrients from 
the earth to produce its own fruit – bitter or sweet as the case may be. 
The roots follow the intrinsic nature of the seed. Even so, one's 
bodily, verbal and mental behaviour is fully influenced by the view 
one holds. One must also face its consequences – evil or good as the 
case may be.
It is this truth that the Buddha tries to put across through the following 
exhortation to his disciples.
"Monks, in the case of a man of wrong views, whatever bodily, 
verbal or mental action he does, accords fully with the view he has 
taken up. Whatever intentions, aspirations, determinations and 
preparations there may be in him, all that will conduce to what is 
unpleasant, unhappy and disagreeable – to what is not beneficial 
but painful. And why so? Because his view, monks is evil. Monks, a 
margosa seed or a bitter-gourd seed or a bitter pumpkin seed thrown 
on moist earth imparts its bitterness, sourness and unpleasantness to 
whatever essence of earth and moisture it lays hold of. Why so? 
Because the seed, monks, is bad. It is the same, monks, in the case of 
that man of wrong view because his view is evil."
'Monks, in the case of a man of right views, whatever bodily, verbal 
or mental action he does, accords fully with the view he has taken up . 
Whatever intentions, aspirations, determinations and preparations 
there may be in him, all that will conduce to what is pleasant happy 
and agreeable – to what is beneficial and blissful. And why so? 
Because his view, monks is good. Monks a seedling of sugar-cane, 
or a paddy seed or a grape seed thrown on moist earth imparts its 
sweetness, pleasantness and deliciousness to whatever essence of 
earth and moisture it lays hold of. Why so? Because the seed, monks 
is good. It is the same, monks, in the case of a man of right view, 
because his view is good.'
                                                                – A.N. I 82
'As one sows the seed
So one reaps the fruit
The doer of good reaps
The fruit of good
The doer of evil
An evil fruit.'
                                     –  S.N. I 227

3029

THE SEE-SAW
We in this world of ups and downs are on a see-saw. Gain comes – and 
up we go, loss comes – we hit the floor. It's the same when honour and 
dishonour, praise and blame, pleasure and pain, alternate in our lives. 
All 'events' range between these four pairs.
To be puffed-up is to come down with a thud. These are the two 
possible extreme reactions to the eight worldly conditions which are 
but transient and trivial. Very often we forget that they are visitors 
who 'drop-in' only to depart – leaving us dazed and amazed.
So unless we receive them with sobriety and impartiality, we lose our 
equilibrium. They pose a challenge to our steadiness – to our 
equanimity. Whenever, we forget the rhythm of a see-saw, we lose our 
balance and come to grief.
Whose mind remains unshaken 
When touched by worldly vicissitudes 
Sorrowless, stainless state secure 
That's the blessing supreme in life'
                                                            –  Maha Mangala S., Sn v. 268

Narcissus
– his reflections on his reflection.
Narcissus was a handsome Greek youth who had never seen his face. 
One day while roaming in a forest glade, he bent down into a pool to 
wash his face. Seeing his own reflection there, he mistook it for an 
angel. Falling in love with the imagined angel, he tried to embrace her. 
The angel disappeared among the ripples but reappeared when 
the ripples calmed down. Again and again he tried, but she kept on 
playing hide and seek with him. The whole day he spent there trying 
but it was in vain. So he went home in the evening determined to come 
back the following day and satisfy his fervent desire.
The following day, and the following day, and the following day, he 
came, but the ripples in the pool foiled his eager attempts to embrace 
the angel. At last he pined away frustrated and embraced 'Death' at the 
edge of the forest pool.
When his grieving friends and relatives found him there, they saw a 
strong smelling forest flower in full bloom on a plant beside him. 
They named it after him in memory of his fateful angelic face, and the 
term `narcissism' found its way into the Dictionary to denote `selflove'.
                                                              A Greek myth – An adaptation
'Just see a world with all its gods 
Fancying a self where no self exists 
Entrenched in name-and-form it builds 
The conceit: 'Ah! This is the truth'
                                                                       – Sn. v. 756 (P.T.S)
********************************************

3231
A post-script on Narcissus.
. . . .  The angel disappeared among the ripples but 
reappeared when the ripples calmed down. Narcissus began to
reflect wisely on the reflection to find out why the angel disappeared 
among the ripples but reappeared when the ripples calmed down. At 
last he realized that an angel appeared only when he looked at her. It 
was only his 'self-image' reflected on water.
Towards sunset he sat at the foot of a tree by the forest pool to take 
stock of his day's reflections. The nominal-form and the formalname of his self-image had been deceiving him all this time. It had 
aroused an erotic feeling giving rise to a mis-perception impelling 
an intention to embrace resulting in an imagined contact and a 
pervert attention. He realized that he had wasted the whole day due 
to his ignorance of the illusory reflective capacity of the water 
surface – doting on the angelic form of his own imagination.
"At every attempt to embrace the angel I have been grasping merely 
an intangible foam-like form. I have been grasping merely a 
bubble-like brittle feeling. I have been grasping merely a miragelike illusory perception. I have been grasping merely a bananatrunk like essenceless heap of preparations. I have been grasping 
merely a magic-like delusive consciousness . . . . . .
Form is like a mass of foam
And feeling-but an airy bubble 
Perception is like a mirage
And preparations a banana trunk
Consciousness is a magic show 
A juggler's trick entire
All these similes were made known 
By the 'kinsman – of – the sun.'
                                                                     – S.N. III 142 (P.T.S)

There is STRENGTH in Forbearance
 Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, spoke thus to Prince 
Dãghâvu: 'Do you, my good youngster, attend on me.' Then, monks, 
Prince Dãghâvu answered 'Yes, Sire', in assent to Brahmadatta, the 
King of Kàsi. Then, monks, Prince Dãghâvu became an early riser 
than Brahmadatta, King of Kàsi, he lay down later, he was a willing 
servant, eager to please, speaking affectionately. Then, monks, 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, soon established Prince Dãghâvu in a 
confidential position of trust.
"Then,monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, spoke thus to Prince 
Dãghâvu: 'Well now, good youngster, harness a chariot, I will go out 
hunting.' And, monks, Prince Dãghâvu having answered 'Yes, Sire', in 
assent to Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, having harnessed a chariot, 
spoke thus to Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi: 'A chariot is harnessed 
for you, Sire, for whatever you may think it is now the right time.' 
Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, mounted the chariot, 
Prince Dãghâvu drove the chariot, and he drove the chariot in such a 
manner that the army went by one way and the chariot by another. 
Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, having gone far, spoke 
thus to Prince Dãghâvu: 'Well now, good youngster, unharness the 
chariot; as I am tired, I will lie down'. And, monks, Prince Dãghâvu 
having answered 'Yes, Sire', in assent to Brahmadatta, the King of 
Kàsi, having unharnessed the chariot, sat down cross-legged on the 
ground. Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, lay down and 
having laid his head on Prince Dãghâvu's lap, and because he was 
tired he fell asleep at once.
Then, monks, it occurred to Prince Dãghâvu: 'This Brahmadatta, 
King of Kàsi, has done us much mischief; he has stolen our troops 
and vehicles and territory and store-houses, and granaries, and

3433
he has killed my parents. This  could be a time when I  could show 
my wrath, and he drew his sword from its sheath. Then monks, it 
occurred to Prince Dãghâvu: 'My father spoke to me thus, at the time 
of his dying: 'Do not you, dear Dãghâvu,  look far or close, for, dear 
Dãghâvu, wrathful moods are not allayed by wrath, wrathful 
moods, dear Dãghâvu, are allayed by non-wrath.' 'It would not be 
suitable for me to transgress my father's words', and he replaced his 
sword in its sheath. And a second time, monks, it occured to Prince 
Dãghâvu: 'This Brahmadattta …….  when I could show my 
wrath', and he drew his sword from its sheath. And a second time, it 
occurred to Prince Dãghâvu: 'My father spoke to me.thus …..  It 
would not be suitable for me to transgress my father's words,' and 
again he replaced his sword in its sheath. And a third time …… and 
again he replaced his sword in its sheath. Then, monks, 
Brahmadatta, the. King of Kàsi, frightened, agitated. fearful, 
alarmed, suddenly got up. Then monks, Prince Dãghâvu spoke thus to 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, 'Why do you, Sire, frightened .... 
suddenly get up ? He said:'As I was dreaming here, my good 
youngster, the son of Dãghãti, the King of Kosala, attacked me with a 
sword. That is why I, frightened, suddenly got up.'
"Then, monks, Prince Dãghâvu, having stroked the head of 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, with his left hand, having drawn his 
sword with his right hand, spoke thus to Brahmadatta the King of 
Kàsi: 'I Sire, am Prince Dãghâvu, that son of Dãghãti the King of 
Kosala. You have done us much mischief. Our troops, vehicles, 
territory, storehouses and granaries were stolen by you, and my 
parents were killed by you. This could be a time when I could 
show  my wrath.' Then monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, 
inclining his head  towards Prince Dãghâvu's feet, spoke thus to 
Prince Dãghâvu: ‘Grant me my life, dear Dãghâvu, grant me my 
life, dear Dãghâvu.'
'How am I able to grant life to a king ?
It is a king who should grant me life.'
'Well then dear Dãghâvu, you grant me life and I will  grant you 
life.' 
Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the king of Kàsi, and Prince D gh u 
granted life to one another and they took hold of (one another's) hands 
and they made an oath to do (one another) no harm. Then, monks, 
Brahmadatta, King of Kàsi, spoke thus to Prince Dãghâvu: 'Well then, 
dear Dãghâvu, harness the chariot; we will go away.' And,monks, 
Prince Dãghâvu having answered, 'Yes Sire' in assent to Brahmadatta, 
the king of Kàsi, having harnessed the chariot, spoke thus to 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi: 'The chariot is harnessed for you Sire, 
for whatever you may think it is the right time.' Then, monks, 
Brahmadutta, the King of Kàsi, mounted the chariot, Prince Dãghâvu 
drove the chariot, and he drove the chariot in such a manner that soon 
it met the army.
Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, having entered Benares 
having had the ministers and councillors convened, spoke thus:
'If, good sirs,.you should see Prince Dãghâvu, the son of Dãghãti , the 
King of Kosala, what would you do to him ? ' Some spoke thus: 'We, 
Sire, would cut off his hands; we Sire,. would cut off his feet; 
….his ears, his nose, …. his ears and nose, …..we Sire, would cut 
off his head.' 
Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, said: 'This, good sirs, is 
Prince Dãghâvu the son of Dãghãti  the King of Kosala; there is no 
occasion to do anything (against him); life was granted by  him to 
me and life was granted by  me to him.'
"Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, spoke thus to Prince 
Dãghâvu: 'Concerning that, dear Dãghâvu, which your father said to 
you  at the time of dying: 'Do not you, dear Dãghâvu look far or 
close, for, dear Dãghâvu, wrathful moods are not allayed by 
wrath, wrathful  moods, dear Dãghâvu, are allayed by nonwrath', what did your father mean ?' He said: 'Concerning that, Sire, 
which my father said to me at that time of dying, - 'Not far’ means, do 
not bear wrath long.
ã âv

3635
 This is what my father said to me at the time of dying, when he said 
'not far', Concerning that, sire, which my father said to me at the time 
of dying 'not close' means: 'do not hastily break with  a friend'. 
This is what my father said to me, Sire, at the time of dying, when he 
said 'not close'. Concerning that Sire, which my father said to me at 
the time of dying. for 'dear Dãghâvu, "wrathful moods are not 
allayed by wrath" means: my parents were killed by a king, but if I 
were to.deprive the king of life, those who desired the king's welfare 
would deprive me of life and those who desired my welfare would 
deprive the king of life; thus that wrath would not be settled by wrath. 
But now that life is granted to me by a king and life is granted to a 
king by me, thus is wrath settled  by non-wrath. This is what my 
father said to me, Sire, at the time of dying when he said: "for, dear 
Dãghâvu, wrathful moods are not allayed by wrath; wrathful moods 
dear Dãghâvu, are allayed by non-wrath."
"Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kàsi, thinking:
'Indeed it is marvellous, indeed it is wonderful that this Prince 
Dãghâvu is so clever that he understands in full, the matter which 
was spoken by his father in brief', gave back his father's troops and 
vehicles and territory and store-houses and granaries and .gave 
him his daughter ….   
                                             – Book of Discipline IV pp 495 ff
                                           (Vinaya Mahavagga Dighàvubhanavara)

The Buddha's Tribute to Parents
“Monks, two persons, I say, it is not easy to repay. Which two ? 
The father and the mother.”
“Even if, monks, one with a life span of a hundred years, living the 
full hundred years, were to carry one's mother on one shoulder and the 
father on the other, attending on them by anointing, bathing and 
massaging while they defecate and urinate on his shoulders – even 
then one could not have paid or sufficiently repaid one's debt of 
gratitude to one's parents.
And even if monks, one were to bestow on one's parents the regal 
splendour of sovereignity over the whole of this great earth with its 
abundance of seven kinds of gems – even then, one would not have 
paid or sufficiently repaid one's debt of gratitude to one's parents.
Why so? Because parents have done so much for their children : They 
gave them life, nourished them and showed them the world.
But whoever, monks, initiates, instils and inculcates the qualities of 
faith in parents lacking in faith, morality in parents of poor morals, 
liberality in parents stingy in giving, and wisdom in parents 
deficient in wisdom – such a one has paid, sufficiently repaid, and 
amply repaid, the debt of gratitude to his parents.”    
              –  A.N. I 61
 
May all sons and daughters follow the Path of Dhamma !

3837

Interest and Rest
Interest takes you half the way. That is the 'root' of the matter – where 
we butt in with a 'But the thing is . . . . “
To get interested in some 'thing' is to get a perch in the fleeting trend 
of thought, the rapidity of which  the Buddha declared – “has no 
parallel”.
“It is not easy to give a simile to show how rapidly thought changes.”
                         –  A.N. I 10
Then how does 'interest' come in?
Interesting as it may seem, interest (chanda) is a euphemism for 
craving (ta?hà). It is a seemingly innocuous representative of craving 
– the lightest shade of it, as it were. It works almost unseen like the 
root of a plant. It is the 'mouse' which controls the 'cursor' – 
attention (manasikàra).
Where interest rests, you find yourself attending to some point of 
contact (phasso) and you become aware of three grades of feeling 
(vedanà) – pleasant, unpleasant , and neutral (sukha, dukkha, 
adukkhamasukha).
Your concentration now picks up the 'thing' of your choice – and there 
you are!
Concentration (samàdhi) is the harbinger of the 'thing' and you are 
either happy, unhappy or bored.
You are now fully involved in it with 'mindfulness' (sati). That is, 
you can be mindful of your pleasure, pain, or boredom.
According to the Buddha, the uninstructed worldling is always 'seesawing' between pain and pleasure. It is the blind alley he finds 
himself in – ignorant as he is.
“. . . . on being touched by painful feeling, he delights in sense 
pleasures. And why is that ? The uninstructed worldling monks, 
knows no way out of painful feeling other than sense pleasures...”         
           – S.N. I 208
But is there an exit from this blind alley? Is there an end to this 'seesawing'?
“Yes”, says the Buddha. You have to move towards the middle – the 
fulcrum – leaving the extremes of pain and pleasure. You have to find 
an interest in the neutral – though it may appear 'boring'. In fact you 
have to go on boring at the middle. If you delve deeper at the middle, 
you can get at the Truth and find an Exit.
It is true that we are usually not 'interested' in the neutral. We simply 
ignore it. We are indifferent. All the same, ignorance lurks there. 
However if we delve deeper at this point with right attention, 
ignorance gets transformed into Wisdom. That is the light in which 
you see the Exit.
At one time, the Buddha instructed the monks as to how they should 
reply to a series of questions likely to be raised by wandering ascetics 
of other sects, concerning the origin, behaviour, and purpose of 'all 
things' (sabbe dhammâ).
“ . . . . When thus questioned, monks, you may reply to those 
wandering ascetics as follows:
“Rooted in interest (desire) friends are all things.
Born of attention are all things.
Arising from contact are all things.
Converging on feeling are all things.
Headed by concentration are all things.
Dominated by mindfulness are all things.
Surmountable by Wisdom are all things.
Yielding deliverence as essence are all things
Merging in the Deathless are all things.
Terminating in Nibbâna are all things.

39
When thus questioned, monks, you may reply in this way to those 
wandering ascetics of other sects”
                                                                       – A.N. V 106f
So after all, interest takes you only half the way, and it is Wisdom that 
takes care of the rest. You are fully at 'rest' when there is no 'interrest'!

All enquiries regarding participation in the Dhammadana should be addressed to:
Mr.G.T.Bandara
The Settlor,  D.G.M.B. 
Royal Institute.  191, Havelock Rd, Colombo 05.
01. Nivane Niveema Volume One 11000
02. Nivane Niveema Volume Two 8000
03. Nivane Niveema Volume Three 5000
04. Nivane Niveema Volume Four 8000
05. Nivane Niveema Volume Five 5000
06. Nivane Niveema Volume Six 3500
07. Nivane Niveema(Lib Ed) Part One (1-6Volumes)  500
08. Nivane Niveema Volume Seven 3000
09. Nivane Niveema Volume Eight 3000
10. Nivane Niveema Volume Nine 5000
11. Nivane Niveema Volume Ten 5000
12. Nivane Niveema Volume Eleven 3000
13. Nivane Niveema(Lib Ed) Part One (1-11 Volume)  2500
14. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume One 13000
15. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume Two 12000
16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume Three 10000
17. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume Four 11000
18. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume Five 10000
19. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume Six 8000
20. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume Seven 4000
21. Hitaka Mahima Volume One 10000
22. Hitaka Mahima Volume Two 7000
23. Uttareetara Hudekalawa  12000
24. Vidasun Upades 8000
25. Chalana Chitraya 7000
26. Diya Suliya 11000
27. Manase Mayawa 4000
28. Bhawana Margaya 14000
29. Towards A Better World  6000
30. Seeing Through  3000
31. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume I  5000
32. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume II  3000
33. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume III  3000
34. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume IV  5000
35. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume V  2000
36.   Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume VI 2000
37.   The Magic of the Mind 2000
38.   Towards Calm and Insight                                         2000
39. Samyutta Nikaya An Anthology 2000
40. Ideal Solitude 2000
41. Nibbana and The Fire Simile 5000
Books Published by D.G.M.B. No. of
Copies* 1. Uttaritara Hudekalawa - Damsak No. 172/173 - (1990) 
-do- (New edition)  D.G.M.B. - (2001)
2. Vidasun Upades - (1996)
3. Nivane Niveema - Volume I (1997) 4. Nivane Niveema - Volume II (1998)
5. Nivane Niveema - Volume III (1998) 6. Nivane Niveema - Volume IV (1998)
7. Nivane Niveema - Volume V (1999) 8. Nivane Niveema - Volume VI (1999)
9. Nivane Niveema - Volume VII (1999) 10. Nivane Niveema - Volume VIII  (2000)
11. Nivane Niveema - Volume IX (2001) 12. Nivane Niveema - Volume X (2002)
13. Nivane Niveema - Volume X1 (2004)
14. Nivane Niveema - Library Edition (1-6 Volumes) (2000)
15. Nivane Niveema - Library Edition (All 11 Volumes) (2010)
16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. I - (1999)
17. Hithaka Mahima - I (1999)
18. Hita Thanima - (2000)
19. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. II - (2000)
20. Pavatma Hà Navatma - (2000)
21. Athi Hati Dakma - (2001)
22. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. III - (2001)
23. Divi Katare Sanda Andura - (2001)
24. Kaya  Anuwa Giya Sihiya - (2001)
25. Mà-Piya Uvatana - (2002)
26. Prathipatti Påjàwa - (2003)
27. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. IV - (2003)
28. Abinikmana - (2003)
29. Hitaka Mahima  II - (2003)
30. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. V - (2005)
31. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. VI - (2006)
32. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. VII - (2009)
33. Budu Samaya Pudgalaya ha Samajaya (2009)
34. Manase Mayawa (2010)
35. Bhavana Margaya (2011)
36. Sasun Pilivetha (2011)
37. Pilivethin Pilivetheta (2011)
*1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought -(1971)
*2. Samyutta Nikaya - AnAnthology, Part II - Wheel No, 183/185 -(1972)
- do - D. G. M. B. Edition (2009) 
*3.  Ideal Solitude - Wheel No, 188 - (1973)
- do- D.G.M.B. Edition - (2010)
*4. The Magic of the Mind - (1974) 
- do - D. G. M. B. Edition - (2007) 
   5. Towards Calm and Insight - (1991) 
- do - D. G. M. B. Edition - (1998)
6. From Topsy - turvydom to Wisdom -Volume 1 - (2003)
7. Seeing Through (1999)    
8. Towards A Better World  (2000)
9. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume I   -  (2003)
10. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume II  -  (2005)
11. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume III -  (2005)
12. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume IV -  (2006)
13. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume V  -  (2007)
14.  Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume VI -  (2010)
15. Nibbana and The Fire Simile  (2010)
* Buddhist Publication Society, P.O. Box, 61, Kandy 
fn!oO .%J: m%ldYk iñ;sh" ;e'fm' 61" uykqjr
By the same author