Title: Deliverance of the Heart
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Deliverance_of_Heart.pdf
Word Count: 15174

Pothgulgala Dhamagrantha 
Dharmasravana Mādhya Bhāraya 
 
 This is to inform our readers that all 
Dhamma books so far written and yet to 
be written by Venerable Bhikkhu 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda will hereafter 
be published by the P.D.D.M.B (Kandy) 
and that the D.G.M.B. (Colombo) would 
not be publishing any of his books. 
 
P.D.D.M.B. 
Kandy 
2013.07.07

i 
 
 
 
 
THE DELIVERANCE OF THE HEART 
THROUGH  
UNIVERSAL LOVE 
 ( Mettā-cetovimutti ) 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
ISBN 978-955-41497-5-5 
 
Published by 
Pothgulgala Dharmagrantha Dharmasravana Mādhya 
Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2015

ii 
 
 
 
Published strictly for free distribution 
All Rights Reserved. 
 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, 
for sale, profit or material gain is prohibited. However, 
permission to print for free distribution as a gift of Dhamma is 
hereby granted and no further permission need be obtained. 
 
This book is available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net

iii 
 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
First Impression – 2015 
Copies of this book may be obtained from: 
1.  Mr. Anura Rupasinghe – No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy. 
2.  Mr.Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
3.  Mr. D. T. Weragala – 422, Welipara, Thalawatugoda. 
4.  Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
   29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
5.  Mr. Sanjeewa Nawaratne 
   308/17 B, Kiriwaththuduwa Road, Magammana, Homagama. 
6.  Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe – No. 26, Havelock Road, Galle. 
7.  Mr. S.A. Lionel 
   140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
8.  Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
9.  Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
    Saman”, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
10. Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
     Jayamanna Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
11. Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
    Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
12. Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
    Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa. 
     Web Site: www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Tel: 011 4 870 333

iv 
 
 
 
 
About the P.D.D.M.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda of Pothgulgala Aranyaya, Kandegedara, Devalegama, 
that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be offered as a 
pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -thirsty world. 
The recently established Trust, officially named “Pothgulgal a 
Dhamagrantha Dharmasravana Mādhya Bhāraya ” centred in the 
sacred city of Kandy enshrining the Tooth Relic of the Buddha, has 
dedicated itself to the task of fulfilling the noble wish. 
 Accordingly, P.D.D.M.B. has taken upon itself the duties of 
publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
‘seeingthroughthenet.net’. Those wishing to participate in this 
multifaceted Dhammadana may note the Account Number of our 
Trust given below. Our readers are cautioned that there is no other 
number in the same Bank to remit their contributions. 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Mr. Anura Rupasinghe  
No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy, 
Sri Lanka. 
P.D.D.M.B.      
Acc. No. 100761000202 
Sampath Bank 
Kandy. 
Tel: 0777-801938 
email: pothgulgala@seeingthroughthenet.net

v 
 
 
 
 
Deliverance of the Heart  
through  
Universal Love 
First Edition – 2015 September 
Sponsored by the P.D.D.M.B.

vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Universal Love 
 
 
‘ To every heart that throbs – 
To every being that feels.’

vii 
 
 
 
Contents 
Prologue viii 
Introduction 1 
Abbreviations 8 
1. The Way to Develop Mettā  10 
2. Blessings of Mettā 12 
3. How to Quell Anger and Dwell on Mettā  14 
4. Five ways of Quelling Malice  21 
5. There is Strength in Forbearance 25 
6. Mother and Child 29 
7. Mettā as a Holy vow 31 
8. Deliverance of the Heart  and Law of Kamma 34 
9. Blowing of the Conch 36 
10. The Salt-Crystal 43 
11. The Right way of Practice  for a Recluse 46 
12. A Doorway to the Deathless 48

viii 
 
 
Prologue 
The Buddha – Fully Enlightened 
Proclaimed to the world 
A Deliverance of the Heart 
Through Universal Love 
 
A boundless love 
Unlimited to all 
Be they frail or stable 
Big or small  
 
Seen or unseen 
Near or far 
Born or to be born 
May they all be well 
 
No narrow confines 
Centred on self 
As dear or hateful  
Or as neutral 
 
No fence for defence 
Or else for offence  
Just a peg in the centre 
To survey the world

ix 
 
 
As above or below 
Or around me to all 
A limitless love 
Unhindered by hate 
 
While standing or walking 
Seated or lying down 
So long as wakeful 
Have mettā at heart 
 
Even as a mother 
Who gives her life  
For her only son 
That he may live 
 
So should one develop 
Towards all beings a heart 
Imbued with love 
Measureless, boundless.

1 
 
 
Introduction 
 The acceptance of the fact that all beings wish to be happy 
is the basis for arousing thoughts of mettā. In developing mettā it 
becomes a spontaneous wish and issues in a few words like “May 
all beings be happy!” One can overcome such negative emotions 
like ill-will, anger and hate which limit, imprison and defile the 
mind and experience a blissful deliverance of the heart thro ugh 
the practice of boundless mettā.  
 The deliverance of the heart through mettā made known 
by the Buddha is a simple meditation, which even a child can 
practice. A child yet unfamiliar with the conventional names of 
directions could radiate the six direc tions with mettā as ‘in front’ 
and ‘behind’, ‘to the left ’ and ‘to the right ’ and ‘above’ and 
‘below’, or else simpler stil l, as ‘above, below and around ’ 
(‘uddhaṁ adho ca tiriya ñcā’). The Buddha ’s advice is that all 
men, women and children should practice this D eliverance of the 
Heart through universal love.  
 Although this is the Buddha ’s behest due to some 
complicated exegesis in the commentarial period, the original 
message of the Deliverance of the Heart through mettā receded to 
the background. Visuddhimagga, (Path of Purification) which is 
regarded as the textbook by meditation teachers today, 
recommends a method of breaking down of barriers between 
oneself and one ’s dear person, the neutral person and the hostile 
person as the  means of at taining the Deliverance of the H eart 
through mettā. This is not at all in accordance with the content of 
the Metta sutta. This mode of exegesis relies on building barriers 
and breaking them down as an approach to that Deliverance of 
the Heart through mettā.  
 The reason for this pervert commentarial trend is a wrong 
attitude born  of an incorrect understanding of the relatio n 
between mettā and friendship ( mittatā). Simply because mettā is 
opposed to ill -will or enmity, it should not be equated to

2 
 
 
friendship or amity. Many meditation masters today begin their 
instructions with the definition ‘Mettā is friendship ’ by taking 
seriously the apparent similarity between ‘mettā’ and ‘mittatā’ 
(friendship). True enough when it comes to pronunciation, mettā 
and mittatā are similar. But the very difference between 
mettānisaṁsa sutta and mittānisaṁsa sutta is a telling argument 
against su ch confusion. The fact that the advantages of mettā, 
which the Buddha has highly praised in the mettānisaṁsa sutta, 
are by far greater and more excellent than those of friendship 
listed in mittānisaṁsa sutta would be clear to whoever  compares 
these two dis courses. Here is a ‘ready-reckoner’ for ascertaining 
the wide disparity between friendship and mettā. 
1. Friendship is private  Mettā is common. 
2. Friendship is inter-personal  Mettā is universal 
3. Friendship is narrow  Mettā is broad 
4. Friendship is a bond  Mettā is a deliverance 
5. Friendship requires  
two persons 
 Mettā can be practiced alone 
6. Friendship is limited Mettā is limitless, immeasurable, 
boundless and great 
 
Mettā to oneself? 
 The Buddha’s injunction is that one should take the axiom 
‘one is dear to oneself ’ as a self -evident illustration and develop 
mettā towards others depending on that conviction. But 
Visuddhimagga misinterprets that injunction and recommends 
developing mettā to oneself as the first step. Me ditations on 
‘Divine Abiding’ (Brahmavihāra) are solely concerned with our 
attitude toward s others. The gravity of the blu nder of ignoring 
this fact comes to light in the Visuddhimagga account of the 
breaking down of the barriers between oneself, one’s dear person, 
neutral person and hostile person. Venerable Buddhaghosa gives 
as a possible instance a case of four mon ks living together of 
whom three represent the dear, the neutral and the hostile to the

3 
 
 
fourth. Then bandits approach the fourth monk and dema nd a 
monk to be killed for some human o blation. It is said that if he 
has broken down the barriers he cannot allow them to take the 
other three nor can he offer himself because self -sacrifice is 
equivalent to not having mettā for oneself! So it seems accor ding 
to this way of reasoning we have to conclude that the Bodhisatta, 
who even as an animal sacrificed his life for others , had no mettā 
for himself!  
  
 The Buddha says that one should develop mettā towards 
all beings with the self -abnegating love of a mother to her only 
son. But Venerable Buddhaghosa recommends a practice of 
mettā, which goes against the spirit  of the Buddha word. W hat 
sort of Deliverance of the Heart ca n that kind of approach lead to? 
In pervading the directions with thoughts of mettā one has to be 
aware of one’s position only as a peg in the center with which to 
survey the world as above, below and all around. Apart from that , 
the Buddha has never sanctioned a selfish attitude of d eveloping 
mettā to oneself. The object of mettā is not a group of persons 
discriminated as one’s dear, not dear or neutral but the totality of 
living beings which the Buddha has presented as five universals.

4 
 
 
The Five Universal Categories: 
  ‘….. ye keci pāṇabhūtatthi 
 ‘….. whatever beings there are 
1. tasā vā thāvarā vā anavasesā 
 whether feeble or stable – without exception  
2. dīghā vā ye mahantā vā majjhimā rassakāṇukathūlā 
whether long or large, middling, short, minute or massive  
3. diṭtḥā vā ye va addiṭtḥā 
whether seen or unseen 
4. ye ca dūre vasanti avidūre 
whether they live far or near 
5. bhūtā vā sambhavesī vā 
whether already come into being or seeking birth 
 sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhitattā 
May all beings be happy at heart.  
 So one should not  get incarcerated within the narrow 
confines of oneself, one’s dear, neutral and hostile marked out by 
a selfish standpoint but pervade or radiate the six directions with 
mettā, towards the above five universal categories. In pervading 
the directions, the method followed at present is to include names 
of the directions in the chant in an unrealistic and imaginary way, 
as for i nstance “May all beings in the E astern direction be well 
and happy! May all beings in the Western direction be well and 
happy!” and so on. However, in the discourses we never find any 
such mention of directions by name when it comes to this 
particular meditation technique. On the other hand, the method of 
developing mettā cetovimutti recommended there is the pervasion 
of one direction ( ékaṁ disaṁ), the second direction ( dutiyaṁ 
disaṁ), the third  direction ( tatiyaṁ disaṁ), the fourth direction 
(catutthiṁ disaṁ), above ( uddhaṁ) and below ( adho) with

5 
 
 
thoughts of mettā. The implication is that it should be realistic 
and experiential taking the direction from where one sits. The 
conventional names of directions are irrelevant.  
From Limit to Limitlessness 
 What we mean by ‘experience’ in this context is not only 
the limited visible range of the meditator according to the above 
mentioned six-fold reckoning, but the limitless range a meditator 
could mentally experience with his ‘mind’s eye ’ based on that 
limited visual range. The preliminary perception of the six 
directions taken with one ’s fleshly eye could be made the basis 
for encompassing all being seen and unseen, big and small. The 
open eye can see only what is there in the limited visual range. 
The closed eye can take in a limitless range. To extend the 
thought of mettā from limit to limitlessness and from the finite to 
infinity is to experience mentally. The chanting of names of the 
directions or reciting a list of provinces and countries is not the 
correct way of developing mettā. The directional pervasion of 
mettā as upwards, downwards and all around for which the 
scaffolding is put up with oneself at the centre , ends with the 
measureless thought of mettā that is so pervasive as to obliterate 
the centre itself. 
Not ‘duty-bound’ – but everyday ‘pay-day’ 
 We invite the readers to estimate the practical value of the 
ideas presented in this little volume with an unbiased mind 
instead of dismissing them as a revolutionary attempt to go 
against tradition. By introducing the Deliverance of the Heart 
through mettā which had long been relegated to the background, 
as a simple but fruitful meditation with immense benefit  which 
even a little child, a woman or a man could practice, might bring 
about a great spiritual revival in the society. Not only to the 
teachers and pupils in  the field of education but also to the 
employers and the employed in other vocations too, t his simple 
thought of mettā would go a long way in helping them to

6 
 
 
overcome the pernicious intolerant atmosphere in the society 
today. If the set of advantages list ed in Mettānisaṁsa Sutta  is 
held out as the day-to-day profits in developing mettācetovimutti, 
even in the state service the concept of duty would be displaced 
by an honest and si ncere attitude of ‘self-service.’ Thereby an 
encouraging prospect of daily-bonus in reaping the advantages of 
meditation would emerge. Be it at home, or on the way, while in 
the vehicle or at school, in the office or in the hospital, this 
spontaneous wish of Universal Love could bring tolerance , 
happiness and contentment even to a life full of hardship  and dire 
need. 
True Wealth 
 The pervert  practice of developing mettā to oneself 
sanctioned by tradition h as gone to the extent of recommen ding 
the development of mettā towards one’s limbs. It is like someone 
who had lived away from his home showing ‘hospitality’ to 
himself upon his retu rn! How can one who goes on  doing mettā 
to one’s own body develop repulsiveness of one ’s own body as a 
meditation for attaining Deliverance from saṁsāra? The 
traditional method of devel oping mettā recommends a system of 
first piling up a store of mettā by developing it towards oneself 
and then distributing it to one ’s dear person, neutral person and 
hostile person. It seems that a lack of understanding of the 
difference between worldly wealth and spiritual wealth has 
created this confusion of values. If one esteems the positivistic 
attitude from the materialistic poin t of view, one should first 
become wealthy by hook or by crook and then be a philanthropist. 
But according to the spiritual standpoint which recognizes charity 
and liberality as a ‘noble wealth ’ (‘ariyadhana’) one becomes 
‘wealthy’ to the extent of being unselfish. That child, that woman 
and that man who becomes wealthy  by pervading mettā in all 
directions towards  the five universal s cited in the Metta sutta 
recalling the attitude of a mother who sacrifices her life for her 
darling child, becomes spirituall y wealthy. There is nothing to

7 
 
 
prevent one from directing that powerful beam of mettā to one 
person on  occasion, drawing freely from that vast store of 
spiritual wealth. 
 Queen Sāmāvati was a female lay -disciple who was 
declared by the Buddha as the foremo st among  the ‘Mettādwellers’. The Buddhist  literature records the miracles she 
performed through the thought of mettā. If there is a trend 
towards developing ‘mettā cetovimutti ’ emulating such 
exemplary characters , a sincere and  benevolent attitude could 
emerge in place of the narrow, self -centered, competitive one -
upmanship prevalent in t he society today. It would be a 
deliverance to those sections of the society oppressed  by 
numerous social iniquities.  
A Doorway to Nibbāna 
 The Deliverance of  the Heart through universal love 
would not only be a doorway to that social lib eration sought after 
by present -day sociologists, but would serve as a doorway to 
liberation from Saṁsāra. According to the Aṭṭhakanāgara sutta  
of the Majjhima Nikāya, it is one of the eleven doorways to 
Deathless Nibbāna (amatadvārā).  That is because one ca n 
realize the supreme bliss of D eathlessness by developing insight 
meditation based on mettā cetovimutti. The Deliverance of the 
Heart through mettā has in it a unification of the mind by an 
experience of oneness based on the universal tendency in all 
living beings na mely, the desire for happiness – disregarding the 
multifariousness of beings in general. It is easy to direct a 
concentrated mind go ne to onenes s from multiplicity , to insight 
meditation. Mettā cetovimutti enables one to overcome hatred out 
of the three taints greed , hatred and delusion as well as ill -will 
which is one of the five hindrances. In that sense too it is a 
doorway to Nibbāna.

8 
 
 
 ‘Loving Kindness’ or ‘Universal Love’? 
 In my earlier writings, I often used the more widely 
accepted term ‘Loving Kindness’ for ‘mettā’.  But it is a hybrid 
term between ‘mettā’ and ‘karunā’ (compassion or kindness), 
which could easily be confused. On the  other hand, the word 
‘love’ has overtones rather monopolized by carnal love. In this 
work I have opted for the less obnoxious term ‘Universal Love’, 
as it is a key to the sublimation  of a basic impulse nearer the 
Heart. 
 ‘Heart’ or ‘Mind’? 
 The rendering ‘Deliverance of the Heart’ for ‘cetovimutti’ 
might be a poser to some scholars. The word ‘ceto’ has 
something of an ambivalence in meaning between ‘mind’ and 
‘heart’ as pointed out by lexicons. In fact the term cetovimutti is 
usually translated as ‘Deliverance of the Mind’. Granted that in 
Buddhist psychology it is not always easy to put some terms into 
watertight compartments as regards definition, ‘cetovimutti’ upon 
occasion could be rendered by ‘Deliverance of the Mind ’. But 
when it comes to the subject of Divine Abidings (‘Brahmavihāra’) 
I prefer the term ‘HEART’. Without getting involved in the 
insoluble problems in modern psychology  regarding the seat of 
the mind (cardiac theory),  I propose to address this little volume 
to the ‘Heart’ rather than to the ‘Mind’. It is no secret that in this 
war-torn world there is a rapacious and heartless quest for 
knowledge (‘science’!) and a disastrous neglect of the HEART – 
which cannot be ‘By-passed’! 
Let this humble gift of Dhamma contribute its mite towards the 
fulfillment of that crying need and usher in World Peace.

9 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
 
A. Anguttara Nikāya 
Dhp. Dhammapada 
G.S. Gradual Sayings 
M. Majjhima Nikāya 
S. Saṁyutta Nikāya 
Sn. Sutta Nipāta 
Thag. Theragāthā

10 
 
 
1. The Way to Develop Mettā 
‘….. sukhino vā khemino hontu 
 ‘….. may they be happy and safe 
sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhitattā 
 may all beings be happy at heart  
ye keci pāṇabhūtatthi 
 whatever beings there are 
tasā vā thāvarā vā anavasesā 
 whether frail or stable – none excepted 
dīghā vā ye mahantā vā 
 whether long or large 
majjhimā rassakāṇukathūlā 
 middling, short, minute or massive  
diṭṭhā vā ye va addiṭṭhā 
 whether seen or unseen 
ye ca dūre vasanti avidūre 
 those dwelling far or near 
bhūtā vā sambhavesī vā 
 born or seeking birth 
sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhitattā 
may all beings be happy at heart 
na paro paraṁ nikubbetha 
 Let one not deceive another 
nātimaññetha katthaci naṁ kañci 
 nor despise anyone anywhere 
byārosanā paṭighasañña 
 in anger and with malicious intent  
nāññamaññassa dukkhamiccheyya 
 let no one wish ill for another

11 
 
 
mātā yathā niyaṁ puttaṁ – āyusā ekaputtamanurakkhe 
 Just as a mother would protect her son – her only son at 
 the risk of her life 
evampi sabbabhūtesu – mānasaṁ bhāvaye aparimāṇaṁ 
 so let him towards all beings develop a boundless heart 
mettañca sabbalokasmiṁ mānasaṁ bhāvaye aparimāṇaṁ 
 a mind imbued with mettā in the whole world, let one 
 develop boundlessly 
uddhaṁ adho ca tiriyañca 
 upward, downward and across 
asambādhaṁ averaṁ asapattaṁ 
 unimpeded with no hate or enmity 
 tiṭṭhaṁ caraṁ nisinno va 
 whether standing, walking or seated 
sayāno vā yāvatassa vigatamiddho 
 or lying down as long as one is awake 
etaṁ satiṁ adhiṭṭheyya 
 let one resolve this mindfulness 
brahmametaṁ vihāraṁ idhamāhu 
 this, they say is the Divine Abiding here.  
   – Excerpts from Metta Sutta. Sn. p 25f.

12 
 
 
2. Blessings of Mettā 
I. “Mettāya  bhikkhave cetovimuttiyā  
“Monks, the Deliverance of the Heart through Universal 
Love 
 āsevitāya – when cultivated 
 bhāvitāya – when developed 
 bahulīkatāya – when much practiced 
 yānikatāya – when made a vehicle 
 vatthukatāya – when made a foundation 
 anuṭṭhitāya – when established  
 paricitāya – when consolidated  
 susamāraddhāya – when properly undertaken  
 
 ekādasānisamsa pāṭikaṅkhā 
 eleven advantages maybe expected.  
 
1. sukhaṁ supati – sleeps well 
2. sukhaṁ paṭibujjhati – wakes up refreshed  
3. na pāpakaṁ supinaṁ passati  – has no evil dreams 
4. manussānaṁ piyo hoti  –  He is dear to human beings 
5. amanussānaṁ piyo hoti  –  He is dear to non-human 
beings 
6. devatā rakkhanti – deities protect him 
7. nāssa aggi vā visaṁ vā satthaṁ vā kamati – neither 
fire nor poison nor weapon can harm him 
8. tuvaṭaṁ cittaṁ samādhiyati – Mind gets easily 
concentrated 
9. mukhavaṇṇo vippasīdati  – facial complexion 
becomes pleasing 
10. asammūlho kālaṁ karoti – dies unconfused

13 
 
 
11. uttariṁ appaṭivijjhanto brahmalokūpago hoti – If one 
penetrates no further, gets born in the Brahma world.  
  – Excerpts from Mettānisansa Sutta. A. V 342 
   
II. yo ca mettaṁ bhāvayati 
appamāṇaṁ patissato 
tanusaṁyojanā honti 
passato upadhikkhayaṁ 
 
Whoever develops mettā 
Measurelessly, mindfully 
His fetters get thinned out 
As he sees the destruction of ‘assets’ 
 
Ekampi ce pāṇamaduṭṭhacitto 
Mettāyati kusalo tena hoti 
Sabbepi pāṇe manasānukampaṁ 
Pahūtamariyo pakaroti puññaṁ 
 
Even for one being – with ungrudging mind  
One has mettā – he is skillful to that extent 
If for all beings he has sympathy at heart 
That noble one would heap up much merit 
  – A. IV 151f. 
 
III.   “Monks, he who makes an offering of hundred 
pots of rice in the morning, hundred pots of rice at noon and 
hundred pots of rice in the evening and he who develops 
mettā in the morning for as long as it takes to pull a cow ’s 
udder, develops mettā at noon as long as it takes to pull a 
cow’s udder and develops mettā in the evening as long as it 
takes to pull a cow ’s udder, out of these two , the latter ’s 
(gift of) mettā is more fruitful than the former’s offering.

14 
 
 
  Therefore, monks, thus should you train 
yourselves: ‘The Deliverance of the Heart through mettā 
would be developed by us, much practiced, made a vehicle,  
a foundation , established, consolidated and properly 
undertaken.’ Monks, thus should you train yourselves.” 
     – Ukkā Sutta, S. II 264 
 
IV. “Supposing, monks, there is a spear with a sharp point. A 
man comes saying: ‘I will blunt, bend and twist this sharp -
pointed spear with my palm or wrist.” 
“What do you think monks, is that man able to blunt, bend 
or twist that sharp-pointed spear with his palm or wrist?” 
“No, indeed, Venerable Sir.” 
“Why is that?” 
“That spear Venerable Sir, is sharp-pointed. It is not easy to 
blunt, bend or twist it with the palm or wrist. That man will 
only get wearied and vexed by it. 
Even so, mo nks, by whomsoever the Deliverance of the 
Heart through mettā is developed, much practiced, made 
like a vehicle, a foundation, established, consolidated and 
properly undertaken, if a non -human being thinks of 
distracting his mind only that non -human being himself 
would get wearied and vexed.  Therefore, monks, thus 
should you train yourselves: ‘The Deliverance of the Heart 
through mettā would be developed by us, much practiced, 
made a vehicle, a foundation, established, consolidated and 
properly undertaken. ’ Monks, thus should you train 
yourselves.” 
  – Satti Sutta, S. II 265

15 
 
 
3. How to Quell Anger and Dwell on Mettā  
1.  (i). Remember the Wise-old “SAW” 
“Even were bandits savagely to sever you limb  from limb 
with a two handled saw, he who entertained hate in his 
heart on that account would not be one who carried out 
my teachings.”  
  – Kakacūpama Sutta, M. I 21  
 
      (ii). “Uppajjate sace kodho 
    āvajja kakacūpamaṁ” 
 – Brahmadatta Thera, Thag.  
 
If anger arises, reflect on the simile of the “SAW.” 
2. Bear up! Like a “dumb-bell” (but with a difference). 
  
 “sace neresi attānaṁ 
  kaṁso upahato yathā 
  esa pattosi nibbānaṁ 
  sārambho te na vijjati” 
       – Daṇḍa Vagga, Dhp.  
 
 “If you restrain yourself like a broken bronze, you have 
already reached appeasement (nibbāna) and there will be no cross 
talk for you.” 
 
(Note: A broken bronze vessel does not give out reverberations or 
echoes, when struck.)

16 
 
 
3. A protective Mantra:  
(Note: Repeat this formula non -stop in times of danger to your 
Mettā. Mettā = Universal Love) 
For a practical illustration, see Puṇṇovāda Sutta, M III 267. 
4. A reliable triumvirate:  
Khanti – mettā – anuddayatā 
 Forbearance – Universal Love – Sympathy.  
5. ‘I see no error made wh ich I could not have made Myself ’ * 
(i.e. given the same amount of delusion)  
* An “antiseptic” for rash itchings  and irritations that may come 
up while handling the suffering, erring, humanity. 
Symptoms: nausea, c -a-r-ping (not coughing), ‘holier than thou ’ 
feeling, stiffness, righteous indignation. 
Contra-indications: Discontinue treatment if “self-pity” sets in.  
Directions for use: Just rub it in. 
6. “Large-heartedness” – the way to Deliverance of the heart 
through Mettā. (Mettā cetovimutti) 
(i). Accommodation – no problem 
 (Accept them with all their weaknesses) 
(ii). Reception – Cordial 
(Receive them with the warmth of friendship) 
(iii). Atmosphere – Free 
(Let them ventilate their grievances) 
7. Switch on to Mettā for a floodlit scene of a gloomy world: 
“Let them abuse me, beat me, kill me –  
  I’ll have Mettā  – Unconditional Mettā.”

17 
 
 
“Subhaparamāhaṁ bhikhave mettācetovimuttiṁ vadāmi” 
“Monks, I say that Deliverance of the Heart through Mettā   
has beauty as the highest aim.” 
      – S. V 119 
 
8. “Touch” the feeble and the stable with Mettā  
 “mettāya phasse tasathāvarāni”  – Sāriputta Sutta, Sn. 
 
9. Veto all hateful impul ses on the basis of the 5 ways of 
quelling malice (āghāta – paṭivinaya).  – A. III 185 
 
(i). “Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards 
him universal love (mettā) should be developed. 
(ii). “Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards 
him compassion (karuṇā) should be developed. 
(iii). “Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards 
him equanimity (upekkhā) should be developed. 
(iv). “Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards 
him unmindfulness and inattention ( asati amanasikāro) 
should be exercised. 
(v). “Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards 
him the attitude of taking into ac count the fact that he is 
the owner of his own deeds ( kammassakatā) should be 
adopted. “That Venerable one is the owner of his own 
deeds, heir to his own deeds, deeds are the matrix for 
him, deeds are his kin, deeds are his refuge, he will 
become the heir of whatever he does.”

18 
 
 
10. The “bad-tempered” are good whetstones for 
Forbearance.  
“Ubhinnamatthaṁ carati 
attano ca parassa ca 
paraṁ saṁkupitaṁ ñatvā 
yo sato upasammati” 
   – Sakka Saṁyutta, S. I 122 
 “He works for the weal of both 
 his own and of the other 
 who on seeing the other enraged 
 mindfully calms himself down.” 
11.  Get rid of your worn-out skin! 
One occasion for Anger is injured self -pride. Supposing you 
make a blunder and your friends are poking fun at you. The 
best thing to do now , is to have a hearty laugh at yoursel f – 
to join with them in poking f un at yourself. Your friends will 
soon realize that now there is no one to po ke fun at – no real 
object for any malicious delight – for they are no w pelting 
stones at the discarded worn-out skin of a serpent.  
“Yo ve uppatitaṁ vineti kodhaṁ 
visaṭaṁ sappavisaṁ va osadhehi 
so bhikkhu jahāti orapāraṁ 
urago jiṇṇamiva tacam purāṇaṁ” 
   – Uraga Sutta, Sn. 
 
He who can curb his wrath 
as soon as it arises 
like timely antidote will check 
snake’s venom that so quickly spreads 
such monk gives up 
the here and beyond

19 
 
 
just as a serpent sheds 
its worn-out skin. 
    ( – Tr. Ven. Nyanaponika 
         “The worn out skin” – Wh. 241/242) 
12.  Plead for your client the Accused, before the prejudiced 
judge – “Anger N Hate” 
Take the cue from Venerable Sāriputta’s discourse on the 
five ways of quelling malice with regard  to five types of 
persons. (A. III 186ff, G.S. III 137ff. – A study of the 
discourse is ‘advocated’ for greater clarity.) 
 
The 5 types of clients: 
(i). One whose ways are impure in deed but pure in word. 
(ii). One whose ways are impure in word but pure in deed. 
(iii). One whose ways are im pure both in deed and word, 
yet from time to time obtains mental clarity, mental 
calm. 
(iv). One whose ways are im pure both in deed and word, 
and obtains no such clarity or calm. 
(v). One whose ways are pure  both in deed and word, and 
who obtains mental clarity, mental calm. 
 
Plead for mitigation, mercy or  innocence as the ‘case’ 
maybe. (See ch.4) 
 
13.  Mettā enables you to di scover uncut -diamonds where 
earlier you found mere chunks of charcoal.  
 
14.  How best to treat a ‘patient’ who is angry and hateful 
towards you: 
(i).  Bathe him with ‘Mettā-water’ – to cool him down

20 
 
 
(ii).  Apply fragrant ‘Mettā-soap’  – to remove his dirt of hate 
(iii).  Use the ‘Mettā-towel’ on him – that he may not catch the     
chill of remorse. 
(iv).  Soothe him with ‘Mettā-balm’ – to cure his irritations 
and old wounds. 
15.  Build the bund of ‘Khanti’ – forbearance – well above the 
level of the marshy wasteland of ‘ill-will’ and turn the 
river of ‘Mettā’ to overflow it in cascades. 
 
16.  A word of Mettā leaves pleasing overtones for others and 
serene undertones for oneself.

21 
 
 
4. Five ways of Quelling Malice 
 The five ways of quelling malice with regard to the 
following five types of persons as ‘advocated’ by venerable 
Sāriputta.  
Five types of persons: 
1. One whose ways are impure in deed but pure in word. 
2. One whose ways are impure in word but pure in deed. 
3. One whose ways are impure both in deed and word, yet 
from time to time obtains mental clarity, mental calm. 
4. One whose ways are impure both in deed and word a nd 
obtains no such clarity or calm. 
5. One whose ways are pure both in deed and word and who 
obtains mental clarity, mental calm. 
 
1. “Therein friends, in regard  to that person whose  ways are 
impure in deed but pure in word, how shoul d one quell one ’s 
malice towards him? 
 Just as friends, a rag -robe wearer in seeing a rag in the street, 
having pressed down one end of it with left foot and spread out 
from the other end would tear off whatever part of it that is 
usable and taking it go his way, even so with regard to that 
person whose ways are impure in deed but pure in word, his 
impure ways in deed should not be att ended to, but those pure 
ways in word he has, should be attended to. That is how 
malice with regard to that person should be quelled.  
2. Therein friends, in regard to that person whose ways are 
impure in word but pure in deed, how should one quell one ’s 
malice towards him? 
 
Supposing, friends, there is a pond covered with mo ss. Then a 
man comes there oppressed by heat, overcome by heat,

22 
 
 
parched up and thirsty. He would go down into the pond, part 
the moss with both his hands, sweep them aside this way and 
that way, drink with his clasped palms and go his way. Even 
so, with regard to that person whose ways are impure in word 
but pure in deed, his impure ways in word should not be 
attended to at that time but  his pure ways in deed should be 
attended to. That is how malice with regard to that person 
should be quelled.  
 
3. Therein friends, in regard to that person whose ways are 
impure both in deed and word, yet from time to time obtains 
mental clarity, mental calm, how should one quell one ’s 
malice towards him?  
Suppose, friends, there is just a little water in a cow ’s footprint. 
Then a man comes opp ressed by heat, overcome by heat , 
weary, parched up and thirsty. It w ould occur to him thus : 
Now here is a little water in a cow ’s footprint. If I were to try 
to drink  it with my palms or with a receptacle, it would get 
churned up and undrinkable. What if I were to go down on all 
fours and drink it like a cow and go my way? And he would go 
down on all fours, make a cow ’s draught of it and go his way. 
Even so with regard  to that person whose ways are impure 
both in deed and word, yet from time to time obtains mental 
clarity, mental calm, those impure ways in deed he has, should 
not be attended to at that time, and those impure ways in word 
he has should not be attended to  at that time, but that mental 
clarity, mental calm that he obtains from time to time, that 
alone should be attended to at that time. That is how malice in 
regard to that person should be quelled. 
4. Therein friends, in regard to that person whose ways are 
impure both in deed and word, and obtains no such clarity or 
calm, how should one quell one’s malice towards him?

23 
 
 
 Suppose, friends, there is  a diseased, miserable, grievously ill 
person who has set upon a journey and for him a village  is far 
off in front and far off from behind, and he would not get 
suitable food, would not get suitable medicine, would not get a 
proper attendant, would not get someone to lead the way to the 
village. Another man going the same way would see him and 
arouse compassion for him, arouse pity for him, arouse 
sympathy for him, with the thought : It would be good if this 
man were to get suitable food, suitable medicine, a proper 
attendant and someone to lead the way to the village. Why so? 
Let not this man meet with  misfortune here itself. Even so, 
friends, with regard to that person whose ways are impure both 
in deed and word and obtains no mental clarity, mental calm 
even from time to time, compassion should be aroused , pity 
should be aroused, sympathy should be ar oused with the 
thought: It would be good if this venerable one would give up 
bodily misconduct and develop bodily good conduct, give up 
verbal misconduct and develop verbal good conduct, give up 
mental misconduct and develop mental good conduct. Why so? 
Let not this venerable one, when his body breaks up, after his 
death be reborn in hell. That is how malice with regard to that 
person should be quelled. 
5. Therein friends, in regard to that person whose ways are pure 
both in deed and word, and obtains mental clarity, mental calm 
from time to time, how should one quell one ’s malice towards 
him?  
 Supposing, friends, there is a pond of cle ar water, pleasant 
water, cool  water, pure water with nice fords, charming, 
surrounded by various kinds of trees. Then a man c omes 
oppressed by heat, overcome by heat , parched up and thirsty. 
He would plunge into that pond, bathe in it, drink from it and 
coming out of it, would sit or lie down under the shade of a 
tree there itself. Even so, friends, with regard to that person 
whose ways are pure both in deed and word and obtains

24 
 
 
mental clarity, mental calm from time to time, those pure ways 
in deed he has, should be attended to, those pure ways in word 
he has, should be attended to, and that mental clarity, mental 
calm he gets fr om time to time, that should be attended to. 
That is how malice with regard to that person be quelled. 
Friends, on coming into contact wit h a person who is pleasing 
all round, the mind becomes pleased.  
 
 These, friends, are the five ways of quelling malic e 
whereby a malice arisen in a monk should be completely 
quelled.  
     – A. III 186ff.

25 
 
 
5. There is Strength in Forbearance 
 Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, spoke thus 
to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘Do you, m y good youngster, attend on me. ’ 
Then monks, P rince Dīghāvu answered ‘Yes, Sir e’, in assent to 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi. Then monks, Prince Dīghāvu 
became an early riser than Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, he lay 
down later, he was a willing servant, eager to please, speaking 
affectionately. Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, soon 
established Prince Dīghāvu in a confidential position of trust. 
 Then monks,  Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, spoke thus 
to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘Well now, good youngster, harness a chariot, 
I will go out hunting. ’ And, monks, Prince Dīghāvu having 
answered ‘Yes, Sire’, in assent to Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, 
having harnessed a chariot spoke thus to Brahmadatta, the King 
of Kāsi: ‘A chariot is harnessed for you, Sir e, for whatever you 
may think it is now the right time.’ 
 Then monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, mounted the 
chariot, Prince Dīghāvu drove the chariot, and he drove the 
chariot in such a manner that the army wen t by one way and  the 
chariot by another.  Then monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, 
having gone far, spoke thus to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘Well now, good 
youngster, unharness the chariot; as I am tired. I will lie down .’ 
And, monks, Prince Dīghāvu having answere d ‘Yes, Sir e’, in  
assent to Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, having unharnessed the 
chariot, sat down cross -legged on the ground. Then, monks, 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, lay down and having laid his head 
on Prince Dīghāvu’s lap, and because he was tired he fell asleep 
at once. 
 Then, monks,  it occurred to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘This 
Brahmadatta, King of Kāsi, has done us much mischief; he has 
stolen our troops and vehicles and territory and storehouses and 
granaries, and he has killed my parents. This could be a time

26 
 
 
when I could show my wrath, and he drew his sword from its 
sheath. Then monks, it occurred to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘My father 
spoke to me thus, at the time of his dying: ‘Do not  you, dear 
Dīghāvu, look far or close, for dear Dīghāvu, wrathful moods are 
not allayed by wrath, wrathful moods, dear Dīghāvu, are allayed 
by non-wrath.’ It would not be suitable for me to transgress my 
father’s words, and he replaced his sword in its sheath. And a 
second time, monks, it occurred to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘This 
Brahmadatta............, when I could show my wrath ’, and he drew 
his sword from its sheath. And a second time it occurred to Prince 
Dīghāvu: ‘My father spoke to me thus..... It would not be suitable 
for me to transgress my father’s words’, and again he replaced his 
sword in its sheath. And a third time.... and again he replaced his 
sword in its sheath. Then monks, Brahmadatta, King of Kāsi, 
frightened, agitated, fearful, alarmed, suddenly got up. Then 
monks, Prince Dīghāvu spoke thus to Brahmadatta, King of Kāsi, 
‘Why do you, Sir e, frightened... suddenly ge t up? He said: ‘As I 
was dreaming here, my good youngster, the son of Dīghīti, the 
King of Kosala, attacked me with a sword. That is why I, 
frightened, suddenly got up.’ 
 Then, monks, Prince Dīghāvu, having stroked the head of 
Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, with his left hand, having drawn 
his sword with his right hand, spoke thus to Brahmadatta, the 
King of Kāsi, ‘I Sire, am Prince Dīghāvu, that son of Dīghīti, the 
King of Kosala. You have done us mu ch mischief. Our troops, 
vehicles, territory, storehouses and granaries  were stolen by 
you, and my parents were killed by you. This could be a time 
when I could show my wrath. Then monks, Brahmadatta, the 
King of Kāsi, inclining his head towards Prince Dīghāvu’s feet, 
spoke thus to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘Grant me my life, dear Dīghāvu, 
grant me my life, dear Dīghāvu.’ 
  
‘How am I able to grant life to a king? 
It is a king who should grant me life.’

27 
 
 
‘Well then dear Dīghāvu, you grant me life and I will grant y ou 
life.’ 
 Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, and Prince 
Dīghāvu granted life to one another and they took hold of (one 
another’s) hands and they made an oath to do (one another) no 
harm. Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, spoke thus to 
Prince Dīghāvu: ‘Well then, dear Dīghāvu, harness the chariot; 
we will go away.’ And, monks, Prince Dīghāvu having answered: 
‘Yes Sir e’ in assent to Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, having 
harnessed the chariot, spoke thus to Brahmadatta, the K ing of 
Kāsi: ‘The c hariot is harnessed for you Sir e, for whatever you 
may think it is the right time. ’ Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the 
King of Kāsi, mounted the chariot, Prince Dīghāvu drove the 
chariot, and he drove the chariot in such a manner that soon it met 
the army. 
 Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, having 
entered Benares having had the ministers and councillors 
convened, spoke thus:  ‘If, good sirs, you should see Prince 
Dīghāvu, the son of Dīghīti, the King of Kosala, what would you  
do to him? ’ Some spoke thus: ‘We, Sir e, would cut off his 
hands; we Sire, would cut off his feet; ..... his ears, his nose, .... 
his ears and nose,... we Sire, would cut off his head.’ 
 Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, said: ‘This, 
good s irs, is Prince Dīghāvu, the son of Dīghīti, the King of 
Kosala; there is no occasion to do anything (against him) ; life 
was granted by him to me and life was granted by me to him.’ 
 
 Then, monks Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, spoke thus 
to Prince Dīghāvu: ‘Concerning that, dear Dīghāvu, which your 
father said to you at the time of dying: ‘Do not you , dear 
Dīghāvu, look far or close, for dear Dīghāvu, wrathful moods 
are not allayed by wrath, wrathful moods, dear Dīghāvu, are 
allayed by non -wrath’, what did your father mean ? He said :

28 
 
 
‘Concerning that, Sire, which my father said to me at that time of 
dying – ‘not far’ means, do not bear wrath long.  This is what 
my father said to me at the time of dying, when he said ‘not far’. 
Concerning that, sir e, which my father said to me at the time of 
dying ‘not close’ means: ‘do not hastily break with a friend ’. 
This is  what my father said to me, Sir e, at the time of dying, 
when he said ‘not close’. Concerning that Sir e, which my father 
said to me at the time of dying : ‘for, dear Dīghāvu, wrathful 
moods are not allayed by wrath ’ means: my parents were killed 
by a king, but if I were to deprive the king of life and those who 
desired the king ’s welfare  would deprive me of life and those 
who desired my welfare wou ld deprive the king of life; thus that 
wrath would not be settled by wrath. But now that life is 
granted to me by a king and life is granted to a king by me, 
thus is wrath settled by non -wrath. This is what my father said 
to me, Sire, at the time of dying when he said: ‘for, dear Dīghāvu, 
wrathful moods are not allayed by wrath, wrathful moods, dear 
Dīghāvu, are allayed by non-wrath.’ 
 Then, monks, Brahmadatta, the King of Kāsi, thinking: 
‘Indeed it is marvel lous, indeed it is wonderful that this Prince 
Dīghāvu is so clever that he understands in full, the matter which 
was spoken by his father in brief’, gave back his father’s troops 
and vehicles and territory and store-houses and granaries and 
gave him his daughter..  
 Book of Discipline IV pp 495ff. 
 Excerpts from Vinaya Mahāvagga Dighāvubhānavāra 
 
‘Na hi verena verāni – sammantīdha kudācanaṁ 
averena ca sammantī – esa dhammo sanantano’ 
– Dhp. V. 5 
 
‘Never by hatred are hatreds appeased 
Only by non-hatred are they appeased 
This is the Eternal Law.’

29 
 
 
6. Mother and Child 
 The birth of a child is, at the same time, the birth of a 
mother into the world. 
 Child is the symbol of a mother. That love for the child, 
that tendernes s of the heart which characteris es a mother, is so 
significant that it is often asso ciated with the change of red blood 
into milk. 
 “Mettā” – usually rendered by that cross-bred term loving 
kindness, is the universal love for which the mother’s love for her 
child is the unit. The Buddha speaking about mettā says for 
instance, “Just as a m other would protect her only child even at 
the risk of her own life, so should one develop a boundless heart 
towards all beings.” 
 A mother is not only born with the child she brings forth, 
she also grows up with the child she brings up. Her growth is in 
terms of the other three Divine Abidings or Brahma Vihāra  – 
compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity. In bringing up her 
child, sometimes a mother has to be stern and tactful. Her soft 
tender love matures into a compassionate sternness, when the 
child is passing through the unruly boyhood and reckless 
adolescence. But that hardness of her heart melts at the correct 
moment, like butter. 
 The child has now reached manhood. He can stand on his 
own feet with enviable self -confidence. The mother also grows 
up with sympathetic joy enjoying the fruits of her labour. Her  
complacence, like curd , is serene and has nothing meddlesome 
about it. 
 The bringing forth and the bringing up is over. The time 
comes now to let go of the attachments and involvements 
regarding the child. But for that separation too, the mother, now

30 
 
 
mature in her experience, is fully prepared with equanimity. Like 
a pot of ghee, she is not easily upset. 
 Universal love, compassion, sympathetic -joy and 
equanimity are the four Divine Abidings a mother practices in a 
limited sense in the course of her mother ly care for the child. 
Charity begins at home. These four are homely virtues in the first 
instance, to be remembered like milk, butter, curd and ghee. The 
four Divine Abidings are to be developed, however, in a 
boundless measure until one ’s heart is fully released in them. A 
mother bears testimony to the practicability and the reciprocal 
value of these Divine Abidings, which  hold the prospects of 
spiritual growth, peace and harmony for the society at large.

31 
 
 
 
7. Mettā as a Holy vow  
 (The Nine – factored Uposatha) 
 “Monks, the nine -factored Uposatha when observed is of 
great fruit of great benefit, of great effulgence, of great effluence.  
 Monks, how observed does the nine factored Uposatha 
become of great fruit, of great benefit, of  great effulgence, of 
great effluence? 
 
1. Here monks, a noble disciple reflects thus: As long as they 
live, the arahants abandon depriving living beings of life, 
abstain from it, they have put aside the cudgel, put aside the 
weapon, are conscientious, full o f pity and dwell 
compassionate towards all living beings. I too shall abandon 
and abstain from depriving living beings of life, this night this 
day and dwell having put aside the cudgel and the weapon 
and be conscientious, full of pity and compassionate to wards 
all living beings. Even by this factor, I am emulating the 
arahants and thereby Uposatha too would be observed by me. 
He is endowed with this first factor.  
 
2. As long as they live arahants abandon taking what is not 
given, abstain from it, take only what is given , expect only 
what is given, and dwell with a pure mind free from thievish 
intent. I too shall abandon and abstain from taking what is not 
given, take only what is given, expect only what is given , this 
night, this day and dwell with a pure mi nd free from thievish 
intent. Even by this factor I am emulating the arahants and 
thereby Uposatha too would be observed by me. He is 
endowed with this second factor.  
 
3. As long as they live arahants abandon unchastity and dwell 
chaste, keeping aloof from t he vulgar practice of sexual

32 
 
 
intercourse. I too shall abandon unchastity, this night, this day 
and dwell chaste keeping aloof from the vulgar practice of 
sexual intercourse. Even by this factor I am emulating the  
arahants and thereby Uposatha too would be observed by me. 
He is endowed with this third factor.  
 
4. As long as they live arahants abandon lying and abstain from 
it, they speak the truth, are devoted to the truth, reliable , 
worthy of confidence, are no deceivers to the world. I too 
shall abandon lyin g and abstain from it, this night, this day 
and speak the truth, be devoted to the truth, worthy of 
confidence, not being a deceiver to the world. Even by this 
factor I am emulating the arahants and thereby Uposatha too 
would be observed by me. He is endow ed with this fourth 
factor. 
 
5. As long as they live arahants abandon and abstain from 
intoxicated drinks, which cause heedlessness. I too shall 
abandon and abstain from intoxicating drinks, which cause 
heedlessness, this night, this day. Even by this factor I am 
emulating the arahants and thereby Uposatha too would be 
observed by me. He is endowed with this fifth factor. 
 
6. As long as they live arahants eat only at one time of the day, 
abstaining from taking food at night, not eating at improper 
hours. I too, this night, this day shall eat only at one time of 
the day, abstaining from taking food at night, not ea ting at 
improper hours. Even by this factor  I am emulating the 
arahants and thereby Uposatha too would be observed by me. 
He is endowed with this sixth factor. 
 
7. As long as they live arahants keep aloof  from dance, song, 
music and shows as well as from the use of garlands, 
perfumes, ointments, adornments and cosmetics. I too, this 
night, this day shall keep aloof from dance, song, music,

33 
 
 
shows as well as from the use of garlands, perfumes, 
ointments, adornments and cosmetics . Even by this factor I 
am emulating the arahants and thereby Uposatha too would 
be observed by me. He is endowed with this seventh factor. 
 
8. As long as they live  the arahants avoid high and luxurious 
couches, using only a low couch, be it a bed or a layer of 
straw. I too, this night, this day shall avoid high and luxurious 
couches, using only a low couch, be it a bed or a layer of 
straw.  Even by this factor I am emulating the arahants and 
thereby Uposatha too would be observed by me. He is 
endowed with this eighth factor. 
   
9. Herein, monks, a noble disciple dwells pervading  one 
direction with thoughts imbu ed with mettā. Likewise the 
second direction..., likewise the third direction,... likewise the 
fourth direction a nd thus above, below and around  
everywhere and equally, he dwells pervading the entire world 
with his thoughts imbued with universal love, abundant, 
exalted, measureless, free from enmity and free from 
affliction. He is endowed with this ninth factor. 
 
Monks, the nine factored Uposatha observed in this way, is of 
great fruit, of great benefit, of great effulgence, of great 
effluence.” 
 – A. IV. 388ff.

34 
 
 
8. The Deliverance of the Heart  
and The Law of Kamma 
 “Monks, I do not say that there is an ending of actions 
(kamma) intentionally done and heaped up without experiencing 
the results and that too either in this very life, or in the next life or 
in future lives. Nor do I say monks, that there is an ending of 
suffering without having experienced the results of actions 
intentionally done and heaped up. 
 Monks that nobl e disciple, thus free from covetousness , 
free fr om ill -will, undeluded, fully aware and mindful pervades 
one direction with thoughts imbued with mettā (Universal Love), 
likewise the second, likewise the third, and likewise the fourth. 
Thus upwards, downwards and across all around and  all over the 
world he dwells pervading with thoughts imbued with mettā 
abundant, grown great, boundless, free from wrath and anger. He 
knows thus : ‘Earlier my mind was p etty and undeveloped. But 
now my mind is boundless and well developed. Whatever limited 
kamma that has been done could not leave any residue there, that 
would not  withstand it. ’ What do you think, monks if this boy 
from his childhood itself would develop Deliverance of the Heart 
through mettā, will he do an evil deed? “No indeed, Venerable 
Sir.” Will suffering touch a person who does not do an evil deed?  
“No indeed, Venerable Sir. How can suffering touch one who 
does not do an evil deed, Venerable Sir?” 
 Monks, the Deliverance of the Heart through mettā should 
be developed by any woman or man. A  woman or a man cannot 
take along her or his body at death. Monks, this mortal person has 
a mind within him. He understands thus: ‘Whatever evil deed that 
has been done by me in the past with this body produced by 
kamma, all that has to be experienced here. It will not follow me.’ 
Monks, the Deliverance of the Heart through mettā thus

35 
 
 
developed conduces to non -returnership in the case of a monk 
who does not penetrate to a higher Deliverance here.  
 With a mind imbued with karuṇā (compassion),.... with a 
mind imbued with muditā (altruistic joy),.... with a mind imbued 
with upekkhā (equanimity) he pervades one direction, likewise 
the second,... likewise the third,.... likewise the fourth,...... Thus 
upwards, downwards, and across all around and all over th e 
world he dwells pervading with thoughts imbued  with upekkhā 
abundant, grown great, boundless, free from wra th and anger. 
And he knows thus: ‘Earlier my mind was petty and undeveloped. 
But now my mind is boundless and well developed. Whatever 
kamma that has been done that would not leave any residue there, 
that would not withstand it. ’ What do you think monks, if this 
boy from his childhood itself would develop Deliverance of the 
Heart through  upekkhā, will he do any evil deed? “No indeed, 
Venerable Sir.” Will suffering touch a person who does not do an 
evil deed?  “No indeed, Venerable Sir. How can suffering touch 
one who does not do an evil deed, Venerable Sir? ” 
 Monks, the Deliverance of the Heart through  upekkhā, 
should be devel oped by any woman  or man. A woma n or man 
cannot take along  her or  his body at death. Monks, this mortal 
person has a mind wi thin him. He understands thus: Whatever 
evil deed that has been done by me here in the past , with this 
body produced by kamma, all that has to be experienced here. It 
will not follow me. Monks the Deliverance of the Heart through 
upekkhā thus developed conduces to N on-returnership in the case 
of a monk who does not penetrate to a higher Deliverance here.”  
 – Karajakāya Sutta, A. V. 299

36 
 
 
9. Blowing of the Conch 
 At one time the Fortunate One was dwelling at the Mango 
Grove of Pāvārika in Nālandā.  
 Then Asibandhakaputta, the headman , the disciple of 
Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta  approached the Fortunate O ne, worshipped 
him and sat on one side.  
 The Fortunate One addressed him as he was seated on one 
side and said: 
 “Headman, how does Nigaṇṭha N ātaputta teach his 
Dhamma to the disciples?” 
 “Venerable Sir, this is how Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta teach his 
Dhamma to the disciples: ‘Whoever destroys life is desti ned to 
downfall, to hell, whoever takes what is not given is destined to 
downfall, to hell, whoever misconducts himself sexually is 
destined to downfall , to hell, whoever speaks falsehood is 
destined to downfall , to hell, whatever way one dwell s in for the 
most part, thereby one is led.’ It is in this way Venerable Sir, that 
Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta teaches Dhamma to his disciples.” 
 “So headman, whatever way one dwell s in for the most 
part by that is one led. If this is the position, then no one is 
destined to downfall to hell according to the words of Nigaṇṭha 
Nātaputta.” 
 “What do you think headman as to that man who destroys 
life by night or by day from time to time, which is more – the 
time he destroys life or the time he does not destroy life?” 
 “Venerable Sir, as to that man who destroys life by night 
or by day from time to time, less is the time he spends destroying 
life. On the other hand more is the time he does not destroy life.”

37 
 
 
  “So headman, whatever way one dwells in for the most 
part by that is one led. If this is the position , no one is destined to 
downfall to hell, according to the words of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta.” 
 “What do you think headman as to that man who takes 
what is not given by night or by day  from time to time, w hich is 
more – the time he spends taking what is not given or the time he 
does not take what is not given?” 
 “Venerable Sir, as to that man who takes what is not given 
by night or by day from time to time,  less is the time he spends 
taking what is not given. On the other h and more is the time he 
does not take what is not given.” 
 “So headman, whatever way one dwells in for the most 
part, by that is one led. If this is the position, no one is destined to 
downfall to hell, according to the words of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta.” 
 “What do you think headman as to that man who 
misconducts himself sexually by ni ght or by day from time to 
time, which is more – the time he misconducts himself sexually  
or the time he does not misconduct himself sexually?” 
 “Venerable Sir, as to that man who misconducts himself 
sexually by night or by day from time to time, less is the time he 
spends misconducting himself sexually . On the other hand more 
is the time he does not misconduct himself sexually.” 
 “So headman, whatever way one dwells in for the most 
part by that is one led. If this is the position , no one is destined to 
downfall, to hell, according to the words of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta.” 
 “What do you think headman as to that man who speaks 
falsehood by night or by day from time to time, w hich is more – 
the time he spends speaking falsehood or the tim e he does not 
speak falsehood?”

38 
 
 
 “Venerable Sir, as to that man who speaks falsehood  by 
night or by day from time to time, less is the time he spends 
speaking falsehood. On the other hand more is the time he  does 
not speak falsehood.” 
 “So headman, whatever way one dwells in for the most 
part by that is one led. If this is the position , no one is destined to 
downfall, to hell, according to the words of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta.” 
 Herein headman a certain teacher sp eaks thus and is of 
this view: Whoever destroys life is destined to downfall , to hell. 
Whoever takes what is not given is destined to downfall , to hell. 
Whoever misconducts himself sexually is destined to downfall, to 
hell. Whoever speaks falsehood is destined to downfall, to hell. In 
that teacher, headman, a disciple is greatly pleased.  
 And it occurs to him: My teacher  speaks thus and is of 
this view: Whoever destroys life is destined to downfall , to hell. I 
have destroyed life in the past, and he takes up this view: Now I 
am destined to downfall, to hell. Headman, if he does not give up 
that saying and that thought and does not relinquish that view, he 
will go to hell as if brought there and dropped. My teacher s peaks 
thus and is of this view: W hoever takes what is not given is 
destined to downfall, to hell. I have taken what is not given in the 
past. And he takes up this view: Now I am destined to downfall , 
to hell. Headman, if he does not give up that saying and  that 
thought and does not relinquish that view, he will go to hell as if 
brought there and dropped. My teacher sp eaks thus and is of this 
view: W hoever misconducts himself sexually is destined to 
downfall, to hell. I have misconducted myself sexually in t he past. 
And he takes up this view: Now I am destined to downfall, to hell. 
Headman, if he does not give up that saying and that thought and 
does not relinquish that view, he will go to hell as if brought there 
and dropped.  My teacher speaks thus a nd is of  this view: 
Whoever speaks falsehood is destined to downfall , to hell. I have 
spoken falsehood in the past. And he takes up this view: Now I

39 
 
 
am destined to downfall, to hell. Headman, if he does not give up 
that saying and that thought and does not relinqu ish that view, he 
will go to hell as if brought there and dropped. 
 But then headman, a Tathāgata arises in the world, the 
Worthy, Fully E nlightened, endowed w ith knowledge and 
conduct, well gon e, a knower of the world, the incomparable 
teacher of tam eable men, teacher of gods and men, the 
Enlightened, the Fortunate one . He censures in various ways the 
destroying of life, condemns it and says: “Abstain from 
destroying life .” He censures the taking of what is not given, 
condemns it and says: “Abstain from ta king what is not given .” 
He censures sexual misconduct condemns it and says: “Abstain 
from sexual misconduct .” He censures speaking of falsehood, 
condemns it and says: “Abstain from speaking falsehood.” In that 
teacher a disciple is greatly pleased and he reflects: 
 “The Fortunate O ne censures in various ways the 
destroying of life, condemns it and says : ‘Abstain from 
destroying life. ’ I have in the past taken life to some extent or 
other. The fact that in the past I have destroyed life to some 
extent or other is not proper,  it is not good. Even if I were to get 
remorseful on that account, that evil deed done cannot be undone. 
Having so reflected, he gives up that destroying of life. He 
becomes one who has abstained from destroying life in the future. 
That is how that evil deed is abandoned. Thus is that evil deed 
transcended. 
 The Fortunate One censures in various ways the taking of 
what is not given, condemns it and says: ‘Abstain from ta king 
what is not given. ’ I have, in the past, taken what is not given to 
some extent or other. The fact that I have, in the past taken what 
is not given  to some ex tent or other is not proper, is not good. 
Even if I were to get remorseful on that account, that evil deed 
done cannot be undone. Having thus reflected, he g ives up that 
practice of taking what is not given and abstains from taking what

40 
 
 
is not given in the future. Thus  is that evil deed  abandoned. Thus 
is that evil deed transcended. 
 The Fortunate O ne censures in various ways sexual 
misconduct, condemns it  and says: ‘Abstain from sexual 
misconduct.’ I have, in the past, committed sexual misconduct to 
some extent or other. The fact that I have, in the past committed 
sexual misconduct to some extent or other is not proper, it is not 
good. Even if I were to get remorseful on that account, the  evil 
deed done cannot be undone. Having thus reflected, he gives up 
that practice of sexual misconduct and abstains from sexual 
misconduct in the future. Thus is that evil deed  abandoned. Thus 
is that evil deed transcended. 
 The Fortunate One censure s speaking of falsehood , 
condemns it and says: ‘Abstain from speaking falsehood.’ I have, 
in the past, spoken falsehood to some extent or other. The fact 
that I have, in the past spoken falsehood to some extent or other is 
not proper, is not good. Even if I were to get remorseful on that 
account, that evil deed done cannot be undone. Having thus 
reflected, he abandons that  speaking of falsehood  and abstains 
from speaking falsehood in the future. Thus is that evil de ed 
abandoned. Thus is that evil deed transcended. 
 Abandoning the destroying of life he abstains from the 
destroying of life. Abandoning the taking of what is not given , he 
abstains from taking what is not given. Abandoning sexual 
misconduct he abstains from sexual misconduct. Abandoning the 
speaking of falsehood  he abstains from speaking falsehood . 
Abandoning frivolous talk  he abstains from frivolous talk . 
Abandoning covetousness he dwells free from covetousness. 
Abandoning malevolent ill-will he has thoughts free from ill-will. 
Abandoning wrong view he becomes one with Right View. 
 Headman, that noble disciple thus free from covetousness, 
free from ill -will, undeluded, fully aware and mindful, dwells

41 
 
 
pervading one direction with thoughts imbued with mettā, 
likewise the second direction, likewise the third direction, 
likewise the fourth direction, thus upwards, downwards and 
across everywhere equally the entire world he dwells pervading 
with thoughts imbued with mettā abundant grown great, 
boundless, free from wrath and anger. 
 Just as, headman, a powerful blower of a conch would 
with little difficulty make known its blowing to the four 
directions, even so headman, the Deliverance of the Heart 
through mettā when thus developed and much practiced, 
whatever limited kamma there be that will not leave  any residue, 
will not withstand it. And as to that noble disciple, headman, thus 
free from covetousness and ill -will, undeluded, fully aware and 
mindful with thoughts imbued with karuṇā (compassion), .... with 
thoughts imbued with muditā (altruistic joy) ,..... with thoughts 
imbued with upekkhā (equanimity) dwells pervading one 
direction, likewise the second direction, likewise the third 
direction, likewise the fourth direction, thus upwards, downwards 
and across everyw here equally the entire world he dwells 
pervading with thoughts imbued with upekkhā abundant, grown 
great , boundless, free from wrath and anger. 
 Just as headman, a powerful blower of a conch, would 
with little difficulty, make known its blowing to the fo ur 
directions even so, headman, the Deliverance of  the Heart 
through upekkhā when thus developed and much practiced, 
whatever limited kamma there be that will not leave any residue, 
will not withstand it. 
 When this was said , Asibandhakaputta, the headman said 
this to the Fortunate O ne: It is excellent, Venerable Sir, it is 
excellent. Even as one would, Venerable Sir, turn upright a thing 
turned upside down, disclose a thing concealed, tell the way to 
one who had lost his way, hold up an oil torch in the da rkness, so 
that those with eyes will see forms, even so in various ways has

42 
 
 
the Dhamma been expounded by the Fortunate O ne. Venerable 
Sir, here I go to the Fortunate one as refuge to the Dhamma and 
to the order of monks. May the Fortunate O ne consider me a  lay 
disciple who has sought his refuge from this day onwards to the 
end of my life. 
  – Saṅkha Sutta, S. IV. 317ff.

43 
 
 
10. The Salt-Crystal 
 “Monks, whoever says this: ‘In whatever way a man does 
a kamma in the same way he experiences it’ – In that case, monks 
there is no scope for dwelling the holy life and no opportunity is 
apparent for r ightly ending suffering. On the other hand, monks, 
whoever says this: ‘If this man does a kamma the result of which 
is to be experienced in a particular w ay, he experiences its result 
in just that way – in that case, monks, there is scope for dwelling  
the holy life and an opportunity is apparent for rightly ending 
suffering. 
 Herein monks, in the case of a certain person even an evil 
deed done – though of little account  leads him to hell. On the 
other hand monks, in the case of another person a similar evil 
deed of little account done is to be experienced in this very life 
and not even the minutest  fraction of it remains – what to say of 
more?  
 Monks, in the case of what sort of a person is an evil deed 
of little account done lead him to hell? 
 Herein, monks, there is a person who is undeveloped in 
deportment, undeveloped in morality, undeveloped in 
concentration, undeveloped in wisdom and is mean, non -plussed 
and messy. In the case of such a person, monks, even an evil deed 
of little account done, leads him to hell. 
 Monks, in the case of what sort of a person is a similar 
evil deed of little account done to be experienced in this very life 
and not even  the minutest fraction of it remains – what to say of 
more.  
 Herein, monks, a certain person is developed in  
deportment, is developed in  morality, is developed in 
concentration, is developed in wisdom , is not mean but

44 
 
 
gentlemanly and broadminded. In the c ase of such a person, 
monks, a similar evil deed of little account done is experienced in 
this very life and not even the minutest fraction of it remains  - 
what to say of more. 
 Supposing, monks, a man would pu t a salt crystal into a 
vessel with a little w ater. W hat do you think, monks, will that 
little water in the vessel become salty and undrinkable by that salt 
crystal?” 
 “Yes, Venerable Sir.” 
 “Why is that?” 
 “That water in the vessel Venerable Sir is little. It is made 
salty and undrinkable by that salt crystal.” 
 “Supposing, monks, a man would put a salt crystal into 
the river Ganges. What do you think monks, will that Ganges 
river become salty and undrinkable by that salt crystal?” 
 “No, indeed, Venerable Sir” 
 “Why is that?” 
 “There is that great mass of water in the river Ganges. It 
will not become salty and undrinkable by that salt crystal.” 
 “Even so, monks, herein even an evil deed done though of 
little account, in the case of one person leads him to hell. But a 
similar evil deed of little acco unt done by another person is 
experienced in this very life and not even the minutest fraction of 
it remains – what to say of more. 
 In what sort of a person  monks, does even an evil deed of 
little account done lead him to hell? Herein, monks, a certain 
person is undeveloped in deportment, is undeveloped in morality,

45 
 
 
is undeveloped in concentration,  is undeveloped in wisdom,  is 
mean, non-plussed and messy. In the case of such a person monks, 
even an evil deed of little account done, leads him to hell. In what 
sort of a person, monks, a similar evil deed of little account done 
is experienced in this very life and not even the minutest fraction 
of it remains – what to say of more ? Herein, monks, a certain 
person is developed in deportment,  is developed in morality, is 
developed in concentration, is developed in w isdom, is not mean 
but gentlemanly and broadminded. In the case of such a person, 
monks, a similar evil deed of little account done , is experienced 
in this very life and not even the minutest fraction of it remains – 
what to say of more?” 
 – Loṇaphala Sutta, A. I 249ff.

46 
 
 
11. The Right way of Practice  
for a Recluse 
 “Monks, how does a monk become one who has entered 
upon the right way of practice for a recluse?  In whatever monk 
with covetousness that  covetousness is abandoned, in one with 
ill-will that ill -will is abandoned, in one with anger that anger is 
abandoned, in one with enmity that enmity is abandoned, in one 
with contempt that contempt i s abandoned, in one with 
domineering that domineering is abandoned, in one with envy 
that envy is abandoned, in one with avarice  that avarice is 
abandoned, in one with decei t that deceit is abandoned in one 
with fraud that fraud is abando ned, in one with evil wishes tho se 
evil wishes are abandoned, in one with wrong vie w, that wrong 
view is abandoned. Monks, by abandoning these taints of a monk, 
these faults of a monk, these offals of a monk, which are 
occasions for downfall and sufferings in bad bournes, I say, a  
monk is one who has entered upon the right way of practice for a 
recluse. 
 He sees himself purified of all these evil unskillful states, 
as free from them, and as he sees himself purified of all these evil 
states and free from them, joy arises in him. To one who has joy, 
happiness arises. In one with happy mind body becomes tranquil. 
One who is tra nquil in body experiences bliss. I n a blissful one, 
the mind gets concentrated. 
 With thoughts imbued with mettā, he pervades one 
direction, likewise the second direction, likewise the third 
direction, likewise the fourth direction , above, below, around 
everywhere equally the entire world h e pervades with thoughts 
imbued with mettā, abundant, grown great, boundless, and free  
from wrath and anger. With thoughts imbued with karuṇā 
(compassion) .......... with thoughts imbued with muditā (altruistic

47 
 
 
joy), .......... with thoughts imbued with upekkhā 
(equanimity) ......... 
 Supposing, monks, there is a pond of clear water, pleasant 
water, cool water, with beautiful sandy ford s and charming. A 
man comes from the eastern direction oppressed by heat, 
overcome by heat, wearied parched and thirsty. He on coming to 
that pond would quench his thirst for water, would dispel the 
distress of heat. A man comes from the western direction....... A 
man comes from the northern direction.. A man comes from the 
southern direction... . From wherever a man comes, oppressed by 
heat, overcome by heat, wearied , parched and thirsty, he on 
coming to that pond would quench his thirst for water, would 
dispel the distress of heat. 
 Even so, monks, if from a khottiya family one has gone 
forth from home to homelessness, he o n coming to this teaching 
and discipline develops mettā, karuṇā, muditā and upekkhā in 
this way and gets inw ard calmness. By inward calmness, I say he 
has entered upon the right way of practice for a recluse. If from a 
Brahmin family.... If from a Vessa family.... If from a Sudda 
family... From whatever family one goes forth from home to 
homelessness..... By inward calmness, I say, he has entered upon 
the right way of practice for a recluse. ......... 
  – Cūla Assapura Sutta, M. I. 283ff.

48 
 
 
12. A Doorway to the Deathless 
 Thus have I heard: At one time Venerable Ānanda was 
dwelling at Beluvagāmaka in Vesāli. At that time the householder 
Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara had arrived in Pāṭaliputta on some 
business. T hen the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara 
approached a certain monk in Kukkuṭārāma and having 
worshipped him sat on one side . Seated on one side  Dasama, the 
householder of Aṭṭhakanāgara addressed that monk and said: 
“Venerable Sir, where is Venerable Ānanda dwelling now? We 
would like to see Venerable Ānanda.” Householder , that 
Venerable Ānanda is dwelling at Beluvagāmaka in Vesāli. 
Dasama, the householder of Aṭṭhakanāgara, after settling his 
business in Pāṭaliputta approached Venerable Ānanda at 
Beluvagāmaka in Vesāli. Having approached him he worshipped 
Venerable Ānanda and sat on one side. Thus seated the 
householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara said this to Venerable 
Ānanda: 
 “Venerable Sir, Ānanda, is there one Dhamma preac hed 
by that Fortunate One, the Worthy, Fully Enlightened who knows 
and sees, wherein a monk dwelling diligently ardent and resolute, 
would get his unemancipated mind emancipated, undestroyed 
influxes destroyed and unattained  freedom from bondage 
attained.”  
 “There is, householder one Dh amma preached by that 
Fortunate One............. freedom from bondage attained .” 
“Venerable Sir , Ānanda, what is that one Dhamma preached by 
that Fortunate One............. freedom from bondage attained.”  
 “Herein, householder, a monk, quite secluded from  sensedesires, secluded from unskillful mental states, enter s upon and 
dwells in the first jhāna which is  accompanied by applied and 
sustained thought with happiness and  bliss born of seclusion . He 
reflects thus: Even this first jhāna is specifically prepared and 
specifically thought out. And he understands: Whatever is

49 
 
 
specifically prepared and specifically thought out is impermanent, 
is of a nature to cease. With that stance he atta ins the destruction 
of influxes. If he does not attain t he destruction of influxes due to 
that very attachment to  Dhamma, that very delight in the 
Dhamma, by the destruction of the five lower fetters, becomes 
one of spontaneous rebirth to attain perfect extinction there, not 
liable to return from that world. Th is too, O’ householder, is one 
Dhamma preac hed by that Fortunate One, the W orthy, Fully  
Enlightened who knows and sees wherein  a monk dwelling 
diligently, ardent and resolute would get his unemancipated mind 
emancipated, undestroyed  influxes destroyed, and unattained 
freedom from bondage attained.  
 Moreover, householder, a monk by the stilling of thoughts 
applied and sustained enters upon and dwells in the second jhāna, 
which has internal confidence  and unification of mind without 
applied and sustained thought with happiness and bliss born of 
concentration. He reflect s thus: Even this second jhāna is 
specifically prepared and specifically thought out , and he 
understands: whatever is specifically prepared and specifically 
thought out is impermanent, is of a nature to cease.  With that 
stance he reaches the destruction of influxes . If he does not reach  
the destruction of influxes  due to that very attachment to the 
Dhamma, that very delight in the Dhamma, by the des truction of 
the five lo wer fetters, becomes one of spontaneous rebirth to 
attain perfect extinction there, not liable to return from that world. 
This too, householder, is one Dhamma preached by that Fortunate 
One, the W orthy, Fully Enlightened, who knows and sees 
wherein a monk dwelling diligently, ardent and resolute would 
get his unemancipated mind emancipated, undestroyed influxes 
destroyed and unattained freedom from bondage attained.  
 Moreover, householder, a monk with the fading away of 
happiness as well, dwells in equanimity and mindful and fully 
aware, he feels bliss with his body about which the noble ones 
announce ‘He dwells in bliss who has equanimity and is mindful ’

50 
 
 
and enters upon and dwells in that third jhāna. He reflects thus: 
Even this third jhāna is specifically prepared, specifically thought 
out, and he understands : whatever is specifically prepared and 
specifically thought out is impermanent, is of a nature to cease. 
With that stance he reaches the des truction of influxes. If he does 
not reach the destruction of influxes , due to that very attachment 
to the Dhamma, that very delight in the Dhamma , by the 
destruction of the five lower fetters, becomes one of spontaneous 
rebirth to attain perfect extinctio n there, not liable to return from 
that world. This  too, householder, is one Dhamma preached by 
that Fortunate One..... ................ and unattained freedom from 
bondage attained.  
 Moreover, householder, with the abandoning of pleasure 
and pain and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he 
enters upon and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which has neither pain 
nor pleasure and has the purity of mindfulness due to equanimity, 
he attains to and abides in the fourth jhāna. He reflects thus: Even 
this fourth jhāna is specifically prepared, specifically thought out, 
and he understands: Whatever is specifically prepar ed and 
specifically thought out  is imper manent, is of a nature to cease. 
With that stance he reaches the dest ruction of influxes. If he does 
not reach the destruction of influxes,  due to that very attachment 
to the Dhamma, that very delight in the Dhamma, by the 
destruction of the five lower fetters, becomes one of spontaneous 
rebirth to attain perfect extinction there, not liable  to return from 
that world. This too , householder, is one Dhamma preached by 
that Fortunate One........... ...........  and unattained freedom from 
bondage attained.  
 Moreover, householder, a monk pervades one direction 
with thoughts imbued with mettā, likewise the second direction, 
likewise the third direction, likewise the fourth direction , thus 
upwards, downwards and across all around  everywhere equally 
the enti re world h e pervades with thoughts imbued with mettā, 
abundant, exalted, measureless and free from wrath and affliction.

51 
 
 
He reflects thu s: Even this Deliverance of the Heart through 
mettā is specifically prepared, specifically thought out, a nd he 
understands: Whatever is specifically prepared and specifically 
thought out is impermanent, is of a nature to cease. With that 
stance he reaches the destruction of influxes. If he does not reach 
the destruction of influxes, due to that very attachment to the 
Dhamma, that very delight in the Dhamma, by the destruction of 
the five lower fetters , becomes one of spontaneous rebirth to 
attain perfect extinction there, not liable to return from that world. 
This too householder, is one Dhamma preached by that Fortunate 
One..................... and unattained freedom from bondage attained.  
 Moreover, householder, a monk pervades one direction 
with thoughts imbued   with karuṇā (compassion)............ with 
thoughts imbued with muditā (altruistic joy),............ with 
thoughts imbued with upekkhā (equanimity), likewise the second 
direction, likewise the third d irection, likewise the fourth 
direction, thus upwards, downwards and across all around 
everywhere equally the entire world  he pervades with thoughts 
imbued with upekkhā, abundant, exalted, measureless, and free 
from wrath and affliction. He reflects thus: Even this Deliverance 
of the Heart through upekkhā is specifically prepared, specifically 
thought out, a nd he understands: Whatever is specifically 
prepared and specifically thought out is impermanent, is of a 
nature to cease. With that stance he reaches the destruction of 
influxes. If he does not reach the destruction of influxes, due to 
that very attachment to the Dhamma, that very delight in the 
Dhamma, by the destruction of the five lower fetters , becomes 
one of spontaneous rebirth to  attain perfect extinction there, not 
liable to return from that world. This too householder, is one 
Dhamma preached by that Fortunate One..................... and 
unattained freedom from bondage attained.  
 Moreover, householder, a monk  with the complete 
surmounting of perceptions of matter with the disappea rance of 
the perceptions of resistance , with non-attention to perceptions of

52 
 
 
variety being aware of ‘Infinite Space’ he enters upon and dwells 
in the sphere of ‘Infinity of S pace’. He reflects thus: Even this 
attainment of the S phere of ‘Infinity of S pace’ is specifically 
prepared, specifically thought out, a nd he understands: Whatever 
is specifically prepared and specifically thought out is 
impermanent, is of a nature to cease. With that stance he reaches 
the destruction of influxes. If he does not reach the destruction of  
influxes due to that very attachment to the Dhamma, that very 
delight in the Dhamma, by the destruction of the five lower 
fetters, becomes one of spontaneous rebirth to attain per fect 
extinction there, not liable to return from that world. This too 
householder, is one Dhamma preached by that Fortunate 
One..................... and unattained freedom from bondage attained.    
 Moreover, householder, a monk by completely 
surmounting the sphere of I nfinity of Space aware of Infinity of 
Consciousness enters upon and dwells in the sphere of Infinity of 
Consciousness. He reflects thus: Even this attainment of the 
Infinity of C onsciousness is specifically prepared , specifically 
thought out,  and he understands: Whatever is specifically 
prepared and specifically thought out is impermanent, is of a 
nature to cease. With that stance he reaches the destruction of 
influxes. If he does not reach the destruction of influxes, due to 
that very attachm ent to the Dhamma, that very delight in the 
Dhamma, by the destruction of the five lower fetters , becomes 
one of spontaneous rebirth to attain perfect extinction there, not 
liable to return from that world. This too householder, is one 
Dhamma preached by t hat Fortunate One..................... and 
unattained freedom from bondage attained.      
 Moreover, householder, by completely surmounting the 
sphere of  Infinity of Consciousness being aware  that ‘There is 
nothing’, he enters upon and dwells in the Sphere of Nothingness. 
He reflects thus: Even this attainment of the Sphere of 
Nothingness is specifically prepared, specifically thought out, and 
he understands: W hatever is specifically prepared and

53 
 
 
specifically thought out is impermanent, is of a nature to cease. 
With that stance he reaches the destruction of influxes . If he does 
not reach the destruction of influxes,  due to that very attachment 
to the Dhamma, that very delight in the Dhamma, by the 
destruction of the five lower fetters , becomes one of spontaneous 
rebirth to attain perfect extinction there, not liable to return from 
that world. This householder is one Dhamma preached by that 
Fortunate One..................... and unattained free dom from 
bondage attained.  
 When said thus , the householder Dasama of 
Aṭṭhakanāgara said this to Venerable Ānanda: “Just as Venerable 
Sir, Ānanda, a man searching for one opening to a treasure, 
would at once hit upon eleven openings to that treasure, even so, 
Venerable Sir, Ānanda, while searching for one Doorway t o the 
Deathless, I have had the opportunity to hear about eleven 
Doorways to the Deathless. Just as Venerable Sir, a man were to 
have a house with eleven doors, when the house is on fire, he 
would be able to save himself through any one of these eleven 
Doorways to the Deathless, even so, Venerable Sir, I would be 
able to make go od my escape through any one of these eleven 
Doorways to the Deathless. Venerable Sir, these followers of 
other sects search for a fee as a tribute to their teachers. Why 
should I not make an offering to Venerable Ānanda.” 
 Then the householder  Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara 
assembled the congregation  of monks resident at Pāṭaliputta and 
Vesāli and offered them delicious food with his own hands. He 
also presented a pair of cloths to each monk and a triple robe to 
Venerable Ānanda. He had a d welling worth five hundr ed built  
for Venerable Ānanda. 
 – Aṭṭhakanāgara Sutta, M. I. 349ff.

54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Mettāvihārī yo bhikkhu 
pasanno buddhasāsane 
adḥigacche padaṁ santaṁ 
saṁkhārūpasamaṁ sukhaṁ’ 
  – Dhp. V. 368 
 
‘The monk who abides in Universal Love 
Pleased in the Buddha’s behest 
May attain to that state of peace 
The blissful stilling of preparations’

By the Same Author 
1. * Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought    (1971) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition    (2012) 
2. * Samyutta Nikaya – An Anthology, Part II – Wheel No, 183/185  (1972) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition    (2009) 
3. * Ideal Solitude – Wheel No, 188     (1973) 
4. * The Magic of the Mind      (1974) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition    (2007) 
5. Towards Calm and Insight     (1991) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition    (1998) 
6. From Topsy – turvydom to Wisdom – Volume I   (2003) 
7. From Topsy – turvydom to Wisdom – Volume II   (2012) 
8. Seeing Through       (1999) 
9. Towards A Better World      (2000) 
10. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume I    (2003) 
11. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume II    (2005) 
12. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume III    (2005) 
13. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume IV    (2006) 
14. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume V    (2007) 
15. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume VI    (2010) 
16. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume VII   (2012) 
17. Nibbana and The Fire Simile     (2010) 
18. A Majestic Tree of Merit     (2012) 
19. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective   (2014) 
 
* Buddhist Publication Society P.O. Box. 61, Kandy 
බ ෞද්ධ ධර්‍ම ග්‍රන්‍ථ ප්‍රකාශන  සමිතිය, තැ.බෙ. 61, මහනුවර
 
All enquiries regarding participation in the Dhammadana should be 
addressed to: 
Mr. Anura Rupasinghe 
No.27, Colombo Street, Kandy, Sri Lanka 
Tel: 081-2232376

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
1. * උත්තරීතර හුදකලාව –  (මුල් මුද්‍රණය)  ද්සකක් ංකක 172/173  (0991  
     – එම –  (නව මුද්‍රණය))  ධමම ග්‍රන්‍ථ මුද්‍රණය ාාර)  (1110  
2. පින් රුකකක මහිම       0911(  
3. විදකුන් උපකදක්        0991(  
4. නිවකන් නිවීම – පළමු කවළුම      0991(  
5. නිවකන් නිවීම – කදවන කවළුම      0991(  
6. නිවකන් නිවීම – කතවන කවළුම      0991(  
7. නිවකන් නිවීම – කිවුවන කවළුම      0991(  
8. නිවකන් නිවීම – පක්වන කවළුම      0999(  
9. නිවකන් නිවීම – ක)වන කවළුම      0999(  
10. නිවකන් නිවීම – කත්වන කවළුම      0999(  
11. නිවකන් නිවීම – ංටවන කවළුම      1111(  
12. නිවකන් නිවීම – නවවන කවළුම      1110(  
13. නිවකන් නිවීම – දකවන කවළුම      1111(  
14. නිවකන් නිවීම – එකකාකළාක්වන කවළුම     1112(  
15. නිවකන් නිවීම – පුක්තකාල මුද්‍රණය) – පරථම ාාග්‍)  (0-6 කවළු්ස    1111(  
16. නිවකන් නිවීම – පුක්තකාල මුද්‍රණය)  ( 0-00 කවළු්ස     1101(  
17. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 0 කවළුම     0999(  
18. පහන් කණයුව ධර් ම කද්නනා – 1 කවළුම     1111(  
19. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 3 කවළුම     1110(  
20. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 2 කවළුම     1113(  
21. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 5 කවළුම     1115(  
22. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 6 කවළුම     1116(  
23. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 1 කවළුම     1119(  
24. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 1 කවළුම     1101(  
25. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 9 කවළුම     1102(  
26. හිතක මහිම – 0       0999(  
27. හිතක මහිම – 1       1113(  
28. හිතක මහිම – 3        1101(  
29. හිත තුනීම        1111(  
30. පුවුත්ම හා නුවුත්ම       1111(  
31. ඇති හුටි දැක්ම        1110(  
32. දිවි කතකර් කුඳෑ ංඳූර       1110(  
33. ක) ංනුව ග්‍ි) කිහි)       1110(  
34. මා-පි) උවුටන       1111(

35. පරතිපත්ති පජාාව       1113(  
36. චලන චිතර)        1112(  
37. දි) කුළි)        1115(  
38. ංබිනික්මන        1113(  
39. බුදු කම) පුද්ග්‍ල)ා හා කමාා)      1119(  
40. මනකක් මා)ාව        1101(  
41. ාාවනා මාර්ග්‍)        1100(  
42. කකුන් පිළිකවත        1100(  
43. පිළිකවතින් පිළිකවතට       1100(  
44. තිකරණය මහිම        1101(  
45. කක)් කතාව        1101(  
46. කමත් කිකත් විමුක්ති)       1101(  
47. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 0 කවළුම      1101(  
48. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 1 කවළුම      1102(  
49. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 3 කවළුම      1102(  
50. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 4 කවළුම      1102(  
51. කක්මකන් නිවන       1101(  
52. තකපෝ ග්‍ුණයමහිම       1103(  
53. කමම චකරක)න් ධමම චකර)ට      1103(  
 * කබෞදධ ග්‍රන්‍ථ පරකානන කමිති), තු.කප. 61, මහනුවර.