Title: Questions and Answers Web Edition Rev 0 9
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Questions-and-Answers_Web_Edition_Rev_0-9.pdf
Word Count: 31944

i 
 
 
 
Questions & Answers 
On Dhamma  
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2016

ii 
 
Published strictly for free distribution. 
First Impression – 2016 
 
 
 
All Rights Reserved 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited. Permission to reprint 
could be obtained by writing to K.N.S.S.B. Dhamma books & 
sermons are available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
 
ISBN 978-955-3962-28-7 
 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
K.N.S.S.B,  
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  Karandana, Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Phone: 0114870333

iii 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
Dhamma books may be obtained from: 
1. Mr. Sunil Wijesinghe – 39/10, St. Rita’s Road, Mt. Lavinia.  
2. Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
3. Mr. Chandana Wijeratne 
23/79A, 1st  Lane, Dharmapala Place, Thalawathugoda. 
4. Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
5. Mr. S.A. Lionel 
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
6. Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – 15, Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
7. Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 ‘Saman’, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
8. Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
 Jayamanne Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
9. Prof. K.M. Wijeratne, Faculty of Dental Sciences,  
 University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.  
10. Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
11. Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
 Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.  
12. Mrs. Nera Wijesundara 
 Ilukpitiya Ayurvedic Clinic, Ilukpitiya, Gatahatta. 
13. Mr. D.C.A. Nissanka de Silva – 91A, Woodward Road, Galle. 
14. Mr. Piyadasa Samarakone 
 Suduwalipalassa, Kirinda, Tissamaharamaya. 
 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How does a bhikkhu know the ford? Here a 
bhikkhu goes from time to time to such 
bhikkhus who have learned much, who are well 
versed in the tra dition, who main tain the 
Dhamma, the Discipline, and the Codes, and he 
enquires and asks questions of them thus: ‘How 
is this, ven erable sir? What is the mean ing of 
this?’ These ven erable ones reveal to him what 
has not been revealed, clar ify what is not clear, 
and remove his doubts about numer ous things 
that give rise to doubt. That is how a bhikkhu 
knows the ford. 
 
- MAHĀGOPĀLAKA SUTTA (MN 33)

v 
 
About the K.N.S.S.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be 
offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -
thirsty world.  
 Accordingly, K.N.S.S.B. has taken upon itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net and the social networking site 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough. Those wishing to participate 
in this multifaceted Dhammadāna may note the account number 
of our Trust given below.  
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
(K.N.S.S.B) 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  
Karandana 
Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Acc. No. 007060000241, 
Sampath Bank, SWIFT: BSAMLKLX 
Branch Code: 070 
Branch: R.G. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo – 07,  
 Sri Lanka.

vi 
 
Contents 
Introduction  vii 
1. Discussions with Bhikkhu Yogānanda  1 
Part 1 2 
Part 2 11 
Part 3 18 
Part 4 26 
Part 5 33 
Part 6 40 
2. Correspondence with Bhikkhu Yogānanda 42 
Part 1 42 
Part 2 45 
Part 3 47 
Part 4 53 
Part 5 54 
3. Correspondence with Mrs. S. P.  58 
Part 1 58 
Part 2 65 
Part 3 67 
4. Correspondence with Mr. U.M.  77 
Part 1 77 
Part 2 89 
Part 3 91 
Part 4 93 
Part 5 97 
5. Correspondence with Mr. P.M.  101 
6. Bhikkhu Varapannyo  108 
7. Abhaya Himi  112 
8. Dhamma Vipula Himi  115 
9. Mr. Upul  118

vii 
 
Introduction 
This is a collection of my correspondence with readers 
preserved over the years. They have been put together as a book 
in the hope that it will clarify some deep points for those with 
inquisitive minds who wish to delve deep into the depths of the 
Dhamma. Except in a few instances, we have substi tuted the 
initials for the names of the questioners. The majority of the 
correspondence were in English. Only three were in Sinhala.  
 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
Sanghopasthāna Suwa Sevana 
Kirillawala Watta 
Dammulla, Karandana 
Sri Lanka 
(B.E. 2559) March 2016

1. Discussions with Bhikkhu Yogānanda  
Introductory Note by the Author: 
This is a series  of articles on Ven Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda Thera. In November 2009, I had the opportunity 
to stay at his monastery for a few d ays and have several long 
conversations with him. The articles are based on the 
recordings of these discussions.  
- Bhikkhu Yogānanda

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Part 1 
Bhante Ñāṇananda is not the monk I thought he would be. 
He is much more. As I recall my first meet ing with him in his 
small cave kuti, the first word that crosses my mind is “innocent”. 
For a senior monk who has been in the order for more than 40 
years, he is dis armingly sim ple, unpre tentious and friendly. 
Childlike even. But you would not get that impres sion from his 
classics Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought and The 
Magic of the Mind. 
 I w as intro duced to his writ ings by my friend Ven. 
Sumana, an English monk. It was Bhante Ñāṇananda’s Nibbāna – 
The Mind Stilled collection that I first read. Later I would go 
through The Magic of the Mind, which I would find both enchanting and baffling at the same time. It would take me even longer to 
take up  Concept and Reality. All of them would leave a last ing 
impression on me, and define the way I inter pret the Dhamma, 
but not before com pletely mis conceiving what he was say ing, 
engage i n a lengthy cor respondence with him, and finally meet 
him only to learn that I was mis erably wrong on many things all 
that time. And it would be a meeting I’ll always remember. 
 I was a staunch ‘Ñāṇavirist’ until that meet ing, so for 
me Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled was more or less a com mentary 
on Notes on Dhamma by Ven. Ñāṇavira Thera. Sure enough there 
were some pas sages here and there that took some effort to beat 
into submission, but language is a flex ible medium and the mind 
is infi nitely cre ative. On the few occa sions when that prob lem 
could not be easily shrugged off, I resorted to con sidering Bhante 
Ñāṇananda the  scholar who needed to bow in front of the  
experience of Ven. Ñāṇavira. 
 The first  vassa in 2009  was a time when my 
understanding of the Dhamma went through some changes. I

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

noted those thoughts down, and sent some of it to Bhante 
Ñāṇananda for review. A pa rticularly long let ter that ran into 
more than 50 pages took two months for a reply. Bhante thought 
it would take an equally long let ter to explain the mat ters, which 
he was not in a position to write: he had just returned from a two -
month stay in t he hospital. Instead, he invited me to visit him in 
his monastery and stay a few days, which created a few problems, 
because Ven. Katukurunde Ñāṇananda Thera is an outcast. 
 His crit ical analy sis of Bud dhist texts and the 
unwillingness to adhere t o the com mentarial tra dition has made 
Bhante Ñāṇananda a rad ical and a heretic. He prob ably knew 
what he was get ting into from the ve ry begin ning. In the 
introduction to Concept and Reality, written in 1969, he states: 
 
“It is feared that th e novelty of some of our 
interpretations will draw two types of extreme reac tion. 
On the one hand, it might give rise to a total antipa thy 
towards the crit ical analy sis of doc trinal points as 
attempted here. On the oth er, it might engen der an 
unreasonable distrust leading to a sweeping condemnation 
of the com mentaries as a whole. This work has faile d in 
its pur pose if its criti cal scrutiny of the occa sional 
shortcomings in the commentarial literature makes anyone 
forget his indeb tedness to the com mentaries for his 
knowledge of the Dhamma.” [1]  
 Over the years he would become less apolo getic and more 
straightforward in his asser tions, but his crit icisms would always 
remain sub tle, his delight ful sar casm barely noticed unless 
approached with the nec essary back ground knowl edge and the 
attention they deserve. For exam ple, crit icising 
the Ābhidhammika atomism and the commentarial sabhāva (ownessence) doctrine, he says:

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

“An insight med itator, too, goes thr ough a sim ilar 
experience when he con templates on name -and-form, 
seeing the four ele ments as empty and void of essence, 
which will give him at least an iota of the con viction that 
this drama of existence is empty and insubstantial. He will 
realize that, as in the case of the dumb show, he is 
involved with things that do not really exist. […] See ing 
the reciprocal relationship between name -and-form, he is 
disinclined to dab ble in con cepts or gulp down a dose of 
prescriptions. […] Wh at is essen tial here, is the very 
understanding of essence lessness. If one sits down to 
draw up lists of con cepts and pre scribe them, it would 
only lead to a mental constipation.” [2] 
 It is in his lat est booklet Nibbana and the Fire Simile that 
I found him being the most direct: 
“There is a flush of Bud dhist literature thriving in 
the West which att empts to interpret this fire simile in the 
light of the Vedic myth that the extin guished fire ‘goes 
into hiding’. Though the Buddha succeeded in convincing 
the Brahmin interlocutors of the dependently arisen nature 
of the fire by the reductio -ad-absurdum method, these 
scholars seem to be imper vious to his argu ments. What is 
worse, mis interpretations have eve n sought refuge in 
blatant mistranslations of sacred texts.  
[…]  
The term ‘extinc tion’ is anath ema to the West in 
general. Perhaps as a euphemism, ‘extin guishment’ might 
be ‘pass able’. But rather than play ing with the ‘fire -
simile’ it is better to accept the obvious conclusions, willy 
nilly.” [3] 
 To appre ciate the rebel liousness of these pas sages and 
many others like it, one needs to under stand the context in which 
they were writ ten. The monas tic Sangha in gen eral is quite

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

dogmatic and tra ditionalist, not en tirely wel coming of 
challenging views. When the Nib bāna sermons were deliv ered at 
the Nissarana Vanaya, Bhante Ñāṇananda had the back ing of his 
teacher, the illus trious Elder  Ven. Matara Sri Ñāṇārāma 
Mahathera, who not only allowed him the free dom but invited 
and encour aged him to express his rad ical views. Even then he 
was crit icized by many of his col leagues. Those views were a 
main rea son that led to Bhante Ñā ṇananda’s depar ture from the 
Nissarana Vanaya after the death of Ven. Ñāṇārāma. He left on 
his own accord, and set up a small monastery in Devalegama: 
Pothgulgala Aranya. It was there that I first met him in November 
last year. 
 
 It is late in the evening that I arrive, and Bhante 
Ñāṇananda is out vis iting a doctor, something that was becom ing 
more frequent as his asthma was get ting worse. After he returns 
at around 10 pm, I’m taken to his small cave kuti by his stu dent 
Ven. Damita. I’m sur prised to see how frail and almost frag ile 
Bhante Ñāṇananda is. I intro duce myself; he slaps his head and 
laughs, and asks: “How did you manage to escape?” 
 The next day, after  piṇḍapāta I went to visit him in his 
kuti. He warmly wel comes me. I pu ll ou t his last reply to my 
letters in which he pro vided some poin ts to pon der on, and start 
asking him for clar ifications on each of the points. As I sit there 
on the floor lis tening to his thor oughly informative commentary, 
some of my cherished views get blasted to bits. 
 Answering a ques tion deal ing with the struc ture of 
experience, Bhante Ñāṇananda quotes the  Hemakamāṇavapucchā of the Sutta Nipāta (from mem ory, of course), and uses 
the simile of the plain tain trunk to illus trate the way knowl edge 
of experience is gained.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

 “It’s a beau tiful sutta, where Hemaka explains the rea son 
why he gained faith in the Buddha. 
 
‘Ye me pubbe viyākaṃsu 
Huraṃ gotama sāsanā, 
Iccāsi iti bhavissati 
Sabbaṃ taṃ itihitihaṃ 
Sabbaṃ taṃ takkavaḍḍhanaṃ 
Nāhaṃ tattha abhiramiṃ. 
Tvañ ca me dhammam akkhāhi taṅhā nigghātanaṃ muni, 
Yaṃ viditvā sato caraṃ tare loke visattikaṃ.’ 
 
‘Those in the past who explained their teachings to 
me outside Gotama’s dispensation said “so it was and so it 
will be”. All that is “so and so” talk; all that pro moted 
speculation. I did  not delight in them. And you, O Sage, 
do expound to me the teach ing of destruc tion of crav ing, 
knowing which far ing mind fully I shall cross over the 
clinging in the world.’ 
 “Those verses cut to the heart of the prob lem. They show 
the value of thi s akālika Dhamma. Taṇhā is some thing that is 
here and now, and it is taṇhakkhayo that is Nibbāna. 
 “Now, the sim ile of the plan tain trunk comes in here. At 
the end, all of this is just a heap of  saṇkhāra–s – preparations, 
which the Bud dha has equated to a pl antain trunk. It is not 
necessary to roll the sheaths to real ize the pith lessness of it; one 
just needs to take the sword of  paññā and cut through. From the 
cross section itself one realizes. Actually that is what is meant by 
understanding paṭiccasamuppāda, not mem orizing the 12 links. 
The Dhamma is akālika because of this principle.” 
 In his let ter Bhante has men tioned the impor tance of 
understanding the dif ference between vijānāti and pajānāti when 
it comes to discussing viññāṇa. I ask for an elaboration.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “This is something that tends to get over looked. There are 
many words that share the ñā root in the texts: sañjānāti, vijānāti, 
pajānāti, abhijānāti, parijānāti, ājānāti. There may be more. It is 
with a reason that there are these differences between them. 
 “It is com monly known that the root  ñā stands for 
‘knowledge’. Why is it said ‘vijānāti’ when it could have eas ily 
been said  ‘jānāti’? Most trans lations just use ‘knows’. 
But vijānāti means ‘dis criminatively knows’. What is the main 
job of viññāṇa? We can clar ify from the  Mahāvedalla Sutta. 
There we get the phrases yaṃ sañjānāti taṃ vijānāti and yaṃ 
vijānāti taṃ pajānāti. ‘What one perceives, that one 
discriminates’ and ‘what one discriminates, that one knows’. 
 “From th e exam ples that f ollow that phrase we can 
understand the  jānana level of each. For  sañjānāti: Nīlakampi 
sañjānāti, pītakampi sañjānāti, lohitakampi sañjānāti, odātampi 
sañjānāti – using colours. When  someone is com ing from a 
distance, all we see is j ust some blob of colour. When he comes 
closer we separate him from the others: ‘oh, he is this per son, not 
the other’. When we know deeply, at  pajānāti level, all is the 
same, just the four ele ments, but let’s le ave that aside for the 
moment.” 
 “What are the examples given for vijānāti? There are two; 
the first is  sukhan’ti pi vijānāti, dukkhan’ti pi vijānāti, 
adukkhamasukhan’ti pi vijānāti. This clearly shows 
that vijānana is unique to liv ing beings, not found in trees and 
rocks. The first level of  viññāṇa is in  discriminating between 
different feelings. For instance, in the  Mahānidāna Sutta we find 
the Bud dha ask ing Ven. Ananda Thera whether there would be 
any self notion where there is no feeling. The answer is ‘no’. That 
shows that feel ing is fun damental. So what is there in feel ing? 
Bifurcation, which is the most fundamental delusion.”

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

 He pauses to say how glad he is that there is no need to 
use ‘footnotes’ when talking to me. I’m glad I did the home work. 
If you want to find Bhante Ñāṇananda in his zone, do the 
necessary prepara tory stud ies, and be will ing to put up with 
copious amounts of Pāḷi, not all of which would be translated. 
 But then he asks “Do you remem ber the other exam ple 
for vijānāti?” I don’t. 
 “There is a sec ond exam ple for  vijānāti from the  Khajjanīya Sutta:  
ambilampi vijānāti, tittakampi vijānāti, kaṭukampi 
vijānāti, madhurakampi vijānāti, khārikampi vijānāti, 
akhārikampi vijānāti, loṇikampi vijānāti, aloṇikampi 
vijānāti — different tastes. Do you see any dif ference 
between knowing colours and knowing tastes?” 
 I mumble my ignorance. 
 “With taste the dis crimination is explicit. When we taste 
something, it takes a while to decide whether it ’s sweet or sour or 
salty. Some foods we can’t eas ily cat egorize by taste, like 
the Nelli fruit. But it is not essen tial to go tha t far: what is 
important is to remem ber that dis criminating between dif ferent 
feeling tones is the main function of viññāṇa. 
 “A unique fea ture of  paṭiccasamuppāda is the way one 
result becomes the cause for another. One pulls the other in. 
When we take a pair of items in paṭiccasamuppāda, one member 
is also a mem ber in the next pair. The very ques tion whether  
saññā and viññāṇa are the same or dif ferent reeks of abso lutism, 
an attempt to sep arate them into water -tight com partments. But 
their connectedness is pointed out in the Sutta with  yaṃ sañjānāti 
taṃ vijānāti, yaṃ vijānāti taṃ pajānāti. This doesn’t mean all 
three are the same either. The nuances are important.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “The dif ference between  viññāṇa and paññā is explained 
as paññā bhāvetabbā, viññāṇaṃ pariññeyyaṃ: paññā is to be 
developed, viññāṇa is to be under stood. When  paññā is 
fulfilled, viññāṇa is fully com prehended. As in the magic show: 
to see through the magic is to miss the show.” 
 The last sen tence is a ref erence to Bh ante Ñāṇananda’s 
short masterpiece The Magic of the Mind. 
 “In the flood lights of  paññā there is no room for the 
shadows of viññāṇa. The delusion of self-love reflects a world, so 
there are  the two: an I and a world. Reflections on the eye, 
reflections on the ear, reflec tions on  the mind: tak ing these 
reflections that fall on the senses as true, the mate rialists go 
looking for a world out there. When the Bud dha called all of that 
a mere illusion, he meant all, includ ing concepts. That’s why it is 
said sabba dhammakkhayaṃpatto vimutto upadhisaṅkhaye.[4] Mind and dhammas are the last resort of delusion.” 
 This is one of the most con troversial of Bhante 
Ñāṇananda’s views. The Magic of the Mind discusses this topic at 
length. He has been called an idealist and an illusionist because of 
it; he rejects both accusations. Being a Ñāṇavirist at the time, this 
‘illusionist’ interpretation was some thing I too found dif ficult to 
accept, espe cially in light of Ve n. Ñāṇavira’s explicit and 
vehement rejec tion of the notion of māyā as a hindu con cept 
shared by the Mahayanists. 
 “It is  viññāṇa that dis criminates between a sense and an 
object. The Ābhidhammikas are stuck thinking that even when all 
else falls apart  mano viññāṇa remains. It is like we se parating a 
flowing river in to parts, nam ing them, and then putting the parts  
back together to cre ate a river. I remem ber something Dr. W.S. 
Karunaratne said: ‘the gram mar of nat ure does not cor respond to 
the gram mar of lan guage’. That’s a nice say ing. This is 
beautifully illus trated in the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta. We sep arate the

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

flux of existence in to parts, with  papañca-saññā-saṇkhā. 
Those saṇkhās are mere sug gestions. They can only nudge us 
toward a cer tain direc tion. We can not understand reality 
using them. 
 “Words have a lim ited capacity. It is okay to use them as 
long as one real izes their lim itations. One who real izes their 
limitations would not be lim ited by them. The Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 
ends with  imā kho Citta lokasamaññā lokaniruttiyo lokavohārā 
lokapaññattiyo, yāhi Tathāgato voharati, aparāmasaṃ. We must 
be so grateful to the ancient bhāṇakas: it would have been s uch a 
loss if that last word were forgotten. Aparāmasaṃ – not grasping. 
That’s where the whole secret lies.” 
 And then he laughs his delight ful laugh, as if all that 
should have been obvious in the first place. 
 
NOTES 
1. Ñāṇananda. K. (1997) [1971], Concept and Reality in 
Early Buddhist Thought, Buddhist Publication Society, 
p. VI. 
2. Ñāṇananda, Katukurunde, Bhikkhu (2004), Nibbāna – 
The Mind Stilled, Vol.II, Dharma Grantha Mudrana 
Bharaya, p. 183. 
3. Ñāṇananda, Katukurunde, Bhikkhu (2010), Nibbāna and 
the Fire Simile, Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bharaya, p. 26. 
4. Sn. 992

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

Part 2 
There is hardly any teach ing that has given rise to more 
internal dis putes among Bud dhists than  paṭiccasamuppāda. My 
next ques tion is based on a com ment by Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
which con siders paṭiccasamuppāda as the golden mean 
between atthitā (existence) an d natthitā (non-existence), 
replacing them with samudaya (arising) and vaya (passing away). 
 “Everyone knows that the mid dle way is the noble eight -
fold path. Every one knows that  the first ser mon was the 
Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta. But if for so me rea son 
Āḷārakālāma or Uddaka Rāma putta were alive, what we would 
have as the Dham macakkappavattana would be some thing short 
like the Bāhiya Sutta, because they were fac ing a du ality of a 
different nature. 
  “The five ascetics were giv en a teach ing based on the 
ethical mid dle path, avoid ing the two extremes of kāmasukhallikānuyoga and attakilamathānuyoga. But the mid dle pat h of 
right view is found in the Kaccānagotta Sutta, beautifully used by 
Ven. Nāgār juna. When the Ther avadins got engrossed with the 
Abhidhamma they for got about it. The Mād hyamikas were alert 
enough to give it the attention it deserved. 
  “Extremism is found not only in ethics, but also in var ious 
kinds of views. The dual ity of asti and nāsti has a long his tory. I 
don’t have much knowl edge in the Vedas, but I remem ber in Ṛg 
Veda, in the Nāsādīya Sūkta, [1] you get the beau tiful 
phrase nāsadāsīn no sadāsīt tadānīṃ. They were spec ulating 
about the begin nings: did exis tence come from non-existence or 
vice-versa. 
 “All th ose kinds of dual ities, be it asti/nāsti or sabbaṃ 
ekattaṃ/sabbaṃ puthuttaṃ etc. were rejected by the Bud dha: 
majjhena Tathāgato Dhammaṃ deseti – he taught the Dhamma

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

by the middle. It’s not just the mid dle path. It’s not a mix ture of 
50% of each. We usu ally think that the mid dle is between two 
ends. It’s a rejec tion of bo th ends and an intro duction of a novel 
standpoint. Again, I remem ber Dr. W.S. Karunaratne say ing how 
paṭiccasamuppāda, both as a phi losophy and as a word, was 
novel to Indian think ing. There were other vāda–s such as 
Adhiccasamuppāda and Issaranimmāna, but not paṭiccasamuppāda, and it is not a vāda. 
 “The ‘par roting’ method of paṭiccasamuppāda involves 
dishing out the 12 term s, and even then, the paṭiloma is often 
forgotten. But the impor tant thing is the prin ciple, embed ded 
in ‘asmiṃ sati…’, as seen in many Sut tas. There again, I also 
made a mis take inadvertently when trans lating: in early edi tions 
of The Magic of the Mind I used ‘this/that’ following the standard 
English trans lations. That’s com pletely w rong. It should be  
‘this/this’. 
 “In the for mula we must take two ele ments that make a 
pair and analyse the con ditionality between them. ‘That’ implies 
something out side the pair, w hich is mislead ing. Paṭiccasamuppāda is to be seen among the ele ments in a pair. The trick 
is in the mid dle; there’s no point in hold ing on to the ends. And 
even that middle needs to be let go of, not grasped. 
 “When intro ducing paṭiccasamuppāda we first get the 
principle: imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ 
uppajjati… and then  yadidaṃ – the word yadidaṃ clearly shows 
that what fol lows is an il lustration. And then the well -known 12 
elements are given. But how is it in the  paṭiloma? Avijjaya tu 
eva – there’s an empha sis, as if to sa y: yes, the aris ing of 
suffering is a fact, it is the nature of the world, but it doesn’t end 
there; from the fad ing away of that same igno rance this suffering 
could be made to cease. That is why we can’t cat egorically say 
that any of these things exist or not. It entirely depends 
on upādāna. It is  upādāna that decides between exis tence and

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

non-existence. When there is no  upādāna you get  anupādā 
parinibbāna, right then and there. And that is why the Dhamma 
is akālika.” 
 The impossibility of mak ing categorical statements about 
existence was dis cussed extensively in Bhante Ñāṇananda’s  The 
Magic of the Mind, and he r eminds me again about the 
importance of the Kālakārāma Sutta which provided the basis for 
that book. He quickly adds that  the Buddha’s stand is not 
something like that of his con temporary sceptic agnostic Sañjaya 
Bellaṭṭhiputta, the so -called eel -wriggler; rather, the sit uation is 
beyond what could be expressed through the linguistic medium. It 
can only be known individually: paccattaṃ veditabbo. 
 His inter pretation of  paṭiccasamuppāda, which dramati -
cally devi ates from the tra ditional exe gesis, has earned Bhante 
Ñāṇananda a few vehe ment crit ics. He amus edly men tions a 
recent let ter sent by a monk where he was accused of ‘being a 
disgrace to the Theriya tra dition’. This crit icism, no doubt  
coming from a Ther avāda dog matist, is under standable see ing 
how accom modating Bhante Ñāṇananda is when it comes to 
teachings traditionally considered Mahāyāna, hence taboo for any 
self-respecting Ther avādin. How ever, if one delves deeper, one 
would see that he is only try ing to stay as close as pos sible to 
early Buddhist teachings. 
 “I didn’t quote from the Mahāyāna texts in the Nib bāna 
sermons,” he says, “because there was no need. All that was 
needed was already found in the Sut tas. Teachers like Nāgār juna 
brought to light what was already there but was hid den from 
view. Unfortunately his later followers turned it in to a vāda.” 
 He goes on to quote two of his favourite verses from Ven. 
Nāgārjuna’s Mūlamādhyamakakārikā (as usual, from memory):

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Śūnyatā sarva-dṛṣtīnaṃ proktā niḥsaranaṃ jinaiḥ, 
yeṣāṃ śūnyatā-dṛṣtis tān asādhyān babhāṣire [MK 13.8] 
The Victorious Ones have declared that empti ness is the 
relinquishing of all views. Those who are possessed of the 
view of emptiness are said to be incorrigible. 
Sarva-dṛṣti-prahāṇāya yaḥ saddharmam adeśayat, 
anukampam upādāya taṃ namasyāmi gautamaṃ  
– [MK 26.30] 
I reverently bow to Gautama who, out of com passion, has 
taught the doctrine in order to relinquish all views. 
 Bhante doesn’t bother trans lating the verses; the ones 
provided above are by David Kalupahana. 
 “When I first read the Kārikā I too was doubt ing Ven. 
Nāgārjuna’s san ity” he laughs. “But the work needs to be 
understood in the con text. He was tak ing a jab at the 
Sarvāstivādins. To be hon est, even the oth ers deserve the rebuke, 
although they now try to get away by using Sarvās tivāda as an 
excuse. How skilled Ven. Nāgārjuna must have been, to com pose 
those verses so elegantly and filling them with so much mean ing, 
like the Dhamma pada verses. It’s quite amaz ing. This has been 
rightly understood by Prof. Kalupahana.” 
 Prof. David J. Kalupahana is an emi nent Sri Lankan 
scholar who stirred up another con troversy when he por trayed 
Ven. Nāgārjuna as a reformist try ing to res urrect early Bud dhist 
teachings. He had been a lec turer dur ing Bhante Ñāṇananda’s 
university days as a layman at Peradeniya. 
 “If there is no sub stance in a nything, what is left is 
emptiness. But m any peo ple are afraid of words, l ike śūnyatā. 
They want to pro tect their four.” With that ‘irrev erent’ comment 
about the four  paramattha dhamma–s of the Abhid hamma, 
Bhante Ñāṇananda breaks into amused laughter.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “If one does not approach the commentarial literature with 
a critical eye, one would be trapped. Unfor tunately many are. In 
fact, I had to remove a few pages from the man uscript of Concept 
and Reality on Ven. Nyanaponika’s request”. 
 I’m disappointed to hear that, as  Concept and Reality had 
already become my favourite com mentary on the Bud dhist 
teachings. There are some delight fully under stated crit icisms of 
the traditional views in the book, and I wonder what we have lost 
in the edi torial process at the hands of  Ven. Nyanaponika Thera, 
an undoubt edly very learned yet quite con servative scholar. 
When I express my dis may, Bhante Ñāṇananda adds that now he 
tends to agree with Ven. Nyanaponika. 
 “I did it unwill ingly, but later on I also th ought it may 
have been too much as it was my first book. Per haps what is left 
is quite enough. The mes sage still gets through. Some of that I 
could restate in the Nib bāna sermons as I had the back ing of my 
teacher.” 
 This teacher is Ven. Matara Sri Ñā ṇārāma Mahathera, 
then abbot of the Nissarana Vanaya and an illustrious elder of the 
Sri Lankan forest tradition. I ask Bhante what the response of the 
Sangha was when those controversial sermons were delivered. 
 “Apart from a very few, the oth ers didn ’t really 
understand. Some went around crit icising, call ing me a heretic. 
Fortunately it didn’t get out of hand thanks to the teacher. But 
then some others like Ven. Khemānanda were very appreciative.” 
 Our dis cussion moves on to  Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera. I 
wonder what influ ence this rad ical monk had on Bhante 
Ñāṇananda, but I can’t muster enough courage to ask directly. So 
I just let him speak on his views.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

 “It is true, Ven. Ñāṇavīra made a start. But I think he went 
to an extreme in his criticisms, until his followers were drop ping 
even the use ful things. And he fai led to make the necessary 
distinctions between saupādisesa and anupādisesa Nibbāna 
elements. That led to an idealized view of the noble disci ple. And 
now there is a lin eage of ‘Ñāṇavīrists’ who fail to see any thing 
beyond Ven. Ñāṇavīra’s views. They are simply idolizing him.” 
 I was one of them until I st arted a cor respondence with 
Bhante Ñāṇananda, so I know the way of thinking. 
 To end the dis cussion I pick up the thorni est of issues. I 
ask: “What is a ‘thing’? Is it com pletely imag inary, or is it 
something made by the mind using the ingre dients ‘out there’?” 
A straightforward answer to that rather extrem ist question would 
make Bhante Ñāṇananda’s position clear on the gamut of views. 
 “I’m sure you have read Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation 
of the Saṃyutta Nikāya. You must have come acro ss 
the Pheṇapindūpama Sutta. In the notes you’ll see Ven. Bo dhi 
explaining that although the lump is illu sory, the ingre dients 
aren’t. It is worse when it comes to the magic show. He says that 
only the magic is not real; the magician’s appur tenances are. This 
is a dis tortion of the sim ile given by the Bud dha. We must 
appreciate the great work done by  Ven. Bodhi, but it is 
unfortunate that he is bound by the commentarial tradition. 
 “What is con sidered the ‘truth’  is rel ative to each 
individual. Each per son gives evi dence in the court of real ity 
based on his own level of expe rience. For example, parents often 
give false explanations to their little children. But these are true to 
the kids. When asked, the kid will tell what his par ents told him. 
It’s true for the child, but not for us. In  the famous commentarial 
story about Ven. Tissa Thera we find him see ing a woman as a 
skeleton, and say ing so when aske d by her hus band. The 
venerable was closer to the truth.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “When we tran scend one level of truth, the new level 
becomes what is true for us. The previous one is now false. What 
one experiences may not be what is expe rienced by the world in 
general, but that may well be true r. But how do we reach the 
ultimate truth? This is beautifully explained in the Dhātuvibhaṇga 
Sutta: Taṃ saccaṃ, yaṃ amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ. And from 
the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta: amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ tad 
ariyā saccato vidū. It is Nib bāna that is of non -falsifying nature, 
where there is no ‘thing’. Nib bāna is the high est truth because 
there is no other truth to transcend it. 
 “The Bud dha called him self the first chick in this era to 
break out of the egg of igno rance. All these won derful things we 
do such as space travel all hap pen inside this  saḷāyatana shell. 
If paṭiccasamuppāda were presented prop erly, per haps a few 
more chicks would be able to break through today. 
 “Ven. Nāgār juna was right: at the end, all is  empty. We 
are not will ing to accept that exis tence is a per version. Existence 
is suffering precisely because it is a perversion.” 
 It may not be a cat egorical answer, and it prob ably isn’t 
possible to give one. But I will bring this issue up again later. 
 We have been talking for more than an hour, and it is time 
for Bhante’s meal. I end the dis cussion, look ing for ward to 
another one in the evening. 
 
NOTES 
1. Ṛgveda: sūkta 10.129 (English translation)

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Part 3 
In the tra ditional exe gesis, pancupādānakkhandhā (five 
aggregates of clinging) and nāma-rūpa (name-and-form) are used 
interchangeably, imply ing that these two are the same. As Ven. 
Ñāṇavīra Thera also pointed out in his  Notes on Dhamma, this is 
a dubious interpretation that doe s not find explicit sup port in the 
Suttas. I ask Bhante Ñāṇananda how we should under stand the 
connection between pancupādānakkhandha and nāma-rūpa. 
 “It is quite com mon to hear that these two are the same: 
that rūpa-upādānakkhandha is the same as the rūpa in namarūpa, and the other four aggre gates are nāma. That is like try ing 
to measure distance in kilograms – a confusion. 
 “In that beau tiful seminar in a moon lit night recorded in 
the Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta, it is made quite clear that  viññāna cannot be a part of  nāma. One ven erable asks “Ko hetu ko paccayo 
rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya?” and so on — what is the cause 
for the des ignation of each aggre gate? And the Bud dha answers 
that it is the four great ele ments that give rise to the des ignation 
of an aggre gate of form. For  vedanā, saññā and saṅkhāra, it 
is phassa – contact. But for viññāna, the cause is nāma-rūpa. 
 “We are used to explaining paṭiccasamuppāda in the form 
of the stan dard 12 links start ing from avijjā. How ever, always 
trying to put  avijjā in the lead in exe gesis led to misinterpretations of cer tain Sut tas. For exam ple, com menting on 
the Mahānidāna Sutta, Ven. Buddhaghosa Thera brings in the so -
called three -life inter pretation whereas there is noth ing miss ing 
from the Sutta itself. As I tried to explain in  The Magic of the 
Mind, it is from the prepa rations that are done in the  darkness of 
ignorance that the duality of viññāna and nāma-rūpa arise.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “And what is that dual ity? The same dual ity seen by the 
dog on a plank over water.” Bhante Ñāṇananda is refer ring to a 
simile he has often used in Dhamma discussions: 
“A dog i s cross ing a plank over a stream. Half way 
through it looks into the water and sees another dog there. 
It wags its tail and the other responds. It snarls and the 
other reacts. It looks away to ignore, but when it looks 
again the water dog is still there looking on. 
The view of an exist ing self is also due to such an unwise 
attention. “I think there fore I am” is the result ing wrong 
conclusion. Neither narcissistic love nor masochis tic hate 
can solve the prob lem. Ignoring with a cyn ical sneer is to 
evade the problem. Therefore one has to thras h-down this 
problem of the elu sive sel f image to the basic 
confrontation between conscious ness and name 
and form.” 
– “Reflect Rightly on the Reflection”  
From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom 
 “Nāma-rūpa is a deception. It is unreal. But in the illu sion 
of viññāna, wherever you look, it is there. What ever it may be, 
whether it’s a sight or a sound or a thought, it is just  vedanā, 
saññā, cetanā, phassa, manasikāra. But here again there is a 
common mis interpretation: when list ing the  nāma-dhamma–s, 
some start from  phassa, vedanā,… They put  phassa to the front. 
But phassa has to be at the back.” 
 He says the above in Sinhala, where the word for ‘back’ is 
‘passa’. The pun is lost in trans lation. As for putting phassa first, 
it is often  seen in the Abhidhamma literature when list ing 
the cetasika–s.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

 “They say so because in paṭiccasamuppāda, phassa 
comes before vedanā. That doesn’t apply here. In the Suttas, such 
as the Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, the ordering is never in that form. The 
Buddha and the Ara hants were not mis taken; logically one can 
have phassa first, but  psychologically it is vedanā that is primary. 
It is through  vedanā that one rec ognizes the four great ele ments, 
not through  phassa. The self notion hinges on  vedanā. That is 
why it deserves to be the first. 
 “So one  develops a  saññā according to  vedanā, based on 
which one has cetanā, at which point the ‘personality’ is taken for 
granted. This cre ates the dual ity nec essary for  phassa. Manasikāra is at the end, some what like  ekaggatā, uni fying them 
all: manasikāra sambhavā sabbe dhammā – all things arise from 
attention. 
 “With vedanā, the self notion ‘awak ens’, although here it 
is more like dream ing. Or like a blind man grop ing in the dark. 
The blind man reacts only to the feel ing of bumping on to something. That is why Ven. Ananda Thera replied to the Bud dha that 
it is not pos sible to have any self notion when there is no  
vedanā. Taṇhā arises from vedanā. 
 “So where does pañcupādānakkhandha come in? 
Pañcupādānakkhandhā is the final result of the constant tussle 
between viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa. This is made clear in the 
Mahāsaḷāyatanika Sutta. What is gath ered from the six  viññāṇa–
s, at the end, are fil tered down to things grasped as “these are my 
forms, these are my feelings, these are my perceptions, …” 
 “You might remember how the Buddha explained the designation of a  khandha, in the Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta:  atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ 
vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā (past, future, 
present, internal or exter nal, gross or sub tle, inferior or superior, 
far or near). That’s the demarcation of the heap.”

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 One of the main th emes of Bhante Ñāṇananda’s 
classic The Magic of the Mind is the illu sory nature 
of viññāṇa. Earlier we discussed some of the nuances involved in 
differentiating between  viññāṇa and paññā, and now the dis cussion moves on to the rela tionship between  viññāṇa and nāmarūpa. 
 “It’s a pity that many Buddhists still cannot accept that the 
goal of this prac tice is the ces sation of viññāṇa. It is a suf fering; 
the simile for viññāṇâhāra is being beaten by a spear 300 times a 
day. The dark ness of  avijjā creates the back ground for it. As I 
pointed out with the sim iles of the cin ema and the magic show, 
these things can only happen as long as there is dark ness. All this 
is just an illu sion, a drama. In fact, the old est mean ing 
of saṅkhāra is found in that context of a stage show. 
 “The con nection between  viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa can be 
illustrated with a child ish simile: it is like a dog chas ing its own 
tail. The modern Rohitassas who try to over come a world as seen 
through viññāna are no dif ferent. They chase after what the 
Buddha dismissed as an illu sion. There is noth ing to go chas ing 
after here; all that needs to be done is to stay where one is, and to 
realize that it is merely a shadow. When the dark ness of avijjā is 
dispelled, saṅkhāra–s are stilled. The game is over. 
 “Viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa revolve around each  other at an 
indescribable speed. That’s why it was told to Ven. Sāti that it is 
wrong to say  “viññāṇaṃ sandhāvati saṃsarati anaññaṃ” (it is 
this same viññāṇa that runs and wanders, not another). If only the 
Ābhidhammikas real ized that  parivatta in lahuparivattaṃ 
cittaṃ means ‘revolv ing’: viññāṇa paccayā nāmarūpaṃ, 
nāmarūpa paccayā viññāṇaṃ. 
 “The Gāthās in the Sagāthaka Vagga, although often not 
given enough atten tion, are very deep. I stopped the Nib bāna

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

series at ser mon num ber 33, but w hat I had planned for 34, 
although never deliv ered, was based on that beau tiful verse from 
the Nimokkha Sutta:  
 
Nandībhavaparikkhayā saññāviññāṇasaṅkhayā, 
Vedanānaṃ nirodhā upasamā evaṃ khvāhaṃ āvuso 
jānāmi 
Sattānaṃ nimokkhaṃ pamokkhaṃ vivekan’ti. [SN. 1.2] 
 
When delight and existence are exhausted 
When perception and consciousness are both destroyed 
When feelings cease and are appeased – thus, O friend, 
Do I know, for them that live 
Deliverance, freedom, detachment. 
– Translation by Bhante Ñāṇananda:  
Saṃyutta Nikāya – An Anthology 
 “In all other reli gions, viññāṇa was taken as a unit, and 
worse, as the soul. It is taught that even if every thing else is 
impermanent, this isn’t. And it is taught as that which 
reaches Brahmā. But the Bud dha poi nted out that it is a mere 
illusion. It can’t exist on its own. 
 “That brings us to a nice point. What is the sim ile used by 
Ven. Sariputta Thera to illustrate the aññamaññapaccayatā (interdependence) of viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa?” 
 “The simile of the two bundles of bamboo reeds” I reply. 
 “Why is that? Couldn’t  he have cho sen something better, 
some wood with pith – say, two bundles of Sāla wood? See how 
penetrative they are even in their use of sim iles. The Pāḷi for 
bamboo reed is tacasāra. Taca means skin or peel, so tacasāra 
means that which has just  the skin for its pith. The thing taken by

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

the world as being full of pith is sum marily dis missed by Ven. 
Sariputta Thera. It’s not a unit either, but a bundle. 
 “I’m reminded of some thing Ven. Ñāṇavīra said: ‘all 
consciousness is self con sciousness.’ That is quite right. 
Occasionally he came up with bril liant insights like that which 
shook the estab lishment. He was one who wasn’t afraid to point 
out these mis interpretations. It is unfor tunate that he was rather 
extremist in other areas. 
 “The whole notion of the so -called antarābhava depends 
on the belief that  viññāṇa ‘goes’ on its own. The Buddha’s 
explanation of the wan dering of viññāṇa is not like that of the 
Upanishads where the sim ile of the leech is used. [1] According to 
the Dhamma viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa are in a state of whirling or 
turning around. 
 “The wan dering of the mind is not like that of phys ical 
things. It’s a circuitous journey of a mind and its object. With the 
taking up of one object by a mind, a sort of whirling begins; when 
one end is lost from gr asp, the other end is taken up: itthabāvaññathābhāvaṃ saṃsāraṃ n’ātivattati – this-ness and 
otherwise-ness, that’s all there is in saṃsāra. Our minds keep 
wandering awa y but keep com ing back to this upādinna. Who 
likes to let go of it, to die? It always comes back to that which is 
held dearly. At the last moment, when Māra comes to snatch it 
away, one does not want to give it up, so there is a con test: the 
struggle for life. The Buddha asked us to just give it up. 
 “Think of any kind of exis tence, and you will see that it 
depends on grasp ing. There is no ‘thing’ that exists on its own. 
Here again, I’m reminded of some thing Dr. W.S. Karunaratne 
said: ‘Exis tence has got to be rel ative; there is no absolute 
existence.’ But the world thinks of unitary things existing on their 
own. They ask, ‘why, even when I don’t look at this thing, 
doesn’t it con tinue existing’? But really there is only a  diṭṭha, a

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

seen. There is only a suta, a heard. But the moment we think of a 
seen ‘thing’, a heard ‘thing’, we are trapped. We cre ate things 
with maññanā, ideation.” 
 “The problem with ‘things’ is s olved in the Bāhiya Sutta: 
there are only diṭṭha, suta, muta, viññāta, nothing else. That is the 
theme in the Kālakārāma Sutta too. As long as one 
does maññanā about these, one would be deluded.” 
 Here we seem to have encoun tered a more thor ough 
answer to my earlier question about the ‘real ity of things’, and it 
is quite clear that Bhante Ñāṇananda has quite a dif ferent view 
from the stan dard Ther avadin inter pretation which is closer to 
naïve real ism. It is also opposed  to Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera’ s 
explanations, and readers who are familiar with Clearing the Path 
would notice that Bhante Ñāṇananda’s inter pretation is close 
to Sister Vajira’s ear lier views. It is easy to see why Bhante is 
sometimes accused of being a viññāṇavādin by those who are less 
willing to consider the subtleties involved. 
 “But how is  viññāṇa made to cease?” Bhante adds, 
discussing the final goal of Bud dhist prac tice. “ Viññāṇa has the 
nature to reflect, and what it reflects is nāma-rūpa. One is 
attached to the reflec tion because one doesn’t know that it is a 
reflection. But when the knowl edge arises, attach ment drops. In 
many instances where  paññā is dis cussed, we find the 
words paṭivedha and ativijjha, meaning ‘penetration’. The view is 
replaced by a vision.” 
 Bhante then quotes from his own Concept and Reality: 
“For the Ara hant … all con cepts have become 
transparent to such a degree in that all -encompassing 
vision, that their boundaries together with their umbra and 
penumbra have yielded to the radi ance of wis dom. This, 
then, is the sig nificance of the word  anantaṃ (endless,

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

infinite). Thus the para doxically detached gaze of the 
contemplative sage as he looks through the con cepts is 
one which has no object (ārammaṇa) as the point of focus 
for the worldling to iden tify it with. It is a gaze that is 
neither conscious nor non-conscious (na saññī assa, saññī 
ca pana assa), nei ther att entive nor non -attentive ( na 
manasikareyya, manasi ca pana kareyya), nei ther fixed 
nor not fixed ( na jhāyati, jhāyati ca pana) – a gaze that 
knows no horizon.” 
 
 
NOTES 
1. E.g.: “And just as a leech mov ing on a blade of grass 
reaches its end, takes hold  of another and draws itself 
together towards it, so does the self, after throwing off this 
body, that is to say, after making it unconscious, take hold 
of another sup port and draw itself together towards it.” 
[Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.3] – From The Upanishads 
– A New Translation by Swami Nikhilananda

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Part 4 
 The following is a min imally edited tran script of Bhante 
Ñāṇananda’s com ments on the  Neyyattha Sutta, which seems to 
have been the seed out of which the  Two Truths doctrine has 
been developed. 
 
 “We come across this in the An guttara Nikāya:  nītattha 
sutta and neyyattha sutta. Nīta, taken as it is, means you are led to 
it. Neyya means you have to be led. So  nīta means you are 
already at the meaning; you don’t have to reinterpret it. Whatever 
is supposed to be the nīta in the Buddha word, you have to take it 
‘as such’. Now, it is dif ferent when it comes to  neyyattha: in that 
case you have to understand it in the context of the Dhamma; you 
can’t take it as it appears. 
 “It is from this dis tinction that  sammuti/paramattha and 
samvṛti/paramārtha (in Buddhist Sanskrit) have been devel oped. 
And also this is the rea son I think the Nettippakaraṇa and 
Petakopadesa were com posed, as guides to the com mentator. 
Because it is th e job of the com mentator to explain a sutta, 
and how it should be explained is a prob lem. There are occa sions 
when the Bud dha used  loka samaññā loka nirutti (worldly 
conventions, worldly par lance) as they are, accord ing to the 
context. And on some  occasions, especially to monks, he would 
say something very deep, which you have to take as it is. 
 “The tra ditional inter pretation, as you get in the 
commentaries, is very sim ple: it says  neyyattha would be such 
suttas where the ordi nary con cepts of beings etc. come in, 
but nītattha is where you get  anicca, dukkha, anattā. That’s a 
very simple definition of it. 
 “Among the dis courses, there are some, like the  Bāhiya 
Sutta, where you don’t hav e to rein troduce anything into it. But 
the people will have to introduce something to understand them –

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

that’s the whole trou ble. A case which came to my atten tion was 
that sutta in the Saṃyutta Nikāya, the case of Moliyaphag guna, 
where, step by step, the Bud dha had to cor rect even the ques tion 
of Moliyaphagguna.[1] Ko nu kho bhante phusati? — it goes like 
that: ‘who, lord, does touch?’ [The Bud dha replies:] ‘I don’t say 
like that. If I did, th en you can ask me like that. The cor rect 
question should be: Kim paccayā?’ 
 “So the  paccaya terminology is actu ally the  nītattha, if I 
may say so. But you can’t talk with  paccaya always. In fact, I 
remember some peo ple who tried  to avoid the ‘I’ con cept 
altogether in con versations, using such phrases as ‘this 
pañcakkhandha’. But that’s only artificial. 
 “This I may say is a ch allenge to under stand the 
discourses. Because you always have to ask your self: what are 
the nītattha suttas and what are the  neyyattha suttas? With out a 
criterion to decide, you are in a fix. But if you start on your own, 
I think you could take instances where the Bud dha is talk ing 
about the four noble truths, as well as paticcasamuppāda. 
 “This is an instance where we see the dif ference between 
the grammar of nature and the grammar of language. You have to 
give way to the grammar of language if you’re to talk. Because if 
you are to explain, you have  to make com promises with 
language, as we say ‘it rains’ or  ‘devo vassatu’. Otherwise there 
is some thing lack ing. The sub ject, the object and then the 
adjectives and adverbs and the sen tence struc ture – these are 
deciding our thinking. The logicians are bound by it. That is why 
the Dhamma is  atakkāvacara. That again is a chal lenge: what is 
meant by atakkāvacara? 
 “Logic has to dis tinguish one from the other. It is again a 
logical ques tion when they ask:  saññā and vedanā – are they 
completely different, or are they the same thing? That is the way 
logic would put it. There’s no half way between. Even that they

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

tried to cover: I’m not very familiar with logic but what is already 
apparent in the canon is the  tetralemma. The ques tion of 
contradiction comes in: either it has to be this or the other. But 
there are these grey areas. 
 “All these prob lems come up because, first of all, we 
break real ity – the flux of life – into pieces. We dif ferentiate 
between a ‘thing’ and its colour: the colour is an adjec tive; the 
object is some thing else. So we cre ate prob lems for our selves. 
But then the Bud dha had to con vey a mes sage – and in fact I 
make it a point to say, why the Bud dha hesitated to teach was not 
out of jeal ousy or any other rea son, but the prob lem was how to 
present this doc trine in an intel ligible way to peo ple. I may say 
that only the Bud dha had that abil ity. Though it is again an 
unsolved problem, about the Pacceka Buddha–s, it seems, if ever 
they remain silent, hence called ‘silent’ Bud dhas, it is because 
they could not, unlike the Bud dha, bring th ese two truths in to 
alignment. 
 “Already in the  Kalakārāma Sutta you see how deep the 
problem is. But the Buddha could explain it sufficiently for one to 
start prac ticing. And once you start prac ticing, then, as in 
the Cūlahatthipadopama Sutta, you are walk ing the Dhamma -
way, and you’ll real ize by your self. You go and see. Now, even 
though the Dhamma says  ehipassika, we don’t want to go; we 
want to stay where we are and go through logic to under stand the 
Dhamma. That is the problem with the scholars. 
 “The Buddha’s Dhamma was an invitation. If you start the 
practice, the rest you will know by yourself. The map can’t be the 
same as the jour ney. No map is com plete by itself; it may use 
colours and signs etc. but it is never complete. So is the Dhamma. 
Much of it, the Bud dha left unex plained. That is prob ably why 
the peo ple are now com plaining that there is no metho dology 
here and that something is lacking in the Dhamma. But you can’t 
be spoon-fed.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “It is because the Bud dha has given suf ficient advice that 
some could real ize even by just lis tening. They didn’t merely 
listen: they lis tened with rapt atten tion. Like in Ven. Bāhiya’s 
case, they were not lead ing idle lives. Their play thing was jhāna. 
So it was easy for the Bud dha to make them under stand, as they 
had a sharp recep tive appa ratus. They only needed  saddhā. 
Without saddhā, with logic if you’re hoping to understand, you’re 
gravely mistaken. 
 “So now, getting down to the type of sut tas we have, at a 
glance, perhaps, Bāhiya sutta is a clear cut case, although those 
who want some thing objective, with a sub stantialist view, would 
find something lack ing there. And also, for instance, when the 
Buddha answered the accu sations of the Brah mins, and when we 
come to the  ten indeterminate points, that per haps is some thing 
like nītattha. The Bud dha is put to that point where He can’t 
agree any longer to the con vention. Because He used 
conventional words, people made it an excuse to glean advan tage 
from it. That is the case with Nibbāna: the fire going out. 
 “If the fire ‘goes out’ some think you should be able to go 
and locate where it is. Some schol ars in the West also fol low the 
same Hindu way where they think when the fire goes out it stays 
in some ineffable state. When it comes to such points of absurdity 
the Buddha had to correct them. Otherwise the Buddha would, for 
all practical purposes, use the convention. Even to Bāhiya he said 
‘This is our  pinḍapāta time’, as if there’s some strict time 
for pinḍapāta. As if His whole life is for  pinḍapāta. ‘We have to 
go on pinḍapāta, don’t come and question us’! But when it comes 
to the Dhamma: ‘in the seen, just the seen, in the heard , just the 
heard.’ When Bāhiya could master and muster sufficient Samādhi 
he had built up in the past, when he was suf ficiently calmed 
down, then the Buddha gave the real thing. 
 
 “There are also other occa sions, for instance in the 
Saṃyutta Nikāya, where you find the verses:

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

‘Ahaṃ vadāmīti pi so vadeyya 
Mamaṃ vadantīti pi so vadeyya, 
Loke samaññaṃ kusalo viditvā 
Vohāramattena so vohareyyā’ti.’ [SN 1.25] 
‘That monk still might use such words as “I,” 
Still perchance might say: “They call this mine.” 
Well aware of common worldly speech, 
He would speak conforming to such use.’ 
 “So every time the Bud dha says ‘I’m going’ and so on, 
you should not think that He’s con tradicted His own  anattā 
doctrine. 
 “Nītattha could also be in such cases like in the  
Alagaddūpama Sutta where the brah mins are repre manded for 
false accu sations. The B uddha comes out with the 
statement: Pubbe c’āhaṃ bhikkhave etarahi ca dukkhañceva 
paññāpemi dukkhassa ca nirodhaṃ – that is the best cri terion to 
decide on which side you are. ‘All  formerly and now, I merely 
say that there is suffering’ – there is no one suffering, whether it’s 
a puggala or person or indi vidual – all this rot comes in because 
of not knowing that the Buddha’s mes sage is also part and par cel 
of language. 
 “For all prac tical pur poses, the Buddha’s words are 
enough. But for those who do not prac tice, but who are arm chair 
critics, there is so much con tradiction in the Buddha’s words. 
Sometimes He says there is  dukkha only, and sometimes He says 
you are suffering. This is also the reason why there is such a mess 
in the interpretations of the kamma doctrine also. In sammādiṭṭhi, 
we may say there’s the ‘lower’  sammādiṭṭhi and the 
‘higher’ sammādiṭṭhi.[2] The dasa-vatthuka sammādiṭṭhi is kammassakatā. When a per son takes kamma as his own, he’s bound 
by it. You are bound by your own grasp ing. Then it’s a fact that 
you’re going to these var ious realms etc.: depen dent

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

on avijjā there is saṅkhāra. Such peo ple have to be judged by 
their own standards. 
 “By the way, I may also say, now that we are on the point: 
if you’re trans lating the Dhamma pada, it is wrong accord ing to 
my understanding to trans late the attavagga as the chap ter 
on Self. It should be  oneself. Oth erwise, as  Radhakrishnan finds 
it, you are on the side of attā. But it is ‘one self’: reflexive. If you 
understand that as self there’s a con tradiction between  attāhi 
attano natthi and attāhi attano natho. But these are just  loke 
samaññā. 
 “Similarly in the  Poṭṭhapāda Sutta, now and then the 
Buddha had to come out, espe cially in the last words of the sutta 
– they are very pow erful: imā kho citta loka samaññā… yāhi 
tathāgato voharati, aparāmasaṃ (“Citta, these are the world’s 
designations, the world’s expres sions, the world’s ways of 
speaking, the world’s descrip tions, with which the Tatha gata 
expresses him self but with out grasp ing to them.”) I remem ber 
reading The Meaning of Meaning by Ogden and Richards; there 
they quoted from the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta. They under stood that 
there’s something very deep in that simile about milk, curd, butter 
etc. Though they didn’t get every thing, they knew the Bud dha 
was nearer the truth about semantics. 
 “But now we think that where there’s a word there should 
be something. It’s the thing that’s causing all the tro uble. There’s 
just a flux of life, a func tioning, but no agent in it. But the 
language requires both. That is why we have to say ‘it rains’, 
leaving the room for some one to ask ‘what is this ‘it’?’. The fire 
goes out: where has it ‘gone’? The Bud dha from time to time had 
to show the absur dity of such ques tions. In such con texts you 
come across the nītattha.”

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

NOTES 
1. SN 12.12 (excerpt below) 
2. “And what is right view? Right view, I tell you, is of two 
sorts: There is right view with effluents, siding with merit, 
resulting in the acquisitions; and there is noble right view, 
without efflu ents, tran scendent, a fac tor of the path.” 
[MN117] 
 
Addendum for NOTE 1 
[…] 
“Who, now, Lord, exercises contact?” 
“Not a fit ques tion”, said the Exalted One. “I am not say -
ing (someone) exercises contact. If I were say ing so, the 
question would be a fit one. But I am not say ing so. And I 
not say ing so, if any one were to ask this: ‘Con ditioned, 
now, by what, Lord, is con tact?’, this were a fit ques tion. 
And the fit answer there, would be: ‘Con ditioned by the 
sixfold sense-sphere, is con tact, conditioned by con tact is 
feeling’.”  
[…] 
 
– Translation by Bhante Ñāṇananda:  
Saṃyutta Nikāya – An Anthology

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

Part 5 
The final part of the  Mahāhatthipadopama Sutta contains 
an interesting analysis by Ven. Sāriputta Thera which sheds light 
on the con nection between  saḷāyatana and pañcupādānakkhandha. I had care lessly com mented on this sec tion by 
reading the Eng lish translation without referring to the Pāḷi, and  
in his reply to my notes Bhante  Ñāṇananda pointed out an 
important distinction I had failed to make. 
 Ven. Ñāṇamoli’s trans lation of the rel evant section reads 
as follows: 
“If, friends, inter nally the eye is intact but no exter nal 
forms come into  its range, and th ere is no cor responding 
[conscious] engage ment, then there is no manifestation of the 
corresponding section of consciousness. [MLDB (2009) p. 283]” 
 ‘Corresponding [conscious] engagement’ is Ven. 
Ñāṇamoli’s ren dering of tajjo samannāhāra. I had taken this to 
be iden tical to  manasikāra (attention), influ enced by Ven. 
Ñāṇavīra Thera’s writ ings. In my inter view, I ask Bhante 
Ñāṇananda for an explanation on the difference between the two. 
 “Earlier we pointed out how, in a dis cussion that may be 
categorized as nītattha, the Bud dha cor rected Ven. 
Moliyaphagguna’s ques tions which implied an agent behind 
action. He rephrased them with the  paccaya terminology. Sim ilarly, when we say  manasikāra, some may tend to think of an 
agent behind the atten tion. But V en. Sāriputta Thera takes a 
different approach here when explaining the arising of viññāṇa. 
 “He discusses three possibilities: 
1. The eye is not ‘bro ken’ – it is func tional. External forms 
don’t come to the vicinity. And Tajjo samannāhāra, what-

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

ever that may be, is not present. Then, there’s no eye 
consciousness. 
“Here, we have to be spe cific about  viññāṇa. 
Again, I’m reminded of some thing Dr. W.S. Karunaratne 
said: “There is no  ‘the viññāṇa’; it is always  ‘a viññāṇa’. 
Everything has to be con crete – there is no abstract 
consciousness.” But peo ple think that con sciousness 
exists on its own, and this ha s given rise to var ious 
theories. Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera also pointed this out when 
he said “paṭiccasamuppāda is viññāṇa”.[1] I may not agree 
with every thing he said, but here he did rev eal an 
important mat ter. Th e rec iprocal rela tionship between  
viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa is the vor tex of exis tence, and it 
is the heart of paṭiccasamuppāda. 
2. The eye is not bro ken, and external forms do come to the 
vicinity. But  tajjo samannāhāra is absent. Then, there is 
no eye-consciousness. 
3. The eye is not broken, external forms come to the vicinity, 
and there is  tajjo samannāhāra. Then, there is eye -
consciousness. 
 “The word  tajjo comes from  tat + ja. Tat means ‘that 
[itself]’. It is the root of such impor tant words 
as tādī and tammaya. So tatja means ‘arisen out of that itself’. 
What is  samannāhāra? You might remem ber that, in the  Caṅkī 
Sutta, the Bud dha happens to see the Kāpaṭhika Brah min youth. 
There we find the word  upasaṃharati along with  samannāhāra,[2] referring to a sort of focus ing that may have not been 
planned – a chance meet ing of eye to eye.  Samannāhāra (āharati = brings) refers to a certain ‘bringing together’. 
 “So tajjo samannāhāra points to the fact that this 
‘bringing together’ of the nec essary f actors for the aris ing of 
consciousness is inherent to the situation itself. It is unique to the 
situation, and does not come from within a per son or from the 
outside. It is not exerted by oneself or an exter nal agent: some

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

thought that there is an  ātman inside who is in charge, while 
others said that it is a God that injects con sciousness into the 
man. Let ting go of all these extremes, Ven. Sāriputta Thera 
pointed out the cru cial role  of tajjo samannāhāra with his 
analysis of the three possibilities.” 
 And then Bhante falls silent, and looks on with a smile. 
 After a few moments, he asks: “What do you hear?” 
 There is a bird singing in the distance. 
 “Did it start singing only now?” 
 It probably had started earlier (and now that I am listening 
to the tapes as I tran scribe this, I know that it had started many 
minutes earlier). 
 “It must have been singing all this while, but only now…” 
I say. 
 “Only now…?” 
 “Only now did the attention go there.” 
 “There you have tajjo samannāhāra! So is it only because 
of the sound of the bird that you heard it? Didn’t you hear it only 
after I stopped talk ing? There could be other rea sons too: had 
there been louder noises, you may not have hea rd it. So we see 
that it is cir cumstantial. That i s why we men tioned in our 
writings: everything is circumstantial; nothing is substantial.” 
 Please allow me to inter ject here and add that the last 
sentence would remain some thing that I’ll alw ays cher ish from 
these interviews. Not only because of the simple profundity of the 
statement or the nice lit tle practical experiment that led up to it, 
but also because of the gentle kindness in the way it was uttered.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

 “The atten tion that i s present in a sit uation is to  be 
understood as hav ing arisen out of the cir cumstances. If there is 
anything of value in the Paṭṭḥāna, t hat would be here, in its 
analysis of the 24 causes. I can’t say for cer tain, but it may well 
be an attempt at s ystematising the gen eral concept mentioned in 
this sutta: how a thought is con nected to another. Since it is 
impossible to explain this mech anism by break ing it apart with 
words, Ven. Sāriputta Thera says it is cir cumstantial – unique to 
the situation itself. 
 “It is because of this nature of the Buddhadhamma that the 
later Indian philoso phers called it a  saṅghātavāda – pluralism, or 
a theory of aggregates, where the causes are not lim ited to one or 
two or none. So my silence paṭicca, the sound of the bird paṭicca, 
absence of other sounds  paṭicca etc. there was the aris ing of a  
different ear-consciousness. 
 “It is alright to refer to  tajjo samannāhāra as manasikāra as long as we make it clear that the process is impersonal. 
We may also bring in the Kiṃ Mūlaka Sutta  [3] here. 
Unfortunately my expla nation of it in  The Magic of the Mind, in 
the chap ter ‘Essenc e of Con cepts’, was not accepted even by 
Ven. Nyanaponika. In the sutta we find the state ment manasikāra 
sambhavā sabbe dhammā (born of atten tion are all things). The 
commentary limits the discussion just to skillful states, which is a 
very nar row way of look ing at it. Be it  sammā or micchā, there 
the Buddha is pointing out the general principle. 
 “It is prob ably because of the impor tance of the prin ciple 
discussed that the Bud dha brought up the sub ject with out being 
prompted by an yone. It is as if He declared it because the world 
would not hear or real ize it oth erwise. The sutta is a won derful 
revelation about what we take as a ‘thing’. It is not some thing 
existing on its own in the world but  a result of many 
psychological causes. But when we say that, we are accused of 
being viññāṇavādins and suññatavādins.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

 “One has to ask: why did the Bud dha say ‘manopubbaṇgamā dhammā, manoseṭṭhā manomayā’ (Mind pre cedes all 
dhammas. Mind is their chi ef; they are all mind -wrought – Dhp 
1)? One has to admit that the Dhamma is mano-mūlika. But 
again, the mind is just one of the senses. What we have here is 
just a self -created prob lem. We dis cussed how exis tence is a 
perversion. The arising of dhammas is also the aris ing of dukkha. 
Not realizing this, some go looking for the truth among ‘things’. 
 “The search goes on because of delusion, and it is fruitless 
because they are chas ing illu sions. Dham mas, things, are all 
fabricated. They are all rel ative. They are all results of maññanā 
(ideation). Just as those who were entrenched in sel f-view saw 
the Buddha as a nihilist, those who are entrenched in mate rialism 
cannot grasp the Buddhist philosophy which puts the mind first.” 
 Here I ask a recur ring ques tion, prob ably because I still 
can’t bring myself to accept the already g iven answers due to my 
own materialistic tendencies (of those days): what would one see 
if one looks at the world ‘objec tively’ – if such a thing were 
possible? Perhaps this is another way of ask ing what one sees in 
the arahattaphala samādhi. 
 “Suññatā” comes the quick reply. 
 “Whether peo ple accept it or not, the truth is empti ness. 
We need not go far: it is already there in the three words animitta, 
appaṇihita and suññata. One has to go from  nimitta (sign) 
to animitta (signless), with the help of signs. The cul mination 
of paṇidhi (resolve) is appaṇihita (undirected). ‘Thingness’ gives 
way to emptiness. 
 “Imagine there were a large box here, with a label say ing 
that the con tents weigh 1000kg. If I were to ask you to move it, 
you’d object saying that it is too heavy for one per son to handle. 
Let’s say I some how coax you to try. When you try to lift, it

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

comes off almost with out effort – there’s no bot tom to the box! 
The 1000kg sign was deceiv ing you. That’s why the real ization 
of the Dhamma is equated to laying down of a burden. 
 “To real ize empti ness, one has to know what one is 
aiming at.  Yad’anuseti, tad’anumīyati, yad’anumīyati, tena 
saṇkhaṃ gacchati (If one has an under lying ten dency towards 
something, then one is m easured in accor dance with it. If one is 
measured in accor dance with some thing, then one is reck oned in 
terms of it. [ SN 22.36]). As long as there is  anusaya there would 
be measuring, giving rise to the con cept of ‘things’. Elim ination 
of anusaya is like the bot tom of the box giv ing way. After that, 
anyone can lift it.” 
 
 
NOTES 
1. … any exem plification of  paṭiccasamuppāda in the 
sphere of expe rience can be re -stated in the form of the 
fundamental exemplification of paṭiccasamuppāda in the 
sphere of expe rience, which is, as i t must be, that 
beginning with viññāṇa. Thus, viññāṇa and 
paṭiccasamuppāda are one.  
 – Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Notes on Dhamma, “A N ote on 
Paṭiccasamuppāda”, para. 20 
 
2. Atha kho kāpaṭhikassa māṇavassa etadahosi: ‘yadā me 
samaṇo gotamo cakkhunā cakkhuṃ upasaṃharissati, 
athāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ pañhaṃ pucchissāmī’ti. 
Atha kho bhagavā kāpaṭhikassa māṇavassa cetasā 
cetoparivitakkamaññāya yena kāpaṭhiko māṇavo tena 
cakkhūni upasaṃhāsi. Atha kho kāpaṭhikassa māṇavassa 
etadahosi: ‘samannāharati kho maṃ samaṇo gotamo, 
yannūnāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ pañhaṃ puccheyyanti. 
[MII p. 169 (PTS)]

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

Then the thought occurred to Kāpaṭhika the youth, “When 
Gotama the c ontemplative meets my gaze with his, I will 
ask him a ques tion.” And  so the Blessed One, 
encompassing Kāpaṭhika’s awareness with his aware ness, 
met his gaze. Kāpaṭhika t hought, “Gotama the 
contemplative has turned to me. Sup pose I ask him a 
question.” [MN 95] 
 
3. […] Rooted in desire (or inter est) friends, are all things; 
born of attention are all things; arising from contact are all 
things; con verging on feel ings are all things; headed by 
concentration are all things; dom inated by mind fulness 
are all things; sur mountable by wis dom are all things; 
yielding deliverance as essence are all things; merg ing in 
the Deathless are all things; terminating in Nibbana are all 
things. [Excerpted from AN 8.83] 
 – Translation by Bhante Ñāṇananda ( The Magic of the 
Mind)

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Part 6 
This is part 6 of a series on Ven. Katukurunde Ñāṇananda 
Thera. Many months have passed since I met Bhante Ñāṇananda 
for the first time, and had this series of discussions. More 
recordings remain to be published than have already appeared 
here. Unfortunately it seems unlikely that I will manage to 
transcribe them. I would now like to wrap up this series with one 
memorable discussion we had: 
 To end our long discussion, I ask from Bhante: “Does this 
mean that we should not be afraid to call Bud dhism 
a suññatavāda?” 
 “We approach the Buddha’s teach ing with our pre cast 
pigeonholes: either it has to be ide alism, or it must be real ism. If 
one really wants to call this an ‘ism’, they should be call ing it 
‘let-go-ism’. One picks up only to make use of and let go. 
 “The entire teach ing of the Bud dha could be summed up 
in a single Pāḷi word. What do you think it is?” 
 I wonder if Bhante is referring to Appamāda. 
 “Yāvadeva”, comes the unex pected answer. Bhante adds 
the Sinhala word: “hudek”. In Eng lish, it means ‘merely for the 
sake of’. I am awed by the simple profundity of that statement. 
 “That one word tran scends all those isms. We migh t as 
well call this teach ing a  yāvadeva-ism. Each step on the way is 
merely for the sake of tak ing the next, and that too is merely for 
the next. I n other words, one has to rever se paṭiccasamuppāda. 
We encounter the word  āhāra (food, nutri ment), for both good 
and the bad.  Hetu, paccaya, āhāra all indi cate causal ity. Later 
tradition tried to make a distinction between hetu and paccaya but 
we do not see this in early texts. For exam ple, we find phrases

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

such as ‘ko hetu, ko paccayo’. The teaching was given to be made 
use of, to go to the other shore, not to get entangled in words.” 
 I ask, almost rhetor ically, i f this mess was cre ated by 
taking the prescriptive teachings of the Buddha as descriptive. 
 “That’s why we said that it is when  pariyatti (scriptural 
study) overtook paṭipatti (practice) that the decline started. How 
can one under stand the texts with out any prac tice? It would be 
just a col lection of words. We need both: sātthaṃ 
sabyañjanaṃ (right meaning and right phras ing). If the mean ing 
is wrong, the phrasing would be wrong, and vice versa. How ever, 
if the meaning is right, even if the phras ing is wrong, there is the 
possibility of mak ing cor rections. Oth erwise we’ll be pass ing 
the piṭaka, the basket, in the dark.” 
 “I’m reminded of one beau tiful line from a story 
mentioned in the com mentaries, which my teacher ( Ven. 
Ñāṇārāma Mahāthera) used often in his Dhamma talks:  añño esa, 
āvuso, gatakassa maggo nāma [1] — This path is different, 
friend, to one who has travelled by it.” 
 
NOTES 
1. See discussion on Gantho in Visuddhimagga, Chapter 3: 
Kammaṭṭhānaggahaṇaniddeso, Dasapalibodhavaṇṇanā

2. Correspondence with Bhikkhu Yogānanda 
Part 1 
Dear Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
In the Cūla Suññata Sutta we encounter the phrase ‘Ayam 
pi kho  animitto cetosam ādhi abhisa ñkhato abhisa ñcetayito’. I 
find it difficult to understand how this experience of the ‘signless’ 
could be ‘prepared and thought out’. Is this animitta cetosamādhi 
different from the animitta vimokkha , and if s o, how is one to 
understand it? 
 
Dear Āyasmā Yogānanda, 
The specially pr epared ( abhi-saṁkhato) and thought -out 
(abhisañcetayito) nature of animitta cetosam ādhi is already 
implicit in the statement: 
“Punacaparaṁ, Ānanda, bhikkhu amanasikaritvā 
akiñcaññāyatanasaññaṁ amanasikaritā nevasaññānāsaññāyatanasaññaṁ animittaṁ cetosamādhiṁ paṭicca 
manasikaroti ekatta ṁ. Tassa animitte cetosam ādhimhi cittaṁ 
pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati adhimuccati.” 
– Cula Suññata S. MIII 107 
“Again, Ānanda, a monk – not attending to the 
perception of the sphere of nothingness, not attending to  the 
sphere of neither perception nor non -perception, attends to the 
unity ( ekattaṁ) dependent on the signless concentration of 
mind. His mind leaps towards it (pakkhandati), acquires 
confidence in it, gets steadied in it and is resolute in it. ”

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

This state of concentration is one that is attained by 
forcibly shutting out some states of perception and developing a 
predilection for another state of concentration . Here is a 
preference for unity ( ekatta) to the exclusion of diversity 
(nānatta). 
It is still far from the supreme freedom ringing through 
the long phrase describing aññāphala samādhi. 
“...............yā yaṁ bhagini sam ādhi na c ābhiṇato na 
cāpanato na sasa ṅkhāra niggayha v āritavato vimuttatt ā ṭhito 
ṭhitattā santusito santusitatt ā na paritassati , ayam bhagini 
samādhi aññāphalo vutto Bhagavatā.”  
– A. IV 428 
“.............Sister, that particular concentration which is 
neither ‘turned – towards’ nor ‘turned outwards ’, which is 
not a form of restraint forcibly held in place by preparation s 
– a concentration which is stable owing to the fact of being 
emancipated and is one of contentment owing to its stability  
and wherein owing to contentment one is not vexed  – this 
concentration, sister, has been made known by the Fortunate One, 
as that which has knowledge (of Arahanthood) as its fruit 
(aññāphalo)” 
For more details of this signless concentration one could 
explore the Mahā Vedalla Sutta where the conditions ( paccayā) 
for its attainment, duration  and coming out are given . The 
concluding section of that Sutta has a lively discussion on the two 
senses (the lower and the higher) in which the terms appamānā 
cetovimutti, ākiñcaññā cetovimutti, suññatā cetovimutti and 
animittā cetovimutti are used . The following declaration by 
Venerable Sariputta is enlightening as to the higher sense (or 
deeper sense) of animittā cetovimutti:

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

“rāgo kho āvuso nimittakara ṇo, doso nimittakara ṇo, 
moho nimittakaraṇo, te khināsavassa bhikkhuno pahīnā......” 
“Lust, friend, is something significative, hatred is 
something significative, delusion is something significative, 
they are abandoned in the influx-free monk....” 
The very freedom from all preparations ( sankhārā), assets 
(upadhī) and cravings ( tanhā) is experienced as the signless 
(animitta), the void ( suññata) and unestablished ( appanihita) 
deliverance according to one’s individual forte in his triple attack 
on the citadel of TRUTH – so to speak – i.e. impermanence 
(anicca) suffering (dukkha) and not sel f (anattā). In fact, it is the 
proper beat and range of the Arahant in his arahattaphalasamādhi. 
“Yesaṁ sannicayo natthi 
Ye pariññāta bhojanā 
suññato animitto ca 
vimokkho yesa gocaro 
ākāse va sakuntānaṁ 
gati tesaṁ durannayā” 
“Those who do not accumulate and have comprehended 
food and whose range (lit. pasture) is the deliverance of the void 
and the signless, their track is hard to trace, like that of birds in 
the sky.”

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

Part 2 
Dear Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
We come across the phrase ‘dasaṅgehi samann āgato 
arahā’ where ‘sammā diṭṭhi’ is the first factor. It seems to me that 
the Arahat ’s detachment for this right view he ‘possesses’ is 
implied by ‘sammā vimutti’. I would like to know from Bhante if 
this is correct. 
 
Dear Āyasmā Yogānanda, 
The Noble Eightfold Path is the ‘Raft’ described in the 
Alagaddūpama Sutta (M. I. 134), according to the ‘Āsivisopama 
Sutta’ (S. IV 175) 
“Kullanti kho bhikkhave ariyasseta ṁ atthaṅgikassa 
maggassa adhivacaṁ” 
“The RAFT, O! monks is a synonym for the Noble 
Eightfold Path” 
Now, Sammādiṭṭhi is the forerunner among the Path 
factors according to the Mahā Cattārīsaka Sutta (M. III. 72) 
“Tatra, bhikkhave, sammāditthi pubbañgamā hoti”  
“Therein monks, Right View is the forerunner” 
By the way, I happened to compare this role of Right 
View to the vanguard in conducting safely a V.I.P. through a 
crowd. In fact, this V.I.P. is the so called ‘self’. Spurious as he is, 
he has to be conducted beyond the Mara ’s realm (‘maccudheyya’ 
– Dhp.v.86). 
Now let us listen to the grand -finale of the Buddha ’s 
exhortation regarding the RAFT in Alagaddūpama Sutta:

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

“Evameva kho bhikkhave kullūpamo mayā dhammo desito 
nittharaṇatthāya no gaha ṇatthāya. Kullūpamaṁ vo bhikkhave 
ājānantehi dhammā pi vo pahātabbā, pageva adhammā.” 
“Even so, monks, have I preached the Dhamma to be 
comparable to a RAFT , for the purpose of crossing over , not 
for the purpose of grasping . Monks, when you comprehend the 
Dhamma, comparable to a RAFT you should abandon even 
good states, how much more so bad states.” 
That one should not cling even to ‘Right View ’ is the 
substance of the Buddha ’s catechism in Maha Taṇhāsaṁkhaya 
Sutta. 
“Imaṁ ce tumhe bhikkhave diṭṭhiṁ evaṁ parisuddhaṁ 
evaṁ pariyodātaṁ allīyetha kel āyetha dhan āyetha mam āyetha, 
api nu tumhe bhikkhave kull ūpamaṁ dhammaṁ desitam 
ājāneyyātha nittharaṇatthāya no gahaṇatthāya.” 
“Monks, purified and cleansed as this view is, if you cling 
to it, cherish it, treasure it, and call it ‘my own’ would you then 
comprehend the Dhamma that has been preached as comparable 
to a ‘Raft’ for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of 
grasping.” 
“No Venerable Sir” 
(‘.........So you are right, after all’)

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

Part 3 
Dear Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
How are we to understand the sekha who has entered the 
path to stream entry but has not reached phala (namely the 
saddhānusārī and the dhammānusārī)? 
 
Dear Āyasmā Yogānanda, 
One can understand the differences between the sekha (on 
the one hand)  and the saddhānusārī and the dhammānusārī 
(on the other) by examining the following quotations: 
1. “Evaṁ svākkhāto bhikkhave may ā dhammo utt āno viva ṭo 
pakāsito chinnapilotiko . Evaṁ svākkhāte bhikkhave may ā 
dhamme..... chinnapilotike yesaṁ bhikkhūnaṁ tīṇi 
saṁyojanāni pah īnāni sabbe te sot āpannā 
avinipātadhammā niyātā sambodhiparāyanā. 
Evaṁ svākkhāto bhikkhave may ā dhammo...... 
chinnapilotiko. Evaṁ svākkhāte bhikkhave may ā dhamme..... 
chinnapilotike ye te bhikkh ū dhammānusārino, 
saddhānusārino sabbe te sambodhi parāyanā.” 
– Alagaddhūpama Sutta (M. I. 141f) 
“Monks, the Dha mma well proclaimed by me thus i s clear, 
open, and evident and free of hoodwink.*  In the Dhamma 
well proclaimed by me thus which is clear, open, evident and 
free of hoodwink those monks who have abandoned thr ee 
fetters are all stream winners, not liable to fall into bad 
bourns, bound (for deliverance) and headed for 
enlightenment. 
Monks, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me is 
clear ... ............ free of hoodwink. In the Dhamma well

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

proclaimed .............. free of hoodwink, those monks who are 
Dhamma followers or faith followers, are  all headed for 
enlightenment.”  
(* A suggested rendering for chinnapilotika – a controversial 
term among scholars) 
– Alagddūpama Sutta (M. I. 141f) 
2. “Sattime bhikkhave puggal ā santo sa ṁvijjamānā lokasmiṁ, 
katame satta?  Ubhatobhāgavimutto, pa ññāvimutto, 
kāyasakkhi, di ṭṭhippatto, saddh āvimutto, dhamm ānusārī, 
saddhānusārī............ Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo 
dhammānusārī? 
Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te sant ā vimokkhā 
atikkamma r ūpe āruppā te na k āyena phassitv ā viharati, 
paññāya cassa disv ā asavā aparīkkhinā honti. 
Tathāgatappaveditā cassa dhamm ā paññāya mattaso 
nijjhānaṁ khamanti, api cassa ime dhamm ā honti, 
seyyathīdaṁ, saddhindriya ṁ viriyindriyaṁ satindriyaṁ 
samādhindriyaṁ paññaindriyaṁ. Aya ṁ vuccati bhikkhave 
puggalo dhammānusārī. 
............Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo saddhānusārī?  
Idha bhikkhave puggalo ye te sant ā vimokkhā atikkamma 
rūpe āruppā te na k āyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya cassa 
disvā āsavā aparikkhīnā honti. Tathāgate cassa 
saddhāmattaṁ hoti pemamatta ṁ apicassa ime dhamm ā 
honti, seyyathīdaṁ saddhindriyaṁ viriyindriyaṁ satindriyaṁ 
samādhindriyaṁ paññindriyaṁ. Ayaṁ vuccati bhikkhave 
saddhānusāri.” 
– Kītāgiri Sutta (M. I. 477ff) 
“Monks, there are seven kinds of persons to be found 
existing in the world. What seven? They are: one liberated in 
both ways, one liberated by wisdom, a body witness, one

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

attained to view, one liberated by faith, a Dhamma follower 
and a faith follower................... ... what kind of person is a 
Dhamma follower? Here some person does not contact with 
the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and 
formless, transcending forms, and his influxes are not yet 
destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, but with wisd om he 
has sufficiently gained a reflective acceptance of thos e 
teachings proclaimed by the T athāgata. Furthermore he has 
these qualities: the faith faculty, the energy faculty, the 
mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the 
wisdom faculty . This kind of person is called a Dhamma 
follower .......... 
 What kind of person is a faith follower? Here some person 
does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations 
that are peaceful and formless, transcending forms, and his 
influxes are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, yet 
he has suffici ent faith in and love for the T athāgata. 
Furthermore he has these qualities: the faith faculty, the 
energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration 
faculty, and the wisdom faculty. This kind of person is called 
a faith follower.” 
– Kitāgiri Sutta (M. I. 477 f) 
3. Seyyathāpi bhikkhave ye te usabh ā gopitaro gopariṇāyakā te 
tiriyaṁ gaṅgāya sota ṁ chetva sotthin ā pāram agama ṁsu, 
evameva kho bhikkhave ye te bhikkh ū Arahanto kh īṇāsavā 
vusitavanto katakaran īyā ohitabhārā anuppattasadatthā, 
parikkhīṇabhavasaṁyojanā sammadaññā vimuttā. Tepi 
triyaṁ mārassa sotaṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ gatā. 
Seyyathāpi bhikkhave balavag āvo dammag āvo tiriyam 
gaṅgāya sota ṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ agamaṁsu, evameva 
kho bhikkhave ye te bhikkh ū pañcannaṁ orambhāgiyānaṁ 
saṁyojanānaṁ parikkhayā opapātikā tatthaparinibbāyino

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

anāvattidhammā tasmā lokā. Te pi tiriya ṁ Mārassa sota ṁ 
chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ gamissanti. 
Seyyathāpi bhikkhave vacchatar ā vacchatariyo tiriya ṁ 
gaṅgāya sota ṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ agamaṁsu, evameva 
kho bhikkhave ye te bhikkh ū tiṇṇaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ 
parikkhayā rāgadosamohānaṁ tanuttā sakadāgāmino saki 
deva imaṁ lokaṁ āgantvā dukkhassantaṁ santaṁ karissanti, 
te pi tiriya ṁ Mārassa sota ṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ 
gamissanti. 
Seyyathāpi bhikkhave vacchak ā kisabalakā tiriyaṁ gaṅgāya 
sotaṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ agamaṁsu, evameva kho 
bhikkhave ye te bhikkh ū tiṇṇaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ parikkhayā 
sotāpannā avinipātadhammā niyatā sambodhiparāyanā, te pi 
‘tiriyaṁ’ mārassa sotaṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ gamissanti. 
Seyyathāpi bhikkhave vacchako tarunako t āvadeva j ātako 
mātugoravakena vuyham āno tiriya ṁ gaṅgāya sota ṁ chetvā 
sotthinā pāraṁ agamāsi, evameva kho bhikkhave ye te  
bhikkhū dhammānusārino saddh ānusārino te pi tiriya ṁ 
mārassa sotaṁ chetvā sotthinā pāraṁ gamissanti. 
– Cūla Gopālaka Sutta (M. I. 266) 
4. “Monks, just as the bulls, the fathers and leaders of the herd, 
breasted the stream of the Ganges  and got safely across to the 
further shore, so too, those monks who are Arahants with 
influxes destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what 
had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, 
destroyed the fetters of becoming and are completely 
liberated through final knowledge by breasting mara ’s stream 
they have got safely across to the further shore. 
Just as the strong cattle to be ...... breasted the stream of the 
Ganges and got safely across to the further shore, so too, 
those monks who with the destruction of the five lower 
fetters will reappear spontaneous ly (in the Pure Abodes) and

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

there attain final Nibbāna without ever returnin g from that 
world by breasting M āra’s stream they will get safely across 
to the further shore. 
Just as the heifers and young oxen breasted the stream of the 
Ganges and got safely a cross to the further shore, so too 
those monks, who with the destruction of the three fetters 
and with the attenuation of lust, hate and delusion, are once 
returners, returning once to this world to make an end of 
suffering. 
Just as the calves and the feeb le cattle breasted the stream of 
the Ganges and got safely across to the further shore, so too 
those monks who, with the destruction of the three fetters are 
stream enterers, not liable to fall into bad bourns bound (for 
deliverance), headed for enlightenment – by breasting māra’s 
stream they too will get safely across to the further shore. 
Just as that tender calf just born being urged by the mother ’s 
lowing, also breasted the stream of the Ganges and got safely 
across to the further shore, so too those monks who are 
Dhamma followers and faith followers by breasting m āra’s 
stream, they too will get safely across to the further shore.” 
– Cūla Gopalaka Sutta (M. I. 266) 
5. “Cakkhuṁ bhikkhave anicca ṁ vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī; 
sotaṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī; gh ānaṁ aniccaṁ 
viparināmī aññathābhāvī; jivh ā aniccā viparināmī 
aññathābhāvī; k āyo anicco viparin āmī aññathābhāvī; mano 
anicco viparināmī aññathābhāvī. 
Yo bhikkhave ime dhamme eva ṁ saddahati adhimuccati 
ayaṁ vuccati saddh ānusārī okkanto sammattaniy āmaṁ 
sappurisabhūmiṁ okkanto, v ītivatto puthujjanabh ūmiṁ 
abhabbo ta ṁ kammaṁ kātuṁ yaṁ kammaṁ katvā nirayaṁ 
vā tiracchānayoniṁ vā pettivisayaṁ vā upapajjeyya;

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

abhabbo ca t āva k ālaṁ kātuṁ yāva na sot āpattiphalaṁ 
sacchikaroti.  
Yassa kho, bhikkhave, ime dhammā  evaṁ paññāya mattaso 
nijjhānaṁ khamanti, aya ṁ vuccati dhamm ānusārī, okkanto 
sammattaniyāmaṁ abhabbo ca t āva kā laṁ kātum y āva na  
sotāpattiphalaṁ sacchikaroti. 
Yo bhikkhave ime dhamme evaṁ pajānāti evaṁ passati ayaṁ 
vuccati sot āpanno avinip ātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano ti.” 
– Okkantika Samyutta (S. III 225f.) 
“Monks the eye is impermanent, changing becoming 
otherwise. The ear........ The nose,,,,,,,, The tongue....... The 
body......... The mind is impermanent, changing becoming 
otherwise. One who places  faith in these teachings and 
resolves on them thus is called a faith follower, one who has 
entered the fixed course of rightness entered the plane of 
superior persons, transcended the plane of the worldlings . He 
is incapable of doing any deed by reason of  which he might 
be reborn in hell, in the animal realm or in the domain of 
ghosts; he is incapable of passing away without having 
realized the fruit of stream entry. 
One for whom these teachings are accepted thus after being 
pondered to a sufficient degree  with wisdom is called a 
Dhamma follower one who has entered the fixed course of 
rightness, entered the plane of superior 
persons ............................ without having realized the fruit of 
stream entry.  
One who knows and sees these teachings thus i s called a 
stream enterer, no longer bound to the netherworld, fixed on 
destiny with enlightenment as his destination.” 
– Connected Discourse on Entering (S. III 225 f.)

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

Part 4 
  2010-01-06 
Dear Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
Is there any difference between Sotāpattiphala Samāpatti 
and Arahattaphala Samāpatti? 
 
Dear Āyasmā Yogānanda, 
Granted that all the four Supramundane Paths and Fruits 
imply a vision of Nibbāna and an insight into the law of 
Dependent Arising, one might wonder why there is a gradation in 
the experiences of the Fruit attributed to the 4 Noble Persons . If 
the ‘taste’ of the Four Fruits in the Supramundane – ‘Bunch’ is 
the same, why all this discrimination? 
According to the Buddha, it is a question of fetters (to 
existence) and influxes (āsavā). It is true that even the 
Streamwinner gets the conviction that there is no fear of death  
where there is no craving and that existence is dependent on 
grasping. But he has not fully realized the stilling of all 
preparations (sabbasankhārasamatha) and the complete 
destruction of craving  because of the tenacity of remaining 
fetters. To that extent his experience of Nibbāna is not on par 
with that of an Arahant who has destroyed the fetters and 
influxes. Even at the risk of possible misconstruing this gra dation 
could be compared to that  of a comma, a semic olon, a colon and 
a Full Stop!  
1    2    3    4 
,     ;     :     .

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Part 5 
2010-12-25 
Nāuyana 
 
Dear Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
I hope Bhante is well and in good health and that the 
venerables are practicing peacefully and harmoniously. 
I would be much grateful if Bhante could kindly clarify a 
Dhamma question I have which seems to be rather fundamental 
and also a matter of controversy since ancient times : does the 
phala immediately follow the magga? 
Certain Suttas (su ch as the ones relating the stor y of 
Sarakāni – SN 55 24 &  25) seem to imply that  there could be a 
significant time gap between the attainments of magga and phala, 
contrary to the traditional interpretation.  It also seems rather 
redundant to have eight Ariyan s if four of them are in their 
respective states for a split second only. 
I hope it would not be too inconvenient for Bhante to send 
a short reply clarifying this issue . It would be of much benefit for 
many of us here. 
 
With love and respect, 
Yogānanda.

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

To: Venerable Yogānanda. 
Dear Āyasmā Yogānanda, 
I received your letter dated 2010 -12-25. Your question.... 
does the phala immediately follow the magga? With its ‘poser’: It 
also seems rather redundant to have eight Ariyans if four of them 
are in their respective states for a split second?  
Could be tackled as follows: 
The Dhamma question you have raised (a matter of 
controversy since ancient times) stems from an insufficient 
understanding of the canonical definition of the 8 ‘ariya 
puggalas’. The relevant Sutta is the one found on pg 292 A IV. 
“Aṭṭhime bhikkhave puggal ā āhuṇeyyā pāhuṇeyyā 
dakkhiṇeyyā añjalikaraṇīyā anuttaraṁ puññakkhettaṁ 
lokassa. Katame aṭṭha?  
Sotāpanno sot āpattiphalasacchikiriyāya pa ṭipanno, 
sakadāgāmi sakad āgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya pa ṭipanno, 
anāgāmi an āgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya pa ṭipanno, arah ā 
arahattāyo paṭipanno, 
Ime kho bhikkhave a ṭṭha puggal ā āhuṇeyya ......... 
pe ........... anuttaraṁ puññakkhettaṁ lokassāti. 
Cattāro ca paṭipannā – cattāro ca phale ṭhitā 
esa saṁgho ujubhūto – paññāsila samāhito 
yajamānānaṁ manussānaṁ – puññapekkhānapāṇinaṁ 
karotaṁ opadhikaṁ puññaṁ – sanghe dinna ṁ 
mahapphalaṁ” 
“Monks there are these eight (types of) individuals worthy 
of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of 
reverential salutation – the unsurpassed field of merit for the 
world. Which are the eight? 
The stream -winner, the one who is treading  the way of 
practice for the realization of the fruit of stream-winning.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

The once -returner, the one who is treading the way of 
practice for the realization of the fruit of once-returning. 
The non -returner, the one who is treading the way of 
practice for the realization of the fruit of non-returning. 
The Arahant, the one who is treading the way of practice 
for Arahanthood. 
These O monks are the eight types of individuals worthy 
of gifts.......... the unsurpassed field of merit for the world. 
The treaders four 
And the four on fruit established 
This is the sangha (in virtue) upright 
Endowed with wisdom, morality and concentration. 
For those human beings who offer sacrifice 
For beings that expect merit 
For those whose assets are in merit 
Whatever is given for the Sangha is of great fruit.” 
The key to solve this long -standing controversy is the 
term paṭipanna. There is a subtle nuance by which the term 
‘magga’ differs from paṭipadā though they are often juxtaposed 
as (apparent) synonyms . The peculiar wording – phala – 
sacchikiriyāya – paṭipanno (which sounds rather periphrastic) is 
enough to forewarn us against confusing it with ‘lokuttara 
magga’ (supra-mundane path) which  incontrovertably is 
immediate (ānantarika). One may wonder why the first line of 
the summary verse does not run something like: 
“Cattāro ca maggaṭṭhā – cattāro ca phale ṭhitā” 
‘Paṭipadā’ (treading) certainly lasts more than a split 
second but the ‘magga’ (path) immediately yields ‘fruit’. Hence 
the indubitable asseveration in Ratana Sutta: 
“Yam Buddhaseṭṭho parivaṇṇayī suciṁ 
samadhimānantarikaññamāhu

Bhikkhu Yogānanda 

samādhinā tena samo na vijjati 
idampi dhamme ratanaṁ paṇītaṁ 
etena saccena suvatthi hotu” 
“That pure concentration which the supremely Awakened 
One extolled 
That concentration which the Noble Ones call 
‘immediate’ 
There is no concentration comparable to it 
This is the excellent jewel nature of the Dhamma 
By the power of this truth – may there be well-being” 
The full import of the clumsy looking repetitive 
expression ‘phala sacchikiriy āya pa ṭipanno’ could be evaluated 
in the light of my long reply to one of your earlier questions. 
“How are we to understand the ‘sekha’ who has entered 
the path of stream -entry but has not reached ‘phala’ (namely the 
‘saddhānusāri’ and the ‘dhammānusāri’)?” 
You may also listen to my Pahan Kanuwa Sermon No. 
169 in which I touched on this ‘magga-paṭipadā’ problem 
(towards the end). 
With mettā 
K. Ñāṇananda.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

3. Correspondence with Mrs. S. P. 
Part 1 
 
Hamburg 16.12.2005 
Dear Venerable Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, 
So now I came to the decision to ask you directly . It’s not 
easy to formulate the problem in a correct and clear way or to 
show the ground from which I ask and I know it’s probably even 
much more effort to answer (except you ’re answering something 
like: “just give it up – all of it are constructions in the mind”). 
The intention is to get advice from you, someone who is 
deeply anchored in the Dhamma, so be sure what ever you will 
say, I will receive it with great appreciation. 
So – as far as my understanding goes (there is no doub t, 
that awakening is possible): 
The aim is the total end of rāga, dosa, moha. 
But this status seems to be understandable  in two kinds of 
possibilities: 
1) Either Nibbāna within lifetime = Nibbāna with 
khandhā but without upādāna   or 
2) parinibbāna after giving up the will of continuing 
(āyusañkhāro) = Nibbāna without any khandhā = the end of all 
which can be thought, felt, perceived? 
The impression of an objective existing world – 
independent from avijjā – is overwhelmed by an Arahant. The 
Arahant is no longer a prisoner of the Paṭiccasamuppādo. 
If this is right, the following question seems logical:  How 
can it be however possible, that there is action, perception, 
feeling etc. – an Arahant teaching the Dhamma for example?

Mrs. S.P. 

Why does an Arahant seem to go back into all that, what 
he had given up (the 5 khandhā)? 
May be in better words : the reason why the  khandhā 
process is working is avijjā and thirst, both is ceased, the ending 
of any wishes was, what the Ariya sāvako was fighting for – after 
reaching this aim – how can any wish come up (even if it is not 
for his own profit but also to help someone) . Viewed from a very 
high perspective isn’t that ‘someone’ nothing more but a concept 
in mind, some sort of product of avijjā? 
Or for another example, why does an Arahant 
(sometimes) commit suicide? (someone who – whatever kind of 
feeling is perceived – recognizes it neutral, just as a conditional 
feeling – even if it is dangerous for his life) why doesn ’t he 
accept it? 
Doesn’t it mean that parinibbāna is better or higher or 
something else than Nibbāna? 
Is there some sort of rest moha, which however by an  
Arahant is recognized as moha? 
Otherwise we would have (objective existing) khandha 
without upādāna? (at least for the whil e as long as the body is 
alive maybe the ‘āyu’ what is it exactly? Which role plays the āyu 
in context with Paṭicca samuppāda?) 
So it seems as if there is somehow still a sort of rest 
suffering or rest delusion/ illusion as long  as parinibbāna is not 
reached? 
In the Suttas it is said that most of the Arahants reach 
paññāvimutti not cetovimutti. But isn ’t parinibbāna always 
paññāvimutti and cetovimutti? 
This would mean that they (the Arahants with 
paññāvimutti) manage to reach cetovimutti in the moment of 
death? Why now? How? What happens – was the release before 
not complete?

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

It is really difficult to understand why ‘someone’ is meant 
to walk around (why the process of being is continued) if ‘he’ is 
totally freed from illusion. 
I think one of the traps of misunderstanding is maybe the 
interpretation of the word Nibbāna. The only way to describe 
Nibbāna is, what it is not and i n using vocabulary of saṁsāro. 
For me in the highest sense it means: it’s impossible to reach or 
experience Nibbāna and there are no words for the 
unconditioned. But what can be experienced is the wisdom of the 
end of saṁsāro with all good feelings from jhānas etc., but both 
the wisdom and the feelings should be seen as saṁsāric 
phenomena, which will come to end after some time because 
there is no base for continuing anymore. 
There is the idea of an Arahant having realized Nibbāna 
and being freed from upādāna, he was teaching and acting more 
than 40 years because of this imagination quite a lot of Buddhists 
think Nibbāna obviously can ’t be ‘no-thing’. I think maybe 
Nibbāna and saṁsāra are mixed up. 
Even the pure and freed and non -manifestative 
consciousness of an Arahant is conditioned or do you see it 
different? 
I think all these questions actually are pointing mainly to 
the same . I hope I c ould transport the difficulties/ the 
contradiction without sounding presumptuous (arrogant) or in 
whatever way not appropriate, please forgive  all this 
incompetency.

Mrs. S.P. 

Pothgulgala Aranya,  
Pahan Kanuwa, Kandegedara,  
Devalegama 
06.01.2006 
 
Dear Upāsikā S.P., 
I received your letter dated 16.12.2005. Many of your 
Dhamma questions are quite pertine nt because generally we have 
too idealistic a picture of an Arahant. But perhaps you can find an 
answer to them once the distinction between sa-upādisesa 
Nibbānadhātu and anupādisesa Nibbānadhātu is understood. I 
have tried to explain this distinction particularly in  my N.M.S. 
Sermon Nos. 18 & 19. 
In the relevant Sutta of Itivuttaka the following 
description is given of the Arahant in sa-upādisesa 
Nibbānadhātu. 
“……. His five sense faculties still remain and due to the 
fact that they are not destroyed, he experiences likes and 
dislikes, pleasures and pains . That extirpation of lust, hate and 
delusion in him, monks, is known as the Nibbāna element with 
residual clinging.” 
So an Arahant is not an insensate ‘vegetable’. In his day 
to day life, he is subject to pleasurable and painful feelings like 
any other person, but he is able to overcome them to the extent he 
brings in mindfulness, concentration and wisdom  he has 
already developed . Hence we are told that the Tathāgata 
experiences taste but does not experience any attachment to it. 
(Brahmāyu Sutta  M. II  138). It is the same when  it comes to 
painful feelings. When a splinter from the rock hurled by 
Devadatta Thera cut the  Buddha’s foot, he experienced 
excruciating pains which however he bore up with mindfulness 
so much so that the deities praised him for his endurance.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

What accounts for the mission of the Buddha and the 
Arahants (teaching the Dhamma, helping others etc.) i s their past 
karmic background which keeps them still alive like the mud and 
water in the lotus pond. It is our academic seclusion  which 
prevents us from appreciating the beauty and fragrance of a lotus 
in its proper place of origin . The Buddhas and Arahants are no 
freaks in the social context. They have still a role to play 
depending on their past karmic background with all its ups and 
downs – the 8 worldly vicissitudes ( aṭṭhalokadhamma). The 
Buddha declares that he has karuṇā (compassion) and anukampā 
(sympathy) for beings, far more than his disciples . Some of his 
chief disciples who were Arahants distinguished themselves in 
this or that field so that the Buddha declared them foremost in 
those particular fields even describing the past ‘kamma’ for 
which they deserved the distinction . This karmic background 
accounts for their ‘shortcomings’ as well – physical and mental . 
Sometimes the Buddha as the teacher had to ‘pull up ’ those 
Arahant disciples – of course, not to the extent of calling them 
‘vain-fellows’ (moghapurisā) for certain faults of commission 
and omission. 
Though the ‘hang-on’ of ‘upādāna’ is over, there is still 
the residual ‘hang-over’ – ‘upādi’. This is the imperfection in 
sa-upādisesa Nibbānadhātu. That is perhaps why Venerable 
Sariputta says that he is awaiting death like one who has done his 
job is awaiting his wages (Thera V1003) . The Arahant has a 
reassuring foretaste of that final release in his phala-samāpatti 
which is also called parinibbāna in some contexts . In fact, the 
Arahant is in his element  only when he is in phala-samāpatti 
(aññāvimokkha), ( aññāphala) with its triple deliverance – 
‘animitta’ (signless), ‘appaṇihita’ (undirected) and ‘suññata’ 
(void). That is his true pasture ( gocara). Nibbāna is explicitly 
called ‘the cessation of the six sense bases ’ (saḷāyatana nirodha). 
But even this ability to attain to the ‘phala’ is still subject to his 
karmic background . That is why Venerable Maha Moggall āna 
with all his iddhi – powers, failed to escape the 500 bandits in

Mrs. S.P. 

their third attempt to kill him. The path to attain the 
‘unconditioned’ (asankhatagāmimagga) is still conditioned . The 
Noble Eight Fold Path is the highest of all things conditioned (see 
Aggappasāda Sutta  A.N. 34) . It is in the last moment of an 
Arahant’s life that the ‘phala-samāpatti’ comes perfect as the 
famous Ratana Sutta describes in the verse beginning with 
“khīnam purāṇam.....” and ending with the line “nibbanti dhirā 
yathāyampadīpo” – the last flicker of the lamp  when the wick 
and the oil are about to be exhausted . This is the final 
extinguishment or extinction which carries the certitude that the 
flame has nothing more to grab for a flare-up in another womb. 
Regarding the question of ‘āyu’ – Venerable Sā riputta 
points out in Mahāvedalla Sutta (M. I 295) that there is a mutual 
relationship between ‘āyu’ and ‘usmā’ (heat) while the five sense 
faculties ( pañcindriyāni) subsist on āyu. It is aga in a case of 
dependent-arising. 
The transcendence of the world – the ‘seeing-through’ of 
the dark curtain of ‘avijjā’ is brought about by penetrative 
paññā – aided by sati and samādhi. The world is steeped in the 
darkness of ‘avijjā’ and ‘papañca’ at its own level of reality . In 
the light of wisdom ‘nippapañca’ the Arahant experiences that 
transcendence summed up in our theme. “This is peaceful, this is 
excellent..... the extinction .” It is a case of switching -on and off 
of the facade of papañca best exemplified by the riddle-like lines. 
“na pāraṁ diguṇaṁ yanti 
na idaṁ ekaguṇaṁ mutaṁ” 
– Sn. V. 714 
They go not twice to the farther shore 
Nor yet is it reckoned a ‘going once’ ! 
The LOTUS-philosophy of being in the world but not of 
the world is truly difficult to understand. We tend to forget about 
the mud and the water that still sustain and ke ep fresh the lotus 
in the pond!

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Commentaries record an instance in which a meditative 
monk was challenged with a barrage of questions by an academic 
monk about the true state of an Arahant. He listened through with 
patience and remarked: 
“The path, friend, is different for one who has traversed 
it!” 
(i.e. a difference between the MAP and the TRIP!) 
I shall limit myself to these few observations because this 
is an area where one can easily be misunderstood, misquoted and 
misinterpreted.  
 
With mettā,  
K. Ñāṇananda

Mrs. S.P. 

Part 2 
 
Hamburg, 16.03.2010 
Dear Venerable Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, 
Recently Bhikkhu An ālayo was so kind to send to me 
your essay ‘Nibbāna and the fire simile ’. Thank you very much 
for asking him to do this!! 
The fire simile is really one of my favorite themes in 
meditating about Nibbāna and for directing the activities of the 
mind more and more to abandoning – referenced to the ‘seeing 
through the net ’. Actually I think this simile can ’t be mistaken, 
and it ca n help to accept, that the ‘going out’ is possible and that 
is at last the only solution for the final finishing of the sa ṁsāric 
round (an acceptance even against the habitual emotional 
tendencies which always want to grasp). 
After this, the main spiritual work is located in correcting 
the false habitual views and actions in upholding the ‘I in the 
world thinking’ and all it’s connected servings and delusions. So, 
to get the turn from worldly interests directed to a spiritual 
development most of us lay people need the good input of 
dhamma teachings over and over again. 
The meditation about the fire simile, or something similar 
like (for example) the five khandhā, is of great benefit and will 
sooner or later conduct to a stabiliz ation and freeing of the heart 
and/or mind. The illustrative story of Dabba Mallaputto and his 
extraordinary death is very impressive and may inspire to a lot of 
kusala thoughts, or may arouse some additional effort . So it may 
happen, from time to time, that the mind reaches a more profound 
level of collection and understanding, and this freeing experience 
without preconceived views shows as a result, that we don ’t even 
need to make a decision of giving up this or that . When the mind 
is really clear and str ong, anicca, dukkha and anattā are evident

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

and there is no longing for all such useless stuff (however great it 
seemed to be before) which is usually summarized under the term 
‘world’, necessarily including all the  concepts of personality 
views. 
But of course, what in fact is req uired to come to these 
reliefs is the establishing of right moral conduct and the 
continuous wish and effort for right und erstanding and total 
clearness. 
Why do I write this?  Well, to express and share my joy 
about the aim, which  the Buddha proclaimed. To read and to talk 
about the deep points in the dhamma is inspiring and very helpful 
for the weak parts of the undeveloped mind, and so you see, that 
your work, in explainin g and confirming and highlight ing the 
dhamma in it ’s deep and original meaning, is a great verific ation 
and encouragement for us. 
In case you would like me to type some of your texts with 
the computer, please let me know.  
So thank you very much for all of your work. 
 
With deep respect and many good wishes for you, 
S.P.

Mrs. S.P. 

Part 3 
Hamburg, March 11, 2015 
Dear Venerable Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, 
Now it ’s already quite a long time since you ’ve left 
Pothgulgala Aranyaya. Sri told me that, by good chance, a new 
place is in reach, with the help of the lay -community. I can 
imagine that a changing of the outer conditions brings a lack of 
calm and plenty of all the other accompanying uncomfort able 
effects. So I really hope  that the efforts are successful and the 
strenuous situation for you will calm down. 
If my letter, with so me more questions, is producing too 
much load for you, and which is in itself already somehow a 
tiresome request, please forgive me, that I came up with it and 
please ignore it and I will just translate. 
So just as a trial – here are the questions: 
Question 1: idappaccayatā  
which you translate as ‘a relation of this and that’  
(Nib. Sermon 1, page 11, section 1; page 12, section 1) 
(Nib. Sermon 2, page 29, section 2 ff . and page 31) and similarly, 
(Nib. Sermon 4, page 86, section 2+4) 
And the explanation in Pāli: 
“iti imasmiṁ sati idaṁ hoti 
imassupādā idaṁuppajjati 
imasmiṁ asati idaṁ na hoti 
imassa nirodhā idaṁ nirujjhati” 
which you translate: 
“Thus – this being – this comes to be 
With the arising of this – this arises 
This not being – this does not come to be 
With the cessation of this – this ceases.”

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

My question: 
Why do you prefer to use only ‘this’ in your translation of 
the four lines? For me it seems to be quite ‘near by’ to use ‘that’ 
here as well, to denote the relating (but different) object or 
aspect. Of course I know that ‘this’ and ‘that’ are relative terms, 
which can easily change their position depending on the point of 
view, however in this context with the 12 links of the paṭicca 
samuppāda for me it seems to be a littl e irritating to use only the 
term ‘this’. In ‘Concept and Reality ’ (1971, page 88) you use 
both terms, translating;  
“when this is, that comes to be; with the arising of this, 
that arises; when this is not, that does not come to be, with the 
stopping of this, that is stopped.” 
Which you seem to have changed in later printings 
(version 2012, in the internet, page 85). 
Question 2: ajjhattaṁ-bahiddhā (difficult theme for me – I hope I 
can manage to explain my thoughts) 
In Nibbāna Sermon 4, page 91/92 you are talking in detail 
about the relativeness of ‘ajjhatta’ and ‘bahiddhā’ or ‘internal’ 
and ‘external’ and you point out the necessity not to  take these 
terms dogmatically. 
Then continuing... ‘more strictly rendered, ajjhatta means 
inward and bahiddhā means outward’. And with the example of 
the modern medicine and people who take in artificial parts in to 
their bodies, you point out: 
‘That is why, in this context ajjhattika has a deeper 
significance than its usual rendering as ‘one’s own’. (with what I 
can easily retrace and agree with, in this case). 
So, what I get from the above statements are mainly 2 
aspects;

Mrs. S.P. 

1) The relativity of these only seemingly opposite or different 
things – I think, I’ve understood and accepted this fact , since a 
long time. 
 However, what is in a changing process, only since quite a 
short time, is the relevance of this view of my active practice . 
With your declaration, I got the initial hint to see the 
importance and method of using this view somehow as a  
mental operation scalpel, which is needed to be used to dissect 
the habitual and subtle conceits tangled in duality!!! 
2) In consequence of their relativity the two terms seem to have 
also a flexible range of meaning in the suttas. 
 And although their differences should not be overstrained, still 
each of the words seem to have its justification in sharpe ning 
the one or other aspect.  
 On the way to overcome the mental prison of duality in some 
perspectives it looks like being helpful to work with the tw o 
terms (not dogmatically of course) . Just from a pragmatic 
point of view, it sometimes seems to be adequate to 
differentiate between ‘mine’ and ‘yours’, ‘inside’ and 
‘outside’ etc. and that’s the background of my related question 
depending on the translat ion/interpretation of the following 
passage; (Nib. Sermon 6, page 122 at the beginning Pāli Sutta: 
A II 157 Cetanā Sutta and SN II 37 Bhumijasuttaṁ) 
 Kāye vā, bhikkhave, sati k āyasañcetanāhetu uppajjati 
ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. 
 Vācāya v ā, bhikkhave, sati v ācīsañcetanāhetu uppajjati 
ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. 
 Mane v ā, bhikkhave, sati manosa ñcetanāhetu uppajjati 
ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. 
Avijjāpaccayā va.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Your translation: ‘........inward pleasure and pain ...’. 
Bhikkhu Bodhi transl ates in the same way as you do: 
“Bhikkhus, when there is the body, then because of bodily 
volition pleasure and pain arise internally...” 
On the other hand Woodward translates: “Monks, where there 
is bodily action, there arises to the self pleasure or pain  caused 
by intention of bodily action.”  
And similarly in their German edition of the Cetanāsutta 
Nyanatiloka and Nyanaponika relate the ‘ajjhattaṁ’ to the 
person who experiences . (lst, ihr Mönche, der Körper da, so 
erwächst einem infolge der Willensäu ßerung in körperlichen 
Werken Wohl oder Wehe.)  
My translation of their whole sentence: “Monks, if a body is 
there, then for that one (or oneself) there arises pleasure or 
pain caused by intention of bodily action.” 
So here you seem to interpret the use of ajjhatta and 
bahiddhā in the same way as in the example with the artificial 
parts in the body, whereas some others here prefer the ‘classical’ 
rendering. 
My question: 
Reading yours or Bhikkhu Bodhi ’s translation there rises 
up an irritation about the meaning. 
What I tend to read with your translation, is, that pleasure 
and pain are more or less limited to an inward experience, and 
the term ‘inward’ is automatically associated with some sort of 
feelings which are not right away triggered through an 
external/outward experience through the senses. 
If this is the sense you use this word in this context, then 
it’s hard for me to see, why pleasure and pain should only be 
limited to an inward experience . If a body is experienced, the 
analysis of my life -experiences brings to me the result that much

Mrs. S.P. 

outward pain, related to this body (for example injury, hunger 
etc) is also possible/happening. 
Instead – if I see the relation of inward and outward in 
this context between the one who experiences and the others, it 
doesn’t produce difficulties, but seem to make sense, especially 
with the continuing text in the sutta, which puts much emphasis 
on the theme of volitional actions and its consequences in 
connection to the relation between the one actor and the other 
actors. 
And taking up again the aspect of the range of the words 
depending on the context I ’d like to draw in your use of the 
words in Nib. Sermon 26, page 550 & 3 . In context with a 
magician and the stan dard formula about consciousness you 
translate ‘ajjhattaṁ’ apparently in the wider sense as well, as 
‘consciousness in oneself ’ in opposition to the external 
consciousness. (In case, that I understood it in the right way) 
So in this last case, for me it is  very meaningful to use 
‘ajjhattaṁ’ to designate oneself and ‘bahiddhā’ for the  
consciousness of others . (Although in this context consciousness 
is something which takes place inwardly, the weight of the 
message seems to lie on the sense: whatever consciousness it is 
all about, mine or others, it ’s impermanent etc. and similarly with 
the other four components of the Khandhā) 
Actually there are more questions, but for today I decide 
to stop here . Perhaps I should just translate and do not ask so 
much!? May be these are just very subjective impres sions and 
should be left aside? 
With deep respect, great thankfulness and plenty o f good 
wishes for your welfare. 
Yours Sincerely, 
Upāsikā S. P.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

26/03/2015 
 
Dear Upāsikā S. P., 
I received your letter of the  11th, with the problems you 
came up in translating my Nibbāna Sermons. I can easily 
understand your problems because I myself have sometimes 
given the following simile to illustrate the seriousness of the task 
of translating from one language to another. 
‘It is like a mother ’s attempt to breast feed a new born 
child. She has first of all to digest and assimilate the food she 
takes and convert it into RED BLOOD. Then, with her love for 
the child, she has to convert it into WHITE MILK! 
Well, then, let me try to answer your questions. 
Answer 1: ‘idappaccayatā’ 
You see an incongruity in my translating ‘idappaccayatā’ 
by ‘relatedness of this to that’ and my translating the basic 
principle of Paṭicca Samuppāda as follows: 
‘Thus – this being – this comes to be 
With the arising of this – this arises 
This not being – this does not come to be 
With the cessation of this – this ceases’ 
I must confess that I was well aware of the incongruity 
and was hard put to find an alternative rendering to bring out 
more faithfull y the depth of meaning ingrained in the term 
‘idappaccayatā’. As a matter of fact, in my first edition of the 
Magic of the Mind, I have followed the standard translation of the 
formula: 
‘This being – that comes to be’ etc. 
But changed it in my later editions to 
‘This being – this comes to be’ etc.

Mrs. S.P. 

We must not forget that the terms ‘Paṭiccasamuppāda’ 
and ‘idappaccayatā’ are ‘strangers’ to the contemporary Indian 
Philosophical thought. But my problem is that when I try to make 
‘sense’ of these terms for  the Western reader, content with 
standard translations, there is considerable risk in (mis) -taking it 
for ‘non-sense’. 
With all that risk, I gave a more reasoned explanation for 
my controversial rendering in my recent series of 20 sermons on 
Paṭicca Samuppāda in Sinhala. Already in my Nibbāna sermons I 
made a breakthrough for the Sinhala (listeners and) readers since 
almost all preachers and authors had followed the standard 
rendering: ‘meya ati kalhi – eya veyi’ etc. 
At least a few discerning readers  have appreciated my 
thought-provoking rendering of the deep dictum enshrining the 
HEART of the Law of Dependent Arising  faithfully to the 
original Pāli. 
To go back to the Buddha-word, what is easily overlooked 
is the fact that the original P āli phrasing has the same 
awkwardness on first hearing, which is why it proved to be an 
‘eye-opener’ (Dhamma-eye) to many ever since . Had the Buddha 
wished to put across a relation between ‘This’ and ‘That’ he 
would have worded it as; 
‘imasmiṁ sati – etaṁ hoti’ 
I have highlighted the validity of this apparently awkward 
formula by showing how the Law holds good for any two links in 
the formula of 12 links – taken up in pairs as a context in itself. 
If I may suggest another ‘awkward’ rendering for 
‘idappaccayatā’ it would be something like: 
‘This – this relatedness!!

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Answer 2: ‘ajjhattaṁ-bahiddhā’ 
This is a complicated subject because it concerns a variety 
of contexts. I shall try to take them up one by one. 
1. Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta 
In the thematic paragraph at the en d of each subsection 
one finds: 
(eg) iti ajjhattaṁ vā kāye kāyānupassī viharati 
 bahiddhā vā ........... 
ajjhatta-bahiddhā vā ........... 
Before getting down to the question of a proper rendering 
for the two terms, let me say something about the ‘purpose’ of the 
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta in general . In fact I have already stated it in 
just a few words in my ‘Towards Calm and Insight’ (p.54). 
Satipaṭṭhāna: 
‘An objective approach to understand the subjective  in 
one’s experience’. 
If you can penetrate into this aphorism, you c an solve 
many of your problems. 
It is because of this objective approach that we get the 
following apparently awkward phrase like: 
‘kāye kāyānupassī viharati’ etc 
– in the case of all four Satipaṭṭhāna objects. 
Whatever the language may be, this could easily irritate a 
translator for he has to give a clumsy rendering like: 
‘contemplating body in the body’ 
The purpose of ‘sati’ aided by ‘sampajañña’ is to 
understand ‘body’ as SUCH without any subjective colouring.

Mrs. S.P. 

That is why ‘internal’ and ‘external’ are better suited than 
‘oneself’ and ‘another’. 
I have also drawn attention to the significance of the 
peculiar compound ‘ajjhatta-bahiddhā’ with reference to my 
simile of ‘sharpening a razor ’. The transcending of the duality 
occurs when the contemplation is ‘razor-edge’ SHARP. 
2. The same principle of transcending the duality of ‘internal’ and 
‘external’ is implicit in the meditation on elements in the Dhātuvibhanga Sutta (M. III 240), though the approach there is directly 
through ‘anattasaññā’. There the duality is between; 
(eg) ‘ajjhattikā paṭhavidhātu’ and ‘bāhirā paṭhavidhātu’. 
Here of course, one might understand by it the earth -element in 
oneself and external to oneself  – just to make the ‘attack’ on 
‘self’ all the more trenchant. In fact the descriptive phrase; 
‘ajjhattaṁ paccattaṁ kakkhalaṁ kharigataṁ upādinnaṁ’
 – bordering on the modern usage ‘organic’ as 
distinguished from ‘the inorganic’. 
3. ‘ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ’ (inward pleasure and pain) 
The passage beginning with – ‘kāye v ā bhikkhave sati 
kāyasañcetanāhetu uppajati ajjhata ṁ sukhadukkham’ ....... etc. 
ending with ‘avijjāpaccayā vā’ – has a very deep dimension of 
meaning. 
If I may summarize, so long as one takes seriously the 
concept of a body as really existing , then, due to intention 
based on that concept, there arises inwardly pleasure and 
pain – due to ignorance . What is the ignorance?  Taking ‘body’ 
at its ‘face-value’ as something compact – grossest level of which 
is hinted at by the term ‘sat-kāya-diṭṭhi’ (lit. ‘existing-bodyview’) ie. taking body as a ‘unit’. 
The same can be applied to ‘vācā’ (speech) and ‘vacīsañcetanā’ – intention based on speech as a unit.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

– and to ‘mano’ (mind) and ‘mano-sañcetanā’ – intention 
based on mind as a unit.  
I wonder whether your rendering can do justic e to the 
depth of this passage. 
I may briefly allude to that level of ‘EXPERIENCE’ 
where these ‘units’ are no more, and that is 
‘arahattaphalasamādhi’ with its ‘anidassana viññāna’. 
You may also examine the ‘Sakalika Sutta’ (S. I. 27) as an 
illustration of that level of freedom from inward PAIN. 
I think the series of 20 sermons on Paṭicca Samuppāda I 
am now translating will clear up many of your problems in 
translating my Nibbāna sermons. Already there is much 
eagerness among those who have heard about it from Sri Lankans 
abroad – to get the English translation . So far I have translated 9 
sermons but I had some difficulty in getting them correctly typed 
out. I have already asked Mr C.  who is helping me in that matter, 
to release by e -mail whatever sermons I have ‘okayed’ to 
Dhamma thirsty readers abroad . I have included your name and 
e-mail address also in that list.  
I greatly appreciate your devotion to the responsible task 
of translating my Nibbāna series – like a loving mother  getting 
ready to ‘breast-feed’ the (German) children. I may mention that 
a group of Chinese dāyakas and dāyikās have brought out a 
library edition of all 7 volumes of the N.M.S. series. 
Best wishes for your good health and progress! 
 
With mettā, 
K. Ñāṇananda

4. Correspondence with Mr. U.M. 
Part 1 
 
20.11.2007 
Most Venerable Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Thero 
Pothgulgala Aranyaya 
Dewalegama. 
Most Venerable Sir, 
It was after posting a copy of the e-mail (sent to Mr A.) to 
you, I realised that in one of the sermons (6 th sermon) of ‘nivane 
niweema’ you have pointed out that cessation of perception and 
feeling (CPF) is a deep state of tranquility absorp tion which  is 
misunderstood as Nibbāna. This explanation is quite in 
accordance with the Culavedalla S utta which states that a 
bhikkhu only after emerging from CPF will experience the three 
contacts viz animitta, sunnata and appanihitta. In other words he 
is in the proper state of Nibbāna not while in CPF but 
immediately after he emerges from it. 
But some other suttas seem to sugg est the CPF both 
deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom ( ceto vimutti 
and panna vimutti ). For example, in the Mahānidāna sutta  the 
Buddha, while explaining  these absorptions to Ven. Ananda, 
says: “By transcending the sphere of neither perception -nor-non 
perception one enters and abides in the cessation of perception 
and feeling. That is the eighth liberation . ‘Ananda, when once a 
monk attains these eight lib erations in forward order, in reverse 
order ..... and has gained by his own super knowledge here and 
now both the destruction of the corruptions and the uncorrupted 
liberation of the heart and liberation by wisdom, that monk is 
called both ways liberated’ and Ananda, there is no other way of

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

both-ways-liberation, that is more excellent and perfect than 
this.” 
Also in the Poṭṭhapada sutta, the Buddha after explaining 
the attainment of cessation by  successive steps praises it:  “What 
do you think, Poṭṭhapada? Have you heard of this before...” 
Also in Mahavedella S utta Ven. Sariputta explains that 
when a bhikk hu is in a state of CPF his faculties become 
exceptionally clear! 
Of course, it is only those who have the ability to get into 
the eight absorptions (asthasamāpatti) could experience CPF. 
I most respectfully invite you Ven. Sir, to kindly clarify 
these puzzling points of dhamma for us. 
May the blessings of the Noble Triple Gem endow you 
Ven. Sir, with more wisdom and protect you for continued 
valuable service to the sasana! 
 
Your most respectfully, 
Upāsaka U.M.

Mr. U. M. 

6-12-2007 
Dear Upāsaka U.M., 
The questions you have raised in your letter dated 
20/11/2007 could be boiled down to the following moot points:  
1. What is the relationship between the cessatio n of 
perception and feeling (CPF  – ‘saññavedayita nirodha 
samāpatti’) and Nibbāna? 
2. Do they mean the same thing or can one distinguish 
between them? 
 
I. Poṭṭhapāda Sutta  (D I 178ff .) could be a good sta rting 
point for the discussion.  It portrays the climate of opinion 
prevalent among contemporary sectarians regarding the question 
of the cessation of higher levels of perception 
(abhisaññānirodha). The burning question of the day was: 
‘Kathaṁ nukho abhisaññānirodho hoti?’ 
‘How does the cessation of higher levels of perception 
come about?’ 
The purely ‘samatha’ (tranquility) approach of those 
ascetics under the influence of ‘sakkāya diṭṭhi’ (personality view) 
ended up with the dilemma: 
‘Perception is a disease, a boil, a dart . But the absence of 
perception is a bewilderment (sammoha). 
This is peaceful, this is excellent, that is to say, the sphere 
of neither perception nor non-perception.’ 
They were on a ‘see-saw’ caught up between the horns of 
a dilemma . Several theories on the qu estion of the arising and 
cessation of perception find mention in Poṭṭhapāda Sutta  (D. I 
180). They are: 
1. A man ’s perceptions arise and cease without any 
cause or condition (ahetu appaccaya).

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

2. Perception is a man ’s soul . It comes and goes . 
When it comes one is percipient when it goes one is 
not percipient. 
3. There are recluses and Brahmins of great psychic 
power & influence . They drag in and drag out that 
man’s perception... 
4. There are gods of great psychic power & influence . 
They drag in and drag out that man’s perception. 
The Buddha ’s solution to this vexed problem follow the 
norm of Dependent Arising (paṭicca samuppāda) 
‘Due to causes and conditions a man ’s perception arises 
and ceases.’ 
(‘sahetu sappaccaya purisassa sa ññā uppajjatipi 
nirujjhatipi’)  
The entire course of training based on the principle of 
(paṭicca samuppāda) is outlined in the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta with the 
refrain-like dictum. 
‘sikkhā ekā saññā uppajjati 
 sikkhā ekā saññā nirujjhati’ 
‘By training one perception arises 
 By training one perception ceases’ 
The crucial point at which the subtlest saññā is 
transcended is described as follows: 
‘yato kho Po ṭṭhapāda bhikkhu saka saññī hoti so tato 
amutra tato amutra  anupubbena sa ññaggaṁ phusati tassa 
saññagge ṭhitassa eva ṁ hoti: (Tr. From ‘there’ to ‘here’ from 
‘there’ to ‘here’ in gradual stages) 
cetayamānassa me pāpiyo acetayamānassa me seyyo... 
yaṁnūnāhaṁ na ceteyyaṁ na abhisaṅkhareyyaṁ... 
so na ceva ceteti na abhisa ṅkharoti. Tassa acetayato 
anabhisaṅkharoto tā ceva sa ññā nirujjhanti a ññā ca o ḷārikā 
saññā na uppajjanti. So nirodha ṁ phusati. Evaṁ kho

Mr. U. M. 

Poṭṭhapāda anupubbābhisaññānirodha sampaj āna sam āpatti 
hoti. 
Gradually passing from one subtle stage of perception to a 
higher and subtler stage of perception one attains to the highest 
level of perception ( saññagga) ie. the sphere of nothingness 
which has as its object the thought ‘There is Nothing ’ (natthi 
kiñci). Reflecting on the perils of ‘cetanā’ and ‘abhisaṁkhāra’ 
(intention and karmic prep aration) one desists therefrom . It is 
then that one attains (lit. touches) Nirodha or cessation. 
Buddha winds up with the conclusive statement: ‘Evaṁ 
kho Poṭṭhapāda anupubbābhisaññānirodha sampajāna samāpatti 
hoti.’  
Thus O! Po ṭṭhapāda is the gradual attainment with 
full awareness to the cessation of higher levels of perception. 
The purpose of this disquisition is to answer the ‘burning 
question’ of the day among ascetics. 
‘How does the cessation of higher levels of perception 
come about?’ 
The Buddha ’s answer has to be understood withi n the 
context. The unusually long compound draws our attention to two 
key terms in particular – ‘anupubba’ – gradual and ‘sampajāna’ 
– full-awareness – which are suggestive of the vipassanā 
approach. 
It is noteworthy that ‘nevasaññānāsaññāyatana 
samāpatti’ (the attainment of the sphere of neither perception nor 
non perception is called ‘saṅkhārāvasesa sam āpatti’ attainment 
with a residue of saṅkhāras or preparations. The decision at the 
‘saññagga’ or highest point of perception to desist from ‘cetanā’ 
and ‘abhisaṅkhāra’ does away with the residual saṅkhāras 
prompted by the self-bias. This is the secret of the ‘breakthrough’ 
introduced by the Buddha.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Now, one who attains to Nirodha S amāpatti invariably 
awakens to  Nibbāna through the triple deliverance – Animitta 
(signless), Appaṇihita (undirected) and Suññata (void). 
 
II. This fact comes to light from the discussion between 
Visākha Upāsaka and the Arahant nun Dhammadinnā in the Cūla 
Vedalla Sutta. 
Visākha: Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitaṁ panayye 
bhikkhuṁ kati phassā phusanti? 
Lady when a monk has emerged from the attainment of 
the cessation of perception and feeling, how many kinds of 
contact touch him? 
Dhammadinnā: Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitam kho 
āvuso vis ākha bhikk huṁ tayo phassā phusant su ññato phasso, 
animitto phasso, appaṇihito phassoti. 
Friend Vis ākha when a monk has emerged from the 
attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling three kinds  
of contact touch him: voidness  contact, signless contact, 
undirected contact. 
Visākha: Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitassa panayye 
bhikkhuno kiṁninnaṁ cittaṁ hoti kiṁponaṁ kiṁpabbhāranti? 
 Lady when a monk has emerged from the attainment of 
the cessation of perception and feeli ng, to what does his mind 
incline to what does it lean, to what does it tend? 
Dhammadinnā: Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vuṭṭhitassa 
kho āvuso vis ākha bhikk huno vivekaninna ṁ cittaṁ hoti 
vivekaponaṁ vivekapabbhāranti. 
Friend Visākha when a monk has emerged from the 
attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling his mind 
inclines to seclusion, leans to seclusion, tends to seclusion.

Mr. U. M. 

The commentary explains : ‘ inclines to seclusion, viveka 
means Nibbāna.’ (M.A. 306  විවෙක නිනනනති ආදිසු නිබබානං 
විවෙවකා නාම)  
It is noteworthy that ‘animitta’, ‘appaṇihita’ and 
‘suññata’ are even  called the three doorways to deliverance 
(vimokkhamukha). 
 
III. In the Mahānidana Sutta a distinction is drawn between a 
dead person and one  who has attained to C.P.F. In both 
kāyasaṅkhāra, vacīsaṅkhāra and cittasaṅkhāra have ceased and 
subsided. In the former vitality is exhausted, heat has gone down 
and sense faculties are fully broken up  (විපරිභිනනානි), but in the 
latter vitality is not exhausted, heat has not gone down and 
faculties are exceptionally clean (විපපසනනානි). 
Here it may be pointed out the term ‘vippasannāni’ 
contrasted with ‘viparibhinnāni’ does not mean that the faculties 
are active – only that they are intact and fresh  i.e. not out of 
order. 
 
IV. Aññā – full comprehension is a term implying final 
convincing knowledge of Arahanthood (cf. ‘aññaṁ vyākaroti’ – 
declaration of one’s atainment to Arahanthood). 
aññāphalasamāpatti, a ññāphalo, a ññāvimokkha and 
aññāpaṭivedha are terms implying the knowledge of the 
attainment of Nibbāna. 
In a discourse at A . IV 422 (නෙක නිපාත ) the Buddha 
declares: 
‘Paṭhamamampāhaṁ bhikkhave jh ānaṁ nissāya 
āsavānaṁ khayaṁ vadāmi, dutiyampāhaṁ ... tatiyampāhaṁ ... 
catutthampāhaṁ ... ākāsānañcāyatanampāhaṁ ... 
viññānañcāyatanampāhaṁ ... ākiñcaññāyatanampāhaṁ ...

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

nevasaññānāsaññāyatanampāhaṁ bhikkhave niss āya āsavānaṁ 
khayaṁ vadāmi.’ 
That is to say he grants the possibility of attaining the 
extinction of influxes or Nibbāna depending on the jhānic levels. 
He explains the procedure in each case, upto 
ākiñcaññāyatana which is the limit of saññāsamāpatti thus: 
Eg. In the case of 1st jhāna: 
‘Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu ...... pa ṭhamaṁ jhānaṁ 
upasampajja viharati. So yadeva tattha hoti r ūpagataṁ 
vedanāgataṁ saññāgataṁ saṅkhāragataṁ viññāṇagataṁ te 
dhamme aniccato dukkhato ro gato ga ṇḍato sallato aghato 
ābādhato parato palokato su ññato anattato samanupassati . So 
tehi dhammehi cittam pa ṭivāpeti. So tehi dhammehi citta ṁ 
paṭivāpetvā amatāya dh ātuyā cittaṁ upasamharati. ‘etaṁ 
santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ sabbasankhārasamatho ............. 
Nibbānanti. So tattha ṭhito āsavānaṁ khayam p āpuṇāti. No ce 
āsavānaṁ khayaṁ pāpuṇāti teneva dhammar āgena t āya 
dhammanandiyā pañcannaṁ orambhāgiyānaṁ saṁyojanānaṁ 
parikkhayā opapātiko hoti tattha parinibb āyī anāvattidhammo 
tasmā lokā.’ 
Here monks, a monk . ........ attains to the first jh āna. 
Whatever things that pertain therein to form, feeling, perception, 
preparations and consciousness , he  contemplates them as 
impermanent as suffering as a malady as a gangrene as a dart as a 
misery as a disease as alien as disintegrating as void as notself . 
He weans his mind from those things . And having weaned his 
mind from those things he focuses his mind on the deathless 
element thus. ‘This is peaceful, this is excellent ....... Nibbāna.’ 
He there and then attains to the extinction of influxes . If he does 
not attain to the extinction of influxes , by the attachment and 
delight in that very mind object with the exhaustion of the lower 
fetters he becomes one of spontaneous re -birth destined to attain 
final extinction there without coming back from that world.

Mr. U. M. 

After this thematic description of the pr ocedure upto 
ākiñcaññāyatana, the Buddha makes the foll owing significant 
pronouncement: 
‘Iti kho bhikkhave y āvatā saññāsamāpatti t āvatā 
aññāpaṭivedho. Yāni ca kho im āni bhikkhave āyatanāni 
nevasaññānāsaññāsamāpatti ca sa ññāvedayitanirodho ca 
jhāyīhete bhikkhave bhikkhuhi sam āpattikusalehi 
samāpattivuṭṭhānakusalehi samāpajjitvā vuṭṭhahitvā sammā 
akkhātabbānīti vadāmi ti.’ 
Thus O! monks as far as is the range of attainment to 
perceptions so far is there a penetration into full comprehension . 
But monks as to these two spheres namely the attainment of 
neither perception nor non -perception and the cessation of 
perception and feelings, monks I say that those meditative monks 
skilled in attainment and in rising from attainment should having 
attained to them rise from them and reflect well over them. 
 
V. The difference between C.P.F. and arahattaphalasamāpatti is that while in the latter state one is ‘percipient 
(conscious) and awake’ (saññi samāno jāgaro) as is evident from 
the M.P.S. episode of the Buddha being unaware of the torrential 
downpour with streaks of lightning and peals of thunder while 
being awake and conscious . What he was conscious of was the 
very cessa tion of existence (‘ bhava nirodho  Nibbānaṁ’) 
summed up in the dictum ‘etaṁ santaṁ... etc’. ‘This is peaceful 
this is excellent.... etc ’. The same experience is called 
‘saḷāyatananirodha’ cessation of the six sense spheres . Nibbānic 
consciousness is non-manifestative consciousness  – 
anidassanaviññāṇa which does not manifest a nāma-rūpa. Here 
is the blissful experience of ‘bhavanirodha’ in the light of Paññā 
(wisdom). 
This is not the case with the CPF . As Ven Dhammadinn ā 
Therī explains in reply to Vis ākha Up āsaka’s question : ‘How

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

lady does the attainments of the cessation of perception and 
feeling come about? One is even not aware of the fact that one is 
in that attainment. 
‘Na kho āvuso Vis ākha sa ññāvedayitanirodhaṁ 
samāpajjantassa bhikkhuno eva ṁ hoti aha ṁ saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpajjissanti vā ahaṁ saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ 
samāpajjāmīti vā ahaṁ saññāvedayitanirodhaṁ samāpannoti vā. 
Atha khv āssa pubbeva  tathā cittṁ bhāvitaṁ hoti yanta ṁ 
tathattāya upanetīti!’ 
‘Friend Visakha, when a monk is attaining the cessation 
of perception and feeling it does not occur to him: I shall attain 
the cessation of perception and feeling or I am attaining the 
cessation of perception and feeling or I have attained the 
cessation of perception and feeling ; but rather his mind has 
previously been developed in such a way that it leads him to that 
state.’ 
 
VI. Although Mahā Nidāna Sutta mentions C.P.F. as the eight 
vimokkha it does not  equate it to the experience of Nibbāna as 
could be glean ed from a careful scrutiny of the ‘summing up of 
the section on ‘‘one who is liberated both ways’ (ubhatobhāga 
vimutta).  
Yato kho Ānanda bhikkhu ime a ṭṭha vimokkhe 
anulomampi sam āpajjati pa ṭilomampi sam āpajjati anuloma -
paṭilomampi sam āpajjati, yatthicchakaṁ yadicchakaṁ 
yāvaticchakaṁ samāpajjatipi vu ṭṭhātipi āsavānañca khay ā 
anāsavam cetovimutti ṁ paññāvimuttiṁ diṭṭheva dhamme saya ṁ 
abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati. Ayaṁ vuccati Ānanda 
bhikkhu ubhatobhāgavimutto imāya ca ānanda ubhatobh āgavimuttiyā aññā ubhatobhāgavimutti uttaritar ā vā paṇītatarā vā 
natthi ti. 
“Ananda when once a monk attains these eight liberations 
in direct order in reverse order and in direct and reverse order,

Mr. U. M. 

entering them and emerging from them as and when, and for as 
long as he wishes and has gained by his own higher knowledge 
here and now by the destruction of influxes both the 
liberation of the mind and the liberation through wisdom, that 
monk is called bot h ways liberated and Ananda there is no other 
way of both ways liberation that is higher or more excellent than 
this.” 
Note: Maurice Walshe’s translation is not accurate (p. 230 
Long Discourses of the Buddha). 
He has here and now  both the destruction of th e 
corruptions ..... – which is incorr ect. The liberation through 
wisdom comes after emerging from C.P.F. as we have pointed 
out above. 
VII. Perhaps the most convincing argument against the general 
belief that saññāvedayitanirodha sam āpatti itself is Nibbāna, is 
the fact that according to Mahā parinibbāna Sutta the Buddha 
passed away or attained parinibbāna not while he was in Nirodha 
Samāpatti but having come down from it to the fourth jh āna. It is 
immediately after arising from the fourth jh āna that he passe d 
away. 
(catutthajjhānā vu ṭṭhahitvā samanantarā Bhagavā 
parinibbāyi.) 
How easy it is to mistake Nirodha Samāpatti as Nibbāna 
is well illustrated by  Venerable Ananda ’s remark when the 
Buddha by stages reached the nirodha sam āpatti on that 
occasion. 
‘Parinibbuto bhante Anuruddha Bhagavā’ 
‘Ven Sir A nuruddha the E xalted One  has attained 
parinibbāna.’ 
But Ven erable Anuruddha corrected him with the 
following authoritative statement : ‘Na āvuso Ānanda B hagavā 
parinibbuto saññāvedayita nirodhaṁ samāpannoti.’

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

“No friend Ananda the Exalted One has not attained 
parinibbāna, he has (only) attained to the cessation of perception 
and feeling.” 
 
Appendix I 
Bhaddaji Sutta A III 202 
Kiṁ nu kho āvuso Bhaddaji dassan ānaṁ aggaṁ kiṁ 
savanānaṁ aggaṁ kiṁ sukhānaṁ aggaṁ kiṁ saññānaṁ aggaṁ 
kiṁ bhavānaṁ agganti. 
Bhaddaji’s answer: 
Atthāvuso brahm ā abhibhū anabhibhūto a ññādatthudaso 
vasavattī yo taṁ brahmānaṁ passati. idaṁ dassanānaṁ aggaṁ. 
Atthāvuso ābhassarā nāma dev ā sukhena abhisann ā parisannā, 
te kadāci karahaci udānaṁ udāneti. “Aho sukhaṁ aho sukhaṁti” 
yo ta ṁ saddaṁ suṇāti. idaṁ savanānaṁ aggaṁ. Atthāvuso 
subhakiṇhā nāmā devā. Te santa ññeva tusit ā sukhaṁ paṭisaṁ 
vedenti. idaṁ sukhānaṁ aggaṁ. Atthāvuso 
ākiñcaññāyatanūpagā devā. Idaṁ saññānaṁ aggaṁ. Atthāvuso 
nevasaññānāsaññāyatanūpagā devā. Idaṁ bhavānaṁ agganti. 
Ananda’s answer: 
Yathā passato kho āvuso anantarā āsavānaṁ khayo hoti. 
Idaṁ dassanānaṁ aggaṁ. Yath ā suṇato anantar ā āsavānaṁ 
khayo hoti ida ṁ savanānaṁ aggaṁ. Yath ā sukhitassa anantar ā 
āsavānaṁ khayo hoti ida ṁ sukhānaṁ aggaṁ. Yath ā saññissa 
anantarā āsavānaṁ khayo hoti ida ṁ saññānaṁ aggaṁ. Yathā 
bhūtassa anantarā āsavānaṁ khayo hoti idaṁ bhavānaṁ agganti.

Mr. U. M. 

Part 2 
 
  29/09/2010
  
Most Venerable Kaṭukurunde Ñaṇananda Thero,  
Based on Kasi Bh āradvāja Sutta  (Sn.): Did the Buddha 
refuse to accept milk rice offered to him at the end of the sermon 
in keeping with the spirit of Dhammadāna? 
If so how can the monks accept offerings af ter delivering 
a dhamma sermon? 
 
Dear Upāsaka U.M., 
I shall try to answer your question s stated in the two 
letters dated (1) 29-09-10 and (2) 05-08-10 
The Buddha refused the offering because in repudiating 
Kasi Bh āradvāja’s insult that he does not ‘plough & sow ’, he 
happened to give an open hint (lit. ‘sing’ an open hint) in verses 
that he is qualified to receive the offering as he also ‘ploughs & 
sows’. It smacks of ‘self-praise’ for the sake of food. That is why 
he rejected the offering . The Buddha’s true aim was to uphold 
the Dhamma  and enlighten Kasi Bhār advāja on the true 
significance of virtues leading upto Nibbāna. That done, his 
purpose is fulfilled. 
You may read and reflect deeply on the two verses (No. 
81, 82) following his refusal . You get an even clearer instance of 
this ‘more-than-gentlemanly’ refusal of an offering which the 
Buddha found it ‘beneath his dignity ’ to accept in Sundarika 
Bhāradvāja Sutta (S.N. Mahāvagga – vss 455-486). 
Here we find Sundarika Bhāradvāja looking around for 
someone worthy of receiving his oblation . When he spotted the 
Buddha seated close by with his head covered, he approached

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

him to offer it. But as soon as the Buddha uncovered his head, he 
insulted the Buddha as a despicable shaveling and was about to 
go away . In the course of the long discussion t hat followed, 
Sundarika Bhāradvāja pointedly asked the Buddha to instruct him 
as to the fittest person to receive the oblation (see vs 461) . 
Among the verses that the Buddha uttered in reply, in as many as 
12 verses (Nos. 467, 478) the refrain runs; 
‘Tathāgato arahati pūraḷāsaṁ’ 
‘Tathāgata deserves the oblation’ 
You can well imagine poor Sundarika Bhāradvāja ’s 
dismay when, after all this, the Buddha refuses to accept the 
oblation with the same axiomatic verse (No. 480) as in 
Kasibhāradvāja Sutta. 
What a wonderful example of the Buddha’s own precept 
to his monks in Dhammadāyāda Sutta. (M. I. 12) 
‘Dhammadāyāda me bhikkhave bhava tha m ā 
āmisadāyādā’ 
‘Monks, be inheritors to my Dhamma – not to my 
requisites’

Mr. U. M. 

Part 3 
05/08/2010 
Most Venerable Kaṭukurunde Ñaṇananda Thero,  
There is the reference to the four lustres which includes; 
‘the lustre of wisdom ’ in the Nibbāna Sermon 7 (p. 148) . Does it 
mean that the ‘lustre of wisdom’ is the same as a lustre of the sun, 
moon and the fire – dispelling darkness from the light they 
emanate; or is it because it (lustre of wisdom) dispels avijjā?.... 
(etc) 
 
Dear Upāsaka U.M.,  
Instead of writing a long commentary on this subject 
which I have discussed already in several of my books, I shall 
briefly indicate the limitations of the above standpoint and give 
references where necessary to my writings – for deeper reflection. 
Granted that paññā dispels avijjā, what is avijjā? 
In the light of paññā the totality of sense percepts is 
tantamount to avijjā. The light of penetrative wisdom 
(pabhassaraṁ idaṁ bhikkhave cittaṁ) is not to be confused with 
external agents of light amenable to physics. (see pp 60 -65 
Saṁyutta Nikāya – An Anthology). It is an illumination coming 
from within, which renders nugatory the ‘made-up’ and prepared 
(saṁkhata) world of sense experiences. Let me quote, anyway the 
relevant concluding lines in the Magic of the Mind (p 79). 
The world enfettered to delusion 
Feigns a promising mien 
The fool to his assets bound 
Sees only darkness around 
It looks as though it would last 
But to him who sees there’s naught (Ud.79)

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, ideas. 
All what they deem desirable – charming, pleasing things 
Of which they claim: ‘it is’ as far as their claim extends 
The world with its gods is agreed, that these are pleasant 
 things. 
And wherein they surcease – ‘that’s unpleasant indeed ’ 
 say they. 
Dvayatānupassanā Sutta. S.N. 
(pls see also pp 76, 77, 82, 83)

Mr. U. M. 

Part 4 
 
25.05.2007 
 
Most Venerable Kaṭukurunde Ñaṇananda Thero, 
I thought of writing this letter after reading ‘The Mind 
Stilled’ 5th Volume. It is with reference to Pahārāda Sutta quoted 
on page 21 . Of course this sutta has been cited by many in 
support of their contention that Nibbāna is yet  another state of 
existence even after the parinibbāna of an Arahant. 
Now, what puzzles me is this: why did the Buddha cite 
the ocean as an example to drive this point?  He could have 
remained silent as in other instances (like with reference to 
Vaccha’s speculative questions) as the question – Nibbāna in 
terms of a volume – would not arise . Due to the Buddha ’s 
explanation of Nibbāna with reference to ‘volume’ the notion that 
it is a supra mundane state of existence could creep into one ’s 
mind. 
I would be grateful Venerable Sir, if you could kindly 
clarify this point fo r me in the interest of Dhamma.  I am 
particularly interested in obtaining a clarification from you, 
because the same example has been used even in Bhagvad -gita, 
as follows: “A person who i s not disturbed by the incessant 
flow of desires – that enter like rivers into the ocean, which is 
ever being filled but is always still – can alone achieve peace, 
and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires. ” Text 70. 
In explaining this verse the commentators have likened it to 
‘Krishna Consciousness’ which of course is the ultimate state of 
existence according to their teaching – union with the Godhead. 
May you Ven. Sir, live long to serve the S āsana in this 
hour of great need! 
Yours respectfully, 
U.M.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Dear Upāsaka U.M., 
I received your letter dated 25/05/2007 posing a problem 
arising out of the reference to ‘Nibbāna Dhāthu’ in the Pahārāda 
Sutta in connection with its sustained simile of the ocean. 
To begin with, there is a more obvious reference to the 
ocean as an abode for beings in the 8th simile “Seyyathāpi 
Pahārāda mahāsamuddo mahataṁ bhūtānam’āvūso....” etc, but 
the beings mentioned there are the following: 
1. Sotāpanno 
2. Sotāpatti phala sacchikiriyāya paṭipanno 
3. Sakadāgāmi 
4. Sakadāgāmi phala sacchikiriyāya paṭipanno 
5. Anāgāmi 
6. Anāgāmi phala sacchikiriyāya paṭipanno 
7. Arahā 
8. Arahattāya paṭipanno 
So it seems, if at all even figuratively, the Buddha 
conceived the great ocean as an abode of huge beings, the beings 
he had in mind were the 8 Ariya Puggalas. The Arahant who has 
attained parinibbāna and passed away is out of the picture! 
If the ‘ocean’ has no place  for anupādisesā parinibbāna 
dhātu how are we to understand the problematic 5th simile? We 
have to remind ourselves that there are 2 Nibbānadhātus. 
“Dve me bhikkhave Nibbānadhāthuyo. Katamā dve? 
Sopādisesā ca Nibbānadhāthu anupādisesā ca Nibbānadhātu….” 
etc. (Itiv. P.38) 
Presumably, then, what the 5th simile tries to convey is the 
fact that however many monks may pass away into parinibbāna, 
there is no decrease (sic) or increase in the Nibbānadhātu as 
such.

Mr. U. M. 

“..........bahū cepi bhikkh ū anupādisesāya parinibbāyanti, 
na t ena Nibbānadhātuyā ūnattaṁ (sic) v ā pūrattaṁ vā 
paññāyati.............” 
The insinuation is that there is no qualitative or 
quantitative de -valuation in the Nibbānadhātu as a result of 
many monks passing away into parinibbāna without residual 
clinging. Granting the fact that the Arahant (the 8th ariyapuggala) 
is already there in the ‘ocean’, his passing away into 
parinibbāna might even give rise to a notion of a ‘decrease’ in 
the ocean! So the boot is actually on the other foot!!! 
It is at this point our simile of the vortex becomes 
meaningful. 
“The vortex has now  become the great ocean itself ” 
(N.M.S. v.p.447) 
The cessation of suffering could therefore be compared to 
the cessation of the vortex leaving only the g reat ocean as it is 
(P448 ibid) 
YES......Leaving only the great  ocean as it is . That is to 
say – there is neither a decrease nor an increase in the ocean. 
Let us now take up the simile that you have quoted from 
the Bhagavadgitā: 
“A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of 
desires – that enter like rivers into the ocean – can alone  
achieve peace and not the man who strives to sa tisfy such desires 
(text 70).” 
Here it is the incessant flow of DESIRES that is 
compared to the flow of rivers into the ocean and the moral 
upheld is not to be disturbed by them. As you know the Buddha 
also compared craving to rivers and streams (eg. Dhp.vv 339, 
340). Also at Itiv 114 (P.T.S.) 
‘Nadiyā sototi kho bhikkhave taṇhāyethaṁ adhivacanaṁ’

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

‘The current of the river, monks, is a synonym for 
craving.’ 
The figure of the river or stream as used by the Buddha is 
less compromising than in the concept of Krishna consciousness 
for the Buddha speaks of a ‘drying up’ of the stream of craving.  
‘Visukkhā saritā na sandati’ (ud. p. 75, PTS) 
‘The stream dried up – flows no more’ 
The simile of the river in Bhagavadgitā does not seem to 
suggest a union with the Godhead: it has no ontological 
connotations. The ideal upheld is ‘not to be – disturbed’ by the 
incessant flow of desires – which continue to flow in all the 
same !!!

Mr. U. M. 

Part 5 
28-11-2010 
Most Venerable Kaṭukurunde Ñaṇananda Thero, 
I have been puzzled over some of the Abhidhamma 
teachings. So I thought of writing to invite you to clear my doubt . 
My question relates to citta vīthīs as explained in Abhidhamma. 
Even Rer ukane Hamuduruwo has said in his book on 
Abhidhamma that citta vīthī s cannot be seen operating; 
nevertheless they have to be understood . This seems to be blind 
acceptance which is against the ‘sandiṭṭhika’ and ‘paccattaṁ 
veditabba’ quality of the Dhamma. 
One can see the arising of citta only by means of another 
citta which has to be fully developed . But citta v īthīs are 
incapable of seeing a citta, because they are still in a formative 
stage, as components of a citta, which cannot on their own see 
and comprehend the arising of a citta. 
Please Venerable Sir, explain this riddle for the benefit of 
so many who blindly follow certain teachings without the ability 
to fully understand them . Even a blind person will believe (even 
blindly) that there is the sun, moon and colours etc., because he 
hears about them from several others who are able to see; he 
could see them if he cures his blindness (like the simile in 
Māgandiya Sutta ). Similarly, we believe the existence of a 
neutron in an atom even though we have not seen; because 
scientists who have seen them, through the microscope have 
confirmed. And if we are interested we could also see them 
through a microscope . One may develop one ’s mind so  that one 
could even see one ’s previous existence to clear any doubt 
(without blindly accepting others) relating to past births . But the 
same would not hold water relating to citta vīthīs. Are we to 
BLINDLY accept these theories?  I hope I  have made myself

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

clear. I would be so grateful if you would kindly elucidate this 
matter Ven. Sir. 
Yours respectfully, 
U.M. 
 
 
Dear Upāsaka U.M., 
I received your letter dated 28 -11-2010 regarding your 
problems relating to the Abhidhamma teachings on ‘citta’ and 
‘citta vīthīs’. I shall put down my comments below . The Buddha 
has explained for us the ‘FLUX’ within and without in his 
teachings on Paṭicca Samuppāda. The flux within is well 
explained by the twelve – linked formula beginning with 
ignorance and ending with decay and death... etc. It is illustrated 
by the tide and the ebb of the ocean – the flux outside (see ch. 
VIII. The Magic of the Mind) . There I have outlined the basic 
principle underlying the law of Paṭicca Samuppāda already in the 
opening sentences. 
“The principle underlyi ng the twelve linked formula of 
Dependent Arising is a law of nature that is universally applicable 
whether one is dealing with the animate realm or the inanimate . It 
presents a dynamic view of all phenomena as they arise 
depending on causes only to cease when these are r emoved” (ibid 
p.44). 
I have also summed up this dynamic philosophy later on 
as follows: 
“Thus the law holds good for both kinds of flux – that of 
water and that of psychological state s. The process of tide and 
ebb is a tendency not only of water but of the saṁsāric individual 
as well . The recognition of this process ‘as-it-is’ marks a 
significant advance on the trends of animistic thought which,

Mr. U. M. 

from prehistoric times, sought to explain phenomena in  terms of 
essence, self or soul” (ibid p.46) 
Now the Abhidhamma schools of thought in Buddhist 
philosophy have failed to appreciate this dynamic approach due 
to their enslavement to concepts which are but static symbols that 
the Buddha made use of without clinging. The gist of the 
Buddha’s exhortation to Citta Hatt hisāriputta in the Poṭṭhapāda 
Sutta (D.N.) comes as the grand finale in these words: 
“For these, Citta, are merely names, expressions, terms of 
speech, designation s in common use in the world . And of these 
the Tathāgata makes use indeed – but without clinging.” 
In this particular instance the Buddha takes as an 
illustration the ‘flux’ of milk (i.e. milk → curd → butter → ghee 
→ junket) 
(see Concept & Reality p.87 fn.) 
Being unaware of the limitations of the conceptual 
superstructure of language and logic ābhidhammikas took to 
elaborate analysis and synthesis of concept s in a vain attempt to 
understand and explain this ‘flux’. 
Analysis yields a list of static concepts es tranged from 
reality. So they were at their wits end synthesizing them avoiding 
the pitfalls of animistic thought . The fact that they sometimes 
even ran that risk is best exemplified by Venerable Buddaghosa ’s 
following comment on Madhupiṇḍika Sutta. 
“..........Because of that contact arises feeling with contact 
as its condition by way of co-nascence etc. Whatever object is felt 
by that feeling, that perception perceives, whatever perception 
perceives, reason ing reasons about that very object . Whatever 
reasoning reasons about, papañca transforms into papañca that 
very object...” 
(see Concept & Reality p.8 fn)

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

The positing  of 4 paramattha dhammas  (citta, cetasika, 
rūpa, Nibbāna) also betrays a lack of understanding Paṭicca 
Samuppāda. The three life interpretation obscures the true 
significance of the vortex ( vaṭṭa) between consciousness and 
name-and-form and its relevance to language and logic (see Ch V 
the Magic of the Mind) . The deeper implication of the Mahā 
Nidāna Sutta pertaining to the pivotal concept (phassa) have been 
ignored. So a hierarchy of dhammas was found to be necessary to 
explain the behaviour of conditions (paccaya). 
With all this confusion the ābhidhammikas hung onto the 
scaffolding of concepts forgetting its true purpose . The RAFT 
meant for crossing over thus came to be grasped – quite contrary 
to the Buddha’s advice. 
By the way, I may mention here that some of those who 
have read ‘Concept and Reality ’ confessed to me frankly that 
they had wasted many years trudging along the labyrinths of 
Abhidhamma! 
 
With mettā, 
K. Nāṇananda

5. Correspondence with Mr. P.M. 
16/04/2015 
Venerable Katukurunde Nanananda Bhikkhu 
Moragolla Watta 
Imbulgasdeniya – 71055 
Sri Lanka. 
Dear Venerable Sir, 
About your comments on ‘Dependant Arising’, though I 
may not have specifically mentioned it , the purpose of this book 
was to show logically how the adjacent factors connect together 
– particularly in th e twelve factored version of arising and 
cessation of suffering . My intention was to show the reader that 
isolating factors in groups – effectively obscuring these 
connections – and imposing several lives are arbitrary and 
contrary to the intention in the suttas (but, there are suttas that 
specifically indicate more than one life in a series and the 
intention is clear) . The aspect of experiential knowledge of the 
Dhamma was not within the scope of this book. 
If my recollection is correct, you point out in one of your 
sermons that, at the culmination of the vipassanā ñāñas , all 
factors of dependent arising cease for an instant. This is so and 
leaves one in no doubt that the twelve factors of dependent 
arising stand and cease together  invalidating the traditional 
three-life interpretation! 
I have listened to all 20 sermons on Paṭicca Samuppāda 
and found myself very comfortable. I very much like the sermons 
describing the vo rtical int erplay of name and form and 
consciousness, with the illustration of the whirlpool and 
explanation of how it comes about. 
I am re -reading your book ‘Seeing Through’ . In the last 
four stages of Ānāpānasati Sutta , vipassanā ñāñas  seem to be 
only implicit: they have been usefully incorporated in this book.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Contact: An extract from Anguttara Nikāya  VI 61 as 
follows: 
“The six interna l bases, friends, are one end, the six 
external bases are the second end, consciousness is in the middle,  
and craving is the seamstress . For the craving sews one to the 
production of this or that state of being.” 
Contact is defined in the suttas as coming together of 
three components: internal-base, corresponding external base and 
consciousness that depends on the first two . Chapter 15 and 
Appendix 1 (under ‘ Citta’) of ‘Dependent Arising’ indicate 
(according to my understanding) that intention and by 
implication, craving 1 precede contact. However, a contemplative 
reading of ‘Seeing Through’ has clarified additio nal things: 
particularly the discriminative function of consciousness and its 
implications. 
Taking eye contact as an example, its definition implies 
coming together of three apparently separate – independent – 
components: eye (one end), form (other end) an d eye 
consciouness (middle). This separateness is an illusion, because: 
 Eye implies form (things to see) and form implies 
eye (as faculty): one end implies the other. 
Thus, eye and form depend on each other. 
 Eye consciousness depends on eye and form: 
middle implies two ends. 
 Eye and form imply eye consciousness:  two ends 
imply middle. 
Thus, all constituents of contact are inseparably related. 
Additionally, and from another perspective, it is consciousness 
that enables discrimination between eye and form: th eir very 
______________________________________________ 
1 Craving is involved in the choice of a particular intention with 
regard to the external base.

Mr. P. M. 

existence depends on it. Nevertheless, as if by fraud, it is included 
as a separate third component to somehow constitute contact: for 
in its absence, there is no contact. This inclusion seems quite 
illegitimate! 
In the non-arahant, contact involves a duality and I see the 
‘production of this or that state of being ’2, indicated in the extract 
above, as follows:3 
 ‘I am’ 4 at the one end and external bases at the 
other end. 
 External bases are ‘for me’ 5 (craving = 
seamstress). 
 External bases are ‘mine’6 (taking-up = upādāna). 
 Production of this or that state of being.7 
In development of contemplation of dependent arising of 
the components of contact – particularly of consciousness – the 
supra-mundane path may be born . With this, both craving and ‘I 
am’ begin to wane to eventually disappear . This is cessation of 
being ( bhava nirodh a 8): Nibbāna. This is also phassa nirodha . 
All relationships of dependence have ceased . The term ‘contact’, 
if used in describing the experience of an Arahant, is nominal. 
______________________________________________ 
2 Bhava 
3 This analysis is structural and not temporal. 
4 Needs identification 
5 Initiation of acquisition (of ‘building blocks’ to construct ‘I’) 
6 Accomplishment of acquisition of ‘building blocks’ (implies 
mastery over them) and construction of an ‘I’ 
7 Identification with construct (noun) as ‘I am this or that’: includes 
measurement (māna) of ‘I am’ and comparison 
8 Complete cessation of identification (atammayatā)

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

Venerable Sir, unless it is exhausting, can you make your 
particular comments on chapter s 13 and 14 of ‘Dependent 
Arising’? However, the analysis mostly, if not entirely, follows 
‘cold logic’! 
 
With Mettā, 
P.M.

Mr. P. M. 

22.04.2015 
Dear Upāsaka P.M., 
I went through your comments on my letter. Before 
getting down to the question of ‘CONTACT’, let me clarify what 
I meant by ‘ logic’, because that is basic  to your understanding of 
what I have to say on this topic. 
As you know, in logic, there is a distinction between 
‘apriori’ (deductive) and ‘ aposteriori’ (inductive) reasoning . 
Commenting on the meaning of ‘apriori ’ ‘the Oxford’ Dictionary 
says: ‘ logically independent of experience, not derived from 
experience’! Perhaps the best illustration for it comes in my 
discussion of the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta in P.S. Sermon No. 11 where I 
cited t he similes given by the Buddha (i)  the beauty queen (ii) 
the staircase – to invalidate  Poṭṭhapāda’s arguments . The two 
peculiar terms the Buddha uses in that context, namely 
‘appāṭihiraka’(undemonstrable) and ‘ sappāṭihīraka’ 
(demonstrable) are highly significant. 
Though less obvious, the generally accepted concept of 
‘CONTACT’ takes for granted the very things  that the Buddha 
calls in question. I am surprised that no one drew attention to the 
refrain-like phrase ‘tadapi phassa paccayā’ (to invalidate – not 
to prove) all the 62 views in Brahmajāla Sutta, until I highlighted 
it in my Nibbāna sermons. As I mentioned in my earlier letter, 
that is the fine-mesh of the super -net where all view -holders get 
caught. No doubt nearly all my readers have found it to be the 
‘CRUX’ of what I have preached and written so far. 
The extract from Majjhe Sutta (A III 40 P.T.S.) you have 
quoted has to be understood in the context of the verse which is 
very deep. It is the topic of my P.S. Sermon No. 09 . If the two 
ends are correctly understood, one does not – with wisdom – 
get attached to the middle . Due to ignorance (eg’) the eye and 
the forms are bifurcated as separate – as in the case of the deer  
running after  the mirage (i.e. ‘water’ – the ‘object’ from its

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

point of view. At each step the deer takes the eye-consciousness 
with it – though it is unaware of it when it chases it . So it is quite 
legitimate to include it as the ‘tertium -quid’. Consciousness is 
never abstract – it is always concrete. If you wish to get it 
clarified you may take the trouble to trace ( by the Title ) The 
Heretic Sage series  in the internet where one Venerable 
Yogānanda who interviewed me in 2009 records our Dhamma 
discussion. Please read Part 5 of the series in particular which 
gives my interpretation of ‘ tajjo samannāhāro ’ in Mahā 
Hatthipadopama Sutta  (M.N.) In the Mahā Vedalla Sutta  
Venerable Sāriputta draws our attention to something more basic 
than consciousness – namely ‘āyu’ & ‘usmā’ (life span and heat). 
It is not advisable to put the non-Arahant and Arahant 
into two water -tight compartments . There is the ‘ sekha’ whose 
intermediate level of understanding is highlighted in the 
Mūlapariyāya Sutta  with the term ‘ abhijānāti’ (as against 
‘sañjānāti’ of the ‘ assutavā puttujjana’ and the cryptic phrase 
‘mā maññi ’ which has puzzled the comm entator (see my 
explanation in C oncept & Reality and N.M.S. series) . The 
‘sotāpanna’, encouraged by his momentary experience of the  
cessation of consciousness , is training towards ‘ pariññā’ 
(parijānāti of the Arahant). It is through ‘ yoniso manasikāra ’ 
(the ‘seed’ of wisdom) that he has a momentary flash through the 
veil of ignorance and the magical illusion of consciousness . To 
get some idea of the depth of insight of an (authentic) sotāpanna 
you may listen to my P.K. sermon No. 209 where even a layman 
and a millionaire like Anāthapindika  gets high compliments 
from the Buddha  for his amazing insight . (I have included this 
sermon in Vol. 9 of Pahan Kanuwa Sermons which will be out 
shortly). 
Regarding P.S. Sermon No. 13 you may study it side by 
side with my discussion of ‘ saṅkhārā’ in Towards Calm and 
Insight (pp.14 -28). I am sorry, with failing health in my senile 
seventies I cannot a fford to go on ‘commenting’ at length . I am

Mr. P. M. 

devoting most of the time to translating the 20 sermons on P.S . 
So far I have finished the first ten . Looking back on the past 45 
years of my monk’s life, I may say, I have already presented in 
rough outline what I have to say in Concept and Reali ty. After 20 
years I elaborated on it in my Nibbāna Sermons. After another 20 
years I delivered the Paṭicca Samuppāda sermons which further 
elaborated on some extremely deep points in the Dhamma . I 
don’t think I will live  to provide ‘commentaries’ to clarify them 
further. All I can do is to remind you of the 3 R’s  (a new 
version!) ‘Reading – Reflection – Realization’. 
My best wishes for your good health and progress towards 
Nibbāna. 
 
With mettā 
K. Ñāṇananda

6. Bhikkhu Varapannyo 
Sir, 
Here in Kolatenna Hermitage, Bandarawela we have the 
first 5 volumes of Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled. If you could send 
us the next books when it appears, we would be very grateful. 
Sir, there is one point which is interesting for me, that is 
why you translated bhava as becoming . As I understand your 
sermons, you see relation between questions about Tathagata and 
Dependent Arising, and you put strong emphasis on cessation of 
conceit ‘I am ’. And then you say that Nibbāna is cessation of 
becoming. But is it so evident? 
When I ask myself about myself – Am I? Am I not? – I 
ask about my being. When I think about Tathāgata – Tathāgata is 
or Tathāgata is not and so on – I think about Tathāgata being 
(word is) . Heraclitus s aid that there is no static being, nothing 
ever is, that everything is becoming – so it ’s clear that 
‘becoming’ deals neither with ‘I am’ which is very static. (as long 
as there is ignorance) nor with ‘is’ in four questions about 
Tathāgata. So if Sir you are right translating bhava as becoming, 
there is some mistake in my reasoning, but in which point? 
 
With respect 
Varapannyo Bhikkhu

Bhikkhu Varapannyo 

Dear Āyasmā Varapannyo, 
I re ceived your letter with its Dhamma question . You 
might be glad to hear that I have just finished translating the 
entire series of 33 sermons on Nibbanā a few days ago. I sent the 
tape recordings of sermons No. 32 & 33 to Ven. An ālayo (in 
Germany) for trancribing. Hopefully by the middle of the next 
year we could bring out the last two volumes of N.M.S . The 
seventh & last volume will include an Index for the whole series, 
compiled by Ven. Anālayo. 
I shall explain the reason for the confusion between 
‘being’ and ‘becoming’. 
From Vedic times, the standard term for being, had been 
‘SAT’ (see p.12 N.M.S. Vol. I) which gave rise to the Rg Vedic 
dilemma between SAT & ASAT. As you know, the term ‘sattva’ 
(Skt.) or ‘satta’ (Pali) is commonly rendered as ‘a being ’. The 
Buddha rejected this false dichotomy by introducing the term 
yathā-bhūta-ñāna based on the law of Paṭicca Samuppāda. The 
term is usually rendered as ‘knowledge & vision of things as -
they-are’ but strictly speaking it means ‘knowledge & vision of 
things as they have become’. ‘The-become’ is always dependent 
on causes and conditions . See for instance, the long and deep 
dialogue in Mahātaṇhāsaṁkhaya S.  (Sutta No. 38) in M.N. 
beginning with the brief question: 
‘Bhūtamidanti bhikkhave passatha.’  
‘Monks, do you see that this is (something) Become?’ 
Granted that ‘bhūta’ is ‘the-become’, ‘bhava’ obviously is 
‘becoming’. 
At this point it must be pointed out that there is an 
ambivalence in the meaning of the term ‘bhava’ commonly 
rendered in English as ‘existence’. For the pre -Buddhistic sages 
and ascetics with their stance on ‘sat-asat’ dichotomy, ‘bhava’ 
and ‘vibhava’ stood for ‘existence’ and its antonym ‘annihilation’ 
on ‘non-existence’. Hence the tw o extreme views of  eternalism

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

and nihilism. The Buddha transcended this dichotomy by his 
teachings on ‘Anattā’. ‘Vibhava’ in the Buddhist context, is 
applicable – if at all – to ‘sankhāras’ – the nature of which is to 
‘rise’ and ‘fall’ (‘uppādavayadhammino’). See my comments on 
the verses uttered by ven. Adhimutta Thera (p. 54ff . N.M.S. Vol. 
II) with special reference to the lines: saṅkhārā vibhavissanti 
tattha kā paridevanā 
You can easily understand why some W estern scholars 
with the soul prejudice are taken aback by my rendering of 
Nibbāna as ‘Extinction’ – going by the fire simile . 
‘Bhavanirodha’ is cessation of becoming, b y the removal of 
‘taṇhā’ which is qualified by the ‘pregnant’ terms ‘ponobhavikā’ 
(bringing about re -becoming – certainly not re -being!) 
nandirāgasahagatā (accompanied by delight and lust) and ‘tatratatrābhinandinī’ (delighting now-here-now-there). Putting an end 
to ‘re-becoming’ is not tantamount to ‘annihilation’ – for there is 
nothing to annihilate. 
By the way , ‘asmi-māna’ is the conceit ‘AM’ (not I am) 
which is the most basic postulate of individual existence – the 
‘peg’ from which all the ‘measurings’ start. The Buddha equated 
‘AM’ to a mere conceit which has to be eradicated ( asmi māna 
samugghāta) in order to attain Nibbāna. 
As I have pointed out in my Nibbāna sermons the term 
‘tathāgata’ had connotations of a ‘being’ to which he never 
subscribed. That is why he rejected the tetral emma i n toto . The 
fire-simile and the whirlpool simile can sufficiently explain the 
Buddha’s silence on this issue. 
According to the Buddha one  must not ask such questions 
as: ‘Am I?’ or ‘Am I not?’ (see Sabbāsava Sutta M.N. Sutta No. 
2) because they are ill -founded and lead to a thicket of 
speculative views . Deeper reflection on Mahātaṇhāsaṁkhaya 
Sutta referred to above will clear up the issue.

Bhikkhu Varapannyo 

I do hope by the time the last two volumes of N.M.S. are 
out many of the dif ficulties in appreciating the dictum ‘bhava 
nirodho Nibbānaṁ’ (cessation of becoming is extinction) will 
disappear. 
Best wishes for your progress. 
 
With mettā 
K.N.

7. Abhaya Himi 
ප්‍රශ්නය: 
ගරුතර ස්ොමින් ෙහන්ස, 
සමාවී වෙවහස වනාබලා කරුණාවෙන් වමය පුහුදිලි කර 
වෙන්න. එනම් අප සාස්තෘන් ෙහන්වස් ෙදාළ ධර්මවය් වනාවයක් 
තුන්ෙල ‘වම් සිත’ මවනෝ - චිත්ත - විඤ්ඤාණ නාමවයන් හඳුන්ෙති. 
වම් නම් තුන වයාදා ඇත්වත් එකම ධර්මතාෙයකට ෙ ? නුතිනම් ඒ ඒ 
තුනට වෙන් වෙන්ෙ දැක්විය යුතුෙ? 
උදාහරණයක් - අංගුත්තර නිකාවය් ‘තික’ මහා ෙග්ගවය් 
තීර්ථායතන සූතරවය් ව ෙයක ‘මවනාපවිචාරති’ යනුවෙන් සිතෙ එම 
සූතරවය්ම විඤ්ඤාණ ධාතුෙ ෙයවයන්ෙ ෙක්ො ඇත. 
සමහර අය වම් මනස - චිත්තය - විඤ්ඤාණය යන තුනම එක 
ධර්මතාෙයක්ය කියා කියති.  
මහා වේෙල්ල සූතරවය් නම් විඤ්ඤාණ යනු රරපප ආී  අරමුණු  
දැන ගන්නො දැනගන්නො යන ස්ෙභාෙයට විඤ්ඤාණයයි හඳුන්ෙති. 
ඔබෙහන්වස්වග් මනවස් මායාෙ යන වපාවත් පළමුවෙනි 
පිටුවේෙ ‘මායාෙම උපමාෙකි විනුවන් ’ ‘මනසක වමෝහනයක් 
ඇතිකරවන්’. 
මවග් පරය්නය වත්රුම් ගුනීමට වමය පර මාණෙත් යයි සිතමි. 
අනුකම්පා කර වමය විසඳා වෙන්න. ඔබෙහන්වස්ට වම් අත්භෙවය්ම 
නිෙන් සුෙ පතමි. 
මීට 
අභය හිමි. 
 
පිළිතුර: 
විඤඤාණ - චිතත - මවනා 
විඤඤාණ : 
චකඛු - වසාත - ඝාන - ජිෙහා - කාය - මන යන ඉන්ද්‍රි ය 
ඒොට අදාළ රපප -සෙෙ-ගනධ-රස-ව ාටඨබබ-ධමම යන අරමුණු සමග 
පටිචචසමුපපනන ෙයවයන් එක්ෙූ කල ච කඛු වි ඤඤාණ, වසාත 
විඤඤාණ, ඝාන විඤඤාණ, ජිෙහා විඤඤාණ, කාය විඤඤාණ, මවනා

Abhaya Himi 

විඤඤාණ උපී . එහිලා ‘තවෙො සමනනාහාවරා’ නම්ෙූ අෙස්ථානුකූල 
වයාමුවීම අතයෙයය බෙ මහා හතථිපවදාපම සූතරවයන් පුහුදිලි වේ. 
“අවනක පරියාවයන  හි වො භි කඛවෙ පටි චචසමුපපනනං 
විඤඤාණං ෙු තතං මයා අ ඤඤතර පචචයා න තථි වි ඤඤාණසස 
සමභවොති” රමහා ත ණහාසංඛය සූතර ය - ම.නි.  පාඨවයන් 
විඤඤාණවයහි පටිචචසමුපපනන බෙ අෙධාරණය කුවරයි. ගින්නක් 
ඊට පරතයය ෙනවේ ඇසුවරන් හඳුන්ෙන්නාක් වමන් වි ඤඤාණයෙ ඊට 
අදාළ පරතයයන් අනුෙ හුිනන්වෙන බෙෙ ඒ සූතර වයන්ම පුහුදිලි වේ. 
ර‘නිකං ගින්නක්’ නුත්තාක් වමන් ‘නිකං විඤඤාණයක්ෙ’ නුත . 
විඤඤාණවයහි කෘතය ය වෙන්කර දැනගුනීමමය. ඇසත් 
රපපයත් වෙන්කර දැනගන්වන් චකඛු විඤඤාණය පහළෙූ විටය. ඇසත් 
රපපයත් නිසා හටගත් වි ඤඤාණය තුළ ඇති ‘මායාව’ ඒ වෙක 
පරතරයක් සහිත වෙකක් හුටියට ‘වවන් - කර’ දැන ගුනීමමය. එනම් 
‘නිසා හටගත් බව ’ අමතක කිරීමය රඅවිෙයා ෙ . වමවස් ෙුරදි වලස 
වෙන්කරගත් ඇසත් රපපයත් අතර ‘ගැටීමක්’ පරකල්පනය කිරීවමන් 
 සස යන අෙස්ථාෙත් ර සස ප ඤඤතති  වෙෙනා , සඤඤා ආදි 
ෙයවයන් මිරිඟුෙක් ඔස්වස් දිවීමත් ඇතිවේ. 
චිතත : 
සඤඤා, වෙෙනා චිතත සංස්කාර ෙයවයන් හඳුන්ො තිබීවමන් 
වපවනන්වන් ‘සිත’ සකස්ෙන්වන් ස ඤඤා, වෙෙනා තුළින් බෙය. 
සිවතහි ‘විචිතරතවයට’ වහ්තුෙ ‘හුඟීම් ෙලින් ’ එය වපෝෂණය වීමය. 
සතිපටඨාන සූතරවයහි ‘සරාගං චිතතං’ ‘සවදාසං චිතතං’ ආදි ෙයවයන් 
දැක්වෙන්වන්ෙ එවහයිනි. විඤඤාණවයන් මතුෙූ අවිෙයාෙ වලෝභ, වෙෝස, 
වමෝහ අනුෙ ෙඩාත් පර කටෙ මතුෙන අෙස්ථාෙ හුිනන්වීමට ‘චිතත’ 
යන්න වයී  ඇති බෙ වපවන්. 
මවනා : 
ඇස් කන් නාසාදි බාහිර ඉ නද්‍රිය පවහන් වගන එන අරමුණු 
භුක්තිවිිනන මනි නද්‍රියට අරමුණ ‘ධමම’ වහෙත් ‘වෙයයි’. වේතනා 
ෙයවයන් කර්ම රැස් කිරීමට මූලික ෙන්වන්ෙ මනසයි. 
මවනා පුබබඞ්ගමා ධමමා 
මවනා වසටඨා මවනාමයා 
වපාදුවේ ‘සිත’ හුිනන්වීමට ‘චිතත, මවනා, විඤඤාණ යන 
ෙචන වයවෙතත් ඉහත විෙරණය අනුෙ වම් පෙ තුවන් සියුම් අර්ථ 
වභ්ෙයක් දැක්විය හුකිය.

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

විඤඤාණ : ඉ නද්‍රියයත් අරමුණත් ‘වෙන්කර’ හඳුනාගුනීවම් 
අෙස්ථාෙ. 
චිතත : වලෝභ, වෙෝස, වමෝහ අනුෙ සිත හුඟීම් ෙලින් විචිතරවූ 
අෙස්ථාෙ. 
මවනා : ෙගකීමකින් යුක්තෙ කමම  රැස් වකවරන පරිදි 
කරියාත්මක ෙන අෙස්ථාෙ.

8. Dhamma Vipula Himi 
වගෞරෙණීය ස්ොමීන් ෙහන්ස, 
වම් ලිපිය ලියන මා පසුගිය සතිවය් ර02  ස්ොමීන් ෙහන්වස් 
හමුවීමට පුමිණි නිස්සරණ ෙනවය් ධම්මවිපුල හිමි නමයි. එදින කළා 
ෙූ සාකේඡාවේී ෙ පසුෙ මතුෙූ ගුටළු කිහිපයක්ෙ ස්ොමීන් ෙහන්වස් 
හමුවේ තුබීම වම් ලිපිවය් අරමුණයි. ඒ සඳහා මට අෙසරයි. 
1. එදින කළ සාකේඡාවේී  මා හට ෙුටහී ගිවය් අප්පමාන 
වේවතාවිමුක්ති රසතර බර හ්ම විහරණ  යනු ධයා න ෙලට ෙඩා 
උත්තරීතර තත්ත්‍වයක් බෙයි. නමුත් අනුරුේධ රහතන් ෙහන්වස් ගිහි 
පින්ෙතකුට ෙරක් පුහුදිලි කරන් වන් එවස් බෙුන් ෙඩන වයෝගියා 
අප්පමානාභා ආී  වෙවියන් අතර උපත ලබන බෙයි. නමුත් වම් 
වෙෙුනි හා තුන්ෙුනි ධයා න ෙලට අනුරපප ෙූ සමාධි මට්ටමකි. 
එවස්ම ග ණක වමාග්ගල්ලාන , ෙන්තභූමි ආී  සූතර  ෙල අනුපෙ  
පිලිවෙත විස්තර කරන වි ට සඳහන් ෙන්වන් 1 සිට 8 ෙන ධයාන 
ෙක්ො විස්තර පමණි. එවස් නම් බර හ්ම විහරණ ෙුීමවමන්ෙ 
ලුවබන්වන් ධයා න මට්ටම් මෙ ? එවස් නම් ආනන්ෙ වතරුන් 
ෙහන්වස් නිෙනට වදාරටු 11 ක් ඉදිරිපත් කරන විට ඒ සතර ධයාන 
ෙලින් වෙන් වකාට දැක්ෙූවය් ඇයි? 
 
2. අනිමිතත සමාධිය යනු කුමක්ෙ ? හතථිසාරිපුතත සූතරවය් රඅං.නි.  
මහා වකා ටඨිත ස්ොමීන් ෙහන්වස් සතර ධයාන ෙලින් වෙන්ෙ 
වකවනකු අනිමිතත සමාධිවයන්ෙ පිරිහිය හුකි බෙ පර කාය කරති. 
මට වත්රුම් ගිවය් වමයින් අෙහස් කරනුවය් සතර අරපප ධයා න 
බෙයි. වහ්තුෙ ඊට රපප නිමිති වනාගන්නා නිසයි. මා නිෙුරදිෙ ? 
එවස් නම් අනිමිතත සමාධිය හා අනිමිතත රඅපපණිහිත, සුඤඤත  
ආදි වකාට ඇති නිෙනට පිවිවසන පිවිසුම් අතර සම්බන්ධයක් 
ඇේෙ?
 
3. ස්ොමීන් ෙහන්වස් විසින් රචිත Saṁyutta Nikāya An Anthology හි 
55 පිට යටම වේවතාවිමු කතිය කාය වේෙනාෙලින් වේරීමට බෙත් , 
පඤඤාවිමුකතිය සුබප මිී ම , නිෙන බෙත් අෙහස් වේ. මා වත්රුම් 
වගන සිටිවය් වම් වෙකම නිෙන් අෙවබෝධ කිරීමක් වලසයි. 
වදාස්තරලා වෙවෙවනකුවගන් වකවනක් හෘෙ විවය්ෂඥවයක්ෙ 
අවනකා ස්නායු විවය්ෂඥවයක්ෙ විය හුකි නමුත්  වෙවෙනාම 
වදාස්තරලා ෙන වස් වම් වෙනම නිෙනට පුමිණ ඇති බෙයි. එවස්ම 
මා අසා තිබුවණ් සුරියුත් වතරුන්ෙහන්වස් ප ඤඤාවිමුකතියත්, 
මුගලන් වතරුන්ෙහන්වස් වේවතාවිමු කතියත් මුල් වකාට නිෙන්

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

අෙවබාධ කල බෙකි. වම් ඇති පරස්පර තාෙය වකවස් විසඳා ගත 
යුතුෙ? 
වගෞරෙනීය ස්ොමීන් ෙහන්වස්ට වේලාෙක් ඇත්නම් මා වග් 
වම් ගුටළු නිරාකරණය කර වෙන වස් ක්ො. කරෙරයක් සිදු ෙූො නම් 
වහෝ යම් ෙුරුේෙක් සිදුෙුනි නම් මා හට සමාෙ වෙන වස්ක්ො. 
 
උ. ධම්මවිපුල හිමි 
නිස්සරණ ෙනය, මීතිරිගල

Dhamma Vipula Himi 

පිළිතුර  
2009-07-21 
1. ‘වචවතාවිමුතති’ පිළිබඳ පරය්නයට අදාළ ඇතුම් කරුණු පුහුදිලි 
කරගුනීමට මහාවෙෙලල සූතරය උපකාරීවේ. 
 එහි අෙසාන වකාටස්ෙල සඳහන් අදු කඛමසුඛ වචවතාවිමුතති සහ 
අනිමිතත වචවතාවිමු තති ෙලට සමවැදීම රසමාපතති  රැඳී සිටීම 
රඨිති  සහ නුගීසිටීම රෙුටඨානය  ගුන කියො බලන්න. එවස්ම එහි 
දැක්වෙන අපපමාණා වචවතාවිමුතති, ආකිඤ්චඤඤා වචවතාවිමුතති, 
සුඤඤතා වචවතාවිමු තති පිළිබඳ නානාථම රනානටඨා  එකාථම 
රඑකටඨා  පරවභ්ෙය අසා ඇති පරය්නෙලට වබවහවින් අදාළය. අකුපප්‍ා 
වචවතාවිමුතතිය ඒහුම වචවතාවිමුතති අතරින් අගරබෙ කියා ඇත. 
2. අනිමිතත සමාධිය අථම  වෙකකින් ගත යුතු බෙ සුළකිය යුතුවේ. 
අනිමිතත විවමාකඛය ෙඩා ගුඹුරු අථම  ෙනෙයි. පිරිහිය හුක්වක් 
‘වනාගුඹුරු’ අනිමිතත සමාධිවයනි. 
 ධයානෙලට ෙඩා බර හ්මවිහාර වචවතාවිමු තති වෙනස්ෙන්වන් 
දිසා රණය එහි ලක්ෂණයක් ෙන බුවිනි. අ ටඨකනාගර සූතර වය් 
අමා වදාරටු අතර වචවතාවිමු තති විවය්ෂවයන් ෙක්ො ඇත්වත් 
ධයාන වමන්ම එකී වචවතාවිමුතතිෙ ‘සංඛත’ බෙ විෙයශනාෙයවයන් 
වමවනහිකර නිෙනට ළංවිය හුකිබුවිනි. 
 වමතතානිසංස සූතරවය් අනුසස් 11  ක් ෙක්ො ඇත්වත් ‘ආවස්විත, 
භාවිත, බහුලීකත, යානිකත, ෙතථුකත, අනුටඨිත, පරිචිත වමතතා 
වචවතාවිමුතතිවයහි මිස මමතරි භාෙනාවෙන් ලබ න ධයා නවයන් 
වනාවේ. එක පුේගලයකු අරමුණු කර ෙඩනා මමතරි  ධයා නයත් 
අපරමාණ වලස ෙඩන වචවතාවිමු තතියත් අතර ගුණාතමක වෙනස 
ෙටහා ගුනීමට ඉතිෙු තතක එක නිපාතවය් අෙසාන සුතර ය ෙුෙ 
පරමාණෙත්ය. 
 ‘අනාසෙ වචවතාවිමුතති පඤඤාවිමුතති’ යනුවෙන් දැක්වෙන විමුතති 
වෙක අර්හත් ල සමාධිය සහ අර්හත්ඵල ප්‍ර ඥාවවයි  අර්හත් ල 
සමාධිය රසළායතන නිවරාධ, භෙ නිවරාධ  මුළුමනින්ම වේෙනාෙ  
තුරන්කළ රඅවෙෙ යිත) නිරුපධි, අනුපාදිවසස නිබබාන ධාතුෙය. 
අර්හත් ල ප්‍රඥාවව මනාප අමනාප , සුඛදුකඛ’ වින්ෙන සහිත 
සඋපාදිවසස තත් ත්‍වයයි. ප්‍රඥාවබලවයන් වේෙනා ෙලින් සිත රැක 
ගනියි, ඉතිෙුතතකවය් ‘නිබබානධාතු වෙක පිළිබඳ විස්තරය බලන්න. 
රනිෙන වෙසුම්ෙල මා කළ විෙරණයෙ කියො බලන්න .

9. Mr. Upul 
2009-12-17 
‘වතරුෙන් සරණයි’ 
පින්ෙත් උපුල් මහත්මයා වෙත වමතින්, 
‘නමට රුෙක් - රුෙට නමක්’ 
‘නමට රුෙක් - රුෙට නමක් ’ වපාවත් පිටපතක් අප වෙත 
පුෙකිරීම ගුන පින්වෙමු. වමම අගනා වෙසුම් එකතුෙ තුළින් දුර්ලභ 
ගණවය් පුළුල් ජීවිත පරිඥානයක් , සියුම් සංවේී  බෙක් , හා ගුඹුරු 
ජීවිත ෙයශනයක් දුටු බෙ සඳහන් කරන්වන් මුදිතාවෙනි. වෙසුම් ‘වපළගුස්ම’ෙ පාඨකයා  කරමවයන් ගුඹුරු අෙවබෝධයක් කරා වගනයන 
අන්ෙමට සුකසී ඇති බෙ වපවන්. 
එදා අප හමුෙූ අෙස්ථාවේී  මා කී පරිදි සිේධාන්තමය ෙයවයන් 
නුෙත සළකා බුලිය යුතුයයි හු වඟන තුන් කිහිපයක් වෙත ඔවේ 
අෙධානය වයාමු කරෙනු කුමුත්වතමි. අත්පිටපත මුද්‍ර ණයට යුවීවම්ී  
සිදුවී ඇතුයි සිතිය හුකි වේෙ  අෙුල ර111 - 115 පිට අතර  මීළඟ 
මුද්‍රණවය්ී  නිෙුරදි වකවරනු ඇතුයි සිතමි. 
 
1. 2 ප්‍ිටුව       ‘විතර්ක විචාර’ 
පරථම ධයානවය් අංග හුටියට ‘විතකක විචාර’ සඳහන් ෙන්වන් 
‘කල්පනා කිරීම හා විමසීම ’ යන අථමවයන් වනාෙ ‘සමාධි නිමිත්තට 
සිත වයී ම හා එහි පුෙතීම ’ යන අරුවතනි. පරථමධයානය තුළ සිත 
පුෙුත්වීමට ඒ අංග වෙක අෙයය  නමුත්, ඒො ඕළාරික නිසා, ගුඹුරු 
ඒකාගරතාෙක් හා උවප්ක්ෂාෙක් ඇති චතුථම ධයානය කරා පියමන් 
කිරීවම්ී  ඒ අංග සන්සිඳුෙනු ලබයි. 
සිත වෙස සතිවයන් බලාසිටීම පමණක්ම පර මාණෙත් වනාෙන 
බුවින් විෙයශනාෙට පාෙක කරගුනීම සඳහා යක්තිමත් සමාධි පෙනමක් 
මතුකරවෙන ධයා න ෙුීමවමහි ෙුෙගත්කම සූතර  වේයනාෙල නිතර 
අෙධාරණය කුවරයි.  
 
2. 14 ප්‍ිටුව     ’ආයය තුෂණීම්භාවය’  
ආයශ තුෂණීම්භාෙවය් උපරිම මට්ටම ‘අවිතකක සමාධි’ නම්ෙූ 
අරහත් ල සමාධියයි. සළායතන නිවරෝධ තත්තෙයයි. නියම නිහඬබෙ 
එයයි.

Mr. Upul 

3. 36-48 ප්‍ිටු: ‘ඒකාගරතාව’ 
ඉහත කී ධයාන තත්තෙ උවෙසා කිසියම් සමාධි නිමිත්තක් 
ඇසුරු කරමින් ෙුඩිදියුණු කරගතයුතුයයි ර ‘ආවස්ෙනා, භාෙනා, 
බහුලීකමම’) බුදුරදුන් ෙදාළ බෙ පුහුදිලිය. සංෙර - පහාන - භාෙනා - 
අනුරකඛණ යන සතරාකාර වීයශය හඳුන්ෙන තුන ‘අනුරකඛණ’ නම්ෙූ 
‘රැකගුනීම’ හඳුන්ොී  ඇත්වත් හටගත් කිසියම් සමාධි නිමිත්තක් ගිලිහී 
යා වනාී  රැකගුනීවම් වීයශය ෙයවයනි. 
‘සමථ’ - ‘විපසසනා’ යනු යි කෂණ වෙකක්ම බෙත් ඒො 
එකිවනකට උපකාර ෙන අන්ෙමින් ෙුඩිය යුතු බෙත් ෙක්ො ඇත. 
i. සමථය වපරටුකරගත් විපසසනාෙ 
ii. විපසසනාෙ වපරටුකරගත් සමථය 
iii. සමථ-විපසසනා වෙක යුගනෙධ ෙයවයන් ෙුීමම 
වම් සම්බන්ධවයන් මපතී  මා පුෙුත්ෙූ පහන්කණුෙ වෙසුමක් 
රCD අංක 157  වම් සමග ඇත . මුදුම් මග තුළ ඇති ප්‍රාවයිගිකසාවප්‍්කෂක ලක්ෂණ ෙටහා වනාගත් ඇතුම් දායශ නිකවයෝ ධයා න 
වෙනුවෙන් වීයශ ෙුීමම මමතෙය තහෙුරු කරන්නක් ර self-affirmation) 
වලස ෙරෙො ගනිති. ඒො ‘සංඛත’ නමුත් විෙයශ නාෙ කුළුගන්ො 
ගුනීමට ඒො උපකාර කරගත හුකිය. පරා වයෝගික-සාවප්කෂක මූලධමම 
පිළිබඳෙ අලගෙදූපම රථවිනීත ආී  සූතර  ඇසු වරන් ‘නිෙවන් නිවීම ’ 
වෙසුම් වපවළහිී  එක්තරා විගර හයක් කවළමි. රනි. නි. 499 -453, 471, 
480-484, 495, 494, 702 පිටු  
සම්වබෝධිය ලුබීවමන් පසු පළමුවෙන්ම ධමම ය වෙසිය යුත්වත් 
කෙවරකුටදැයි සළකා බුලීවම්ී  ඉහළ අරපප ධයා න ලබා සිටි 
ආළාරකාලාම උේෙකරාම පුතත තෙුසන් වෙවෙන බුදුරදුනට වපනී ගිවය් 
ෙහා ධමම ය අෙවබෝධ කරගුනීමට ඔෙු න් සමත් වෙතුයි ෙුටහුන 
බුවිනි. 
 
4. 94-106 ප්‍ිටු ‘මමතරීවය් ්ල්ප්‍තඔ යබයි’ 
*උල්පත: උල්පතකින් දිය ගලන්වන් ඇතුළතට වනාෙ 
ප්‍ිටතටය. 
බුේධ වේයනාවේ වනාමුති ‘තමාට මමතරී කිමකමක්’ අටුො 
යුගවය්ී  මුල්බුසවගන ඇතිබෙ වපවන්. අෙ මමතරී  භාෙනාවේ මුල් 
පියෙර හුටියට හුම තුනකම ඉගුන්වෙන්වන් තමාට මමතරී 
කරගුනීමයි. සූතර ගත බුෙධ වේයනාෙට අනුෙ  නම් මමතරී භාෙනාවේී

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

තමා ගුන සිතිය යුත්වත් තමා සු පයට කුමතිබෙත් දුකට 
අකුමුතිබෙත් ර ‘තමා ්ප්‍මා වකාට’) සාක්ෂිස්ථානවය් තබාවගන 
අනුන්වග් සුප කුමති - දුකට අකුමුති බෙ සිතට කාෙේදා ගුනීම 
සඳහා පමණි. මමතරී -කරුණා-මුදිතා ෙුනි බර හමවිහරණ හුවෙක් 
තමාවගන් බුහුරට වයාමුකළයුතු , විහිදුවියයුතු, චින්තාකල්පය. තමාට 
මමතරී කරගැනීම, තමාට ආගන්තුක සත්කාර කරගැනීම ෙුනි 
කරමවිවරෝධී අෙහසකි.  
කලකට ඉහත ඉංගරීසි වපාතක කියෙූ කවියක් සිහියට නුවගයි. 
I invited a party to tea 
Guests there were but three 
‘I’, ‘Myself’ and ‘Me’ 
‘I’ passed round the cakes to ‘Me’ 
While ‘Myself’ made the tea 
‘මාතායථා නියං පුතතං - ආයුසා එකපුතතමනුරවකඛ 
එෙමපි සබබභූවතසු - මානසං භාෙවය අපරිමාණං’ 
කෙුරුත් ෙන්නා වමම සි ෙධානතයට අනුෙ , තම එකම පුතු 
දිවිපුදා රැකගන්නා මෙක් වමන් හුම සතුන් වෙත වමත්සිත අපර මාණ 
වලස ෙුඩිය යුතුවේ. තමාට මමතරී කිරීවම් ‘මූලධමමයට’ අනුෙ නම් ඒ 
මෙ තමාට කිසි මමතරී යක්, කරුණාෙක් නැති තුනුත්තියකි! 
දුගියකු වග් කුසගිනි වේෙනාෙ තමා තුළින් ෙටහා වගන තම ආහාර 
වේල ඔහුට පරිතයා ග කරන ප්‍ින්වතකු තමාට මමතරී-කරුණා නැති 
වකවනකි!! වමකල වල් ෙන්වෙන , ෙකුගඩු ෙන්වෙන අය තම ‘සිරැරට’ 
මමතරී-කරුණා වනාෙක්ෙන අයය!!! වමහිී  කුසලාකුසල විගර හය සහ 
වමතතානිසංස සිහියට නගාගත යුතුවේ. 
තමා-හිතෙතා-මුෙහතා-අහිතෙතා යන සතරා කාර විගරහයක් 
ඔස්වස් මමතරී භාෙනාෙ දියුණු කරගත යුතු බෙක් අටුො පෙසන 
නමුදු මමතරී භාෙනාවේ ‘අත්වපාත’ ෙුනි වමතතසූතරවය් දැක්වෙන්වන් 
තමා වක්න්ද්‍ර වකාටගත් ‘අතතවනාමතික’ විගරහයක් වනාෙ විය්ෙ 
සාධාරණ, විය්ෙ ෙයාපී පඤචවිධ විගරහයකි. එය වකටිවයන් ෙක්ෙවතාත් 
වමවස්ය: 
i. තුතිගත්-තුතිවනාගත් 
ii. වලාකු-කුඩා 
iii. දුටු-නුදුටු 
iv. දුර-නුදුර 
v. උපන්-නූපන්

Mr. Upul 

යටකී අ ටුොගත සතරාකාර විගර හය සනාථ කිරීමට ‘සීමා 
සම්වභ්ෙය’ කළ අෙස්ථාෙට නිෙයශ නයක් ෙයවයන් ෙක්ො ඇති කථා 
පුෙත ර101 පිටුෙ  සතය සිේධියකට ෙඩා පර බනධයක රවගතූ කතාෙක  
ස්ෙරපපය ෙරයි. 
වබෝධිසත්තෙ චරිතය තුළත් , මහාකාරුණික බුදු රොණන් 
ෙහන්වස්වග් චරිතය තුළත් දැකිය හුකි පරහිතකාමී ආතම පරිතයාගය - 
අනුන් වෙනුවෙන් දුක් ගුනීම - වකවස් අගය කළයුතුෙ ? තමාට 
මමතරීය, ෙයාෙ, කරුණාෙ දැක්වීම් ෙයවයන් කය සිවතන් වෙන්කර 
ගුනීම නාමරපප විගරහය හා සුස වඳන බෙක්ෙ වනාවපවන්. ‘දුවකන්ම 
සුප ලබාගත හුකිය ’ යන අනතගාමී ෙෘෂටිවකෝණයට අනුෙ වකවරන 
අතතකිලමථානුවයෝගය බුදුරදුන් අනුමත වනාකළ නමුදු ‘සරත් සමවය් 
හටගත් කුමුදු මලක් සිඳ ලන්නාක් වමන් ආතම ස්වන්හය සිඳ දැමිය 
යුතු යයිෙ ෙදාළහ. රධ. ප. මගගෙගග ගා.285  
භෙතෘෂ්ණාෙට නුඹුරුෙූ හි නදු වයෝගීන් මිනිස් සිරුර  
ආය්චයශෙත් ඊය්ෙර නිමමාණයක් වලස සළකන අතර , බුදුෙහවම් විරාගී 
චිනතනයට අනුෙ වරෝගපීඩා දුක්කම්කවටාලු ආී නෙ පිරි වම් සිරුර 
‘මාරයාවග්’ නිමමාණයක් ෙුනිය. එබුවින් නිස්සාරෙූ වම් සිරුවරන් 
ගතහුකි ‘සාරය’ විමුකති සාරයයි. නිවනයි. 
වමකල වබාවහෝ වේයකයන් දු කඛ සතයය ‘ආතතියට’ සීමා 
කරන බෙ අසන්ට ලුවේ. එවස් නම් මාගශ  සතයය ෙයවයන් ‘ආතති 
කළමනාකරණය’ ෙුෙ සපවහ්. බුෙධ කාලවය් ‘අනමතගග’ සූතර වේයනාෙ 
අසා රහත්බෙ පො ලුබුවේ සංසාර භය හා සංවේගය විමු කතියට 
උපකාර ෙන බුවිනි. අසමසම වෙදැ දුරු තුමන්වග් නෙගුණ පාඨවයන් 
පරකටෙන ‘විවය්ෂඥ’ උපාධි මාලාෙ වකවරහි  අචල යරෙධාෙක් ඇතිෙ 
සිටි ඔෙුන් තාවකාලික නිර්වින්දන ෙලින් සපහීමකට පත් වනාවී 
‘ඒකානත නිර්වේදය’ තුළින් සංසාර වරෝගය සෙහටම නිොරණය 
කරගත් බෙ වපවන්. ර‘භාෙනා වයාමුෙ’ CD තුටිවය් අංක 199 පළමු 
වෙසුම මමතරී වේවතාවිමුක්තිය පිළිබඳෙය . 
 
5. 210 ප්‍ිටුව      නාමරූප්‍ විගරහය 
බුදුරදුන් වමන්ම සුරියුත් මාහිමියන්ෙ ‘නාමරපප’ හඳුන්ොී වම්ී  
1. වේෙනා  2. ස ඤඤා  3. වේතනා  9.  සස  5. මනසිකාර යන  
අනුපිළිවෙල අනුෙ නාමධමම  ෙක්ො තිබීම සුළකිය යුතුවේ. 
‘තකශානුකූලෙ’  සසය මුලට ආයුතු නමුත් වමහි ී  වේෙනාෙ මුලින්ලා 
ගුවණනුවය් ‘රපප’ හඳුනාගුනීමට වේෙනාෙ පුවරෝගාමී ෙන බුවිනි. 
විඤඤාණය අෙදිෙන්වන් වේෙනාවෙනි. රවම් සම්බන්ධවයන් ‘හිතක 
මහිම - 2 වපාවත් 25 පිටුවේ එන ‘ඇගිලි පහ’ රචනය බලන්න .

Questions & Answers on Dhamma 

‘නමට රුෙක් - රුෙට නමක්’ වපාත පිළිබඳෙ සසුන් ෙයාවෙන් 
කළ වම් ගුණ -වදාස් දැක්වීම ඔවේ ඉදිරි සසුන් වමවහයට දි රියක්ම 
වේො! උතුම් වතරුෙන් ගුණ වබ වලන් නිවරෝගිසුෙ, ධමමමය සුනසුම 
සුලවස්ො! 
වමයට,  
සසුන් ලුදි 
ක. ඤාණනනෙ

By The Same Author 
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought   
2. Saṁyutta Nikāya – An Anthology  
3. Ideal Solitude  
4. The Magic of the Mind  
5. Towards Calm and Insight   
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume I  
7. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume II  
8. Seeing Through  
9. Towards A Better World  
10. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume I  
11. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume II  
12. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume III  
13. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume IV  
14. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume V  
15. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VI  
16. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VII 
17. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Library Edition  
18. Nibbāna and The Fire Simile  
19. A Majestic Tree of Merit  
20. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective  
21. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume I  
22. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume II  
23. Walk to Nibbāna   
24. Deliverance of the Heart through Universal Love 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla, Karandana 
Phone: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
සු.යු.: වමම කෘති වල්ඛනය සරලත්‍වයට මුල්තුන දුන් අංක 
අනුපිළිවෙලක් සහිතෙ සකස්වී ඇති බෙත් , වල්ඛනවය් 
අගහරිවය් එන කෘති වබාවහෝ දුරට ගුඹුරු විය හුකි බෙත්, 
පාඨකයින් දැනුෙත් කිරීම් ෙයවයන් සඳහන් කරනු 
කුමුත්වතමි. 
- සම්පාෙක  
1. තිසරණ මහිම  
2. හිතක මහිම – 1 
3. හිතක මහිම – 2 
4. හිතක මහිම – 3 
5. දිවි කතවර් සුඳප අඳූර 
6. කය අනුෙ ගිය සිහිය 
7. හිත තුනීම 
8. පින් රුවකක මහිම 
9. අබිනික්මන 
10. පිළිවෙතින් පිළිවෙතට 
11. කවය් කතාෙ 
12. මා-පිය උෙුටන 
13. පරතිපත්ති පූොෙ 
14. පුෙුත්ම හා නුෙුත්ම 
15. කමම චකරවයන් ධමම චකරයට 
16. වමත් සිවත් විමුක්තිය 
17. ඇති හුටි දැක්ම 
18. තවපෝ ගුණ මහිම 
19. සක්මවන් නිෙන 
20. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 1 වෙළුම 
21. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 2 වෙළුම  
22. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 3 වෙළුම  
23. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 9 වෙළුම  
24. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 5 වෙළුම  
25. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 4 වෙළුම  
26. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 7 වෙළුම  
27. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 8 වෙළුම  
28. පහන් කණුෙ ධමම වේයනා – 9 වෙළුම  
29. විෙසුන් උපවෙස්

30. භාෙනා මාගශය 
31. උත්තරීතර හුෙකලාෙ 
32. සසුන් පිළිවෙත 
33. චලන චිතරය 
34. දිය සුළිය 
35. බුදු සමය පුේගලයා හා සමාෙය 
36. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  පළමු වෙළුම   
37. නිෙවන් නිවීම – වෙෙන වෙළුම  
38. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  වතෙන වෙළුම   
39. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  සිෙුෙන වෙළුම   
40. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  පස්ෙන වෙළුම   
41. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  සයෙන වෙළුම   
42. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  සත්ෙන වෙළුම   
43. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  අටෙන වෙළුම   
44. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  නෙෙන වෙළුම   
45. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  ෙසෙන වෙළුම   
46. නිෙවන් නිවීම –  එවකාවළාස්ෙන වෙළුම    
47. නිෙවන් නිවීම – පුස්තකාල මුද්‍රණය ර1-11 වෙළුම්) 
48. පටිචච සමුපපාෙ ධමමය – 1 වෙළුම  
49. පටිචච සමුපපාෙ ධමමය – 2 වෙළුම  
50. පටිචච සමුපපාෙ ධමමය – 3 වෙළුම  
51. පටිචච සමුපපාෙ ධමමය – 4 වෙළුම 
52. මනවස් මායාෙ 
53. පුරණි වබෞෙධ චින්තාවේ සංකල්පය සහ යථාථමය 
 
නුෙත මුද්‍රණය කරවීම පිළිබඳ විමසීම් 
කටුකුරුන්වේ ඤාණනන්‍ෙ සෙහම් වසනසුන  
කිරිල්ලෙලෙත්ත, ෙම්මුල්ල, කරඳන  
 
දුරකථනය: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net