Title: Wheel of kamma to wheel of Dhamma Rev 0 9
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Wheel-of-kamma-to-wheel-of-Dhamma-Rev-0_9.pdf
Word Count: 4680

i 
 
From  
The Wheel of Kamma 
To  
The Wheel of Dhamma 
 
 
 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
Published by 
Kaṭukurunde Ñānananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2016

ii 
 
Published strictly for free distribution. 
First Impression – 2016 
 
 
 
All Rights Reserved 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited.  Permission to reprint 
could be obtained by writing to K.N.S.S.B. Dhamma books & 
sermons are available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
 
ISBN 978-955-3962-27-0 
 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
K.N.S.S.B,  
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  Karandana, Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Phone: 0114870333

iii 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
Dhamma books may be obtained from: 
1.  Mr. Sunil Wijesinghe – 39/10, St. Rita’s Road, Mt. Lavinia.  
2.  Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
3.  Mr. Chandana Wijeratne 
23/79A, 1st  Lane, Dharmapala Place, Thalawathugoda. 
4.  Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
5.  Mr. S.A. Lionel 
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
6.  Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – 15, Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
7.  Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 ‘Saman’, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
8.  Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
 Jayamanne Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
9.  Prof. K.M. Wijeratne, Faculty of Dental Sciences,  
 University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.  
10.  Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
11.  Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
 Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.  
12.  Mrs. Nera Wijesundara 
 Ilukpitiya Ayurvedic Clinic, Ilukpitiya, Gatahatta. 
13.  Mr. D.C.A. Nissanka de Silva – 91A, Woodward Road, Galle. 
14.  Mr. Piyadasa Samarakone 
 Suduwalipalassa, Kirinda, Tissamaharamaya. 
 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough

iv 
 
 
 
 
“Mind is the forerunner of mind objects, mind is 
their chief, they are mind-made. If with a corrupt 
mind one speaks or acts, suffering drags close 
behind him like the wheel of the cart the hoof of  
the burdened ox.” 
 
*    *  * 
 
“Mind is the forerunner of mind objects, mind is 
their chief, they are mind made. If with a pleased 
mind one speaks or acts, happiness follows him 
close behind like one’s own shadow that never 
departs.”

v 
 
 
Contents 
 
A Prologue vi 
About the K.N.S.S.B. viii 
From the Wheel of Kamma to the 1 
Wheel of Dhamma 1 
An Epilogue 8 
Notes 11

vi 
 
A Prologue 
 The journey of Saṁsāra is by the wheel of kamma. The 
journey to Nibbāna is by the wheel of dhamma. The turning of 
the wheel of kamma is dreadful . The turning of the wheel of 
dhamma is peaceful. This little book presents  a biography of one 
who in the midst of an extremely bitter life struggle has gone 
through both these turnings of wheels in the form of a confession 
that is both amazing and instructive.  
 This confessionary account which is shorter than a novel, 
but longe r than a short story is by no means a fiction. Truth is 
indeed stranger than fiction . It is an extract from a letter 
addressed to my revered teacher the Most Venerable Mātara Sri 
Ñānārāma Mahā  Thera by an upāsikā who sought meditation 
instructions from him in 1987 . I had the rare opportunity of 
participating in discussions  and corresponding with native and 
foreign meditators who met him or wrote to him . The second 
letter addressed to him by this particular upāsikā was so amazing 
that I copied some parts of it and added it to my personal file. 
 After twenty five years now I take it out to share it with 
others certainly not wi th the idea of arousing a furore  in the 
society. Our readers should not be tempted either to  go in search 
of that upāsikā out of cheap curiosity or approach us to pick up 
hints to that end. It will be embarrassing to her if she is still alive 
or at least to her friends and relatives who knew her plight. 
 May the modest and sincere confession of t his great lady 
who could extend her memories as far back as twelve thousand 
years and was capable of exchanging messages with planets five 
hundred light years away serve as a sermon highlighting the

vii 
 
limitless dangers of kamma, and the supreme solace in dha mma 
to our readers . May it be an invitation to do a thorough 
introspection in accordance with the Buddha’s advice to 
Bhaddavaggiya princes who went in search of a woman! 
 ‘attānaṁ gaveseyyātha’ – ‘seek after yourselves’ 
   With Sāsana at heart, 
   Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
Sanghopasthāna Suwa Sevana 
Kirillawala Watta 
Dammulla, Karandana 
Sri Lanka 
(B.E. 2559) March 2016

viii 
 
About the K.N.S.S.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be 
offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -
thirsty world.  
 Accordingly, K.N.S.S.B. has taken upon itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net and the social networking site 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough. Those wishing to participate 
in this multifaceted Dhammadāna may note the account number 
of our Trust given below.  
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
(K.N.S.S.B) 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  
Karandana 
Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Acc. No. 007060000241, 
Sampath Bank, SWIFT: BSAMLKLX 
Branch Code: 070 
Branch: R.G. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo – 07,  
 Sri Lanka.

ix 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
I wish to acknowledge the assistance given by Professor 
Chandana Jayaratne in translating the difficult sentences in the 
upāsikā’s letter which had to do with astronomy, and to  
Dr. Keerthi Gunathilake for getting his help for me. 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda

1 
 
From the Wheel of Kamma to the  
Wheel of Dhamma 
To the Most Venerable Nāyaka Thero, 
 The main purpose of my writing this letter is to place 
before you Venerable Sir, an important problem that I have.  
Though my mind is generally calm, composed and luminous, I 
lose my temper in ordinary day to day problems and find it 
difficult to control myself . Then I go on ranting and raving  like 
an uneducated crazy woman . Because of this trait  I irritate my 
family members, my friends and my neighbours. I get fed up with 
myself. But very soon my mind gets  free from this mad fit of 
rage. It again becomes luminous . I forget even the incident. It is 
like a breeze that blows over a tank of calm water . The water that 
gets ruffled by the breeze again becomes calm after the breeze is 
gone. The ruffling is not deep. 
 Though this does not affect me, those around me are 
adversely affected by it to a great extent. They are not prepared to 
forget it easily as I do. Thereby in everyday life I keep on making 
enemies. I become a subject of displeasure for  them. I want to be 
free from this unpleasant trait. 
 Venerable Sir, I am seeking your advice for that purpose . 
After such an incident I can make a precise assessment of the 
whole incident. I can clearly see my weakness . I can see how it 
came up . I can also see the weaknes ses of those who got 
involved. I tell myself I should have restrained myself . Yet, I 
keep on repeating the same mistake . Now it has almost become a 
habit. Sometimes I wonder whether there is any extraneous

2 
 
compelling force behind it . Even if there is, it is my weakness to 
get caught up in it. 
 To clarify all these, I have to come out with another 
episode. Venerable Sir, I can see my past births as far back as 
twelve thousand years . Of course not all births, but those in 
which I collected good and bad kamma that influence this life. 
Out of them there are three which greatly influence this life. 
1. A life in which I was a princess in a prosperous kingdom 
in the Atlantic ocean twelve thousand years ago. 
2. Thereafter, a life as an extremely wi se and beautiful 
princess in La ṅkāpura (Sri Lanka) who wielded majestic 
power like a male. 
3. A life du ring the reign of K ing Devā nampiyatissa as a 
maid of honour of Queen Anulā  wherein I became a nun 
along with her and practised near the Srī Mahā  Bodhi. 
(This store of  skilful kamma has a lasting effect . I have a 
feeling that what puts me on the right track is the skilful 
force of thoughts influenced by this kamma.) 
 In this life I had to go through untold suffering in the 
midst of endless mental torment . I was held responsible for 
others’ faults and publicly scoffed and scorned. I was ostracised 
and made the laughing stock of others . This is the last phase of 
the resulting serious evil kamma I had committed as a princess in 
Laṅkāpura. Though I have paid off the bulk of that  kamma, there 
is a little left like the lingering heat of extinguished embers . I 
suffered the brunt of that miserable kamma as a female slave in 
the service of priests of a Hindu temple  in South India. That was

3 
 
a life in which I suffered torture like a beast. 1  I loved the 
husband of another woman and revengefully imprisoned that 
woman using my royal power throug h my brother (we were co -
regents). She was a delicate and beautiful woman loyal to her 
husband. She was extremely shocked and terrified and suffered 
the torment . I took  joy in tormenting her (ie.  mental torment ). 
Thereby she was subject ed to public criticism . Her husband 
blamed her and turned her out . By then she was in an advanced 
stage of pregnancy . She suffer ed that pain as well as social  
condemnation and died a miserable death.  
 In this life I paid off the residue of that evil kamma which 
serves me right. I was segregated and censured. I was scoffed and 
scorned seriously by my husband and his kith and kin. I had to 
suffer along with my children as a hapless deserted woman. I was 
held responsible for faults I never committed and made the target 
of social condemnation . I was virtually imp risoned. Now I am 
living a lonely life with my children (my husband turned me out). 
 When all these distresses were coming my way, my power 
of skilful kamma (merits of keeping the precepts)  surfaced and I 
became curious about the cause of all these. Thereby I got used to 
go in search of the depth of Buddhist philosophy and the truth . I 
developed a liking for reading and doing meritorious deeds . I 
became attached to the dhamma . My mind’s eye and wisdom eye 
opened. However, grievously I suffered the  force of kamma, now 
I do not have an iota of mental torment . I forget these afflictions. 
I am no longer affected by them. 
                                                             
1 What follows is a flashback.

4 
 
 My name was Aneeha when I was a Royal princess in the 
kingdom in Atlantic ocean . When I was 14 years old I was 
initiated in to a monastery as a nu n to practise medicine . I was 
made to sit in front of a blue lotus pond and practise blue kasiṇa 
(a contemplation device). The practice of blue kasiṇa was meant 
for emitting blue radiations by my mind to cure the wounds of 
patients who undergo surgical treatment and to anaesthetize them. 
In that age the medical science was associated with psychic 
powers. Priests who had extra sensory mental powers knew that I 
possessed a special ability to emit blue rays through my mind . 
However, I practised only for four years . At the age of eighteen I 
ran away from the temple and from that country too. 
 In this life when I see this blue lotus my mind becomes 
pleasant, one pointed and luminous . I am exhilarated . My mind 
becomes peaceful as if extinguished . The blue lotus flower is 
very pleasing for me. The sky blue is very pleasing for me. I gave 
an account of those three lives becaus e they have a connection 
with my present life. 
Q.1. Is the crazy rage that comes up a part of my evil kamma? 
Q.2. Can I calm down my mind by developing the blue kasiṇa?

5 
 
P.S. 
 I can recognize in this life , persons whom I knew in past 
lives. Those who are closest to me were my salutary friends . 
Another section wh o are near me w ere my sworn enemies . But I 
have the same feeling towards both these groups. 
 Apart from this, there are unseen salutary friends who do 
not belong to this realm  of perception. They te ll me about some 
of my past lives (which I cannot recall). I have been informed 
that I came to this earthly existence from Cātummahārājika 
heaven twelve thousand years ago and that I will be returning 
there after this life. 
 I can see t wo lives awaiting  me, one is a birth as a 
specialist doctor (surgery). After that, a birth in which I will be a 
monk. Both these will be births as a male in which my powerful 
good kamma would be uppermost . Though I saw  a vast gap 
between this birth and the next, I could not s ee where I would be 
in the interim . Now I have b een informed that I will be in 
Cātummahārājika heaven. When my mind is clear  they convey 
these to me. 
 Apart from this I receive messages from a planet orbiting  
around a star some 500  light years away (in Pleiades in the star 
constellation Taurus) in this same galaxy . They tell me that I 
could even come to that planet after ten years . Inhabitants on that 
planet have the power to travel on extra sensory thought waves . 
They are highly de veloped in their scientific knowledge and 
psychic power . They converse through the mental medium 
(mind-to-mind). They have televised important events in this

6 
 
aeon by some sort of television . Some parts of Gautama 
Buddha’s sermons are also there. 
 When I searched for this I found in some astronomy 
books that astronomers suspect the exis tence of a solar system in 
this cluster of stars. Scientists have doubts about something when 
there are logically valid evidences; when it is reasonable to doubt. 
 I too am curious about all these . It is a great joy to me t o 
know that they have powerful  minds and are worthy of 
association. For four months in the recent past I used to get these 
mental messages. Now they have stopped. They have waited until 
my bad kamma is atte nuated and my mind is clear enough to 
convey these messages. 
 I do not feel that all these are marvellous or strange 
events. I only see through them how far this saṁsāra extends. 
Whether I am here on this earth now or whether I will be born in 
Cātummahārājika heaven in my n ext b irth, it is all  the same to 
me. There is no particular joy. Aren’t all these the creations of the 
magical force that is called ‘mind’? 
 My only wish and aspiration is the reali zation of the 
omniscience of a  Buddha. This is my final birth as a female . I 
have a feeling that I will pay off all serious kamma done in my 
saṁsāric past in this very life. Thereafter, the journey lying ahead 
for me is a clear, vast and direct one . There are no obstacles on 
my way. My mind spreads far and wide  like a clear sky . I see all 
this in just one instant . After that, the mind gets obscure and 
quiet. Now I can feel this very strongly.

7 
 
 I beg you Venerable Sir, to give me the gift of Dhamma 
that suits this journey . I think o nly you are my guide at this 
juncture in my life. 
 I beg pardon a thousand times for troubling you with these 
long letters. 
P.S. 
 After I wrote this letter I could solve by myself one 
problem. The madness o f rage was a characteristic trait  of the 
birth in which I committed that seriou s evil kamma. Today it has 
boomeranged on me as a self -inflicting weapon that brings blame 
and contempt. At that time it was a weapon  to dominate others . 
Just see how kamma produces its effect . Now I must rise against 
this and cut off that karmic force. But how to do it? It comes up at 
unexpected moments like a sudden tornado. 
 I will tell you the way my female birth ended when I meet 
you Venerable Sir. It is an interesting story about karmic forces.

8 
 
An Epilogue 
 We did not get the opportunity to listen to the interesting 
story about karmic forces hinted at by the last sentence of the  
letter because she did not show  up on the date appointed by our 
Most Venerable Teacher. Although he himself as well as some of 
us who knew about this letter awaited a reply as to why she could 
not come on that day or any letter to the effect t hat she would 
come on another day, it never came . We do not know whether it 
was the interference of some opposing karmic force which  
prevented her from meeting our Most Venerable Teacher until he 
passed away. 
 Whatever it is, we hope that our readers would rest 
content with this incomplete autobiography and get an  incentive 
through it to make a change for the better in their lives . Even for 
readers who have doubts about kamma and its effect, and about 
dhamma and its lofty aims, this autobiography would go a long 
way in straightening up their views . This noble mother seems to 
have improved on the Sinhala adage ‘suffering that has come is 
as sweet as honey’ to say ‘suffering tha t has come is as sweet as 
the dhamma’. She has made the burden of the wheel of kamma a 
blessing in disguise b y accepting her own karmic heritage and 
infused into her philosophy of life a modest tolerance which  does 
not pass on the blame to others. 
 The group of relatives and the society outside that scoffed 
and scorned her seem to have been unaware of the force of 
kamma which affected her and the mighty power of dhamma 
inherent in her. Just see how the ball of cotton thread gets knotted 
through ignorance ! Her autobiographical account makes it clear

9 
 
that birth as a female or male is a karmic heritage connected with 
the third precept . The masculine personality evolving within her 
is revealed by her way of expression.  The effort she has made to 
remain unshaken  before the eight worldly vicissitudes in the 
midst of good and evil karmic forces is remarkably exemplary.  
 This upāsikā has understood well the Buddha’s teaching 
in the Ṭhāna sutta (Note.1) where he says that a woman or man, a 
layman or monk, should constantly reflect on the norm of kamma. 
She has accepted the fact that kamma is one’s own 
(kammassakomhi), that it is one’s rightful inheritance 
(kammadāyādo), that it is one’s true relative (kammabandhu), and 
the true refuge ( kammapaṭisarano). She was careful enough not 
to get entangled in a knotty ball of karmic thread by blaming 
others, hating them and taking revenge. 
 Moreover, she was using her personal experience of 
suffering to turn the wheel of dhamma within her life in 
accordance with the basic principle proclaimed by the Buddha in 
the Upanisā Sutta (Note.2). This life story is an excellent proof of 
the moral law:  ‘F aith has suffering as the supportive condition ’. 
The fountain of true faith is the deep conviction of s aṁsāric 
suffering. The cyclic Paṭicca samuppāda found in Upanisā Sutta 
has attracted the special attention of many scholars . In the more 
popular twelve link ed sermon on Dependent Arising ( Note.3), 
beginning with dependent on ignorance, preparations arise, etc., 
there is a direct and an indirect order . While the direct order says 
dependent on ignorance preparations arise, in the indirect order it 
says with the remainderless cessation  of ignorance comes the 
cessation of preparations. But in the Upanisā Sutta, having stated 
that ignorance is the supportive condition for preparations

10 
 
(avijjūpanisā sankhārā ), according to the same first principle, 
instead of an indirect ord er, it is said that  suffering is the 
supportive condition for faith  (dukkhūpanisā saddhā). The series 
of conditions beginning with faith extends through joy, zest, 
calm, happiness, concentration, knowledge and vision of thi ngs 
as they are, dejection, dispassion, emancipation, to  knowledge 
and vision of emancipation . The transformation in the lif e of our 
upāsikā is also reminiscent of the Upanisā Sutta with this  
difference that the aim in this case is not the knowledge of the 
path to Arhanthood, but omniscience of the Buddha. 
 We feel that this epilogue should end with a transference 
of merit. We do not know whether this great lady  with a unique 
power of perfections  is still on this earth or in the 
Cātummahārājika heaven. Wherever she is , may she rejoice in 
the skilful kamma we have acquired  by this gift of dhamma for 
the benefit of the worldlings who ignore the wheel of dhamma 
though hamstrung by the wheel of kamma, and thereby make her 
way in saṁsāra on a direct and clear  path and realize her lofty 
aspirations for Buddhahood.

11 
 
Notes 
1. “…Kammassakomhi kammadāyādo kammayoni 
kammabandhu kammapaṭisaraṇo yaṃ kammaṃ karissāmi 
kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vā tassa dāyādo bhavissāmī’ti 
abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbaṃ itthiyā vā purisena vā 
gahaṭṭhena vā pabbajitena vā.” 
  – Ṭhāna Sutta, Anguttara Nikāya 3, page 72, PTS 
 “A woman or man, a layman or monk should constantly reflect 
thus, ‘I am the owner of my kamma, I am the inheritor of my 
kamma, kamma is my matrix, kamma is my relative, kamma is 
my resort, whatever kamma I do, whether good or evil, I will 
be its inheritor.” 
2. “Evameva kho, bhikkhave, avijjūpanisā sa ṅkhārā, sa ṅkhārūpanisaṃ viññāṇaṃ, viññā ṇūpanisaṃ nāmarūpaṃ, nāmarū pūpanisaṃ saḷāyatanaṃ, sa ḷāyatanūpaniso phasso, 
phassūpanisā vedanā, vedanūpanisā ta ṇhā, ta ṇhūpanisaṃ 
upādānaṃ, upādānūpaniso  bhavo, bhavūpanisā jāti, 
jātūpanisaṃ dukkhaṃ, dukkhūpanisā saddhā, saddhūpanisa ṃ 
pāmojjaṃ, pāmojjūpanisā pīti, pītūpanisā passaddhi, passad -
dhūpanisaṃ sukhaṃ, sukhūpaniso samādhi, samādhūpanisa ṃ 
yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṃ, yathā bhūtañāṇadassanūpanisā 
nibbidā, nibbidūpaniso virāgo, virāgūpanisā vimutti, 
vimuttūpanisaṃ khayeñāṇaṃ.” 
 
– Upanisā Sutta, Saṁyutta Nikāya   
 Vol. 2, page 32, PTS

12 
 
3. “Imasmiṃ sati ida ṃ hoti. Imassuppādā ida ṃ uppajjati. 
Imasmiṃ asati idaṃ na hoti. Imassa nirodhā idha ṃ nirujjhati, 
yadidaṃ avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā, sa ṅkhārapaccayā 
viññāṇaṃ, viññā ṇapaccayā nāmarūpa ṃ, nāmarūpapaccayā 
saḷāyatanaṃ, sa ḷāyatanapaccayā phasso, phassapaccayā 
vedanā, vedanāpaccayā ta ṇhā, ta ṇhāpaccayā upādāna ṃ, 
upādānapaccayā  bhavo, bhavapaccayā jāti, jātipac cayā 
jarāmaraṇaṃ, sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāsāyā sambh - 
avanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhak khandhassa samudayo 
hoti. Avijjāyatv eva asesavirāganirodhā sa ṅkhāranirodho, 
saṅkhāranirodhā viññāṇanirodho, viññāṇanirodhā nāmarūpa- 
nirodho, nāmarūpa -nirodhā sa ḷāyatananirodho, sa ḷāyatana- 
nirodhā phassanirodho, phassanirodhā vedanānirodho, 
vedanānirodhā ta ṇhānirodho, ta ṇhānirodhā upādānanirodho, 
upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho, bhavanirodhā jātinirodho, 
jātinirodhā jarāmaraṇaṃsokaparidevadukkhadomanassu- 
pāyāsā nirujjhanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa 
nirodho hoti.”  
  – Bahudhātuka Sutta, Majjhima Nikāya      
    Vol.3, page53f., PTS 
 
 This being, this comes to be. With the  arising of this, this 
arises. This not be ing, this does not come to be. With the 
cessation of this, this ceases. That is to say, from ignorance as 
condition, arise preparations . From preparations as condition, 
arises consciousness. From consciousness as condition, name 
and form . From name and form as condition, the six sense -
spheres. From the six sense -spheres as condition, contact . 
From contact as condition, feeling . From feeling as condition,

13 
 
craving. From craving as condition, grasping . From grasping 
as condition , becoming. From becoming as condition, birth . 
From birth as condition a rise decay and death, sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief and despair. Such is the arising of this 
entire mass of suffering. 
 
 From the complete fading away and cessation of that very 
ignorance, there comes to be the cessation of preparations . 
From the cessation of preparations, the cessation of 
consciousness. From the cessation of consciousness, the 
cessation of name and form . From the cessation of name and 
form, the cessation of the six sense -spheres. From the 
cessation of the six -sense-spheres, the ce ssation of contact . 
From the cessation of contact, the cessation of feeling . From 
the cessation of feeling, the cessation of craving . From the 
cessation of craving, the cessation of grasping . From the 
cessation of grasping, the cessation of becoming . From the 
cessation of becoming, the cessation of birth . From the 
cessation of birth, decay and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain , 
grief and despair cease . Such is the ceasing of this entire mass 
of suffering.

By The Same Author 
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought   
2. Saṁyutta Nikāya – An Anthology  
3. Ideal Solitude  
4. The Magic of the Mind  
5. Towards Calm and Insight   
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume I  
7. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume II  
8. Seeing Through  
9. Towards A Better World  
10. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume I  
11. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume II  
12. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume III  
13. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume IV  
14. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume V  
15. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VI  
16. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VII 
17. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Library Edition  
18. Nibbāna and The Fire Simile  
19. A Majestic Tree of Merit  
20. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective  
21. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume I  
22. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume II  
23. Walk to Nibbāna   
24. Deliverance of the Heart through Universal Love 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla, Karandana 
Phone: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
සැ.යු.: මෙෙ කෘති මලේඛනය සරලත්‍වයට ෙුලේතැන දුනේ අංක 
අනුපිළිමෙලකේ සහිතෙ සකසේවී ඇති බෙතේ , මලේඛනමයේ 
අගහරිමයේ එන කෘති මබොමහෝ දුරට ගැඹුරැ විය හැකි බෙතේ, 
පොඨකයිනේ දැනුෙතේ කිරීම් ෙශමයනේ සඳහනේ කරනු 
කැෙැතේමතමි. 
- සම්පොදක  
1. තිසරණ ෙහිෙ  
2. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 1 
3. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 2 
4. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 3 
5. දිවි කතමේ සැඳෑ අඳූර 
6. කය අනුෙ ගිය සිහිය 
7. හිත තැනීෙ 
8. පිනේ රැමකක ෙහිෙ 
9. අබිනිකේෙන 
10. පිළිමෙතිනේ පිළිමෙතට 
11. කමයේ කතොෙ 
12. ෙො-පිය උෙැටන 
13. පරතිපතේති පූජොෙ 
14. පැෙැතේෙ හො නැෙැතේෙ 
15. කෙම කකරමයනේ රෙම කකරයට 
16. මෙතේ සිමතේ විෙුකේතිය 
17. ඇති හැටි දැකේෙ 
18. තමපෝ ගුණ ෙහිෙ 
19. සකේෙමනේ නිෙන 
20. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 1 මෙළුෙ 
21. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 2 මෙළුෙ  
22. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 3 මෙළුෙ  
23. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 4 මෙළුෙ  
24. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 5 මෙළුෙ  
25. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 6 මෙළුෙ  
26. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 7 මෙළුෙ  
27. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 8 මෙළුෙ  
28. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 9 මෙළුෙ

29. විදසුනේ උපමදසේ 
30. භොෙනො ෙොගගය 
31. උතේතරීතර හුදකලොෙ 
32. සසුනේ පිළිමෙත 
33. කලන චිතරය 
34. දිය සුළිය 
35. බුදු සෙය පුදේගලයො හො සෙොජය 
36. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  පළෙු මෙළුෙ   
37. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ – මදෙන මෙළුෙ  
38. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  මතෙන මෙළුෙ   
39. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සිෙුෙන මෙළුෙ   
40. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  පසේෙන මෙළුෙ   
41. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සයෙන මෙළුෙ   
42. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සතේෙන මෙළුෙ   
43. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  අටෙන මෙළුෙ   
44. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  නෙෙන මෙළුෙ   
45. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  දසෙන මෙළුෙ   
46. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  එමකොමළොසේෙන මෙළුෙ    
47. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ – පුසේතකොල ෙුද්‍රණය 11-11 වෙළුම්) 
48. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 1 මෙළුෙ  
49. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 2 මෙළුෙ  
50. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 3 මෙළුෙ  
51. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 4 මෙළුෙ 
52. ෙනමසේ ෙොයොෙ 
53. පැරණි මබෞදර චිනේතොමේ සංකලේපය සහ යථොථමය 
 
නැෙත ෙුද්‍රණය කරවීෙ පිළිබඳ විෙසීම් 
කටුකුරැනේමදේ ඤාණනන්‍ද සදහම් මසනසුන  
කිරිලේලෙලෙතේත, දම්ෙුලේල, කරඳන  
 
දුරකථනය: 0777127454  
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net