Title: The Heretic Sage
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/The-Heretic-Sage_Rev_9.0.pdf
Word Count: 13314

i 
 
 
The Heretic Sage  
Discussions with  
Bhikkhu Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
 
 
by 
Bhikkhu Yogānanda 
 
 
 
 
Published by 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2016

ii 
 
Published strictly for free distribution. 
First Impression – 2016 June 
 
 
 
All Rights Reserved 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited. Permission to reprint 
could be obtained by writing to K.N.S.S.B. Dhamma books & 
sermons are available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Cover photo credits: Tharaka Rupasinghe 
ISBN 978-955-3962-42-3 
 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
K.N.S.S.B,  
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  Karandana, Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Phone: 0114870333

iii 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
Dhamma books may be obtained from: 
1. Mr. Sunil Wijesinghe – 39/10, St. Rita’s Road, Mt. Lavinia.  
2. Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
3. Mr. Chandana Wijeratne 
23/79A, 1st  Lane, Dharmapala Place, Thalawathugoda. 
4. Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
5. Mr. S.A. Lionel 
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
6. Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – 15, Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
7. Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 ‘Saman’, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
8. Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
 Jayamanne Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
9. Prof. K.M. Wijeratne, Faculty of Dental Sciences,  
 University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.  
10. Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
11. Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
 Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.  
12. Mrs. Nera Wijesundara 
 Ilukpitiya Ayurvedic Clinic, Ilukpitiya, Gatahatta. 
13. Mr. D.C.A. Nissanka de Silva – 91A, Woodward Road, Galle. 
14. Mr. Piyadasa Samarakone 
 Suduwalipalassa, Kirinda, Tissamaharamaya. 
 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough

iv 
 
About the K.N.S.S.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be 
offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -
thirsty world.  
 Accordingly, K.N.S.S.B. has taken upon itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons  on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net and the social networking site 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough. Those wishing to participate 
in this multifaceted Dhammadāna may note the account number 
of our Trust given below.  
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
(K.N.S.S.B) 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  
Karandana 
Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Acc. No. 007060000241, 
Sampath Bank, SWIFT: BSAMLKLX 
Branch Code: 070 
Branch: R.G. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo – 07,  
 Sri Lanka.

v 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction  vii 
Part 1  1 
Part 2  10 
Part 3  17 
Part 4  25 
Part 5  32 
Part 6  39

vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Heretic Sage 
(First Impression – 2016 July) 
‘The gift of Dhamma excels all other gifts’

vii 
 
Introduction 
This is a series of articles on Ven Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda Thera. In November 2009, I had the opportunity 
to stay at his monastery for a few days and have several long 
conversations with him. The articles are based on the 
recordings of these discussions.  
- Bhikkhu Yogānanda

viii 
 
 
 
 
 
How does a bhikkhu know the ford? Here a 
bhikkhu goes from time to time to such 
bhikkhus who have learned much, who are well 
versed in the tra dition, who main tain the 
Dhamma, the Discipline, and the Codes, and he 
enquires and asks questions of them thus: ‘How 
is this, ven erable sir? What is the mean ing of 
this?’ These ven erable ones reveal to him what 
has not been revealed, clar ify what is not clear, 
and remove his doubts about  numerous things 
that give rise to doubt. That is how a bhikkhu 
knows the ford. 
 
- MAHĀGOPĀLAKA SUTTA (MN 33)

Part 1
Bhante Ñāṇananda is not the monk I thought he would be. 
He is much more. As I recall my first meet ing with him in his 
small cave kuti, the first word that crosses my mind is “innocent”. 
For a senior monk who has been in the order for more than 40 
years, he is dis armingly sim ple, unpre tentious and friendly. 
Childlike even. But you would not get that impres sion from his 
classics Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought and The 
Magic of the Mind. 
 I was intro duced to his writ ings by my friend Ven. 
Sumana, an English monk. It was Bhante Ñāṇananda’s Nibbāna – 
The Mind Stilled collection that I first read. Later I would go 
through The Magic of the Mind, which I would find both enchanting and baffling at the same time. It would take me even longer to 
take up  Concept and Reality. All of them would leave a last ing 
impression on me, and define the way I inter pret the Dhamma, 
but not before com pletely mis conceiving what he was say ing, 
engage in a lengthy cor respondence with him, and finally meet 
him only to learn th at I was mis erably wrong on many things all 
that time. And it would be a meeting I’ll always remember. 
 I was a staunch ‘Ñāṇavirist’ until that meet ing, so for 
me Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled was more or less a com mentary 
on Notes on Dhamma by Ven. Ñāṇavira Thera. Sure enough there 
were some pas sages here and there that took some effort to beat 
into submission, but language is a flex ible medium and the mind 
is infi nitely cre ative. On the few occa sions when that prob lem 
could not be easily shrugged off, I resorted to con sidering Bhante 
Ñāṇananda the scholar who needed to bow in front of the  
experience of Ven. Ñāṇavira. 
 The firs t vassa in 2009  was a time when my 
understanding of the Dhamma went through some changes. I

The Heretic Sage 

noted those thoughts down, and sent some of it to Bhante 
Ñāṇananda for review. A par ticularly long let ter that ran into 
more than 50 pages took two months for a  reply. Bhante thought 
it would take an equally long let ter to explain the mat ters, which 
he was not in a position to write: he had just returned from a two -
month stay in the hos pital. Instead, he invited me to visit him in 
his monastery and stay a few days, which created a few problems, 
because Ven. Katukurunde Ñāṇananda Thera is an outcast. 
 His crit ical analy sis of Bud dhist texts and the 
unwillingness to adhere to the com mentarial tra dition has made 
Bhante Ñāṇananda a rad ical and a her etic. He prob ably knew 
what he was get ting into from the ve ry begin ning. In the 
introduction to Concept and Reality, written in 1969, he states: 
 
“It is feared that th e nov elty of some of our 
interpretations will draw two types of extreme reac tion. 
On the one hand, it might give rise to a total antipa thy 
towards the crit ical analy sis of doc trinal points as 
attempted here. On the oth er, it might engen der an 
unreasonable distrust leading to a sweeping condemnation 
of the com mentaries as a whole. This work has faile d in 
its pur pose if its criti cal scrutiny of the occa sional 
shortcomings in the commentarial literature makes anyone 
forget his indebted ness to the com mentaries for his 
knowledge of the Dhamma.” [1]  
 Over the years he would become less apologetic and more 
straightforward in his asser tions, but his crit icisms would always 
remain sub tle, his delight ful sar casm barely noticed unless 
approached with the nec essary back ground knowl edge and the 
attention they deserve. For exam ple, crit icising 
the Ābhidhammika atomism and the commentarial sabhāva (ownessence) doctrine, he says:

Part 1 

“An insight med itator, too, goes through a sim ilar 
experience when he con templates on name -and-form, 
seeing th e four ele ments as empty and void of essence, 
which will give him at least an iota of the con viction that 
this drama of existence is empty and insubstantial. He will 
realize that, as in the case of the dumb show, he is 
involved with things that do n ot really exist. […] See ing 
the reciprocal relationship between name -and-form, he is 
disinclined to dab ble in con cepts or gulp down a dose of 
prescriptions. […] What is essen tial here, is the very 
understanding of essence lessness. If one sits down to 
draw up lists of con cepts and pre scribe them, it would 
only lead to a mental constipation.” [2] 
 It is in his lat est booklet Nibbana and the Fire Simile that 
I found him being the most direct: 
“There is a flush of Bud dhist literature thriving in 
the West which attempts to inter pret this fire simile in the 
light of the Vedic myth that the ex tinguished fire ‘goes 
into hiding’. Though the Buddha succeeded in convincing 
the Brahmin interlocutors of the dependently arisen nature 
of the fire by the reductio -ad-absurdum method, these 
scholars seem to be imper vious to his argu ments. What is 
worse, mis interpretations have eve n sought refuge in 
blatant mistranslations of sacred texts.  
[…]  
The term ‘extinc tion’ is anath ema to the West in 
general. Perhaps as a euphemism, ‘extin guishment’ might 
be ‘pass able’. But rather than  playing with the ‘fire -
simile’ it is better to accept the obvious conclusions, willy 
nilly.” [3] 
 To appre ciate the rebel liousness of these pas sages and 
many others like it, one needs to under stand the context in which 
they were writ ten. The  monastic Sangha in gen eral is quite

The Heretic Sage 

dogmatic and tra ditionalist, not en tirely wel coming of 
challenging views. When the Nib bāna sermons were deliv ered at 
the Nissarana Vanaya, Bhante Ñāṇananda had the back ing of his 
teacher, the illus trious Elder Ven. Matara Sri Ñāṇārāma 
Mahathera, who not only allowed him the free dom but invited 
and encour aged him to express his rad ical views. Even then he 
was crit icized by many of his col leagues. Those views were a 
main rea son that led to Bhante Ñāṇananda’s depar ture from the 
Nissarana Vanaya after the death of Ven. Ñāṇārāma . He left on 
his own accord, and set up a small monastery in Devalegama: 
Pothgulgala Aranya. It was there that I first met him in November 
last year. 
 
 It is late in the evening that I arrive, and Bhante 
Ñāṇananda is out vis iting a doctor, something that was becoming 
more frequent as his asthma was get ting worse. After he returns 
at around 10 pm, I’m taken to his small cave kuti by his stu dent 
Ven. Damita. I’m sur prised to see how frail and almost frag ile 
Bhante Ñāṇananda is. I intro duce myself; he slaps his head and 
laughs, and asks: “How did you manage to escape?” 
 The next day, after  piṇḍapāta I went to visit him in his 
kuti. He warmly wel comes me. I pu ll out his last reply to my 
letters in which he pro vided some poin ts to pon der on, and  start 
asking him for clar ifications on each of the points. As I sit there 
on the floor lis tening to his thor oughly informative commentary, 
some of my cherished views get blasted to bits. 
 Answering a ques tion deal ing with the struc ture of 
experience, Bhante Ñāṇananda quotes the  Hemakamāṇavapucchā of the Sutta Nipāta (from mem ory, of course), and uses 
the simile of the plain tain trunk to illus trate the way knowl edge 
of experience is gained.

Part 1 

 “It’s a beau tiful sutta, where Hemaka explains the rea son 
why he gained faith in the Buddha. 
 
‘Ye me pubbe viyākaṃsu 
Huraṃ gotama sāsanā, 
Iccāsi iti bhavissati 
Sabbaṃ taṃ itihitihaṃ 
Sabbaṃ taṃ takkavaḍḍhanaṃ 
Nāhaṃ tattha abhiramiṃ. 
Tvañ ca me dhammam akkhāhi taṅhā nigghātanaṃ muni, 
Yaṃ viditvā sato caraṃ tare loke visattikaṃ.’ 
 
‘Those in the past who explained their teachings to 
me outside Gotama’s dispensation said “so it was and so it 
will be”. All that is “so and so” talk; all that pro moted 
speculation. I did not delight in them. And you, O Sage, 
do expound to me the teach ing of destruc tion of crav ing, 
knowing which far ing mind fully I shall cross over the 
clinging in the world.’ 
 “Those verses cut to the heart of the prob lem. They show 
the value of this akālika Dhamma. Taṇhā is some thing that is 
here and now, and it is taṇhakkhayo that is Nibbāna. 
 “Now, the sim ile of the plan tain trunk comes in here. At 
the end, all of this is just a heap of  saṇkhāra–s – preparations, 
which the Bud dha has equated to a pl antain trunk. It is not 
necessary to roll the sheaths to real ize the pit hlessness of it; one 
just needs to take the sword of  paññā and cut through. From the 
cross section itself one realizes. Actually that is what is meant by 
understanding paṭiccasamuppāda, not mem orizing the 12 links. 
The Dhamma is akālika because of this principle.” 
 In his let ter Bhante has men tioned the impor tance of 
understanding the dif ference between vijānāti and pajānāti when 
it comes to discussing viññāṇa. I ask for an elaboration.

The Heretic Sage 

 “This is something that tends to get over looked. There are 
many words that share the ñā root in the texts: sañjānāti, vijānāti, 
pajānāti, abhijānāti, parijānāti, ājānāti. There may be more. It is 
with a reason that there are these differences between them. 
 “It is com monly known that the root  ñā stands for 
‘knowledge’. Why is it said ‘vijānāti’ when it could have eas ily 
been said  ‘jānāti’? Most trans lations just use ‘knows’. 
But vijānāti means ‘dis criminatively knows’. What is the main 
job of viññāṇa? We can clar ify from the  Mahāvedalla Sutta. 
There we get the phras es yaṃ sañjānāti taṃ vijānāti and yaṃ 
vijānāti taṃ pajānāti. ‘What one perceives, that one 
discriminates’ and ‘what one discriminates, that one knows’. 
 “From the exam ples that f ollow that phrase we can 
understand the  jānana level of each. For  sañjānāti: Nīlakampi 
sañjānāti, pītakampi sañjānāti, lohitakampi sañjānāti, odātampi 
sañjānāti – using colours. When  someone is com ing from a 
distance, all we see is just some blob of colour. When he comes 
closer we separate him from the others: ‘oh, he is this person, not 
the other’. When we know deeply, at  pajānāti level, all is the 
same, just the four ele ments, but let’s le ave that aside for the 
moment.” 
 “What are the examples given for vijānāti? There are two; 
the first is  sukhan’ti pi vijānāti, dukkhan’ti pi vijānāti, 
adukkhamasukhan’ti pi vijānāti. This clearly shows 
that vijānana is unique to liv ing beings, not found in trees and 
rocks. The first level of  viññāṇa is in  discriminating between 
different feelings. For instance, in the  Mahānidāna Sutta we find 
the Bud dha ask ing Ven. Ananda Thera whether there would be 
any self notion where there is no feeling. The answer is ‘no’. That 
shows that feel ing is fun damental. So what is there in feel ing? 
Bifurcation, which is the most fundamental delusion.”

Part 1 

 He pauses to say how glad he is that there is no need to 
use ‘footnotes’ when talking to me. I’m glad I did the home work. 
If you want to find Bhante Ñāṇananda in his z one, do the 
necessary prepara tory stud ies, and be will ing to put up with 
copious amounts of Pāḷi, not all of which would be translated. 
 But then he asks “Do you remem ber the other exam ple 
for vijānāti?” I don’t. 
 “There is a sec ond exam ple for  vijānāti from the  Khajjanīya Sutta:  
ambilampi vijānāti, tittakampi vijānāti, kaṭukampi 
vijānāti, madhurakampi vijānāti, khārikampi vijānāti, 
akhārikampi vijānāti, loṇikampi vijānāti, aloṇikampi 
vijānāti — different tastes. Do you see any dif ference 
between knowing colours and knowing tastes?” 
 I mumble my ignorance. 
 “With taste the dis crimination is explicit. When we taste 
something, it takes a while to decide whether it ’s sweet or sour or 
salty. Some foods we can’t eas ily cat egorize by taste, like 
the Nelli fruit. But it is not essen tial to go tha t far: what is 
important is to remem ber that dis criminating between dif ferent 
feeling tones is the main function of viññāṇa. 
 “A unique fea ture of  paṭiccasamuppāda is the way one 
result becomes the cause for another. One pulls the other in. 
When we take a pair of items in paṭiccasamuppāda, one member 
is also a mem ber in the n ext pair. The very ques tion whether  
saññā and viññāṇa are the same or dif ferent reeks of abso lutism, 
an attempt to sep arate them into water -tight com partments. But 
their connectedness is pointed out in the Sutta with  yaṃ sañjānāti 
taṃ vijānāti, yaṃ vijānāti taṃ pajānāti. This doesn’t mean all 
three are the same either. The nuances are important.

The Heretic Sage 

 “The dif ference between  viññāṇa and paññā is explained 
as paññā bhāvetabbā, viññāṇaṃ pariññeyyaṃ: paññā is to be 
developed, viññāṇa is to be under stood. When  paññā is 
fulfilled, viññāṇa is fully com prehended. As in the magic show: 
to see through the magic is to miss the show.” 
 The last sen tence is a ref erence to Bhante Ñāṇananda’s 
short masterpiece The Magic of the Mind. 
 “In the flood lights of  paññā there is no room for the 
shadows of viññāṇa. The delusion of self-love reflects a world, so 
there are  the two: an I and a world. Reflections on the eye, 
reflections on the ear, reflec tions on  the mind: tak ing these 
reflections that fall  on the senses as true, the mate rialists go 
looking for a world out there. When the Bud dha called all of that 
a mere illusion, he meant all, includ ing concepts. That’s why it is 
said sabba dhammakkhayaṃpatto vimutto upadhisaṅkhaye.[4] Mind and dhammas are the last resort of delusion.” 
 This is one of the most con troversial of Bhante 
Ñāṇananda’s views. The Magic of the Mind discusses this topic at 
length. He has been called an idealist and an illusionist because of 
it; he rejects both accusations. Being a Ñāṇavirist at the time, this 
‘illusionist’ interpretation was some thing I too fo und difficult to 
accept, espe cially in light of Ve n. Ñāṇavira’s explicit and 
vehement rejec tion of the notion of māyā as a hindu con cept 
shared by the Mahayanists. 
 “It is  viññāṇa that dis criminates between a sense and an 
object. The Ābhidhammikas are stuck thinking that even when all 
else falls apart  mano viññāṇa remains. It is like we se parating a 
flowing river in to parts, nam ing them, and then putting the parts 
back together to cre ate a river. I remem ber something Dr. W.S. 
Karunaratne said: ‘the gram mar of nature does not cor respond to 
the gram mar of lan guage’. That’s a nice say ing. This is 
beautifully illus trated in the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta. We sep arate the

Part 1 

flux of existence in to parts, with  papañca-saññā-saṇkhā. 
Those saṇkhās are mere sug gestions. They can only nudge us 
toward a cer tain direc tion. We can not understand reality 
using them. 
 “Words have a lim ited capacity. It is okay to use them as 
long as one real izes their lim itations. One who real izes their 
limitations would not be lim ited by them. The Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 
ends with  imā kho Citta lokasamaññā lokaniruttiyo lokavohārā 
lokapaññattiyo, yāhi Tathāgato voharati, aparāmasaṃ. We must 
be so grateful to the ancient bhāṇakas: it would have been s uch a 
loss if that last word were forgotten. Aparāmasaṃ – not grasping. 
That’s where the whole secret lies.” 
 And then he laughs his delight ful laugh, as if all tha t 
should have been obvious in the first place. 
 
NOTES 
1. Ñāṇananda. K. (1997) [1971], Concept and Reality in 
Early Buddhist Thought, Buddhist Publication Society, 
p. VI. 
2. Ñāṇananda, Katukurunde, Bhikkhu (2004), Nibbāna – 
The Mind Stilled, Vol.II, Dharma Grantha Mudrana 
Bharaya, p. 183. 
3. Ñāṇananda, Katukurunde, Bhikkhu (2010), Nibbāna and 
the Fire Simile, Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bharaya, p. 26. 
4. Sn. 992

Part 2
There is hardly any teach ing that has given rise to more 
internal dis putes among Bud dhists than  paṭiccasamuppāda. My 
next ques tion is based on a com ment by Bhante Ñāṇananda, 
which con siders paṭiccasamuppāda as the golden mean 
between atthitā (existence) an d natthitā (non-existence), 
replacing them with samudaya (arising) and vaya (passing away). 
 “Everyone knows that the mid dle way is the noble eight -
fold path. Every one knows that  the first ser mon was the 
Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta. But if for so me rea son 
Āḷārakālāma or Uddaka Rāma putta were alive, what we would 
have as the Dham macakkappavattana would be some thing short 
like the Bāhiya Sutta, because they were fac ing a du ality of a 
different nature. 
  “The five ascetics were giv en a teach ing based on the 
ethical mid dle path, avoid ing the two extremes of  kāmasukhallikānuyoga and attakilamathānuyoga. But the mid dle pat h of 
right view is found in the Kaccānagotta Sutta, beautifully used by 
Ven. Nāgār juna. When the Ther avadins got engrossed with the  
Abhidhamma they for got about it. The Mād hyamikas were alert 
enough to give it the attention it deserved. 
  “Extremism is found not only in ethics, but also in var ious 
kinds of views. The dual ity of asti and nāsti has a long his tory. I 
don’t have much knowledge in the Vedas, but I remem ber in Ṛg 
Veda, in the Nāsādīya Sūkta, [1] you get the beau tiful 
phrase nāsadāsīn no sadāsīt tadānīṃ. They were spec ulating 
about the begin nings: did exis tence come from non-existence or 
vice-versa. 
 “All th ose kinds of dual ities, be it asti/nāsti or sabbaṃ 
ekattaṃ/sabbaṃ puthuttaṃ etc. were rejected by the Bud dha: 
majjhena Tathāgato Dhammaṃ deseti – he taught the Dhamma

Part 2 

by the middle. It’s not just the mid dle path. It’s not a mix ture of 
50% of each. We usu ally think that the mid dle is between two 
ends. It’s a rejec tion of both ends and an intro duction of a novel 
standpoint. Again, I remem ber Dr. W.S. Karunaratne say ing how 
paṭiccasamuppāda, both as a phi losophy and as a word, was 
novel to Indian think ing. There were other vāda–s such as 
Adhiccasamuppāda and Issaranimmāna, but not paṭiccasamuppāda, and it is not a vāda. 
 “The ‘par roting’ method of paṭiccasamuppāda involves 
dishing out the 12 term s, and even then, the paṭiloma is often 
forgotten. But the impor tant thing is the prin ciple, embed ded 
in ‘asmiṃ sati…’, as seen in many Sut tas. The re again, I also 
made a mis take inadvertently when trans lating: in early edi tions 
of The Magic of the Mind I used ‘this/that’ following the standard 
English trans lations. That’s com pletely w rong. It should be 
‘this/this’. 
 “In the for mula we must take two ele ments that make a 
pair and analyse the con ditionality between them. ‘That’ implies 
something out side the pair, w hich is mislead ing. Paṭiccasamuppāda is to be seen among the ele ments in a pair. The trick 
is in the mid dle; there’s no point in hold ing on to the ends. And 
even that middle needs to be let go of, not grasped. 
 “When intro ducing paṭiccasamuppāda we first get the 
principle: imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti, imassuppādā idaṃ 
uppajjati… and then  yadidaṃ – the word yadidaṃ clearly shows 
that what fol lows is an il lustration. And then the well -known 12 
elements are given. But how is it in the  paṭiloma? Avijjaya tu 
eva – there’s an empha sis, as if to sa y: yes, the aris ing of 
suffering is a fact, it is the nature of the wor ld, but it doesn’t end 
there; from the fad ing away of that same igno rance this suffering 
could be made to cease. That is why we can’t cat egorically say 
that any of these things exist or not. It entirely depends 
on upādāna. It is  upādāna that decide s between exis tence and

The Heretic Sage 

non-existence. When there is no  upādāna you get  anupādā 
parinibbāna, right then and there. And that is why the Dhamma 
is akālika.” 
 The impossibility of mak ing categorical statements about 
existence was dis cussed extensively in Bhante Ñāṇananda’s  The 
Magic of the Mind, and he r eminds me again about the 
importance of the Kālakārāma Sutta which provided the basis for 
that book. He quickly adds that  the Buddha’s stand is not 
something like that of his con temporary sceptic agnostic Sañjaya 
Bellaṭṭhiputta, the so -called eel-wriggler; rather, the sit uation is 
beyond what could be expressed through the linguistic medium. It 
can only be known individually: paccattaṃ veditabbo. 
 His inter pretation of  paṭiccasamuppāda, which dramati -
cally devi ates from the tra ditional exe gesis, has earned Bhante 
Ñāṇananda a few vehe ment crit ics. He amus edly men tions a 
recent let ter sent by a monk where he was accused of ‘being a 
disgrace to the Theriya tra dition’. This crit icism, no doubt  
coming from a Ther avāda dog matist, is under standable see ing 
how accom modating Bhante Ñāṇananda is when it comes to 
teachings traditionally considered Mahāyāna, hence taboo for any 
self-respecting Ther avādin. How ever, if one delves deeper, one 
would see that he is only trying to stay as close as pos sible to 
early Buddhist teachings. 
 “I didn’t quote from the Mahāyāna texts in the Nib bāna 
sermons,” he says, “because there was no need. All that was 
needed was already found in the Sut tas. Teachers like Nāgār juna 
brought to light what was already there but was hid den from 
view. Unfortunately his later followers turned it in to a vāda.” 
 He goes on to quote two of his favourite verses from Ven. 
Nāgārjuna’s Mūlamādhyamakakārikā (as usual, from memory):

Part 2 

Śūnyatā sarva-dṛṣtīnaṃ proktā niḥsaranaṃ jinaiḥ, 
yeṣāṃ śūnyatā-dṛṣtis tān asādhyān babhāṣire [MK 13.8] 
The Victorious Ones have declared that empti ness is the 
relinquishing of all views. Those who are possessed of the 
view of emptiness are said to be incorrigible. 
Sarva-dṛṣti-prahāṇāya yaḥ saddharmam adeśayat, 
anukampam upādāya taṃ namasyāmi gautamaṃ  
– [MK 26.30] 
I reverently bow to Gautama who, out of com passion, has 
taught the doctrine in order to relinquish all views. 
 Bhante doesn’t bother trans lating the verses; the ones 
provided above are by David Kalupahana. 
 “When I fi rst read the Kārikā I too was doubt ing Ven. 
Nāgārjuna’s san ity” he laughs. “But the work needs to be 
understood in the con text. He was tak ing a jab at the 
Sarvāstivādins. To be hon est, even the oth ers deserve the rebuke, 
although they now try to get away by using Sarvās tivāda as an 
excuse. How skilled Ven. Nāgārjuna must have been, to com pose 
those verses so elegantly and filling them with so much mean ing, 
like the Dhamma pada verses. It’s quite amaz ing. This has been 
rightly understood by Prof. Kalupahana.” 
 Prof. David J. Kalupahana is an emi nent Sri Lankan 
scholar who stirred up another  controversy when he por trayed 
Ven. Nāgārjuna as a reformist try ing to res urrect early Bud dhist 
teachings. He had been a lec turer dur ing Bhante Ñāṇananda’s 
university days as a layman at Peradeniya. 
 “If there is no sub stance in a nything, w hat is left is 
emptiness. But m any peo ple are afraid of words, l ike śūnyatā. 
They want to pro tect their four.” With that ‘irrev erent’ comment 
about the four  paramattha dhamma–s of the Abhid hamma, 
Bhante Ñāṇananda breaks into amused laughter.

The Heretic Sage 

 “If one does not approach the commentarial literature with 
a critical eye, one would be trapped. Unfor tunately many are. In 
fact, I had to remove a few pages from the man uscript of Concept 
and Reality on Ven. Nyanaponika’s request”. 
 I’m disappointed to hear that, as  Concept and Reality had 
already become my favourite com mentary on the Bud dhist 
teachings. There are some delight fully under stated crit icisms of 
the traditional views in the book, and I won der what we have lost 
in the ed itorial process at the hands of  Ven. Nyanaponika Thera, 
an undoubt edly very learned yet quite con servative scholar. 
When I express my dis may, Bhante Ñāṇananda adds that now he 
tends to agree with Ven. Nyanaponika. 
 “I did it unwill ingly, but later on I also thought it may 
have been too much as it was  my first book. Per haps what is left 
is quite enough. The mes sage still gets through. Some of that I 
could restate in the Nib bāna sermons as I had the back ing of my 
teacher.” 
 This teacher is Ven. Matara Sri Ñāṇārāma Mahathera, 
then abbot of the Nissarana Vanaya and an illustrious elder of the 
Sri Lankan forest tradition. I ask Bhante what the response of the 
Sangha was when those controversial sermons were delivered. 
 “Apart from a very few, the oth ers didn ’t really 
understand. Some went ar ound crit icising, call ing me a heretic. 
Fortunately it didn’t get out of hand thanks to the teacher. But 
then some others like Ven. Khemānanda were very appreciative.” 
 Our dis cussion moves on to  Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera. I 
wonder what influ ence this rad ical monk had on Bhante 
Ñāṇananda, but I can’t muster enough courage to ask directly. So 
I just let him speak on his views.

Part 2 

 “It is true, Ven. Ñāṇavīra made a start. But I think he went 
to an extreme in his criticisms, until his followers were drop ping 
even the use ful things. And he fai led to make the necessary 
distinctions between saupādisesa and anupādisesa Nibbāna 
elements. That led to an idealized view of the noble disci ple. And 
now there is a lin eage of ‘Ñāṇavīrists’ who fail to see any thing 
beyond Ven. Ñāṇavīra’s views. They are simply idolizing him.” 
 I was one of them until I started a cor respondence with 
Bhante Ñāṇananda, so I know the way of thinking. 
 To end the dis cussion I pick up the thorni est of issues. I 
ask: “What is a ‘thing’? Is it com pletely imag inary, or is it 
something made by the mind using the ingre dients ‘out there’?” 
A straightforward answer to that rather extrem ist question would 
make Bhante Ñāṇananda’s position clear on the gamut of views. 
 “I’m sure you have read Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation 
of the Saṃyutta Nikāya. You must have come across 
the Pheṇapindūpama Sutta. In the notes you’ll see Ven. Bodhi 
explaining that although the lump is  illusory, the ingre dients 
aren’t. It is worse when it comes to the magic show. He says that 
only the magic is not real; the magician’s appur tenances are. This 
is a dis tortion of the sim ile given by the Bud dha. We must 
appreciate the great work d one by  Ven. Bodhi, but it is 
unfortunate that he is bound by the commentarial tradition. 
 “What is con sidered the ‘truth’  is rel ative to each 
individual. Each per son gives evi dence in the court of real ity 
based on his own level of expe rience. For example, parents often 
give false explanations to their little children. But these are true to 
the kids. When asked, the kid will tell what his par ents told him. 
It’s true for the child, but not for us. In the famous com mentarial 
story about Ven. Tissa Thera we find him see ing a woman as a 
skeleton, and say ing so when aske d by her hus band. The 
venerable was closer to the truth.

The Heretic Sage 

 “When we tran scend one level of truth, the new level 
becomes what is true for us. The pre vious one is now fal se. What 
one experiences may not be what is expe rienced by the world in 
general, but that may well be true r. But how do we reach the 
ultimate truth? This is beautifully explained in the Dhātuvibhaṇga 
Sutta: Taṃ saccaṃ, yaṃ amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ. And from 
the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta: amosadhammaṃ nibbānaṃ tad 
ariyā saccato vidū. It is Nib bāna that is of non -falsifying nature, 
where there is no ‘thing’. Nib bāna is the high est truth because 
there is no other truth to transcend it. 
 “The Bud dha called him self the first chick in this era to 
break out of the egg of igno rance. All these won derful things we 
do such a s space travel all hap pen inside this  saḷāyatana shell. 
If paṭiccasamuppāda were presented prop erly, per haps a few 
more chicks would be able to break through today. 
 “Ven. Nāgār juna was right: at the end, all is empty. We 
are not will ing to accept th at existence is a per version. Existence 
is suffering precisely because it is a perversion.” 
 It may not be a cat egorical answer, and it prob ably isn’t 
possible to give one. But I will bring this issue up again later. 
 We have been talking for more than an hour, and it is time 
for Bhante’s meal. I end the dis cussion, look ing for ward to 
another one in the evening. 
 
NOTES 
1. Ṛgveda: sūkta 10.129 (English translation)

Part 3
In the tra ditional exe gesis, pancupādānakkhandhā (five 
aggregates of clinging) and nāma-rūpa (name-and-form) are used 
interchangeably, imply ing that these two are the same. As Ven. 
Ñāṇavīra Thera also pointed out in his  Notes on Dhamma, this is 
a dubious interpretation that does not find explicit sup port in the 
Suttas. I ask Bhante Ñāṇananda how we should under stand the 
connection between pancupādānakkhandha and nāma-rūpa. 
 “It is quite com mon to hear that these two are the same: 
that rūpa-upādānakkhandha is the same as the  rūpa in namarūpa, and the other four aggre gates are nāma. That is like try ing 
to measure distance in kilograms – a confusion. 
 “In that beau tiful seminar in a moon lit night recorded in 
the Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta, it is made quite clear that  viññāna cannot be a part of  nāma. One venerable asks “Ko hetu ko paccayo 
rūpakkhandhassa paññāpanāya?” and so on — what is the cause 
for the des ignation of each aggre gate? And the Bud dha answers 
that it is the four great ele ments that give rise to the des ignation 
of an aggre gate of form. For  vedanā, saññā and saṅkhāra, it 
is phassa – contact. But for viññāna, the cause is nāma-rūpa. 
 “We are used to explaining paṭiccasamuppāda in the form 
of the stan dard 12 links start ing from avijjā. How ever, always 
trying to put  avijjā in the lead in exe gesis led to mis -
interpretations of cer tain Sut tas. For exam ple, com menting on 
the Mahānidāna Sutta, Ven. Buddhaghosa Thera brings in the so -
called three -life inter pretation whereas there is noth ing miss ing 
from the Sutta itself. As I tried to explain in  The Magic of the 
Mind, it is from the p reparations that are done in the dark ness of 
ignorance that the duality of viññāna and nāma-rūpa arise.

The Heretic Sage 

 “And what is that dual ity? The same dual ity seen by the 
dog on a plank over water.” Bhante Ñāṇananda is refer ring to a 
simile he has often used in Dhamma discussions: 
“A dog is cross ing a plank over a stream. Half way 
through it looks into the water and sees another dog there. 
It wags its tail and the other responds. It snarls and the 
other reacts. It looks away to ignore, but when it looks 
again the water dog is still there looking on. 
The view of an exist ing self is also due to such an unwise 
attention. “I think there fore I am” is the result ing wrong 
conclusion. Neither narcissistic love nor masochis tic hate 
can solve the prob lem. Ignoring with a cyn ical sneer is to 
evade the problem. Therefore one has to thras h-down this 
problem of the elu sive sel f image to the basic 
confrontation between conscious ness and name 
and form.” 
– “Reflect Rightly on the Reflection”  
From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom 
 “Nāma-rūpa is a deception. It is unreal. But in the illu sion 
of viññāna, wherever you look, it is there. What ever it may be, 
whether it’s a sight or a sound or a thought, it is just  vedanā, 
saññā, cetanā, phassa, manasikāra. But here again there is a 
common mis interpretation: when list ing the  nāma-dhamma–s, 
some start from  phassa, vedanā,… They put  phassa to the front. 
But phassa has to be at the back.” 
 He says the above in Sinhala, where the word for ‘back’ is 
‘passa’. The pun is lost in trans lation. As for putting phassa first, 
it is often  seen in the Abhidhamma literature when list ing 
the cetasika–s.

Part 3 

 “They say so because in paṭiccasamuppāda, phassa 
comes before vedanā. That doesn’t apply here. In the Suttas, such 
as the Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, the ordering is never in that form. The 
Buddha and the  Arahants were not mis taken; logically one can 
have phassa first, but  psychologically it is vedanā that is primary. 
It is through  vedanā that one rec ognizes the four great ele ments, 
not through  phassa. The self notion hinges on  vedanā. That is 
why it deserves to be the first. 
 “So one devel ops a  saññā according to  vedanā, based on 
which one has cetanā, at which point the ‘personality’ is taken for 
granted. This cre ates the dual ity nec essary for  phassa. Manasikāra is at the end, some what like  ekaggatā, uni fying them 
all: manasikāra sambhavā sabbe dhammā – all things arise from 
attention. 
 “With vedanā, the self notion ‘awak ens’, although here it 
is more like dream ing. Or like a blind man grop ing in the dark. 
The blind man reacts  only to the feel ing of bumping on to some -
thing. That is why Ven. Ananda Thera replied to the Bud dha that 
it is not pos sible to have any self notion when there is no  
vedanā. Taṇhā arises from vedanā. 
 “So where does pañcupādānakkhandha come in? 
Pañcupādānakkhandhā is the final result of the constant tussle 
between viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa. This is made clear in the 
Mahāsaḷāyatanika Sutta. What is gath ered from the six  viññāṇa–
s, at the end, are fil tered down to things grasped as “these are my 
forms, these are my feelings, these are my perceptions, …” 
 “You might remember how the Buddha explained the designation of a  khandha, in the Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta:  atītānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ 
vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā (past, future, 
present, internal or ex ternal, gross or sub tle, inferior or supe rior, 
far or near). That’s the demarcation of the heap.”

The Heretic Sage 

 One of the main th emes of Bhante Ñāṇananda’s 
classic The Magic of the Mind is the illu sory nature 
of viññāṇa. Earlier we discussed some of the nuances involved in 
differentiating between  viññāṇa and paññā, and now the di scussion moves on to the rela tionship between  viññāṇa and nāmarūpa. 
 “It’s a pity that many Buddhists still cannot accept that the 
goal of this prac tice is the ces sation of viññāṇa. It is a suf fering; 
the simile for viññāṇâhāra is being beaten by a spear 300 times a 
day. The dark ness of  avijjā creates the back ground for it. As I 
pointed out with the sim iles of the cin ema and the magic show, 
these things can only happen as long as there is dark ness. All this 
is just an illu sion, a dram a. In fact, the old est mean ing 
of saṅkhāra is found in that context of a stage show. 
 “The con nection between  viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa can be 
illustrated with a child ish simile: it is like a dog chas ing its own 
tail. The modern Rohitassas who try to over come a world as seen 
through viññāna are no dif ferent. They chase after what the 
Buddha dismissed as an illu sion. There is noth ing to go chas ing 
after here; all that needs to be done is to stay where one is, and to 
realize that it is merely a shadow. When the dark ness of avijjā is 
dispelled, saṅkhāra–s are stilled. The game is over. 
 “Viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa revolve around each other at an 
indescribable speed. That’s why it was told to Ven. Sāti that it is 
wrong to say  “viññāṇaṃ sandhāvati saṃsarati anaññaṃ” (it is 
this same viññāṇa that runs and wanders, not another). If only the 
Ābhidhammikas real ized that  parivatta in lahuparivattaṃ 
cittaṃ means ‘revolv ing’: viññāṇa paccayā nāmarūpaṃ, 
nāmarūpa paccayā viññāṇaṃ. 
 “The Gāthās in the Sagāthaka Vagga, although often not 
given enough atten tion, are very deep. I stopped the Nib bāna

Part 3 

series at ser mon num ber 33, but what I had planned for 34, 
although never deliv ered, was based on that beau tiful verse from 
the Nimokkha Sutta:  
 
Nandībhavaparikkhayā saññāviññāṇasaṅkhayā, 
Vedanānaṃ nirodhā upasamā evaṃ khvāhaṃ āvuso 
jānāmi 
Sattānaṃ nimokkhaṃ pamokkhaṃ vivekan’ti. [SN. 1.2] 
 
When delight and existence are exhausted 
When perception and consciousness are both destroyed 
When feelings cease and are appeased – thus, O friend, 
Do I know, for them that live 
Deliverance, freedom, detachment. 
– Translation by Bhante Ñāṇananda:  
Saṃyutta Nikāya – An Anthology 
 “In all other reli gions, viññāṇa was taken as a unit, and 
worse, as the soul. It is taught that even if every thing else is 
impermanent, this isn’t. And it is taught as that which 
reaches Brahmā. But the Bu ddha poi nted out that it is a mere 
illusion. It can’t exist on its own. 
 “That brings us to a nice point. What is the sim ile used by 
Ven. Sariputta Thera to illustrate the aññamaññapaccayatā (interdependence) of viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa?” 
 “The simile of the two bundles of bamboo reeds” I reply. 
 “Why is that? Couldn’t he have cho sen something better, 
some wood with pith – say, two bundles of Sāla wood? See how 
penetrative they are even in their use of sim iles. The Pāḷi for 
bamboo reed i s tacasāra. Taca means skin or peel, so tacasāra 
means that which has just the skin for its pith. The thing taken by

The Heretic Sage 

the world as being full of pith is sum marily dis missed by Ven. 
Sariputta Thera. It’s not a unit either, but a bundle. 
 “I’m reminded of something Ven. Ñāṇavīra said: ‘all 
consciousness is self con sciousness.’ That is quite right. 
Occasionally he came up with bril liant insights like that which 
shook the estab lishment. He was one who wasn’t afraid to point 
out these mis interpretations. It is unfor tunate that he was rather 
extremist in other areas. 
 “The whole notion of the so -called antarābhava depends 
on the belief that  viññāṇa ‘goes’ on its own. The Buddha’s 
explanation of the wan dering of viññāṇa is not like that of the 
Upanishads where the sim ile of the leech is used. [1] According to 
the Dhamma viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa are in a state of whirling or 
turning around. 
 “The wan dering of the mind is not like that of phys ical 
things. It’s a circuitous journey of a mind and its object. With the 
taking up of one object by a mind, a sort of whirling begins; when 
one end is lost from gr asp, the other end is taken up: itthabāvaññathābhāvaṃ saṃsāraṃ n’ātivattati – this-ness and 
otherwise-ness, that’s all there is in saṃsāra. Our minds keep 
wandering awa y but keep com ing back to this upādinna. Who 
likes to let go of it, to die? It alwa ys comes back to that which is 
held dearly. At the last moment, when Māra comes to snatch it 
away, one does not want to give it up, so there is a con test: the 
struggle for life. The Buddha asked us to just give it up. 
 “Think of any kind of exis tence, and you will see that it 
depends on grasp ing. There is no ‘thing’ that exists on its own. 
Here again, I’m reminded of some thing Dr. W.S. Karunaratne 
said: ‘Exis tence has got to be rel ative; there is no absolute 
existence.’ But the world thinks of unitary things existing on their 
own. They ask, ‘why, even when I don’t look at this thing, 
doesn’t it con tinue existing’? But really there is only a  diṭṭha, a

Part 3 

seen. There is only a suta, a heard. But the moment we think of a 
seen ‘thing’, a heard ‘thing’,  we are trapped. We cre ate things 
with maññanā, ideation.” 
 “The problem with ‘things’ is solved in the Bāhiya Sutta: 
there are only diṭṭha, suta, muta, viññāta, nothing else. That is the 
theme in the Kālakārāma Sutta too. As long as one 
does maññanā about these, one would be deluded.” 
 Here we seem to have encoun tered a more thor ough 
answer to my ear lier question about the ‘real ity of things’, and it 
is quite clear that Bhante Ñāṇananda has quite a dif ferent view 
from the stan dard Ther avadin interpretation which is closer to 
naïve real ism. It is also opposed  to Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera’s 
explanations, and readers who are familiar with Clearing the Path 
would notice that Bhante Ñāṇananda’s inter pretation is close 
to Sister Vajira’s ear lier views. It is easy to see why Bhante is 
sometimes accused of being a viññāṇavādin by those who are less 
willing to consider the subtleties involved. 
 “But how is  viññāṇa made to cease?” Bhante adds, 
discussing the final goal of Bud dhist prac tice. “ Viññāṇa has the 
nature to reflect, and what it reflects is nāma-rūpa. One is 
attached to the reflec tion because one doesn’t know that it is a 
reflection. But when the knowl edge arises, attach ment drops. In 
many instances where  paññā is dis cussed, we find the 
words paṭivedha and ativijjha, meaning ‘penetration’. The view is 
replaced by a vision.” 
 Bhante then quotes from his own Concept and Reality: 
“For the Ara hant … all con cepts have become 
transparent to such a degree in that all -encompassing 
vision, that their boundaries together with their umbra and 
penumbra have yielded to the radi ance of wis dom. This, 
then, is the sig nificance of the word  anantaṃ (endless,

The Heretic Sage 

infinite). Thus the para doxically detached gaze of the 
contemplative sage as he looks through the con cepts is 
one which has no object (ārammaṇa) as the point of focus 
for the worldling to iden tify it with. It i s a gaze that is 
neither conscious nor non-conscious (na saññī assa, saññī 
ca pana assa), nei ther atten tive nor non -attentive ( na 
manasikareyya, manasi ca pana kareyya), nei ther fixed 
nor not fixed ( na jhāyati, jhāyati ca pana) – a gaze that 
knows no horizon.” 
 
 
NOTES 
1. E.g.: “And just as a leech mov ing on a blade of grass 
reaches its end, takes hold of another and draws itself 
together towards it, so does the self, after throwing off this 
body, that is to say, after making it unconscious, take hold 
of another sup port and draw itself together towards it.” 
[Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.3] – From The Upanishads 
– A New Translation by Swami Nikhilananda

Part 4
 The following is a min imally edited tran script of Bhante 
Ñāṇananda’s com ments on the  Neyyattha Sutta, which seems to 
have been the seed out of which th e Two Truths doctrine has 
been developed. 
 
 “We come across this in the An guttara Nikāya:  nītattha 
sutta and neyyattha sutta. Nīta, taken as it is, means you are led to 
it. Neyya means you have to be led. So  nīta means you are 
already at the meaning; you don’t have to reinterpret it. Whatever 
is supposed to be the nīta in the Buddha word, you have to take it 
‘as such’. Now, it is dif ferent when it comes to  neyyattha: in that 
case you have to understand it in the context of the Dhamma; you 
can’t take it as it appears. 
 “It is from this dis tinction that  sammuti/paramattha and 
samvṛti/paramārtha (in Buddhist Sanskrit) have been devel oped. 
And also this is the rea son I think the Nettippakaraṇa and 
Petakopadesa were com posed, as guides to the com mentator. 
Because it is the job of the com mentator to explain a sutta, 
and how it should be explained is a prob lem. There are occa sions 
when the Bud dha used  loka samaññā loka nirutti (worldly 
conventions, worldly par lance) as they are, accord ing to the 
context. And on some occa sions, especially to monks, he would 
say something very deep, which you have to take as it is. 
 “The tra ditional inter pretation, as you get in the 
commentaries, is very sim ple: it says  neyyattha would be such 
suttas where the ordi nary con cepts of beings etc. come in, 
but nītattha is where you get  anicca, dukkha, anattā. That’s a 
very simple definition of it. 
 “Among the dis courses, there are some, like the  Bāhiya 
Sutta, where you don’t hav e to rein troduce anything into it. But

The Heretic Sage 

the people will have to introduce something to understand them – 
that’s the whole trou ble. A case which came to my atten tion was 
that sutta in the Saṃyutta Nikāya, the case of Moliyaphag guna, 
where, step by step, the Bud dha had to cor rect even the ques tion 
of Moliyaphagguna.[1] Ko nu kho bhante phusati? — it goes like 
that: ‘who, lord, does touch?’ [The Bud dha replies:] ‘I don’t say 
like that. If I did, then you can ask me like that. The cor rect 
question should be: Kim paccayā?’ 
 “So the  paccaya terminology is actu ally the  nītattha, if I 
may say so. But you can’t talk with  paccaya always. In fact, I 
remember some peo ple who tried  to avoid the ‘I’ con cept 
altogether in con versations, using such phrases as ‘t his 
pañcakkhandha’. But that’s only artificial. 
 “This I may say is a ch allenge to under stand the 
discourses. Because you always have to ask your self: what are 
the nītattha suttas and what are the  neyyattha suttas? With out a 
criterion to decide, you are in a fix. But if you start on your own, 
I think you could take instances where the Bud dha is talk ing 
about the four noble truths, as well as paticcasamuppāda. 
 “This is an instance where we see the dif ference between 
the grammar of nature and the grammar of language. You have to 
give way to the grammar of language if you’re to talk. Because if 
you are to explain, you have  to make com promises with 
language, as we say ‘it rains’ or  ‘devo vassatu’. Otherwise there 
is some thing lack ing. The sub ject, the object and then the 
adjectives and adverbs and the sen tence struc ture – these are 
deciding our thinking. The logicians are bound by it. That is why 
the Dhamma is  atakkāvacara. That again is a chal lenge: what is 
meant by atakkāvacara? 
 “Logic has to dis tinguish one from the other. It is again a 
logical ques tion when they ask:  saññā and vedanā – are they 
completely different, or are they the same thing? That is the way

Part 4 

logic would put it. There’s no half way between. Even that they 
tried to cover: I’m not very familiar with logic but what is already 
apparent in the canon is the  tetralemma. The ques tion of 
contradiction comes in: either it has to be this or the other. But 
there are these grey areas. 
 “All these prob lems come up because, first of all, we 
break real ity – the flux of life – into pieces. We dif ferentiate 
between a ‘th ing’ and its colour: the colour is an adjec tive; the 
object is some thing else. So we cre ate prob lems for our selves. 
But then the Bud dha had to con vey a mes sage – and in fact I 
make it a point to say, why the Bud dha hesitated to teach was not 
out of jealousy or any other rea son, but the prob lem was how to 
present this doc trine in an intel ligible way to peo ple. I may say 
that only the Bud dha had that abil ity. Though it is again an 
unsolved problem, about the Pacceka Buddha–s, it seems, if ever 
they remain silent, hence called ‘silent’ Bud dhas, it is because 
they could not, unlike the Bud dha, bring th ese two truths in to 
alignment. 
 “Already in the  Kalakārāma Sutta you see how deep the 
problem is. But the Buddha could explain it sufficiently for one to 
start prac ticing. And once you start prac ticing, then, as in 
the Cūlahatthipadopama Sutta, you are walk ing the Dhamma -
way, and you’ll real ize by your self. You go and see. Now, even 
though the Dhamma says  ehipassika, we don’t want to go; we 
want to stay where we are and go through logic to under stand the 
Dhamma. That is the problem with the scholars. 
 “The Buddha’s Dhamma was an invitation. If you start the 
practice, the rest you will know by yourself. The map can’t be the 
same as the jour ney. No map is com plete by itself; it may use 
colours and signs etc. but it is never complete. So is the Dhamma. 
Much of it, the Bud dha left unex plained. That is prob ably why 
the peo ple are now com plaining that there is no method ology

The Heretic Sage 

here and that something is lacking in the Dhamma. But you can’t 
be spoon-fed. 
 “It is because the Bud dha has given suf ficient advice that 
some could real ize even by just lis tening. They didn’t merely 
listen: they lis tened with rapt atten tion. Like in Ven. Bāhiya’s 
case, they were not lead ing idle lives. Their play thing was jhāna. 
So it was easy for the Bud dha to make them under stand, as they 
had a sharp recep tive appa ratus. They only needed  saddhā. 
Without saddhā, with logic if you’re hoping to understand, you’re 
gravely mistaken. 
 “So now, getting down to the type of sut tas we have, at a 
glance, perhaps, Bāhiya sutta is a clear cut case, although those 
who want some thing objective, with a sub stantialist view, would 
find some thing lack ing there. And also, for instance, when the 
Buddha answered the accusations of the Brah mins, and when we 
come to the  ten indeterminate points, that per haps is some thing 
like nītattha. The Bud dha is put to that point where He can’t 
agree any longer to the con vention. Because He used 
conventional words, people made it an excuse to glean advan tage 
from it. That is the case with Nibbāna: the fire going out. 
 “If the fire ‘goes out’ some think you should be able to go 
and locate where it is. Some schol ars in the West also fol low the 
same Hindu way where they think when the fire goes out it stays 
in some ineffable state. When it comes to such points of absurdity 
the Buddha had to correct them. Otherwise the Buddha would, for 
all practical purposes, use the convention. Even to Bāhiya he said 
‘This is our  pinḍapāta time’, as if there’s some strict time 
for pinḍapāta. As if His whole life is for  pinḍapāta. ‘We have to 
go on pinḍapāta, don’t come and question us’! But when it comes 
to the Dhamma: ‘in the seen, just the seen, in the heard, just the 
heard.’ When Bāhiya could master and muster sufficient Samādhi 
he had built up in the past, when he was suf ficiently calmed 
down, then the Buddha gave the real thing.

Part 4 

 “There are also other occa sions, for instance in the 
Saṃyutta Nikāya, where you find the verses: 
‘Ahaṃ vadāmīti pi so vadeyya 
Mamaṃ vadantīti pi so vadeyya, 
Loke samaññaṃ kusalo viditvā 
Vohāramattena so vohareyyā’ti.’ [SN 1.25] 
‘That monk still might use such words as “I,” 
Still perchance might say: “They call this mine.” 
Well aware of common worldly speech, 
He would speak conforming to such use.’ 
 “So every time the Bud dha says ‘I’m going’ and so on, 
you should not think that He’s con tradicted His own  anattā 
doctrine. 
 “Nītattha could also be in such cases like in the  
Alagaddūpama Sutta where t he brah mins are repre manded for 
false accu sations. The B uddha comes out with the 
statement: Pubbe c’āhaṃ bhikkhave etarahi ca dukkhañceva 
paññāpemi dukkhassa ca nirodhaṃ – that is the best cri terion to 
decide on which side you are. ‘All for merly and now, I merely 
say that there is suffering’ – there is no one suffering, whether it’s 
a puggala or person or indi vidual – all this rot comes in because 
of not knowing that the Buddha’s mes sage is also part and par cel 
of language. 
 “For all prac tical pur poses, the Buddha’s words are 
enough. But for those who do not prac tice, but who are arm chair 
critics, there is so much con tradiction in the Buddha’s words. 
Sometimes He says there is  dukkha only, and sometimes He says 
you are suffering. This is also the reason why there is such a mess 
in the interpretations of the kamma doctrine also. In sammādiṭṭhi, 
we may say there’s the ‘lower’  sammādiṭṭhi and the 
‘higher’ sammādiṭṭhi.[2] The dasa-vatthuka sammādiṭṭhi is kam-

The Heretic Sage 

massakatā. When a per son takes kamma as his own, he’s bound 
by it. You are bound by your own grasp ing. Then it’s a fact that 
you’re going to these var ious realms etc.: depen dent 
on avijjā there is saṅkhāra. Such peo ple have to be judged by 
their own standards. 
 “By the way, I may also say, now that we are on the point: 
if you’re trans lating the Dhamma pada, it is wrong accord ing to 
my under standing to trans late the attavagga as the chap ter 
on Self. It should be  oneself. Oth erwise, as  Radhakrishnan finds 
it, you are on the side of attā. But it is ‘one self’: reflexive. If you 
understand that as self there’s a con tradiction between  attāhi 
attano natthi and attāhi attano natho. But th ese are just  loke 
samaññā. 
 “Similarly in the  Poṭṭhapāda Sutta, now and t hen the 
Buddha had to come out, espe cially in the last words of the sutta 
– they are very pow erful: imā kho citta loka samaññā… yāhi 
tathāgato voharati, aparāmasaṃ (“Citta, these are the world’s 
designations, the world’s expres sions, the world’s w ays of 
speaking, the world’s descrip tions, with which the Tatha gata 
expresses him self but with out grasp ing to them.”) I remem ber 
reading The Meaning of Meaning by Ogden and Richards; there 
they quoted from the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta. They under stood that 
there’s something very deep in that simile about milk, curd, butter 
etc. Though they didn’t get every thing, they knew the Bud dha 
was nearer the truth about semantics. 
 “But now we think that where there’s a word there should 
be something. It’s the thing that’s causing all the trou ble. There’s 
just a flux of life, a func tioning, but no agen t in it. But the 
language requires both. That is why we have to say ‘it rains’, 
leaving the room for some one to ask ‘what is this ‘it’?’. The fire 
goes out: where has it ‘gone’? The Bud dha from time to time had 
to show the absur dity of such ques tions. In such con texts you 
come across the nītattha.”

Part 4 

NOTES 
1. SN 12.12 (excerpt below) 
2. “And what is right view? Right view, I tell you, is of two 
sorts: There is right view with effluents, siding with merit, 
resulting in the acquisitions; and there is noble right view, 
without efflu ents, tran scendent, a fac tor of the path.” 
[MN117] 
 
Addendum for NOTE 1 
[…] 
“Who, now, Lord, exercises contact?” 
“Not a fit ques tion”, said the Exalted One. “I am not saying (someone) exercises contact. If I were say ing so, the 
question would be a fit one. But I am not say ing so. And I 
not say ing so, if any one were to ask this: ‘Con ditioned, 
now, by what, Lord, is con tact?’, this were a fit ques tion. 
And the fit answer there, would be: ‘Con ditioned by the 
sixfold sense-sphere, is con tact, conditioned by con tact is 
feeling’.”  
[…] 
 
– Translation by Bhante Ñāṇananda:  
Saṃyutta Nikāya – An Anthology

Part 5
The final part of the  Mahāhatthipadopama Sutta contains 
an interesting analysis by Ven. Sāriputta Thera which sheds light 
on the con nection between  saḷāyatana and pañcupādānakkhandha. I had care lessly com mented on this sec tion by 
reading the Eng lish translation without referring to the Pāḷi, and 
in his reply to my notes Bhante  Ñāṇananda pointed out an 
important distinction I had failed to make. 
 Ven. Ñāṇamoli’s trans lation of the rel evant section reads 
as follows: 
“If, friends, inter nally the eye is intact but no exter nal 
forms come into its range, and th ere is no cor responding 
[conscious] engage ment, then there is no manifestation of the 
corresponding section of consciousness. [MLDB (2009) p. 283]” 
 ‘Corresponding [conscious] engagement’ is Ven. 
Ñāṇamoli’s ren dering of tajjo samannāhāra. I had taken this to 
be iden tical to  manasikāra (attention), influ enced by Ven. 
Ñāṇavīra Thera’s writ ings. In my inter view, I ask Bhante 
Ñāṇananda for an explanation on the difference between the two. 
 “Earlier we p ointed out how, in a dis cussion that may be 
categorized as nītattha, the Bud dha cor rected Ven. 
Moliyaphagguna’s ques tions which implied an agent behind 
action. He rephrased them with the  paccaya terminology. Sim ilarly, when we say  manasikāra, some may tend to think of an 
agent behind the atten tion. But V en. Sāriputta Thera takes a 
different approach here when explaining the arising of viññāṇa. 
 “He discusses three possibilities: 
1. The eye is not ‘bro ken’ – it is func tional. External forms 
don’t come to the vicinity. And Tajjo samannāhāra, what-

Part 5 

ever that may be, is not present. Then, there’s no eye 
consciousness. 
“Here, we have to be spe cific about  viññāṇa. 
Again, I’m reminded of some thing Dr. W.S. Karunaratne 
said: “There is no  ‘the viññāṇa’; it is always  ‘a viññāṇa’. 
Everything has to be con crete – there is no abstract 
consciousness.” But peo ple think that con sciousness 
exists on its own, and this ha s given rise to var ious 
theories. Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera also pointed this out w hen 
he said “paṭiccasamuppāda is viññāṇa”.[1] I may not agree 
with every thing he said, but here he did rev eal an 
important mat ter. The  reciprocal rela tionship between  
viññāṇa and nāma-rūpa is the vor tex of exis tence, and it 
is the heart of paṭiccasamuppāda. 
2. The eye is not bro ken, and external forms do come to the 
vicinity. But  tajjo samannāhāra is absent. Then, there is 
no eye-consciousness. 
3. The eye is not broken, external forms come to the vicinity, 
and there is  tajjo samannāhāra. Then, there is eye -
consciousness. 
 “The word  tajjo comes from  tat + ja. Tat means ‘that 
[itself]’. It is the root of such impor tant words 
as tādī and tammaya. So tatja means ‘arisen out of that itself’. 
What is  samannāhāra? You might remem ber that, in the  Caṅkī 
Sutta, the Bud dha happens to see the Kāpaṭhika Brah min youth. 
There we find the word  upasaṃharati along with  samannāhāra,[2] referring to a sort of focus ing that may have not been 
planned – a chance meet ing of eye to eye.  Samannāhāra (āharati = brings) refers to a certain ‘bringing together’. 
 “So tajjo samannāhāra points to the fact that this 
‘bringing together’ of the nec essary f actors for the aris ing of 
consciousness is inherent to the situation itself. It is unique to the 
situation, and does not come from within a per son or from the

The Heretic Sage 

outside. It is not exerted by one self or an exter nal agent: some 
thought that there is an  ātman inside who is in charge, while 
others said that it is a God that injects con sciousness into the 
man. Let ting go of all these extremes, Ven. Sāriputta Thera 
pointed out the cru cial role of  tajjo samannāhāra with his 
analysis of the three possibilities.” 
 And then Bhante falls silent, and looks on with a smile. 
 After a few moments, he asks: “What do you hear?” 
 There is a bird singing in the distance. 
 “Did it start singing only now?” 
 It probably had started earlier (and now that I am listening 
to the tapes as I tran scribe this, I know that it had started many 
minutes earlier). 
 “It must have been singing all this while, but only now…” 
I say. 
 “Only now…?” 
 “Only now did the attention go there.” 
 “There you have tajjo samannāhāra! So is it only because 
of the sound of the bird that you heard it? Didn’t you hear it only 
after I stopped talk ing? There could be other rea sons too: had 
there been louder noises, you may not have heard it. So we see 
that it is cir cumstantial. That i s why we men tioned in our 
writings: everything is circumstantial; nothing is substantial.” 
 Please allow me to inter ject here and add that the last 
sentence would remain some thing that I’ll always cher ish from 
these interviews. Not only because of the simple profundity of the

Part 5 

statement or the nice lit tle practical experiment that led up to it, 
but also because of the gentle kindness in the way it was uttered. 
 “The atten tion that is present in a sit uation is to  be 
understood as hav ing arisen out of the cir cumstances. If there is 
anything of value in the Paṭṭḥāna, t hat would be here, in its 
analysis of the 24 causes. I can’t say for cer tain, but it may well 
be an attempt at sys tematising the gen eral concept mentioned in 
this sutta: how a thought is con nected to another. Since it is 
impossible to explain this mech anism by break ing it apa rt with 
words, Ven. Sāriputta Thera says it is cir cumstantial – unique to 
the situation itself. 
 “It is because of this nature of the Buddhadhamma that the 
later Indian philoso phers called it a  saṅghātavāda – pluralism, or 
a theory of aggregates, where the causes are not lim ited to one or 
two or none. So my silence paṭicca, the sound of the bird paṭicca, 
absence of other sounds  paṭicca etc. there was the aris ing of a  
different ear-consciousness. 
 “It is alright to refer to  tajjo samannāhāra as manasikāra as long as we make it clear that the process is impersonal. 
We may also bring in the Kiṃ Mūlaka Sutta  [3] here. 
Unfortunately my expla nation of it in  The Magic of the Mind, in 
the chap ter ‘Essence of Con cepts’, was not accepted even by 
Ven. Nyanaponika. In the sutta we find the state ment manasikāra 
sambhavā sabbe dhammā (born of atten tion are all things). The 
commentary limits the discussion just to skillful states, which is a 
very nar row way of look ing at it. Be it  sammā or micchā, there 
the Buddha is pointing out the general principle. 
 “It is prob ably because of the impor tance of the prin ciple 
discussed that the Bud dha brought up the sub ject with out being 
prompted by any one. It is as if He declared it because the world 
would not hear or real ize it oth erwise. The sutta is a won derful

The Heretic Sage 

revelation about what we take as a ‘thing’. It is not some thing 
existing on its own in the world but  a result of many 
psychological causes. But when we say that, we are accused of 
being viññāṇavādins and suññatavādins. 
 “One has to ask: why did the Bud dha say ‘manopubbaṇgamā dhammā, manoseṭṭhā manomayā’ (Mind pre cedes all 
dhammas. Mind is their chi ef; they are all mind -wrought – Dhp 
1)? One has to admit that the Dhamma is mano-mūlika. But 
again, the mind is just one of the senses. What we have here is 
just a self -created prob lem. We dis cussed how exis tence is a 
perversion. The arising of dhammas is also the arising of dukkha. 
Not realizing this, some go looking for the truth among ‘things’. 
 “The search goes on because of delusion, and it is fruitless 
because they are chas ing illu sions. Dham mas, things, are all 
fabricated. They are all rel ative. They are all results of maññanā 
(ideation). Just as those who were entrenched in self -view saw 
the Buddha as a nihilist, those who are entrenched in mate rialism 
cannot grasp the Buddhist philosophy which puts the mind first.” 
 Here I ask a r ecurring ques tion, prob ably because I still 
can’t bring myself to accept the already given answers due to my 
own materialistic tendencies (of those days): what would one see 
if one looks at the world ‘objec tively’ – if such a thing were 
possible? Perhaps this is another way of ask ing what one sees in 
the arahattaphala samādhi. 
 “Suññatā” comes the quick reply. 
 “Whether peo ple accept it or not, the truth is empti ness. 
We need not go far: it is already there in the three words animitta, 
appaṇihita and suññata. One has to go from  nimitta (sign) 
to animitta (signless), with the help of signs. The cul mination 
of paṇidhi (resolve) is appaṇihita (undirected). ‘Thingness’ gives 
way to emptiness.

Part 5 

 “Imagine there were a large box here, with a label say ing 
that the con tents weigh 1000kg. If I were to ask you to move it, 
you’d object say ing that it is too heavy for one per son to handle. 
Let’s say I some how coax you to try. When you try to lift, it 
comes off almost with out effort – there’s no bot tom to the box! 
The 1000kg sign was deceiv ing you. That’s why the real ization 
of the Dhamma is equated to laying down of a burden. 
 “To real ize empti ness, one has to know what one is 
aiming at.  Yad’anuseti, tad’anumīyati, yad’anumīyati, tena 
saṇkhaṃ gacchati (If one has an under lying ten dency towards 
something, then one is mea sured in accor dance with it. If one is 
measured in accor dance with some thing, then one is reck oned in 
terms of it. [ SN 22.36]). As long as there is  anusaya there would 
be measuring, giving rise to the con cept of ‘things’. Elim ination 
of anusaya is like the bot tom of the box giv ing way. After that, 
anyone can lift it.” 
 
 
NOTES 
1. … any exem plification of  paṭiccasamuppāda in the 
sphere of expe rience can be re -stated in the form of the 
fundamental exemplification of paṭiccasamuppāda in the 
sphere of expe rience, which is, as i t must be, that 
beginning with viññāṇa. Thus, viññāṇa and 
paṭiccasamuppāda are one.  
 – Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Notes on Dhamma, “A N ote on 
Paṭiccasamuppāda”, para. 20 
 
2. Atha kho kāpaṭhikassa māṇavassa etadahosi: ‘yadā me 
samaṇo gotamo cakkhunā cakkhuṃ upasaṃharissati, 
athāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ pañhaṃ pucchissāmī’ti. 
Atha kho bhagavā kāpaṭhikassa māṇavassa cetasā 
cetoparivitakkamaññāya yena kāpaṭhiko māṇavo tena

The Heretic Sage 

cakkhūni upasaṃhāsi. Atha kho kāpaṭhikassa māṇavassa 
etadahosi: ‘samannāharati kho maṃ samaṇo gotamo, 
yannūnāhaṃ samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ pañhaṃ puccheyyanti. 
[MII p. 169 (PTS)] 
 
Then the thought occurred to Kāpaṭhika the youth, “When 
Gotama the con templative meets my gaze with his, I will 
ask him a ques tion.” And  so the Blessed One, 
encompassing Kāpaṭhika’s awareness with his aware ness, 
met his gaze. Kāpaṭhika  thought, “Gotama the 
contemplative has turned to me. Sup pose I ask him a 
question.” [MN 95] 
 
3. […] Rooted in desire (or inter est) friends, are all things; 
born of attention are all things; arising from contact are all 
things; con verging on feel ings are all things; headed by 
concentration are all things; dom inated by mind fulness 
are all things; sur mountable by wis dom are all  things; 
yielding deliverance as essence are all things; merg ing in 
the Deathless are all things; terminating in Nibbana are all 
things. [Excerpted from AN 8.83] 
 – Translation by Bhante Ñāṇananda ( The Magic of the 
Mind)

Part 6
This is part 6 of a series on Ven. Katukurunde Ñāṇananda 
Thera. Many months have passed since I met Bhante Ñāṇananda 
for the first time, and had this series of discussions. More 
recordings remain to be published than have already appeared 
here. Unfortunately it seems unlikely that I will manage to 
transcribe them. I would now like to wrap up this series with one 
memorable discussion we had: 
 To end our long discussion, I ask from Bhante: “Does this 
mean that we should not be afraid to call Bud dhism 
a suññatavāda?” 
 “We approach the Buddha’s teach ing with our pre cast 
pigeonholes: either it has to be ide alism, or it must be real ism. If 
one really wants to call  this an ‘ism’, they should be call ing it 
‘let-go-ism’. One picks up only to make use of and let go. 
 “The entire teach ing of the Bud dha could be summed up 
in a single Pāḷi word. What do you think it is?” 
 I wonder if Bhante is referring to Appamāda. 
 “Yāvadeva”, comes the unex pected answer. Bhante adds 
the Sinhala word: “hudek”. In Eng lish, it means ‘merely for the 
sake of’. I am awed by the simple profundity of that statement. 
 “That one word tran scends all those isms. We might as 
well call this teach ing a  yāvadeva-ism. Each step on the way is 
merely for th e sake of tak ing the next, and that too is merely for 
the next. I n other words, one has to rever se paṭiccasamuppāda. 
We encounter the word  āhāra (food, nutri ment), for both good 
and the bad.  Hetu, paccaya, āhāra all indi cate causal ity. Later 
tradition tried to make a distinction between hetu and paccaya but 
we do not see this in early texts. For exam ple, we find phrases

The Heretic Sage 

such as ‘ko hetu, ko paccayo’. The teaching was given to be made 
use of, to go to the other shore, not to get entangled in words.” 
 I ask, almost rhetor ically, i f this mess was cre ated by 
taking the prescriptive teachings of the Buddha as descriptive. 
 “That’s why we said that it is when  pariyatti (scriptural 
study) overtook paṭipatti (practice) that the decline sta rted. How 
can one under stand the texts with out any prac tice? It would be 
just a col lection of words. We need both: sātthaṃ 
sabyañjanaṃ (right meaning and right phras ing). If the mean ing 
is wrong, the phrasing would be wrong, and vice versa. How ever, 
if the meaning is right, even if the phras ing is wrong, there is the 
possibility of mak ing cor rections. Oth erwise we’ll be pass ing 
the piṭaka, the basket, in the dark.” 
 “I’m reminded of one beau tiful line from a story 
mentioned in the c ommentaries, which my teacher ( Ven. 
Ñāṇārāma Mahāthera) used often in his Dhamma talks:  añño esa, 
āvuso, gatakassa maggo nāma [1] — This path is different, 
friend, to one who has travelled by it.” 
 
NOTES 
1. See discussion on Gantho in Visuddhimagga, Chapter 3: 
Kammaṭṭhānaggahaṇaniddeso, Dasapalibodhavaṇṇanā

By The Same Author 
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought   
2. Saṁyutta Nikāya – An Anthology  
3. Ideal Solitude  
4. The Magic of the Mind  
5. Towards Calm and Insight   
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume I  
7. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume II  
8. Seeing Through  
9. Towards A Better World  
10. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume I  
11. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume II  
12. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume III  
13. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume IV  
14. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume V  
15. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VI  
16. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VII 
17. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Library Edition  
18. Nibbāna and The Fire Simile  
19. A Majestic Tree of Merit  
20. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective  
21. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume I  
22. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume II  
23. Walk to Nibbāna   
24. Deliverance of the Heart through Universal Love 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla, Karandana 
Phone: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
සැ.යු.: මෙෙ කෘති මලේඛනය සරලත්‍වයට ෙුලේතැන දුනේ අංක 
අනුපිළිමෙලකේ සහිතෙ සකසේවී ඇති බෙතේ , මලේඛනමයේ 
අගහරිමයේ එන කෘති මබොමහෝ දුරට ගැඹුරැ විය හැකි බෙතේ, 
පොඨකයිනේ දැනුෙතේ කිරීම් ෙශමයනේ සඳහනේ කරනු 
කැෙැතේමතමි. 
- සම්පොදක  
1. තිසරණ ෙහිෙ  
2. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 1 
3. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 2 
4. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 3 
5. දිවි කතමේ සැඳෑ අඳූර 
6. කය අනුෙ ගිය සිහිය 
7. හිත තැනීෙ 
8. පිනේ රැමකක ෙහිෙ 
9. අබිනිකේෙන 
10. පිළිමෙතිනේ පිළිමෙතට 
11. කමයේ කතොෙ 
12. ෙො-පිය උෙැටන 
13. පරතිපතේති පජාොෙ 
14. පැෙැතේෙ හො නැෙැතේෙ 
15. කෙම කකරමයනේ රෙම කකරයට 
16. මෙතේ සිමතේ විෙුකේතිය 
17. ඇති හැටි දැකේෙ 
18. තමපෝ ගුණ ෙහිෙ 
19. සකේෙමනේ නිෙන 
20. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 1 මෙළුෙ 
21. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 2 මෙළුෙ  
22. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 3 මෙළුෙ  
23. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 4 මෙළුෙ  
24. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 5 මෙළුෙ  
25. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 6 මෙළුෙ  
26. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 7 මෙළුෙ  
27. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 8 මෙළුෙ  
28. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 9 මෙළුෙ  
29. විදසුනේ උපමදසේ

30. භොෙනො ෙොගගය 
31. උතේතරීතර හුදකලොෙ 
32. සසුනේ පිළිමෙත 
33. කලන චිතරය 
34. දිය සුළිය 
35. බුදු සෙය පුදේගලයො හො සෙොාය 
36. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  පළෙු මෙළුෙ   
37. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ – මදෙන මෙළුෙ  
38. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  මතෙන මෙළුෙ   
39. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සිෙුෙන මෙළුෙ   
40. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  පසේෙන මෙළුෙ   
41. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සයෙන මෙළුෙ   
42. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සතේෙන මෙළුෙ   
43. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  අටෙන මෙළුෙ   
44. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  නෙෙන මෙළුෙ   
45. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  දසෙන මෙළුෙ   
46. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  එමකොමළොසේෙන මෙළුෙ    
47. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ – පුසේතකොල ෙුද්‍රණය (1-11 මෙළුම්) 
48. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 1 මෙළුෙ  
49. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 2 මෙළුෙ  
50. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 3 මෙළුෙ  
51. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 4 මෙළුෙ 
52. ෙනමසේ ෙොයොෙ 
53. පැරණි මබෞදර චිනේතොමේ සංකලේපය සහ යථොථමය 
 
නැෙත ෙුද්‍රණය කරවීෙ පිළිබඳ විෙසීම් 
කටුකුරැනේමදේ ඤාණනන්‍ද සදහම් මසනසුන  
කිරිලේලෙලෙතේත, දම්ෙුලේල, කරඳන  
 
දුරකථනය

knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net