Title: The Law of Dependent Arising LE Rev 1.0
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/The-Law-of-Dependent-Arising_LE_Rev_1.0.pdf
Word Count: 161464

i 
The Law of Dependent Arising 
(Paṭicca Samuppāda) 
The Secret of Bondage and Release 
Library Edition 
by 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Volume P.S. series No. P.K. Series No. 
I 01 – 05 183 – 187 
II 06 – 10 188 – 192 
III 11 – 15 193 – 197 
IV 16 – 20 198 – 202 
Published by 
Kaṭukurunde Ñānananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2016

ii 
Published strictly for free distribution. 
First Impression –  2016 November 
   
 
 
 
All Rights Reserved 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for sale, 
profit or material gain is prohibited. Permission to reprint could be 
obtained by writing to K.N.S.S.B. Dhamma books & sermons are 
available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
 
ISBN 978-955-3962-70-6 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
K.N.S.S.B,  
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  Karandana, Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Phone: 0114870333

iii 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
Dhamma books may be obtained from: 
1.  Mr. Sunil Wijesinghe – 39/10, St. Rita’s Road, Mt. Lavinia.  
2.  Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
3.  Mr. Chandana Wijeratne 
23/79A, 1st  Lane, Dharmapala Place, Thalawathugoda. 
4.  Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
5.  Mr. S.A. Lionel 
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
6.  Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – 15, Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
7.  Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 ‘Saman’, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
8.  Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
 Jayamanne Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
9.  Prof. K.M. Wijeratne, Faculty of Dental Sciences,  
 University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.  
10.  Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
11.  Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
 Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.  
12.  Mrs. Nera Wijesundara 
 Ilukpitiya Ayurvedic Clinic, Ilukpitiya, Gatahatta. 
13.  Mr. D.C.A. Nissanka de Silva – 91A, Woodward Road, Galle. 
14.  Mr. Piyadasa Samarakone 
 Suduwalipalassa, Kirinda, Tissamaharamaya. 
 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough

iv 
 
‘yo paṭicca samuppādaṁ passati 
 so Dhammaṁ passati 
 yo Dhammaṁ passati 
 so paṭicca samuppādaṁ passati’ 
 
 
 
 
 
‘He who sees Dependent Arising 
sees the Dhamma 
 He who sees the Dhamma 
sees the Dependent Arising’

v 
 
 “What, monks is Dependent Arising? 
Conditioned by birth, monks, is decay-and-death. 
Whether there be an arising of the Tathāgatas 
or whether there be no arising of the Tathāgatas 
that elementary nature 
that orderliness of the Dhamma 
that norm of the Dhamma 
the specific conditionality 
does stand as it is. 
 
THAT – the Tathāgata awakens to 
and intuits into. 
Having awakened to it 
and intuited into it 
he explains it 
preaches it 
proclaims it 
reveals it 
analyzes it 
elucidates it 
and says – 
LOOK!”

vi 
 
Contents 
Introduction viii 
Abbreviations xi 
Sermon 1 1 
Sermon 2 31 
Sermon 3 59 
Sermon 4 85 
Sermon 5 113 
Sermon 6 139 
Sermon 7 167 
Sermon 8 193 
Sermon 9 223 
Sermon 10 247 
Sermon 11 273 
Sermon 12 303 
Sermon 13 325 
Sermon 14 351 
Sermon 15 375 
Sermon 16 401 
Sermon 17 425 
Sermon 18 449 
Sermon 19 473 
Sermon 20 493

vii 
About the K.N.S.S.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be 
offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -
thirsty world.  
 Accordingly, K.N.S.S.B. has taken upon itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net and the social networking site 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough. Those wishing to participate 
in this multifaceted Dhammadāna may note the account number 
of our Trust given below.  
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
(K.N.S.S.B) 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  
Karandana 
Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Acc. No. 007060000241, 
Sampath Bank, SWIFT: BSAMLKLX 
Branch Code: 070 
Branch: R.G. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo – 07,  
Sri Lanka.

viii 
 Introduction 
The Buddha, soon after his enlightenment, reflected on 
the depth of the Dhamma he had real ized. He saw two points in 
this Dhamma that transcends logic ( atakkāvacara), which it is 
difficult for the worldlings immersed in defilements to see. One is 
the Law of Dependent Arising ( Paṭicca Samuppāda ) or 
conditionality ( idappaccayatā). The other is Nibbāna – the 
stilling of all Preparations (sabba-saṅkhāra-samatha).  
 Owing to the very pr ofundity of the Law of Dependent 
Arising, hardly a century after the passing away of the Buddha, a 
number of Buddhist sects that sprang up offered a wide variety of 
interpretations of this central philosophy. Both as a term and as a 
philosophy Paṭicca Samuppāda happened to be a ‘stranger’ to the 
contemporary religious environment. The outcome of 
philosophical attempts to get familiar with this ‘stranger’ was a 
miscellany of treatises offering conflicting views. Each Buddhist 
sect had its own interpretation of Paṭicca Samuppāda . This 
makes it all the more difficult to ascertain the exact significance 
of the term that accords with the Buddha’s teaching.  
 Against this hazy background, the Pahan Kanuwa series 
of Paṭicca Samuppāda sermons came to be inspired by an urge to 
clarify the correct position in the light of the Buddha ’s sermons. 
Some 25 years ago I happened to deliver a series of 33 sermons 
on Nibbāna before the assembly of meditative monks in 
Meetirigala Nissarana Vanaya he rmitage, which came out in 
eleven volumes under the title ‘Nivane Niveema ’. The English 
translation of it titled: ‘Nibbāna The Mind Stilled ’ followed in 
seven volumes. There too, I took the opportunity to discuss the 
Law of Dependent Arising to some extent. However, some of our 
readers invited me to write a separate book on Paṭicca 
Samuppāda. Now that this series of 20 Pahan Kanuwa sermons 
on Paṭicca Samuppāda has come out in four volumes, I suppose 
the above request is fulfilled. The similes I used in the Nibbāna

ix 
sermons to explicate certain aspects of Paṭicca Samuppāda find 
fuller expression in this series addressed to the local audience.  
 I am glad that the translation of this series of sermons 
titled ‘Law of Dependent Arising – The Secret of Bondage and 
Release’ will be published by the K.N.S.S.B. with the 
enthusiastic help of the generous supporters who appreciate the 
deep Dhamma. 
– Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
Sanghopasthāna Suwa Sevana 
Kirillawala Watta 
Dammulla, Karandana 
Sri Lanka 
(B.E. 2559) September 2015 
 
 
 I wish to thank Mrs. Lilian Ratnayake for translating on 
my behalf sermons No. 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18 and 19  in this 
volume. Due to failing health I could translate only sermon s No. 
1 – 11, 15 and 20.   
– Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
  (B.E.2559) April 2016

x 
The Law of Dependent Arising  
The Secret of Bondage and Release 
Volumes i - iv – Library Edition 
(First Impression – November 2016) 
‘The Gift of Dhamma excels all other gifts’ 
 May the merit of this gift of Dhamma offered by the 
generous group of Dhamma -friends, whose names are given 
below, conduce to their attainment of the highest bliss of 
Nibbāna!  
– Patron  
 K.N.S.S.B. 
 
This print has been sponsored by:- 
1. Upali Senaratne 
2. Damitha Senaratne 
3. Dr. Upali Abeysiri  and 
4. Pushpa Abeysiri 
in memory of their departed parents:- 
1. L. C. Senaratne 
2. P. Senaratne 
3. H. L. D. P. Wijeratne 
4. L. Wijeratne 
5. K. Abeysiri 
6. B. Abeysiri 
7. M. A. Munidasa 
8. A. Munidasa

xi 
Abbreviations 
 Pāli Texts: 
 (References are to page numbers in P.T.S. Editions) 
D.  Dīgha Nikāya 
M.  Majjhima Nikāya 
S.  Saṁyutta Nikāya 
A.  Anguttara Nikāya 
Dhp.  Dhammapada 
Ud.  Udāna 
Itv. Itivuttaka  
Sn.  Sutta Nipāta 
J.A. Jātaka Commentary 
Thag. Theragāthā 
M.A.  Majjhima Nikāya Commentary 
S.A.  Saṁyutta Nikāya Commentary 
Vism. Visuddhimagga 
Vin.  Vinaya 
M.M.  The Magic of the Mind 
S.H.B.  Simon Hewavitharana Bequest Series 
B.J.T.S  Buddha Jayanti Tripitaka Series

Sermon 1 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 183)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Yadā have pātubhavanti dhammā 
ātāpino jhāyato brāhmaṇassa 
athassa kaṅkhā vapayanti sabbā 
yato pajānāti sahetudhammaṁ 
Yadā have pātubhavanti dhammā 
ātāpino jhāyato brāhmaṇassa 
athassa kaṅkhā vapayanti sabbā 
yato khayaṁ paccayānaṁ avedi 
Yadā have pātubhavanti dhammā 
ātāpino jhāyato brāhmaṇassa 
vidhūpayaṁ tiṭṭhati mārasenaṁ 
suriyova obhāsayamantalikkhaṁ 1 
– Udāna, Bodhivagga  
 
When phenomena manifest themselves 
To the ardently meditating Brahmin 
Then all his doubts get dispelled 
Since he knows the Causal Law 
When phenomena manifest themselves 
To the ardently meditating Brahmin 
Then all his doubts get dispelled 
Since he knows the extinction of conditions 
When phenomena manifest themselves 
To the ardently meditating Brahmins 
Dispelling hosts of Māra he stands 
Like the sun illumining the firmament

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Dear Listeners, 
The Teacher of the Three Worlds, the Fortunate One, 
Fully Enlightened, after his attainment of Enlightenment in the 
province of Uruvelā on the banks of River Nerañjarā, remained 
seated under the Bodhi tree for seven days experiencing the bliss 
of emancipation. According to the first three discourses of the 
Udāna, the Buddha at the end of the seven days kept attending 
thoroughly to the Law of Dependent Arising during the  three 
watches of the seventh night. The three verses we brought up as 
the topic of our sermon today were uttered by the Buddha as 
paeons of joy (udāna) proclaiming that he attended to the Law of 
Dependent Arising in three ways during the three watches of the 
night.  
 Although on the first hearing one might think that all three 
verses are similar, those who listened carefully would have 
understood that t he second verse differs from the first after three 
lines by substituting a new line as the fourth. Then in the third 
verse after two lines, the third and fourth lines say something 
new. For all the apparent similarity, each verse has a significance 
of its own in that it describes one of the three ways in which the 
Buddha attended to the Law of Dependent Arising. It is perhaps 
due to the specific importance of each of those verses that this 
discourse collection, the Udāna, introduces each of the three 
verses with the same introductory story.  
 First of all, let us try to understand the meaning of the 
verse that comes at the end of the first discourse. Even by getting 
at the meaning of these three verses, we can get some idea of the 
Law of Dependent Arising. T o begin with, let us form a general 
idea of the meaning. 
‘Yadā have pātubhavanti dhammā 
ātāpino jhāyato brāhmaṇassa’

Sermon 1 

‘When phenomena manifest themselves to the ardently 
meditating Brahmin’  – according to the terminology of this 
dispensation, the term Brahm in, on occasion, can refer to the 
arahant or to the Buddha. Here we have to understand it in that 
sense.   
 athassa kaṅkhā vapayanti sabbā 
yato pajānāti sahetudhammaṁ 
When those phenomena become manifest to that Brahmin, 
all his doubts get dispelled because he understands thereby the 
Law of Causality. This then is the meaning of the first verse.  
Now, for the second verse. It begins in the same way. At 
whatever time phe nomena manifest themselves to the ar dently 
meditating Brahmin (i.e.  to the Buddha), all his doubts get 
dispelled  – ‘yato khaya ṁ paccayānaṁ avedi’ – since he now 
knows the cessation of conditions. 
And now for the third verse. ‘ Yadā have pātubhavanti 
dhammā – ātāpino jhāyato brāhma ṇassa’– when phenomena 
manifest themselves to the ardently meditating Brahmin  – then, 
something new comes up ‘ vidhūpayaṁ tiṭṭhati mārasena ṁ – 
suriyova obhāsayamantalikkha ṁ’ – “like the sun illumining the 
sky, he stands dispelling t he hosts of Māra. That is, just as the 
sun dispels the darkness, so he dispels (or exorcises, fumigates) 
the hosts of Māra.”  
So this is the meaning of the three verses. Let us now try 
to understand the Law of Dependent Arising with the help of 
these three verses. The three ways of attention are briefly stated 
in the three discourses as follows. 
During the first watch of the night, the Buddha attended 
on the Law of Dependent Arising in the direct order and during 
the second or the middle watch in reverse or der. During the last 
watch, he combined both ways of attending and attended in both

The Law of Dependent Arising 

direct and reverse order. Now we shall give a clue to the 
understanding of these three ways of attention.  
The first line of the verse says: ‘ Yadā have pātubhavanti 
dhammā’ – when phenomena manifest themselves. What are 
these phenomena? The discourse itself explains what they are. 
Those of you who are acquainted with the Law of Dependent 
Arising know that it consists of twelve factors. Some even recite 
the formula in their meditation.  
 ‘Avijjā paccayā saṅkhārā, sa ṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṁ, 
viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṃ, nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṁ, 
saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā, vedanā -
paccayā taṇhā, ta ṇhāpaccayā upādānaṁ, upādānapaccayā 
bhavo, bhavapaccayā jāti,  jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā sambhavanti. Evametassa 
kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti.’  
‘From ignorance as condition (arise) preparations ; from 
preparations as condition (arises)  consciousness; from 
consciousness ……. name and form; from name and form ……. 
the six sense spheres;  from  the six sense spheres  ……. contact; 
from contact ……. f eeling; from feeling ……. craving; from 
craving ……. grasping; from grasping ……. becoming; from 
becoming ……. birth; from birth as condi tion arise decay and 
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. Such is the 
arising of this entire mass of suffering.  
It is the occurrence of these 12 conditions that is meant by 
the phrase ‘when phenomena manifest themselves’. The 12 
factors ar e called conditions ( paccayā) because none of them 
arises by itself. They arise due to causes and conditions. When 
phenomena manifest themselves to the ardently meditating 
Brahmin, his doubts are dispelled. How? The last line gives the 
answer, ‘yato pajānāti sahetudhammaṁ’ because he understands 
now the Law of Causality. What is called ‘ Paticca samuppāda’ is

Sermon 1 

actually that norm, that Law of nature. That norm is stated as a 
formula in four lines. Only the first two came to light in the first 
sutta.  
 Iti imasmiṁ sati – idaṁ hoti 
 imassa uppādā – idaṁ uppajjati 2 
Thus: This being – this comes to be 
 With the arising of this – this arises. 
Now this is the statement of the Law in its direct order. The first 
sutta deals with the two principles relevant to the direct order. 
One might wonder why the statement has ‘this’ and ‘this’ where 
we expect to have ‘this’ and ‘that’ as ‘ This being that comes to 
be’. There is a subtle point involved in this apparently awkward 
statement. The reason is that if we take up any couple of links in 
the twelve-linked formula of illustration of the Law conjoined by 
‘paccayā’, such as for instance ‘ avijja  paccayā  saṅkhārā’ (with 
ignorance as condition preparations), we have to say this being 
this arises. Only if we are referring to some thing outside the 
context, i.e.  outside the couple of links we have taken up, we 
have to say ‘that’. It is important to remember that the 12 links of 
the formula of Dependent Arising serve to illustrate the first 
principle: 
 This being – this comes to be 
 With the arising of this – this arises 
Let us cite some such illustrations: 
 When there is ignorance – preparations come to be 
 With the arising of ignorance – preparations arise 
 When there are preparations – consciousness comes to be 
 With the arising of preparations – consciousness arises 
 When there is consciousness – name-and-form comes to be

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 With the arising of consciousness – name-and-form arises 
It is this first principle that is called ‘ sahetudhammaṁ’ – 
the causal law. The essential thing is to understand the Law as 
such. But what often happens is to fully ignore it and be satisfied 
with the rattling off of the 12 links. So me are not even aware that 
there is a first principle involved.  
On the other hand, this discourse begins with that first 
principle itself, saying that the Buddha attended thoroughly to the 
Law of Dependent Arising in direct order (anulomaṁ). 
 Iti imasmiṁ sati – idaṁ hoti 
 imassa uppādā – idaṁ uppajjati 2 
Thus: This being – this comes to be 
 With the arising of this – this arises. 
Then the illustrations of that first principle are introduced with 
the conjunctive ‘yadidaṁ’ – ‘namely’.  
“Namely: 
From ignorance as condition (arise) preparations, from 
preparations as condition (arises) consciousness, from 
consciousness … name-and-form, from name-and-form … the six 
sense spheres, from the six sense spheres … contact, from contact 
… feeling, from feel ing … craving, from craving … grasping, 
from grasping … becoming, from becoming… birth, from birth 
as condition arise decay and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, 
grief and despair.”  
Last of all comes the statement which explains what all 
this is about: 
‘Thus comes to be the arising of this entire mass of 
suffering.’

Sermon 1 

So the direct order explains the arising of this mass of 
suffering. 
We said that there are three ways of attending. During the 
first watch of the night, the Buddha attended thoroughly to the 
arising aspect. That is why the first two lines amounted to saying: 
 ‘This being – this comes to be 
 With the arising of this – this arises’ 
It is as an illustration of this fact that the twelve links are 
stated as summed up by the sentence: Thus comes to be the 
arising of this entire mass of suffering. The first verse expresses 
the same idea. 
At the same time, let us try to understand the significance 
of the third line of the verse. 
‘Athassa kaṅkhā vapayanti sabbā’ 
 ‘All his doubts get dispelled.’ 
Now what are these doubts? In order to understand what 
they are, one has to read the Sabbāsava Sutta 3 of the Majjhima 
Nikāya. The ordinary worldling has doubts and waverings in 
regard to the three periods of time, past, future and present. As to 
the past, the ordinary worldling who has not seen this Law of 
Dependent Arising is fully immersed in the personality view 
(sakkāyadiṭṭhi) thinking in terms of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ and atten ds 
unwisely to the past thus: ‘W as I in the past? Was I not in the 
past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past?  Having 
been what, what did I become, in th e past? The ordinary 
worldling sets about, reasoning with the postulate ‘I’. Similarly 
he attends to the future in five ways. This kind of attention is 
called ‘ ayonisomanasikāra’ w rong attention or non -radical 
attention. T his is how he attends to the fu ture: Shall I be in the 
future? Shall I not be in the future? What shall I be in the future?

The Law of Dependent Arising 

How shall I be in the future? Having been what, what shall I 
become in the future?’ This may sound jocular. But all wordlings 
are in this jocular position. Then about the present, he attends in 
six ways which may sound even funnier. ‘Am I? Am I not? What 
am I? How am I? Where has this being come from? Where will it 
go? The ‘Being’ here represen ts the self idea. He is involved in 
the self-view. 
This sixteen-fold doubt gets dispelled by seeing the Norm 
of Conditionality. That is why the noble disciple who has 
understood the Law of Dependent Arising by the Path of Stream -
winning entertains no doubt s of this sort. All those doubts arise 
because of reasoning in terms of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ based on the 
personality view. The Buddha has declared that this way of 
reasoning leads to 62 views. They end up by falling into two 
extremes. Either they take up the vi ew ‘I exist’ or go on asserting 
‘I do not exist’ as regards the future. Thereby, on the one hand 
they uphold the eternalist view by claiming that they have a 
permanent soul or on the other hand they go to the annihilationist 
extreme by asserting that they would be no more after death since 
the body itself is the soul. Brahmajāla Sutta says that in between 
these two extreme views there are as many as 62 views. All those 
views get dispelled even by seeing the arising aspect of the 
conditions. That is the mean ing of the first verse. What we have 
said so far is gleaned from the first verse. Out of the three modes 
of attending to the Law of Dependent Arising, the first is the 
direct mode which is concerned with the arising aspect. 
The second verse refers to the w ay of attending during the 
middle watch of the night. 
‘yato khayaṁ paccayānaṁ avedi’ 
‘Since he knows the extinction of conditions’ 
What the second verse says in particular is that the 
Buddha saw the extinction of conditions. When he attended to the

Sermon 1 

reverse order, he saw that the conditions become extinct, 
precisely because they arise due to conditions. This fact is 
summed up in these two statements. 
Iti – imasmiṁ asati – idaṁ na hoti 
imassa nirodhā – idaṁ nirujjati 4 
Thus: This not being – this does not come to be  
With the cessation of this – this ceases 
The word ‘ nirodha’ (cessation) is introduced with it and 
the illustration follows: 
‘Avijjā nirodhā sa ṅkhāranirodho, sa ṅkhāranirodhā 
viññāṇanirodho, viññā ṇanirodhā nām arūpanirodho, nāmarūpa -
nirodhā sa ḷāyatananirodho, sa ḷāyatananirodhā phassanirodho, 
phassanirodhā vedanānirodho, vedanānirodhā ta ṅhānirodho, 
taṅhānirodhā upādānanirodho, upādānanirodhā bhavanirodho, 
bhavanirodhā jātinirodho, jātinirodhā jarāmara ṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā nirujjhanti. Evametassa keva -
lassa dukkhakkhandhassa nirodho hotī.’ 
‘With the cessation of ignorance, the cessation of 
preparations, with the cessation of preparations, the cessation of 
consciousness, with the cessation of cons ciousness, the cessation 
of name and form, with the cessation of name and form, the 
cessation of six sense spheres, with the cessation of six sense 
spheres cessation of contact, with the cessation of contact, the 
cessation of feeling, with the cessation of  feeling, the cessation of 
craving, with the cessation of craving, the cessation of grasping, 
with the cessation of grasping, the cessation of becoming, with 
the cessation of becoming, the cessation of birth, with the 
cessation of birth, decay and death, sorrow, lamentation pain grief 
and despair cease …..’ 
Then comes the conclusive statement:

The Law of Dependent Arising 

‘Thus there comes to be the cessation of this entire mass 
of suffering.’ So this is the cessation aspect which is called ‘the 
reverse order’ (paṭilomaṁ). In this manner both the direct and the 
reverse order of the Law of Dependent Arising were attended to 
during the first two watches of the night. 
Now for the third watch of the night. Here we have 
something that goes deeper. How did the Buddha spend the third 
watch? He combined both the direct and the reverse order in 
attending to the Law of Dependent Arising. One cannot easily 
understand the depth of this way of combined attention. It is 
presented in the discourse by citing all the four clauses of the 
Law of Dependent Arising together. 
This being – this comes to be 
With the arising of this – this arises 
This not being – this does not come to be 
With the cessation of this – this ceases 
With this citation the norm of Paticca Samuppāda  is 
expressed in full. Then, as the illustration of this norm, both the 
arising and cessation aspects of the 12 links are given. The 
formulation in the direct order begins as usual with the words 
‘Avijja paccayā saṅkhārā, saṅkhārapaccayā viññāṇaṁ’ etc., i.e – 
‘From ignorance as condit ion (arise) preparations, from 
preparations as condition (arise) consciousness’ etc, summed up 
by the statement that this is the arising of this entire mass of 
suffering. But then comes the highly significant statement 
‘avijjāyatveva asesavirāganirodhā saṅkhāranirodho’ 5 – i.e. ‘But 
with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance, 
there comes to be the cessation of preparations’ and so on. 
Though easily overlooked, the ‘BUT’ here (Note: avijjāya-tueva) is of prime importance in assessing the significance of this 
‘combined attention’ as it may be called. The nature of the 
unimaginably long Saṁsāra is such that proverbially we say that 
there is no beginning to ignorance as the cause of it. But this

Sermon 1 

phrase asserts that all the same, with the remainderless fading 
away of ignorance, the other links of the chain, preparations, 
consciousness, name and form etc. cease altogether culminating 
in the cessation of the entire mas s of Saṁsāric suffering. Hence 
the pivotal significance of ignorance in the formula. 
This occurs immediately – not as generally understood in 
the course of three lives. You know how Paṭicca Samuppāda is 
explained nowadays. With the cessation of ignorance, all the 
other links up to decay and death cease. This is an extremely deep 
point that is to say, the combined attention in the ‘direct and 
reverse order’. Even the simile given in this connection has 
deeper implications. 
Vidhūpayaṁ tiṭṭhati mārasenaṁ 
Suriyova obhāsayamantaḷikkhaṁ 
Dispelling hosts of Māra he stands 
Like the sun illumining the firmament 
It would take one hour to give a full commentary to these 
two lines. This simile alludes to the change that the Brahmin 
undergoes as he attends to the direct and reverse order 
simultaneously. At that moment the Brahmin is dispelling the 
forces of Māra. In fact the word ‘vidhūpayaṁ’ rendered literally 
means ‘fumigating’ or ‘smoking out’ as in the case of exorcising 
demoniac forces by caustic incense. So the allusion is to the 
Buddha’s conquest of Māra. The sun illumining the sky is the 
light of wisdom. The army of Māra is the impelling power of 
thought. Those of you who have read the Padhāna Sutta of the 
Sutta Nipāta would know how the Bodhisatta himself has defined 
the ten armies of Māra. 
Kāmā te paṭhamā senā 
dutiyā arati vuccati 
tatiyā khuppipāsā te  
catutthī taṇhā pavuccati 6

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Sense desires is your first battalion 
The second is called dejection 
Hunger and thirst make up the third 
And craving is called the fourth 
According to this definition the ten armies of Māra are the 
thoughts. Sense desires, dejection in regard to the holy life, 
thoughts about hunger and thirst and craving etc. – all these are 
distracting thoughts. Now what does this imply? All these 
thoughts arise due to ignorance. These are the saṅkhāras or 
preparations which make up this world with its pleasures and 
pains. So at whatever moment one attends both in the direct and 
reverse order in an extremely subtle way, thoughts are simply 
displaced. What does this amount to? In ou r sermons we have 
pointed out on many occasions that deliverance is not something 
that comes in the other world but one that is realizable here and 
now in the arahant’s mind by the subsidence of thoughts. You 
may have heard that Nibbāna is called the still ing of all 
preparations and the relinquishment of all assets ( upadhi). This is 
a reference to the arahattaphalasamādhi. ‘ Avitakkasamādhi’ 
(thoughtless concentration) and ‘ avitakkajhāna’7 (thoughtless 
absorption) are also allusions to it. Now the last mentioned simile 
is a description of this arahattaphalasamādhi. The battalion of 
thoughts called the army of Māra is put to flight when the direct 
and reverse order of attending is accelerate d. Sometimes in our 
sermons we gave a simile to illustrate this way of combined 
attention – the simile of sharpening a razor. In sharpening a razor 
on a whetstone or on a leather strap, the razor blade is moved up, 
up, up and down, down, down and at the final stage of sharpening 
the blade  has to be moved rapidly up -and-down, up -and-down, 
up-and-down. Similarly, where both the direct and the reverse 
order unite ‘razor -edge sharp’, ‘thoughts’ can no longer survive. 
At that moment name -and-form is cut off and consciousness 
gains freedom as non -manifestative consciousness. The third 
stage therefore is in effect arahattaphalasamādhi itself.

Sermon 1 

So then we have sufficiently explained the three stages. 
We have here the Law of Dependent Arising as such. We mustn’t 
mix u p things. The basic law we have mentioned already – 
namely what is epitomized in the four lines. That is what is 
essential. Though many go on rattling off the 12 links they do not 
know what it is all about. The twelve links are only illustrations. 
They are called ‘paccayā dhammā’8 (conditioned things). What is 
called ‘sahetudhamma’ is the norm – the basic principle we have 
already mentioned. 
This being – this comes to be 
With the arising of this – this arises 
This not being – this does not come to be  
With the cessation of this – this ceases 
 Only a Buddha can discover this law. It is such a 
wonderful thing. Why? Because what up to then was explained in 
terms of ‘I’ and ‘mine’, the Buddha pointed out as a phenome non 
that occurred due to a collo cation of factors casually conditioned. 
That is to say, the Law of Dependent Arising. 
 Let me add this much by way of clarification. Some of 
you may have heard about the two  chief Disciples of the Buddha 
– Venerable Sāriputta and Moggallāna. As laymen they were 
called Upatissa and Kolita. These two Brahmin youths were 
going in search of Truth. Once they went to see a sort of concert 
called ‘ giragga samajja ’ (hilltop festival). While they were 
watching the dramatic performances both of them got disgusted 
before long probably because of their Samsāric maturity. It might 
have served as a prelude to them for the realization of the vacuity 
of the drama of existence. Shortly afterwards Upatissa happened 
to come across Venerable Assaji, one of the first five disciples of 
the Bu ddha. Venerable Assaji was on his alms -round when 
Upatissa saw him. Impressed by his saintly appearance, Upatissa 
followed him and after he has h ad his meal approached him and

The Law of Dependent Arising 

asked him: “Who is your teacher? What sort of Dhamma does he 
preach?” 
 Venerable Assaji modestly replied: “I have gone forth 
only recently. I do not know much Dhamma.” “I am Upatissa” 
the other said “I can understand in detail what is said in brief.” 
Then Venerable Assaji uttered the following verse. 
 Ye dhammā hetuppabhavā 
tesaṁ hetuṁ tathāgato āha 
tesañca yo nirodho 
evaṁ vādī mahāsamaṇo 9 
 Whatever things that arise from causes 
 Their cause the Tathāgata has told 
 And also their cessation 
 Thus teaches the great recluse 
 Upatissa became a Stream-winner on hearing the first two 
lines of the verse. How did he become a Stream -winner? The 
secret is to be found on the commentary we have given above. 
 Ye dhammā hetuppabhavā 
tesaṁ hetuṁ tathāgato āha 
 Whatever things that arise from causes 
 Their cause the Tathāgata has told  
 With these  two lines only the direct order has been 
explained. But about this many are confused – even the 
commentators. Things that arise from causes are what we called 
‘paccayā dhammā ’. According to the commentators, however, 
the cause of things arising from cause s is ignorance ( avijjā). The 
cause (hetu) is not ignorance but the Law of Conditionality itself 
as we explained above. Upatissa understood that all these are 
conditioned as soon as he heard the first two lines. The norm 
underlying them is what is expressed as ‘This being – this arises’.

Sermon 1 

Since Uptissa was of mature wit, even by the first two lines he 
understood that whatever that arise from cause s and conditions 
has to cease of necessity. Even before a hint to the reverse order 
was given, he inferred the norm in  full. You may have heard that 
even when an ordinary person becomes a Stream -winner, the gist 
of his attainment is given in a short formula  – in fact the shortest 
and purest expression of it – which runs as follows: 
Yaṁ kiñci samudayadhammaṁ 
sabbaṁ taṁ nirodhadhammaṁ 10 
Whatever is of a nature to arise 
All that is of a nature to cease 
Here we have the basic principle in a nutshell. Whatever 
arises due to causes and conditions has to cease of necessity. 
Though Upatissa attained the Fruit of Stream -winning merely by 
hearing the first two lines of Venerable Assaji’s verse, his friend 
Kolitha attained it only when he heard all four lines. The oth er 
two lines are: 
Tesañca yo nirodho 
evaṁ vādī mahāsamaṇo 
And also their cessation  
Thus teaches the great recluse. 
‘Things arisen from causes (‘ hetuppabhavā dhammā ’) 
mentioned in the first line refer to the 12 links of the Law of 
Dependent Arising. All the 12 links are arisen from causes. Their 
cause ( hetu) is the basic principle – the law as such. Even if a 
small child realizes it, he is a Stream-winner. 
So let us proceed from there. By now you might have got 
some idea of it. The 12 links are so man y illu strations. What 
underlies them is the law of conditionality. ‘From ignorance as 
condition, preparations, from preparations as condition,

The Law of Dependent Arising 

consciousness, and so on’. That is how the formula runs. But that 
is not all. It is only the direct order. But then the  Buddha points 
out that if  ignorance can be made to cease at whatever moment, 
that is to say, with the dawn of wisdom, preparations, 
consciousness, name and form, six sense spheres and all the rest 
of the links cease altogether. 
Though we say so, it might  not be easy to understand all 
this. To facilitate understanding deep points, the Buddha has 
allowed the use of similes. So let us now pass on to the world of 
similes. But before that there is something worth mentioning in 
particular. There is a wonderful relationship between 
consciousness and name and form. Even in the past, many of our 
scholars have granted the fact that there is a reciprocal 
relationship between them. This is something the Buddha himself 
has declared. Even the Buddha Vipassi had proclaim ed that there 
is such a relationship between consciousness and name and form. 
That is to say, dependent on consciousness is name and form and 
dependent on name and form is consciousness. This is where 
many scholars get stuck – this inter -dependence. If one  starts 
searching from the other end: ‘What is the cause of decay and 
death? Birth. What is the cause of birth? Existence, or becoming’. 
If one goes on questioning like that and comes up to name and 
form, on searching further for it s cause, one will find 
consciousness. But then search does not go beyond 
consciousness, for the cause of consciousness is name and form. 
Between these two there is an inter -dependence or a reciprocal 
relationship. This is the crux of the whole problem. 
To explain this we have given various similes, such as the 
Vortex Simile. A current of water tries to run away from the main 
stream but when its attempt is foiled, it turns back. But on turning 
back it forgets its relationship with the mainstream. It is like the 
case of two halves. At whatever moment the cyclic process is 
complete, it becomes a ‘Unit’. There is a similar magical illusion 
implicit in consciousness. In fact the Buddha has declared that

Sermon 1 

consciousness is comparable to a magic show. The magical effect 
of this magic show i s such that it reflects something. As we all 
know, a conscious being has the ability to look back – to reflect. 
This is not a property common to inanimate things like trees and 
rocks. All conscious beings possess the ability to reflect or 
retrospect. This reflection can be done rightly or wrongly. To 
illustrate these two ways of reflection, we gave a simile – a 
simple one intelligible to anybody. The simile of a dog on a plank 
crossing a stream. We have mentioned this quite often. While 
crossing the stream on a plank over it, a dog looks down in to the 
water. Seeing a dog there, it either wags its tail in a friendl y way 
or growls angrily. Or else out of curiosity it keeps on looking 
down again and again. Due to wrong attention it doesn’t 
understand what really happens. The dog thinks that it is looking 
because it sees. But the truth  of the matter  is that it sees b ecause 
it looks. Every time it looks it sees a dog. Consciousness has such 
a delusive magical quality about it. This is because consciousness 
has the property of reflecting something. What does it reflect? 
Name and from. Let me first explain what name and form is 
before giving other similes. 
The term ‘ nāmarūpa’ (name and form) is variously 
interpreted by scholars. ‘ Nāma’ has nothing to do with ‘bending’ 
as sometimes explained. The constituents of ‘ nāma’ are feeling 
(vedanā), perception (saññā), intention (cetanā), contact (phasso) 
and attention ( manasikāro).11 You may even count these five on 
your fingers. 
Feeling, perception, intention, contact and attention are 
collectively called ‘Name’ ( nāma). Why are they called ‘name’? 
Generally we recognize something with the help of a 
conventional name given to it. But a child gets to know 
something through feeling. Take for instance the case of a blind 
man. Isn’t it by ‘feeling’ that a blind man gets to know 
something? Feeling gives him a ‘sign’or perception. Percept ion 
gives rise to an intention. Intention directs him to some point of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

contact. Now that is where contact comes in. Last of all comes 
attention. There are many critics who question this counting of 
feeling as the foremost among constituents of name. As we 
sometimes pointed out, those who go by the commentarial 
tradition inadvertently put contact first. Did Ven. Sāriputta make 
a mistake? Did the Buddha himself go wrong? Definitely not. At 
this point we have to say something about consciousness.  
Venerable Sā riputta clarifies it in the Mahā Vedalla 
Sutta.12 It is as if Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita gets it clarified for us.  
“Consciousness, consciousness, they say, friend, in how 
far is it friend called consciousness.”    
(‘Viññāṇaṁ viññāṇanti āvuso vuccati, 
 Kittāvatā nu kho āvuso viññāṇanti vuccati’)  
“Knows discriminatively, knows discriminatively, it is in 
that sense, friend, that consciousness is so called.” 
Then Venerable Sāriputta goes on to explain what sort of 
discrimination consciousness is doing. Now  listen attentively. 
What is this basic discrimination? 
“This is pleasant’ – so one discriminates. ‘This is painful’ 
– so one discriminates. ‘This is neither painful nor pleasant’ – so 
one discriminates.” 
(“Vijānāti vijānātīti kho āvuso, tasmā viññā ṇanti vuccati. 
Kiñca vijānāti; Sukhantipi vijānāti, dukkhantipi vijānāti, 
adukkhamasukhantipi vijānāti …”) 
So then the very first function of consciousness is the 
awareness of feeling. That is where consciousness awakens. It is 
true that even the rubber tree exud es latex when an incision is 
made on it. But surely we don’t say that the tree is weeping. 
Therefore the basic function of consciousness is feeling. It is

Sermon 1 

through feeling that the notion of self awakens. Even that fact is 
clearly pointed out. Once the Buddha asked Ānanda: 
“Therein, Ānanda, whoever says this: “Feeling is not my 
self. My self is not of a nature of experiencing,” he should be 
asked thus: “Friend, where there is nothing felt in whatever way, 
would there be the notion ‘Am’ (or ‘I am’)?”   
“There would not, Lord” 
(“Tatr Ānanda yo so evamāha” na heva kho me vedanā 
attā, appa ṭisaṁvedano me attāti “so evamassa vacanīyo yattha 
panāvuso sabbaso vedayita ṁ natthi api nu kho tattha ‘asmīti’ 
siyāti?” 
“No hetaṁ bhante.”) 13 
Now, that is the reason why feeling is counted first 
instead of contact. The basic function of consciousness is the 
discrimination between the three grades of feeling – the pleasant, 
the painful and the neither painful nor pleasant. As you  are seated  
here , why do you now and then c hange your posture? Isn’t it 
because of feeling? So in other situations too. ‘Feeling’ gives rise 
to ‘perception’. Then comes ‘intention’. “Never mind listening to 
the sermon. Let me turn a little.” That is the intention. Where 
does the next thought go? To  the point of ‘contact’. With that 
‘attention’ gets engaged. 
I hope you all can now gather what the constituents of 
‘name’ ( nāma) are. Then what is called ‘form’ ( rūpa)? There 
again many are confused. Here is the definition of ‘ rūpa’in 
‘nāmarūpa’.   
‘Cattāroca mahābhūtā catuññañca mahābhitāna ṁ 
upādāya rūpaṁ’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

‘The four great primaries and form derived from the four 
great primaries.’ 
The word ‘ upādāya’ in this definition is often 
mistranslated and misinterpreted. The four great primaries are 
like four ‘non-descript ghosts’ (eg. ‘bhūta’– ghostly being). They 
can be recognized only with the help of the factors listed under 
‘nāma’ (name). So ‘rūpa’ is in effect ‘ rūpa saññā’ (perception of 
form) derived from the four great primaries. Take it that way, for 
that is how the ‘non -descripts’ become ‘describable’. What we 
have here is not that ‘matter’ ( rūpa) the scientists have in mind. 
To explain this, we coined various definitions: 
‘Name in ‘name and form’ is formal name, 
Form in ‘name and form’ is nominal form’ 
Now try to get this clear. What is meant by saying ‘Name’ 
in name and form is formal name is that it is not the type of 
conventional name known to the world like ‘clock’ and chair’. It 
is only the most preliminary or incipient stage in naming, as in 
the ca se of a blind man acquainting himself with some object 
through feeling, perception and the rest of the name  group. Then 
about form in name and form , we said, it is nominal form ( or 
form only in name) in the sense that it is not something existing 
by itself as known in the world. It can only be known through the 
constituents of name. As you all know, the earth -element is 
perceived as hard and soft and the fire -element in terms of 
hotness and coolness. The four great primaries are recognized by 
means of the factors on the name side. In fact, it is only a 
perception of form ( rūpasaññā). That is why we called it 
‘nominal form’ or ‘form only in name’. If one correctly 
understands ‘name and form’ he would realize that it is merely a 
reflection on consciousness. T hink for instance, of what comes 
before the eyes – what falls on the retina. Isn’t that the beginning 
of the camera? It is only a refle ction which the brain interprets  as 
beautiful. That is why the Buddha calls perception a mirage.

Sermon 1 

What appears out there a s beautiful is actually not there. That is 
to say, with eye as a condition it appears beautiful. To one who 
wears green spectacles, for instance, it would appear green. 
Consciousness and name and form are inter -related. We use a 
special term in this connec tion – one that is found in the 
discourses, namely ‘ dvayatā’ (duality). Existence involves a 
duality. That is what we call ‘ vaṭṭa’ or vortex. We shall explain it 
in due course. There is a vortex between supply and demand on 
which price depends. The interde pendence between 
consciousness and name and form involves the entire world in a 
vortical interplay.  
Think of the cinema world or any other world we are 
familiar with – the sports world or the cricket world, for instance. 
First of all let us take the crick et world. Now what happens in the 
cricket world? The poor bat and ball become alive only when the 
two teams confront each other.  Isn’t that so? The rules of the 
game, and the prospect of winning represent ‘name’ in this case. 
The cricket world is sustained by the delusion with which the two 
teams take their stand on the two sides. That is the duality 
involved in this case. 
Now think of the cinema world. It exists between the 
scenes on the screen and the audience. The darkness of ignorance 
provides the nece ssary background. In the case of the cricket 
game, the two teams forget their friendship in the heat of 
competition. That is the background of ignorance. Preparations 
arising out of that ignorance sustain the cricket-match, i.e. bodily 
verbal and mental pr eparations. Hopes and disappointments are 
bound by rules and regulations of the game. In the cinema world 
also, the background of darkness ironically highlights the 
delusion created by the make -up of actors and actresses. When 
one is enjoying a film -show, one is unaware of that background 
of darkness. One forgets that the scenes appear beautiful due to 
the darkness around. This gives us a clue to the significance of 
the darkness of ignorance. That is why the simile of the movie is

The Law of Dependent Arising 

helpful in understanding t he Law of Dependent Arising. That is 
not a simile we have introduced. The Buddha himself has given 
the simile of the movie, though of course not in the modern sense. 
In the cinema world within the darkness of ignorance, 
preparations go on in the mind of th e cinema fan with which he 
experiences joys and sorrows. In this way, we can create any 
number of worlds. As you turn the pages of a newspaper, you 
pass through several such worlds. Each world has its own ‘name -
factors’ and ‘form -factors’. The illusion of life goes on within a 
succession of such worlds. 
Let us take another simile to illustrate another aspect of 
this illusion – the simile of the chess game. The basic hint for 
what I am going to tell you, I borrowed from a certain story about 
a Zen master. So me of you may have heard of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism. As it went on spreading, one section became 
apprehensive of the trend towards excessive philosophizing and 
began to lay emphasis on concentration and insight. That section 
came to be known as Zen Buddhists. Ze n masters are a strange 
lot. Sometimes they would train their pupils by giving them 
insoluble riddles called ‘koans’. It is said that while grappling 
with the puzzle they attained enlightenment. This sudden 
enlightenment they called ‘Satori’. So this is th e background. 
Now I shall tell a story – whether it be true or not – is instructive 
all the same. 
There was a Zen master who was very stern. He used to 
train his pupils by extremely stern methods. One day he ordered 
two of his pupils to play a game of ches s without losing. In the 
story I read, no names are given. But I shall give two meaningful 
Sinhala names to the two pupils. One is Ajith (‘invincible’) the 
other is Sumith (‘good friend’). Now the Zen master orders Ajith 
and Sumith to play chess imposing a  strict condition. “You must 
play without losing. Whoever loses I shall behead!” Both knew 
that the teacher meant what he said – as he stood sword in hand. 
So these two obedient pupils took up the challenge in mortal fear

Sermon 1 

and started the game while the tea cher stood nearby with a raised 
sword. 
As the game went on, before long invincible Ajith reached 
a point where it was obvious that with two more draws he would 
be the winner. Sumith – the good friend that he is, though 
terrified resigned himself to his fat e without malice. However, 
Ajith, moved by compassion for his good friend, knowingly made 
a false draw in a spirit of self sacrifice. With the next draw, Ajith, 
who could have been the winner, would lose his head and Sumith 
would win – but lose his friend.  Now what will the Zen master 
do? Will he cut off Ajith’s head and keep his word – honest and 
truthful as he is? 
Well, this is what he did. He bent down and swept the 
chess board clean. That was the end of the game. You might think 
that it was a ‘tame -draw’ with no winner or loser. But it seems 
both Ajith and Sumith emerged winners for the story ends with 
this enigmatic sentence:  
‘Both of them attained Satori!’  
But how? No explanation was given in the book I read. 
Granted that it is a true story, let us t ry to understand how such a 
thing is possible. Invincible Ajith sacrificed his life for his friend. 
Sumith with an air of resignation was ready to accept the 
inevitable so that his friend would survive the fatal game. So they 
both were prepared to ‘ Let-go’. The chess board was their 
WORLD. Their existence ( bhava) in the chess -world was due to 
grasping ( upādāna). The prospect of winning was for them, a 
question of life and death. When they both sacrificed their lives, 
the ‘Let-go’ was complete. But neither o f them had to die. Only 
‘Death’ had to die, as they both gained insight into 
‘Deathlessness’ ( amata). How did it happen? When the Zen 
master swept the chess board declaring the game ‘null and void’ 
both pupils realized the delusion they were in. It was as if they

The Law of Dependent Arising 

woke up from a dream. The dream was the existence in a world 
of chess fully involved with the pieces. So it seems, by means of 
a game of chess in which no one won or lost, this tactful Zen 
master gave his pupils an insight into the Law of Dependent  
Arising – the secret of bondage and release. 
One might think that such wonderful techniques of 
training are found only in Zen Buddhism. But that is not so. I 
shall tell you a similar story in our own tradition which perhaps 
you have already heard but not fully understood. It is about the 
acrobat Uggasena alluded to in the Dhammapada and related in 
detail in its commentary.  14 It seems Uggasena was so skillful as 
an acrobat that he could stand balanced on a sixty – cubit bamboo 
pole. One day when he was performing in the midst of a crowd, 
the Buddha while on his alms -round came to the spot with Ven. 
Mahā Moggallāna. At the Budd ha’s request Venerable 
Moggallāna challenged Uggasena to display his acrobat feats. 
The latter in response made a number of circling leaps into the 
sky and stood up right on the bamboo pole precariously balanced. 
Then the Buddha uttered the following riddl e verse which 
embodied a challenge similar to the one the Zen master had 
made. 
Muñca pure muñca pacchato 
majjhe muñca bhavassa pāragū 
sabbattha vimuttamānaso 
na puna jātijaraṁ upehisi 15 
Let go what has gone before 
Let go that which comes after 
Let go thy hold on the middle as well 
Thus with mind released in every way 
Thou comest never more to birth and decay 
Here the words ‘ pure’ and ‘ pacchato’ stand for the 
temporal past and future. But for the acrobat precariously

Sermon 1 

balanced, they are suggestive of the spatial ‘before’ and ‘behind’. 
Likewise, ‘majjhe’ temporally means ‘ the present ’ but for the 
acrobat it could ironically refer to his risky spatial stance on the 
bamboo pole. So here we have something like a ‘Koan’. However 
Uggasena with his saṁsāric maturity in wisdom, backed by his 
literally ‘one-pointed’ concentration on top of the bamboo pole, 
took it as a challenge for insight. The last two lines gave the 
necessary hint. That was enough. He attained Arahanthood then 
and there, came down from the pole and worshipped the Buddha. 
So there too we have an instance of a subtle topic of 
meditation being presented as an insoluble riddle. Here again the 
question of duality comes up. Past and future is a duality like 
victory and defeat. By the way, regarding that  story about 
winning and losing, there is a beautiful verse in the Sukha Vagga 
(Chapter on Happiness) in the Dhammapada. As we saw, it was 
for winning that Ajith and Sumith played chess. Both of them 
realized the mass of suffering involved. They understood  that 
birth, decay and all the rest of suffering are dependent on 
grasping. The Dhammapada verse is a beautiful summary of this 
idea. 
Jayaṁ veraṁ pasavati  
dukkhaṁ seti parājito 
upasanto sukhaṁ seti  
hitvā jayaparājayaṁ 16 
Victory breeds hatred 
The defeated lies in sorrow 
Happily lies the tranquil one 
Giving up victory and defeat 
 Victory and defeat both have to be given up. That is what 
Ajith and Sumith finally realized. The duality of victory and 
defeat is sustained by ignorance as in the case of a  cricket match. 
How many have gone crazy about it? It is the same in regard to

The Law of Dependent Arising 

films and teledrama. That is why the Buddha declared that all 
worldlings are insane. We don’t like to be called mad. But the 
truth is that ignorance makes one forget, like darkn ess in the case 
of the film show. It is the darkness of ignorance that sustains the 
two teams in the sports world. The two teams with their 
respective well -wishers create their own worlds productive of 
hatred and malice. 
 So you should understand that the formula of Paṭicca 
Samuppāda is not something to be by hearted and rattled off 
meaninglessly. You must try to grasp the deep meaning behind 
the statement of the formula in direct and reverse order. Let us try 
to understand why it is said that ‘ saṅkharā’ or preparations arise 
due to ‘ avijjā’ or ignorance. The term ‘ saṅkhārā’ itself has 
connotations of deception or spuriousness. In the Indian society 
in the past, it was associated with the ‘make -up’ and other 
preparatory activities of a drama. They could be b odily, verbal or 
mental. This applies to the cricket game as well. The magic show 
of consciousness is kept up by those saṅkhāras. Confroning 
consciousness (viññāṇa) in an inter -dependent partnership, there 
is name and form ( nāmarūpa), i.e. feeling, perception, intention, 
contact and attention together with the four great primaries, earth, 
water, fire and air and form derived from them. The deepest point 
in Paṭicca Samuppāda  is traceable to this interplay between 
consciousness and name and form. That is what  we called the 
vortex. If all goes well, you might get the opportunity to hear 
more about the vortex next time. 
 For the present, just understand this much. Paṭicca 
Samuppāda as interpreted by many nowadays is divisible into 
three lives, with ignorance and  preparations as the past, 
becoming, birth and death as the future and the intervening eight 
links as the present. Immediately, with the cessation of ignorance, 
preparations cease and along with it consciousness. The cessation 
of consciousness is something  like a subsidence or appeasement. 
One might mistake cessation of consciousness to be death itself.

Sermon 1 

That is not the case. It is the cessation of that conditioned or 
‘made–up’ (saṅkhata) consciousness. What comes up then is the 
‘non-manifestative consciousn ess’ (anidassana viññāṇa). This is 
an aspect of the Dhamma that had long remained neglected. 
There is a consciousness that is freed from name and form. It is a 
subsidence or appeasement which Arahants experience. It is 
within the conditioned consciousness that the worldlings are 
entrapped and bound. 
 This consciousness is six fold. 17 The visual world, the 
auditory world and so forth. The Buddha has defined the world 
with reference to the six sense -spheres.18 As a matter of fact the 
so called world is the wo rld of the six fold sense -sphere. It is not 
the world that modern scientists frame up. Now even they are 
becoming aware of their shortcomings in understanding. There is 
only a visual world, an auditory world, an olfactory world a 
gustatory world a tactile world and lastly a mental world. Let us 
not forget that the six sense -spheres are dependent on name and 
form. So the division, the bifurcation, the duality is maintained 
down the line as internal and external ( ajjhatta – bahiddhā). Eye 
is the internal sphe re and forms the external sphere. Both are 
made up of the four elements. But greater value is attached to the 
internal – to this conscious body (‘ saviññāṇaka kāya ’). It is the 
perception that this conscious body chases that the Buddha called 
a mirage. One simply goes on watching scenes  on the ‘eye -
screen’ and listening to the ‘ear -drum’. That is the ‘cinema’ and 
the ‘music’ we enjoy. The Buddha pointed out to the world for 
the first time that it is due to the ignorance or ‘not – knowing’ at 
the moment of touch in the case of all sense -spheres, that feeling, 
perception and all the rest of it flow in. As a result of it beings 
keep running round and round in the cycle of existence ( bhava). 
It was probably the difficulty of explaining it to the world that 
made h im ponder over the Law of Dependent Arising in the 
direct order, in the reverse order and in the direct -and-reverse 
order. He must have thought how difficult it is to present it to the 
world through the medium of language. It is so deep as a

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Dhamma. Theref ore you should not take it lightly as a mere 
jumble of words but apply it to your own lives and tread the path 
of Dhamma. The path is morality, concentration and wisdom. 
There is no other path to understand this Dhamma in all its depth. 
Whoever in the past  had understood this Dhamma – be they 
arahants, laymen or laywomen, they all accomplished it through 
morality, concentration and wisdom. It is the same today too. 
Therefore it is not, as some believe, attainable through haphazard 
methods – though we spoke about instantaneous realization. 
 Whatever it may be, the Law of Dependent Arising is one 
thing and its illustration another, as far as the twelve – linked 
formula is concerned. When you get down to the practice of 
Satipaṭṭhāna you will understand how the Buddha has made 
known the distinctions between the internal and the external and 
arising and ceasing. To those who had developed insight in their 
Saṁsāric past like Uggasena, the Buddha could impart instant 
enlightenment. But you must not think that all ar e similarly 
gifted. So you should make a genuine effort with that aim, 
making a start from morality itself. 
 Today you have made a good start. Most of you have 
observed the higher pre cepts. I hope you have spent the  day 
fruitfully in meditation and the like. I do hope and wish that this 
sermon too would be useful to you in your insight meditation and 
help you realize your noble aspirations. Whatever, beings there 
be, from the lowest hell ‘ avīci’ to the highest Brahma  world 
‘Akaniṭṭha’ – may they all rejoice in this insightful sermon! May 
it conduce to their attainment of Nibbāna! May you all realize 
those high attainments in this very life!

Sermon 1 

1. Ud.1-3 Bodhi Sutta 1,2,3 
2. Ud.1 Bodhi Sutta 1 
3. M.1-8 Sabbāsava Sutta 
4. Ud.2  Bodhi Sutta 2 
5. Ud.2 Bodhi Sutta 3-2 
6. Sn. 435 Padhāna Sutta 
7. S.I 124 Dhītaro Sutta 
8. S.II 43 Paccayo Sutta 
9. Vin.I 40 
10. Ud.49 
11. S.I 3,4 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
12. M.I 292 Mahā Vedalla Sutta 
13. D.II 67 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
14. Dhp. A. Uggasena seṭṭhiputtassa vatthu  
15. Dhp. V 348 Taṇhā vagga 
16. Dhp. V 201 Sukha vagga

Sermon 2 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 184)
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Kuto sarā nivattanti 
kattha vaṭṭaṁ na vaṭṭati 
kattha nāmañca rūpañca 
asesaṁ uparujjhati  
Yattha āpo ca paṭhavī 
tejo vāyo na gādhati 
ato sarā nivattanti 
ettha vaṭṭaṁ na vaṭṭati  
ettha nāmañca rūpañca  
asesaṁ uparujjhati 
– Sara Sutta, Devatā Saṁyutta, S.  
Wherefrom do currents turn back 
Where whirls no more the whirlpool 
Wherein does name and form 
Get cut off with no trace left 
Where water, earth, fire and air 
Are unplumbed and find no footing 
Herefrom do currents turn back 
Here whirls no more the whirlpool 
Here it is that name and form 
Get held in check with no trace left

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Dear Listeners,  
The Fully Enlightened Buddha made known to the world 
that Saṁsāric existence is a cyclic process in that it is a going the 
same round again and again. That indeed is the true meaning of 
the term ‘saṁsāra vaṭṭa’. The two significant words ‘ saṁsarana’ 
and ‘nissaraṇa’ are also suggestive of a going round and an exit 
from th e vicious circle – the release. When one keeps going 
round and round for an inconceivably long period of time, one 
tends to build up a tension or an impulse to continue the process. 
That is what makes it extremely difficult to get out of the cyclic 
process. What the Fully Enlightened One proclaimed to the world 
through the Law of Dependent Arising is the cause of this cyclic 
process and the way of getting out of it.  
The two verses we have taken up as the topic of our 
sermon today, also deals with these two  aspects of running round 
(saṁsarana) and exit from the round – the centripetal and the 
centrifugal aspects. These two verses are found in the Devatā 
Saṁyutta of the Saṁyutta Nikāya. 1 The first verse embodies a 
deep Dhamma question raised by a deity in the  Buddha’s 
presence. The second verse has the Buddha’s answer to it.  
Let us try to get a general idea of the meaning of the two verses. 
 Kuto sarā nivattanti 
kattha vaṭṭaṁ na vaṭṭati 
From where do currents turn back? Where does the whirlpool not 
whirl? 
 kattha nāmañca rūpañca 
asesaṁ uparujjhati 
Where does name-and-form get cut off without residue?

Sermon 2 

This is the question posed by the deity, and here is the Buddha’s 
reply: 
 Yattha āpo ca paṭhavī 
 tejo vāyo na gādhati 
Where water and earth, fire and air find no footing. 
ato sarā nivattanti 
It is from there that currents turn back. 
ettha vaṭṭaṁ na vaṭṭati  
It is here that the whirlpool does not whirl. 
ettha nāmañca rūpañca  
asesaṁ uparujjhati 
It is here that name and form get cut off without residue.  
You all mi ght have understood that these are two riddle 
verses. It seems the most important word in the two verses is 
‘vaṭṭa’ – ‘round’. The word ‘vaṭṭa’ also has the sense of turning 
round or going round. Here the turning round is that of water 
currents. That is why we brought up a simile of a vortex in our 
explanation of the Law of Dependent Arising. It is not something 
contrary to the Buddha’s teaching.  But unfortunately, if you look 
up the standard Canonical translations in Sinhala for the meaning 
of this riddle verse, you will find something like this: 
‘Kattha va ṭṭaṁ na va ṭṭati’ – ‘Where does Sa ṁsāric rain 
not rain?’ This talk about rain obfuscates a deep aspect of the 
Law of Dependent Arising. On this subject, we have spoken a lot 
in our sermons. In our last sermon too, we referred to the simile 
of the vortex. Today, I shall explain it in detail.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Let us try to understand how a whirlpool or a vortex 
comes to be formed. The mainstream of water in a river usually 
flows downwards. But some runaway current of water, rather 
pervertly or arbitrarily tries to run against the mainstream. It  is 
trying to do something impossible. So after going a little way, it 
clashes with the mainstream, gets thrown off, turns round and 
pushed on by the mainstream, makes a vain attempt to go 
forward. Due to this vain attempt, which every time gets foiled, a 
whirlpool or a vortex is formed with the passage of time. As if 
because it fails to go forward, it starts moving downward in a 
revolving fashion due to the resulting tension. It goes on digging 
towards the bottom deeper and deeper until an abyss is formed.  
As you know, where there is a whirlpool, there is an abyss. Along 
with the formation of an abyss, something else happens. A 
vacuum is created on the surface water by the funnel -like 
churning motion downward. To fill this vacuum the whirlpool 
develops a dangerous power of attraction. That is why a swimmer 
is always apprehensive of a whirlpool. It attracts whatever that 
comes within its orbit. This power of attraction is comparable to 
grasping (upādāna) if the vacuum it tries to fill is craving (taṇhā). 
This peculiar behavior of a whirlpool makes it a centre of activity 
– a Unit. Wherever there is a whirlpool in a river, one can point it 
out as a ‘here’ and a ‘there’.  
If we take this whirlpool or vortex in a metaphorical 
sense, we can interpret its formation  this way: The nature of the 
world is impermanence. But beings have in them four 
perversions:2 
1. Perception of permanence in the impermanent  
2. Perception of beauty in the repulsive 
3. Perception of happiness in the painful 
4. Perception of self in the not-self. 
Because of the ignorance ( avijjā) represented by the four 
perversions, some impelling force of preparations ( saṅkhārā)

Sermon 2 

moves forward. Where it fails to go forward, it turns round and as 
we have already explained, gives rise to a whirlpool or vortex. It 
is the preparations that sustain the vortex.  
So then the role of ignorance and preparations can explain 
the inter -relation between consciousness and name -and-form, 
which we compared to a vortex. Very often, we had to point out 
that name-and-form 3 has to be und erstood differently and not as 
it is explained nowadays. To put it briefly – ‘name’ in name-andform is only a formal name and ‘form’ in name -and-form is only 
a nominal form. Feeling, perception, intention, contact and 
attention are the factors on the ment al side with which the four 
great primaries – earth, water, fire and air are recognized. That is 
why they are collectively called name. By that recognition, a 
‘perception of form’ comes up, which in effect is a form only in 
name. So this vortex is something spurious. In fact, even the term 
‘saṅkhārā’ has connotations of spuriousness or deceptiveness, as 
for instance in its association with the drama. The motive force of 
preparations aroused by ignorance keeps up the vortical interplay 
between consciousness and name -and-form. In our last sermon, 
we pointed out with illustrations like the chess game and the dog 
on the plank, how the activity of the vortex gives rise to a duality 
which sustains the illusion of existence. In short, the vortex gives 
a perverted notion of an actual existence. That is what we  meant 
by a ‘here’ and a ‘there’ giving a false impression of existence in 
a flowing river. Through those similes, we tried to present the 
basic facts underlying the Law of Dependent Arising.  
In drawing out the implications of this simile further, let 
us not forget that the Buddha compared consciousness to a 
magical illusion .4 Consciousness has the quality of reflection as 
in the case of water. Because of its quality of reflection, name and 
form are reflected on it. The world takes it to be real. Mistaking  it 
to be an actual name and an actual form is the beginning of all the 
confusion. We described this bifurcation into two sides as a 
competition with the chess game and the cricket match as

The Law of Dependent Arising 

illustrations. As a simple illustration, we gave the simile of the  
dog on the plank which it seems, has now become popular among 
preachers.  
More recently, we gave another simile which many would 
relish. It is about the handsome Greek youth Narcissus borrowed 
from Greek literature. Narcissus had never seen his own face. 
One day while wandering in a forest, he bent down into a pond to 
wash his face. Seeing his own face as a reflection, he imagined an 
angel in the water and tried to embrace her. Because of the 
ripples, he kept on repeating his vain attempt and finally pined  
away and died. We gave this simile to show that the interplay 
between consciousness and name-and-form is something similar.  
Then how can one liberate oneself from this predicament? 
That is the problem before us now. This is not a problem we have 
introduced ourselves. There are a number of discourses preached 
by the Buddha himself which mention this inter -relation between 
consciousness and name -and-form ( aññamañña paccayatā  – 
mutual conditionality). The way of freedom from this vortex is 
clearly portrayed in the Mahāpadāna Sutta.5 In that discourse our 
Buddha relates how Vipassi Buddha in the distant past attained 
Buddhahood. He did not go through a period of rigorous 
austerities like our Gotama Buddha. Instead, when the time was 
ripe for his attainment, he  used radical attention to understand by 
stages the Law of Dependent Arising. Starting from the very end, 
he went on tracing the causes for existence until he came to the 
mutual conditionality between consciousness and name -andform. Briefly stated, his way of attending proceeded as follows: 
‘Given what, does decay and death come to be? 
Conditioned by what is decay and death?’ 
As you all know, decay and death is the last among the 
twelve links. This is the way of radical attention or ‘yonisomanasikāra’. The meaning of the term ‘ yonisomanasikāra’

Sermon 2 

should be properly understood. To analyze the word: ‘ yoni’ 
means the matrix or the place of origin. So ‘ yonisomanasikāra’ is 
attention by way of the matrix – the point of origin. In short, it 
means reflection as t o the causes and conditions. First of all, he 
thought: ‘When what is there does decay and death come to be? 
Dependent on what is decay and death? Then it occurred to him: 
‘When birth is there, decay and death comes to be. Dependent on 
birth is decay and death.’ 
In the same way, he directed radical attention further and 
thought: ‘When what is there does birth come to be? Dependent 
on what is birth? When existence is there does birth come to be. 
Dependent on existence is birth.’ This is because birth is the 
beginning of existence. Only when there is a concept of 
existence, can there be a concept of birth. Then he thought: 
‘Given what does existence come to be? Dependent on what is 
existence?’ And he understood: Given grasping does existence 
come to be, dependent on grasping is existence.  
Going by the same mode of radical attention, he thought 
of the condition for grasping and found craving and likewise the 
condition of craving to be feeling, condition of feeling to be 
contact, condition for contact to be the s ix sense-spheres. What is 
called six sense -spheres is sometimes spoken of as twelve 
spheres. Then one has to understand by it the six internal spheres, 
i.e. the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind 
and the six external spheres, i.e. the forms, the sounds, the smells, 
the tastes, the tangibles and the ideas. Taken as pairs, they are the 
six spheres of sense. It is because of these spheres that contact 
comes to be. Then he thought: ‘What being there does the six -
fold sense-sphere come to be? What is the condition for the six -
fold sense -sphere?’ It occurred to him then: ‘When name -andform is there does the six -fold sense -sphere come to be. Name -
and-form is the condition for the six -fold sense -sphere.’ Going 
further, he thought: ‘What being  there does name-and-form come 
to be? What is the condition for name -and-form?’ He understood

The Law of Dependent Arising 

that it is when consciousness is there that name -and-form comes 
to be, that consciousness is the condition for name -and-form. 
Then he pondered: ‘What being there does consciousness come to 
be? What is the condition for consciousness?’ He realized that it 
is when name -and-form is there that consciousness comes to be, 
that name-and-form is the condition for consciousness. With that 
he was convinced of the inter dependence of these two links.  
It is said that at this point it occurred to the Bodhisatta 
Vipassi: 
‘Paccudāvattati kho ida ṁ viññāṇaṁ nāmarūpamhā. 
nāparaṁ gacchati.’ 
‘This consciousness turns back from name -and-form. It 
does not go to another.’ 
 This is how he  aroused the knowledge of the arising 
nature of things. On reaching that point in his radical attention, it 
occurred to him: 
 This consciousness does not go beyond name -and-form. 
Dependent on name-and-form is consciousness and dependent on 
consciousness is  name-and-form. From there he reflected back: 
Dependent on name -and-form is six sense -spheres, dependent on 
six sense -spheres contact,  dependent on contact, feeling, 
dependent on feeling, craving and so on ending with the 
conclusion: This is the arising o f this entire mass of suffering. 
This, then, is the arising aspect of suffering. With that 
understanding, it is said, that the Bodhisatta Vipassi exclaimed: 
 ‘Samudayo, samudayo’ 
 ‘Arising, arising’

Sermon 2 

 At this juncture, the Bodhisatta Vipassi is said to have 
made an utterance of joy as we get in the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta 6 in the case of our Gotama Buddha.  
 ‘Cakkhuṁ udapādi ñāṇaṁ udapādi, paññā udapādi, vijjā 
udapādi, āloko udapādi’ 
 ‘The eye arose, the knowledge arose, the wisdom arose, 
the science arose, the light arose.’ 
 That is as regards the arising aspect.  
 Along with it, the Bodhisatta Vipassi attended to the 
cessation aspect and that too starting from the end. 
 ‘When what does not exist does decay and death not come 
to be? With the cessation of what does the cessation of decay and 
death come about? And he understood: ‘When there is no birth, 
decay and death does not come to be; with the cessation of birth 
comes cessation of decay and d eath.’ I hope you all can 
understand the reverse order in the same way. ‘When what does 
not exist does birth not come to be? With the cessation of what 
does the cessation of birth come about? When there is no 
existence, birth does not come to be; with the cessation of 
existence comes cessation of birth. Likewise, when grasping 
ceases existence or becoming would cease. When craving ceases, 
grasping would cease. When feeling ceases, craving would cease. 
When contact ceases, feeling would cease. When the six s ensespheres cease, contact would cease. When name-and-form ceases, 
the six sense -spheres would cease. When consciousness ceases, 
name-and-form would cease. When name -and-form ceases, 
consciousness would cease. With this, again, he reached the point 
at which the inter-relation between consciousness and name -andform became obvious. Then the Bodhisatta Vipassi is said to have 
uttered this highly significant statement.  
 ‘Adhigato kho myāyaṁ vipassanā maggo bodhāya.’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 ‘The way of insight to awakening has been  aroused by 
me.’ 
 This clearly indicates that the Law of Dependent Arising 
which in our tradition has been almost relegated to the limbo is 
directly relevant to meditation and helpful for enlightenment.  
 After understanding the cessation aspect, the Bodhi satta 
Vipassi exclaimed that the way of insight has been aroused 
because it is the decisive aspect in regard to insight. The reason is 
that along with the cessation of name -and-form, the six sense -
spheres cease and with that contact, feeling and craving al so 
cease. Thus the entire mass of suffering comes to cease. What 
comes after this is only the following information: The 
Bodhisatta Vipassi, with the help of this mode of insight reflected 
on the rise and fall of the five aggregates of grasping as follows: 
 Thus is form, thus its arising, thus its passing away. 
 Thus is feeling, thus its arising, thus its passing away. 
 Thus is perception, thus its arising, thus its passing away. 
 Thus are preparations, thus their arising, thus their passing 
away. 
 Thus is consciousness, thus its arising, thus its passing 
away. 
 Finally, it is said that having contemplated on the rise and 
fall of the five aggregates, before long, he attained 
Enlightenment.  
 We can form some idea of the way of reflection in insight 
meditation by this account. What is meant by the contemplation 
of the rise and fall ( udayabbaya) is the contemplation of the 
arising and ceasing nature of phenomena. In contemplating on 
arising and ceasing, the question of causes and conditions comes 
up as a matter  of course. As we mentioned the other day, 
according to discourses like Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta,7 the cause and 
condition for form is the four great primaries, namely, earth,

Sermon 2 

water, fire and air. The cause and condition for feeling is contact. 
The cause and condition for perception is contact. The cause and 
condition for preparations is contact. But the cause and condition 
for consciousness is name -and-form. We can infer that t he 
Bodhisatta Vipassi in his contemplation of rise and fall of the five 
aggregates of grasping, reflected lastly on consciousness and 
thereby became acquainted with name -and-form. As the radical 
attention on name -and-form became sharper and sharper, he 
realized the cessation of preparations and attained enlightenment.  
 From our analysis of this discourse, it should be obvious 
how important the Law of Dependent Arising is. Generally, we 
talk only about the Four Noble Truths. But from this episode, it is 
clear that when one examines the causes and conditions of 
consciousness, one would hit upon name -and-form. Let me 
elaborate a little on this point. However much we explain, it 
seems there are many who cannot budge an inch from the 
traditional interpretation. So often, I have pointed out with special 
reference to the Buddha’s own definition found in the discourses 
that the factors on the ‘name’ side in name -and-form are feeling, 
perception, intention, contact and attention. It is with the help of 
these five tha t we recognize the four elements, earth, water, fire 
and air in terms of hard and soft, hot or cold, and so forth. That is 
why it is called rūpasaññā (perception of form). Those five 
factors are called name only in a formal sense. Primarily, 
recognition is  not by ‘name’ in the conventional and linguistic 
sense. But by means of feeling, perception, intention, contact and 
attention. Some confuse the issue by arguing that contact has to 
precede feeling. However much we point out with quotations, 
they insist on putting contact first. Let me explain it in such a way 
that at least you all would not forget.  
 Please stretch your right hand if you can. Now stretch out 
the fingers. I am going to give you an exercise to drive out 
sleepiness if any. Now stretch your pa lm. Alright, start counting 
your fingers. ‘One’, what is the finger you bend? Is it the thumb?

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Isn’t it the little finger? This is how I call the small but 
mischievous little finger – ‘Feeling’. Then comes number Two – 
the ring finger where you wear the si gnet ring. Well, call it 
‘Perception’. Now for number Three. Bend the decisive middle 
finger, prominent and intrusive. See how it digs into your palm. 
Let us call it ‘ Intention’. He is the one who calls the waiter and 
silences a meeting. You do your work w hen ‘intention’ steps in. 
Number Four is the index finger, fussy and busy all the time. You 
may dub it ‘ Contact’. What comes last as Number five? The 
THUMB – ‘standing apart but approachable to the rest’ as 
lexicons define it. Take it as ‘ Attention’. So ha ve this ‘at your 
finger tips’, this definition of ‘Name’. When you clutch your 
fingers, the one nearest to your thumb (i.e. Attention) is the index 
finger (i .e. CONTACT). Well, that is why I prefer the original 
sutta definition of ‘ nāma’. Of course, these similes are not found 
in the discourse. I brought these up only for clarification. Now, 
after this, at least you all, dear listeners, must not doubt the 
Buddha-word regarding ‘nāma’ in ‘nāmarūpa’.  
 To impress you further on this point, let me say something 
more. There may be in this audience lawyers and other 
knowledgeable persons who know more about legal matters. I 
have heard that there is provision for such a tactic  as this in legal 
affairs. Sometimes a case of murder or theft comes up in the la w 
courts with no one to give evidence. When there is no evidence, 
the accused has to be discharged. In such circumstances our legal 
system has provision for a tactic like this. Suppose there are five 
persons accused in a case of planned theft of a very serious typ e. 
But no one comes forward to give evidence. In such a situation, 
the judge can give pardon to one of the alleged culprits under the 
oath: “You must tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but 
the truth.” Thereby that culprit is persuaded to give evi dence 
holding nothing back. Now mind you, the Buddha himself 
resorted to such a “middle path” tactic.

Sermon 2 

 The magical illusion of consciousness is an insoluable 
problem. This problem, which no one in the world not even the 
seers, could solve, the Buddha succ essfully solved through his 
‘Middle Path’. It is to illustrate this mode of solution that I 
employ this simile. I don’t know much about law, but this much I 
know. So let me explain now. We identified THUMB with 
ATTENTION. He is the guy, who in the guise of  non-radical 
attention ( ayoniso manasikāra ) led us up the garden path and 
brought us all this long way in Saṁsāra. He has dubious relations 
with the little finger (feeling), the ring finger (perception), with 
the middle finger (intention) and above all, with the index finger 
(contact). As a matter of fact, he is closely associated with the 
fussy and busy index -finger. The Buddha unde rstood that out of 
the whole ‘bunch’, the biggest even in size is the THUMB 
(Attention). He is the guy who as ‘non -radical attention’ planned 
the whole crime. So what did the Buddha do? He converted ‘non -
radical attention’ into ‘radical attention’ insistin g on the 
confession of ‘the Truth, the whole Truth and nothing but the 
Truth’. That is how the Buddha adjudicated this mysterious case 
of consciousness.  
 To put all this in a nutshell, let us go back to ‘the -dog-onthe-plank’. That dog keeps on looking do wn into the water 
because of non -radical attention. If it suddenly understands “It is 
not that, I look because I see, but that I see because I look, it will 
no longer go on looking.” 
 Then there is the story of Narcissus we have cited in our 
books. In fact , we gave a revised version of that story about the 
handsome Greek youth Narcissus. In the original story, it is said 
that he fell in love with the reflection of his own face in the pond, 
mistaking it to be an angel’s, and sacrificed his life for the 
imagined angel and that a flower nearby his dead body was 
named after him. That was all. But we revised the story and made 
a ‘Buddhist version’ of it. We ‘resurrected’ the youth and got him 
to realize the fact that it is his own reflection that he is in love

The Law of Dependent Arising 

with – that he is ‘seeing’ because he ‘looks’. But this is only our 
‘post-script’ to the story. If that youth had actually aroused that 
radical attention, he could have become a Stream -winner. Well, 
all this is to show that attention is the most important fa ctor. That 
is why, with the change from non -radical attention to radical 
attention, everything became clear to the Buddha.  
 Let us pass on to another story. Some of you might not 
like those Greek stories. Well, we have our Jātaka stories. 
Among the Jātaka stories there is one called Ummagga Jātaka 8 – 
a fairly long story. There we have an interesting and instructive 
story titled ‘The gem problem’. I shall try to relate it in brief.  
 ‘King Vedeha of Mithilā was informed that there is a gem 
in the pond by the city gate. The king asked his senior -most 
advisor Senaka to procure it. He went there and looked into the 
pond. True enough there was a gem, so he got the people to 
empty the pond to get it. But they cou ldn’t find the gem. Then he 
ordered them to dig out the mud but all in vain. However when 
the pond got filled again, the elusive gem was still there. Again 
and again he got the people to empty the pond but no one could 
trace it. At last, he reported the ma tter to the king who then 
entrusted that duty to his youngest advisor Bodhisatta 
Mahosadha. Wise as he was, Mahosadha, as soon as he looked 
into the pond, understood that it is only a reflection and that the 
gem must be in the crow’s nest on the palm tree by the pond. In 
the presence of the king who also came there, he got a bowl full 
of water immersed into the pond. A gem was visible there too. 
“Where then is the gem?” asked the king. “It is in the crow’s nest 
up there, Lord”, replied Mahosadha and got it down for the king.’ 
 So this is a good illustration for non -radical attention 
(ayonisomanasikāra). Senaka imagined a gem in the pond and 
dug out the mud. To Bodhisatta Mahosadha’s wisdom -eye, it 
appeared only as a reflection on water. By the way, there is a 
certain detail in this episode, which, curiously enough, has a

Sermon 2 

deeper dimension. As you may remember, in the two verses that 
formed the topic of our sermon, there was the question: 
 Wherefrom do currents turn back 
 Where whirls no more the whirlpool 
 Wherein does name and form 
 Get cut off with no trace left 
And what was the Buddha’s answer?  
 Where water, earth, fire and air 
 Are unplumbed and get no footing 
 Herefrom do currents turn back 
 Here whirls no more the whirlpool 
 Here it is that name and form 
 Get held in check with no trace left 
Now what does this mean? 
 Where the four great primaries – earth, water, fire and air 
– do not get a footing, that is to say, do not get established, it is 
from there that the currents turn back. So far in our comm entarial 
tradition, no one could understand the import of the riddle verse 
and the Buddha’s answer to it. Even from the episode we have 
just related, you can get a clue to it. According to Senaka’s 
‘sight’, there was a gem in the pond. Therefore a gem got 
established in earth, water, fire and air. But to Mahosadha’s 
‘insight’, it appeared merely as a reflection. So there was no need 
to dig into the pond to find it. Now from that point onwards, let 
me sidetrack to another discourse which is also relevant to our 
topic. It is the Kevaḍḍha Sutta 9 of the Dīgha Nikāya.  
 It is an extremely deep sutta which has puzzle d many a 
scholar. It embodies a wonderful episode which the Buddha 
relates to a certain householder. According to it, a certain monk 
whose name is not given conceived a problem which is of the 
type that modern scientists are concerned with. ‘Where do these

The Law of Dependent Arising 

four great primaries, earth, water, fire and air cease without 
residue?’ He seems to have thought that there must be some place 
where they completely cease. He did not approach the Buddha to 
get an answer. Instead, because he had developed psychic 
powers, went from heaven to heaven seeking an answer to his 
problem from the gods. They said: “We do not know. Go and ask 
those in higher heavens. Passing from heaven to heaven and from 
Brahma world to Brahma world, finally he put his question to 
Mahā Brahmā. He was shy to confess his ignorance in the 
company of Brahmas. So he cautioned that monk to a side and 
confided: “I myself do not know the answer. But why did you 
come all this way? You should have asked the Buddha himself.” 
Then that monk came back to the Buddha and posed his question: 
“Where do those four great primaries, earth, water, fire and air 
cease without residue?” The Buddha, however, instead of 
answering the question as it is, remarked: “Monk, that is not the 
way you should put the question. This is how you should word it: 
Kattha āpo ca paṭhavī – tejo vāyo na gādhati 
kattha dīghañca rassañca – aṇuṁ thūlaṁ subhāsubhaṁ 
kattha nāmañca rūpañca – asesaṁ uparujjhati. 
‘Where do water and earth, fire and air find no footing, 
Where do long and short – subtle and gross, comely and ugly,  
And name and form – get held in check with no trace left?’ 
 
 First of all, let us try to understand the significance of the 
Buddha’s reformulation of the question.  
‘Kattha āpo ca paṭhavī – tejo vāyo na gādhati’ 
 Here too we have the word ‘ gādhati’ (‘to find a footing’). 
‘Where do water and earth, fire and air find no footing?’ It is not 
a question of destruction or complete cessation, but a case of 
getting not established by ‘not finding a footing’. Then there are 
these significant words too.

Sermon 2 

 ‘kattha dīghañca rassañca – aṇuṁ thūlaṁ subhāsubhaṁ 
 kattha nāmañca rūpañca – asesaṁ uparujjhati.’ 
 Where do (the distinctions like) long and short, subtle and 
gross, comely  and ugly, and name and form get  held in check 
with no trace left. Instead of the word ‘ nirujjhati’ (ceases) in the 
original question, the Buddha introduced the significant word 
‘uparujjhati’ (‘to hold in check’). After reformulating that 
monk’s question in this way, the Buddha gave the following 
answer which, for a long time, has puzzled the scholars: 
 viññāṇaṁ anidassanaṁ    
 anantaṁ sabbatopabhaṁ 
 ettha āpo ca paṭhavī    
 tejo vāyo na gādhati  
 ettha dīghañca rassañca 
 aṇuṁ thūlaṁ subhāsubhaṁ 
 ettha nāmañca rūpañca 
 asesaṁ uparujjhati 
 viññāṇassa nirodhena 
 etthetaṁ uparujjhati 
 Consciousness which is non-manifestative 
 Endless lustrous on all sides 
 Here it is that water and earth 
 Fire and air no footing find 
 Here again is long and short 
 Subtle and gross, comely and ugly 
 Here is name as well as form 
 Are held in check with no trace left 
 Wherein consciousness comes to cease 
 All these are held in check therein 
 Now let us attempt a solution to this longstanding puzzle. 
The Buddha is declaring that there is something called 
‘anidassana viññāṇa’ – ‘non-manifestative consciousness’. Since

The Law of Dependent Arising 

we have already told you about the ‘Elusive Gem’, you can easily 
guess what ‘ anidassana’ means. Or else, from the Narcissus 
story, you can get a clue to the meaning of the term ‘ anidassana’ 
(non-manifestative). For Narcissus, deluded as he was, the water 
in the pond manifested an angel. Had wisdom dawned on him, 
the manifestation – the angel – would be no more. Consciousness 
of an angel would have ceased. So also is the case with the Gem -
in-the-pond, King Vedeha as well as Senaka had a consciousness 
of a gem. After Bodhisatta Mahosadha dispelled the delusion, 
their consciousness ceased to manifest a gem, and along with that 
distinctions, based on earth, water, fire, air, long and short, 
comely and ugly, relating to the reflection of the gem were gone. 
So then this is the meaning of the phrase ‘ viññāṇaṁ 
anidassanaṁ’. What is it that the non -manifestative 
consciousness does not manifest? Whatever that has to do with 
the perception of form. Ther eby the significance of the pairs of 
words the Buddha tagged on to that monk’s question would also 
become clear.  
 ‘…dīghañca rassañca aṇuṁ thūlaṁ subhāsubhaṁ’  
 ‘Long and short, subtle-gross, comely-ugly’ 
 All these distinctions are part and parcel with t he 
perception of form. Finally, it is said that name -and-form are held 
in check without residue. That is by way of summary.  
 But then, what is the meaning of the last two lines? 
 ‘viññāṇssa nirodhena – etthetaṁ uparujjhati’ 
 ‘With the cessation of conscio usness, all these are held in 
check.’ 
 What is meant is the cessation of the ‘ abhisaṅkhataviññāṇa’ (‘the specifically prepared consciousness’). In other

Sermon 2 

words, it is the deluded consciousness (e.g., the ‘gem -
consciousness’ or the ‘angel-consciousness’).  
 Whatever pertains to the ‘ abhisaṅkhata-viññāṇa’ comes 
to cease in that all lustrous consciousness ( sabbatopabhaviññāṇa). When light comes from all directions, consciousness 
becomes non -manifestative (‘ viññāṇaṁ anidassanaṁ anantaṁ 
sabbatopabhaṁ’). 
 Let us  go back to our simile of the film -show. When a 
beautiful film-star appears on the screen, one might be tempted to 
go and embrace her, like Narcissus. The unreality of all what 
appears on the screen is understood when the cinema hall is fully 
illuminated. Only the screen is there. The scenes are gone. When 
Bodhisatta Mahosadha ‘enlightened’ them on the point, the King 
and Senaka understood that there is no gem in the water. All 
these are clues to the meaning of the phrase ‘ viññāṇaṁ 
anidassanaṁ’. Consciousness becomes ‘non-manifestative’ when 
it is endless and lustrous on all sides. What is the lustre? Wisdom 
is the lustre. We have pointed this out on many occasions. Some 
people seem to think that the Buddha compared wisdom to a 
lustre or light only in a metaphorical sense. But that is not so. The 
Buddha’s sermon on lustres (pabhā) is a very powerful one.10  
‘Catasso imā bhikkhave pabhā. Katamā catasso?  
Candappabhā, suriyappabhā, aggippabhā paññāpabhā. 
Imā kho bhikkhave catasso pabhā. 
Etadaggaṁ bhikkhave imāsaṁ catunnaṁ  
yadidaṁ paññāpabhā’  
 ‘Monks, there are these four lustres. What four? The 
lustre of the moon, the lustre of the sun, the lustre of the fire, the 
lustre of wisdom. These, monks, are the four lustres. Of these 
four, monks, this is the highest, namely, the lustre of wisdom.’ 
 All this time people took this declaration lightly. It is 
through this lustre of wisdom that this illusory magic show is

The Law of Dependent Arising 

exposed for what it is. If name in name -and-form is formal name 
and form in name -and-form is nominal form, it is dependent on 
such a spurious name -and-form that the six -fold sense -sphere 
bifurcates into two teams – eye and forms, ear and sounds etc. 
and then, it is as a result of the interplay between these two  teams 
that we get a world. That is why the Buddha defined the world in 
terms of the six sense -spheres.11 The entire world is to be found 
within this duality. Last of all comes the duality of mind and 
mind-object. It is within this world of the six -fold sense -sphere 
that all those ‘things’ that we take seriously, cease. Some people 
are scared of the word ‘ suññatā’ (voidness). But one cannot help 
it. That is why the Buddha compared it to an awakening from a 
dream. The worldlings are in a dream world. If things see n in a 
dream are no longer there when one wakes up, there is no point in 
lamenting. Things non -existing are seen as non -existing. That is 
the ‘knowledge -of-things-as-they-are’ ( yathābhūtañāṇa). The 
Truth came to light in the light of wisdom.  
 Regarding na me-and-form, there are many significant 
references well worth quoting. For instance, there are these two 
lines which convey something deep:  
 ‘Taṁ nāmarūpasmiṁ  asajjamānaṁ 
 akiñcanaṁ nānupatanti dukkhā’ 12 
 ‘That one untrammeled by name-and-form 
 And possessionless – no pains befall’ 
 Not to get entangled in name -and-form is equivalent to 
owning nothing. Then there is nothing to get attached to. 
 There is also this revealing declaration: 
 ‘Anattani attamāniṁ  
 passa lokaṁ sadevakaṁ 
 niviṭṭhaṁ nāmarūpasmiṁ 
 idaṁ saccanti maññati’ 13

Sermon 2 

 ‘Behold the world with all its gods 
 Fancying a self where none exists 
 Entrenched in name-and-form it builds 
 The conceit: ‘This is the truth.’ 
 Like Narcissus, like Senaka, the world has got entrenched 
in name-and-form. That is what the Buddha is pointing out to us. 
The lustre or light we spoke about is not like any form of light 
known to modern science. It is within this darkness, then, that the 
forms we see with our eyes and take to be real exist. That is why 
the Buddha compared all perceptions to a mirage.  
 Let me say something more to the same effect. There is an 
important discourse on duality we had discussed earlier too. It 
centres round the following highly significant verse:  
 ‘Yo ubhante viditvāna 
 majjhe mantā na lippati 
 taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
 so‘dha sibbanimaccagā’ 14 
 This verse, actually found in the Tissametteyya Sutta  of 
the Sutta Nipāta is so deep in meaning that, according to the 
Anguttara Nikāya, already during the Buddha’s life time, monks 
cited it and gave six different interpretations to it in a sort of 
symposium.15 
 Rendered simply, the verse conveys the following idea: 
 ‘Whoever, having known both ends, with wisdom, gets 
not attached to the middle, him do I call a Great Man. It is he who 
has gone beyond the seamstress.’ 
 We have given a long commentary to this verse already. 
Out of the six interpretations, two are relevant to our topic today. 
So we shall limit our discussion to those two. The common 
feature in all the six interpretations is the positing of two things as

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the two ends with something at the middle. The two ends are 
supposed to be stitched up ignoring the middle by a seamstress.  
 In one of the two interpretations we propose to discuss, 
one end is ‘ nāma’ (name), the second end is ‘ rūpa’ (form) and 
the middle is  ‘viññāṇa’ (consciousness). Just see, many scholars 
in defining ‘nāma’ insist on including consciousness also in it. It 
is utterly wrong. The analysis of ‘nāmarūpa’ in our commentarial 
tradition is contrary to the Law of Dependent Arising. Here it is 
clearly stated that ‘name’ is one end and ‘form’ is the other end 
and that ‘consciousness’ is in the middle. Craving is the 
seamstress. What does she do? She ignores th e existence of 
consciousness in the middle and stitches up name and form, 
making one forget that the very distinction between name and 
form is due to consciousness. All this shows what a deep 
understanding those monks had even about one verse where 
present day scholars get stuck. Six monks gave six different 
interpretations to the same verse and the Buddha ratified all of 
them, specifying, however, that he himself had the first 
interpretation in mind when he uttered that verse. It seems that all 
the six int erpretations are topics of meditation. So now we have 
dealt with one of them.  
 Well, there is another meditation topic like that. Only 
these two we are mentioning, as they are relevant to our theme. 
According to this particular interpretation, one end is the six 
internal sense-spheres. The second end is the six external sense -
spheres. As we have already explained the six internal spheres are 
the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind. The 
six external spheres are their objects, the forms , the sounds, the 
smells, the tastes, the tangibles and the ideas. They are on either 
side and again consciousness is in the middle. But craving puts 
the knot. Just as in the case of name and form, craving stitches 
them up into a knot ignoring consciousness. So also in the case of 
the sense-spheres, for instance, eye and forms are separated and

Sermon 2 

craving, the seamstress, stitches them up ignoring consciousness 
which is in the middle.  
 Sometimes the difference between consciousness and 
wisdom is pointed out i n the discourses. Their respective 
functions are also clarified. One such clarification is: 
 ‘ . . . . paññā bhāvetabbā – viññāṇaṁ pariññeyyaṁ’ 16 
 ‘ . . . . wisdom is to be developed – consciousness is to be 
comprehended.’ 
 In fact the development of wisd om is for the purpose of 
comprehension of consciousness. As wisdom develops, the nature 
of consciousness is understood. Now, what does this mean? To 
understand the nature of a magic show as it is, is to be free from 
its spell. That is ‘the end’ of the magi c show. It is the same with 
the delusion about the cinema -screen or the T.V. screen. When 
wisdom comes up, consciousness goes down. That is the 
implication of the phrase ‘ viññāṇassa nirodhena ’– ‘with the 
cessation of consciousness’. Now you can understand what the 
cessation is. It is like the cessation of the ‘angel -consciousness’ 
of Narcissus and the ‘gem-consciousness’ of Senaka.  
 That monk thought that there is some place where the four 
great primaries cease completely. The Buddha, however, held 
that what matters is the perception of form derived from the four 
great primaries – that it is a case of grasping (upādāna). It is not a 
destruction of the four great primaries. If one takes ‘ rūpa’ in the 
materialistic sense, like modern scientists, one cannot understand 
the deeper implications of these verses. What we have before us 
is a question of release from this vortical interplay – from the 
meaningless running in the same circle.  
 Between name -and-form and consciousness, worldlings 
keep running round and round in vain. We spoke about an abyss. 
You can understand this abyss in relation to the whirlpool we

The Law of Dependent Arising 

have described. It is to fill the vacuum arising out of the abyss 
that craving and grasping step in with the result the Five 
Aggregates get accumulated. That is like the flotsam and jetsam 
that the abyss attracts and engulfs. All these implications go with 
our simile of the vortex. But  if one interprets the term ‘vortex’ as 
rain, all these deep meanings have no place. The point at which 
the currents turn back is the full understanding of the vortex. 
With that, the whirlpool of that individual ‘whirls no more’. He 
cannot be traced anymor e. The whirlpool or the vortex of the 
Arahant has ceased. But there is nothing to lament. The whirlpool 
was in the water. The mainstream too is a body of water. So what 
has actually ceased is only a pervert notion of existence.  
 Just see, when we interpre t these verses in this way, there 
are some who call it nihilistic. Even the Buddha was branded a 
‘Nihilist’ by the Braham ins. In the body of water flowing 
downwards, there was a pervert formation called a whirlpool or a 
vortex as a result of a runaway curr ent. Even Buddhas and 
Pacceka Buddhas  have been so many Saṁsāric runaway water 
currents. After a vain vortical interplay for aeons and aeons, if 
through wisdom their name -and-form comes to an end, currents 
will never flow for them again. You can now unders tand what 
sort of a deep Dhamma the Buddha has presented to us through 
this vortex simile. The delusion is seen through by the light of 
wisdom. That is the path of insight Bodhisatta Vipassi followed. 
It was when the radical attention ( yonisomanasikāra) be came 
razor-edge sharp that wisdom dawned on him. That is precisely 
why there is this significant phrase in that same discourse:  
 ‘yonisomanasikārā ahu paññāya abhisamayo’ 
 ‘Through radical attention, there was the understanding 
through wisdom’ 
 So then, radical attention is the seed of wisdom, and also 
its harbinger.

Sermon 2 

 Well knowing this innate capacity of ‘Attention’ – the 
‘THUMB’ – the Buddha gave him free pardon for the nonce. 
There is no other way to solve this Sa ṁsāric riddle. But one 
thing. W hen ‘Attention’ began exposing the inside story of the 
plot, confessing his own complicity in it as non -radical attention, 
something like ‘catching -the-thief-red-handed’ happened in the 
end. I shall tell you the whole story later. Why do we say it is like 
‘catching-the-thief-red-handed? Because it is due to this guy 
‘Attention’ that every ‘thing’ in the world becomes a ‘THING’!  
 ‘Manasikāra sambhavā sabbe dhammā’ 17 
 ‘All things have attention as their origin’ 
 Everything originates from attention. Attenti on is the 
discoverer of ‘the thing’. All things are rooted in interest 
(‘chandamūlakā sabbe dhmmā’ ). There is a very important 
discourse bearing on this topic which we might have mentioned 
earlier. The special significance of attention lies in the fact tha t it 
makes a ‘thing’ what it is. That is why the ‘THUMB’ is so 
important. To anyone in this world ‘ a thing’ becomes ‘ the thing’ 
only when his attention picks it up. Isn’t that so? Just think about 
it. Setting aside all your problems, you all are now listen ing to 
this sermon. But as soon as you go home, problems crop up 
again. How? Your attention went there. Attention picks up the 
problems. When a problem comes up, it is ‘ the thing ’ for you. 
But it is ‘ nothing’ for your neighbour. Your problem has made it 
‘the thing’ for you. Although ‘Attention’ was granted free 
pardon, when he confesses his part in the plot, it becomes 
obvious that he is the biggest thief. It is as if he is caught red -
handed. What is that he has stolen? ‘THE THING’ – the ‘mind 
object’ (‘mano-dhammā’). ‘Mind and mind objects’ constitute the 
most formidable dyad of all. The other dyads, like eye and forms, 
ear and sounds, are simple. The subtlest point is where the mind 
strikes the ‘mind -object’ (dhamma). That is the most elusive

The Law of Dependent Arising 

object. What is it that we call ‘what comes to my mind?’ Let me 
quote from the first verse of the Dhammapada, as usual: 
‘Mano pubbaṅgamā dhammā 
manoseṭṭhā manomayā’ 18 
 
‘Mind is the forerunner of mind objects 
Mind is their chief – they are mind-made’ 
 
 These two lines are found in the two opening verses of the 
Dhammapada. Until the Buddha came on the scene, everyone 
thought that things exist in themselves and that mind comes later. 
The Buddha, however, pointed out to the world that ‘ mind’ 
comes first and  ‘things’ come later. Not only that. ‘ Manomayā’. 
‘Things’ are mind -made. That ‘gem -in-the-pond’ was mind -
made, The angel of Narcissus was mind -made. The Buddha 
proclaimed to the world this nature of phenomena.  
 Modern scientists should ponder over the Buddha’s 
comparison of all perceptions to a mirage. 19 Not only the 
scientists but some of our silly people also take up their 
viewpoint. That is not science but nescience. If the scientists get a 
hint to the correct direction, they might understand that th ey have 
got stuck somewhere. It is because they started from the wrong 
end. In the last analysis, they will have to grant the fact that 
‘things’ originate from attention (‘ manasikārasambhavā sabbe 
dhammā’). In the final reckoning, ‘attention’ is found to b e the 
culprit. What is the reason for attention? Interest ( chanda). In the 
same discourse, it is said that ‘all things are rooted in interest’ 
(chandamūlakā). Interest is the lightest shade of craving ( taṇhā). 
That is why the Buddha preached that interest is also the root of 
the Five Aggregates of grasping. The word chanda has the sense 
of ‘liking’ or ‘wanting’. It is because of ‘ chanda’ that Narcissus 
saw an angel and the King saw a gem. So one can understand 
why the Buddha has preached that in order to at tain 
emancipation, ignorance and craving must be done away with.

Sermon 2 

We have to kill our Saṁsāric ‘mother’ and ‘father’. Craving is the 
mother and ignorance the father whom we have to kill according 
to a riddle verse in the Dhammapada (mātaraṁ pitaraṁ hantvā 20 
– having killed the mother and the father). We have come all this 
long way in Saṁsara because of the ‘hindrance’ (nīvaraṇa) of the 
father and the ‘fetter’ ( saṁyojana) of the mother. That in short is 
the secret of the vortex. Interest is that lightest sh ade of craving, 
which comes in almost unknowingly. If you try to keep track of 
your thoughts, you will find that suddenly a thought breaks in as 
from nowhere. But if you are sharp enough, you will realize that 
in some subtle way as if in a dream a need or a wanting surfaces. 
As soon as it arises, it becomes ‘the thing’. There is a lot to be 
said on this point. I have put it in brief. If there is merit in you all 
and life in me, perhaps you will get the opportunity to listen to 
some more sermons like this. 
 So from what little we have told you, you might 
understand these things – though scholars may not – since you 
are now on higher precepts and in a meditative state of mind. We 
invite you to open up for yourselves the path of insight and 
realize your higher aspirations. Whatever beings there be, from 
the lowest hell to the highest Brahma realm, may they all rejoice 
in our sermon! May the merits in rejoicing conduce to the 
fulfilment of their higher aims! May you too as soon as possible 
in this very dispensati on of the Buddha, understand the Four 
Noble Truths through knowledge of the Law of Dependent 
Arising and attain the Deathless Ambrosial Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. S.I 15 Sara Sutta 
2. A.II 52 
3. S.II 3-4 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
4. S.III 142 Phena Sutta   
5. D.II 30-35 Mahāpadāna Sutta 
6. S.V 422  
7. M.III 17 Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta 
8. J.A.VI 129 (No. 546) 
9. D.I 215 Kevaḍḍha Sutta  
10. A.II 139 
11. S.IV 87 Loka Sutta 
12. Dhp.V 221 Kodha Vagga  
13. Sn.V 756 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
14. Sn.V Tissa metteyya mānava puccā 
15. A.III 399 Majjhe Sutta 
16. M.I 293 Mahāvedalla Sutta 
17. A.V 106 Kiṁ mūlaka Sutta 
18. Dhp.vv 1,2, Yamaka Vagga 
19. S.III 142 Pheṇa Sutta 
20. Dhp.vv 294,295 Pakiṇṇaka Vagga

Sermon 3 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 185)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Ekamūlaṁ dvirāvaṭṭaṁ 
timalaṁ pañcapattharaṁ 
samuddaṁ dvādasāvaṭṭaṁ 
pātālaṁ atarī isī 
– Ekamūla Sutta, Devatā Saṁyutta, S.1 
 
With but one root and turning twice 
With triple stain and arenas five 
The ocean with its eddies twelve 
The quaking abyss – the sage has crossed 
 
Dear Listeners,  
In order to understand properly the Law of Dependent 
Arising, one has to have a deep insight into the inter -dependence 
between consciousness and name -and-form. In t he last two 
sermons we compared this inter -dependence to a whirlpool. The 
deepest point in a whirlpool is the abyss. The riddle verse we 
have taken up today as the topic of our sermon, has a reference to 
an abyss. Let us examine whether there is any connec tion 
between the Law of Dependent Arising and this abyss.  
This is a riddle verse that is found in the Devatā Saṁyutta 
of the Saṁyutta Nik āya. It seems that a certain deity has put 
together and presented seven factors in the Dhamma 
metaphorically as a sust ained simile in this verse. First of all, let 
us try to get the literal (apparent) meaning of the verse.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

‘Ekamūlaṁ dvirāvaṭṭaṁ’ Having one root and with two 
turnings round. ‘Timalaṁ pañca pattharam’ With three stains and 
five expanses. ‘ Samuddaṁ dvādasāvaṭṭaṁ’– the ocean with 
twelve whirlpools. ‘ Pātālaṁ atarī isī’ – ‘The abyss the sage has 
crossed.’ 
Only this difficult riddle verse is found there in that 
context without any clue to its meaning. The commentary gives 
some meanings at random. Though it appears as a difficult verse, 
the similes alluded to in it are to be found elsewhere in the 
discourses. To begin with the abyss itself, there is a discourse by 
the same name  2 in the Vedanā Sa ṁyutta of the Saḷāyatana 
Vagga in the Saṁyutta Nikāya. There the Buddha says: 
‘Monks, this is a synonym for painful bodily feelings, 
namely, the abyss.’ 
(‘Sārīrikānaṁ kho eta ṁ bhikkhave dukkhāna ṁ 
vedanānaṁ adhivacanaṁ yadidaṁ pātāloti’) 
So you all now know what the abyss is. Then as for the 
ocean, that too, we can unde rstand by an open hint in the 
Samudda Sutta 3 in the same section of the Saṁyutta Nikāya. 
‘Cakkhu bhikkhave puris assa samuddo. Tassa rūpamayo 
vego, Yo ta ṁ rūpamayaṁ vegaṁ sahati, ayaṁ vuccati bhikkhave 
atari cakkhusamuddaṁ saūmiṁ sāvaṭṭaṁ sagāham sarakkhasaṁ 
tiṇṇo  pāragato thale ṭiṭṭhati brāhmaṇo.’   
‘The eye, O monks, is the ocean for a man. It has the force 
of waves of forms. Whoever endures that force of forms, he, O 
monks, is called one who has crossed the eye -ocean with its 
waves, whirlpools, seizures, and demons  – the Brahmin who has 
crossed over and stands on dry ground on the further shore.’ 
Now what does this mean? The eye is called an ocean for 
a man. In that ocean, there are the waves of forms. Whoever is

Sermon 3 

able to withstand the force of those form waves, is called the 
Brahmin who has crossed over this eye ocean with its waves, 
whirlpools, seizures and demons and stands on the dry ground 
having gone beyond. The reference here is to the Arahant.  
The discourse  goes on to give the same description in 
regard to the other sense spheres  – namely, the ear, the nose, the 
tongue, the body and the mind, calling each of them an ocean for 
a man to cross over. The objects of the six senses are called 
waves. This is an instructive discourse for those meditators whose 
meditation topic is the six sense spheres. In the eye ocean there is 
the force of form waves. If one gets swept away by them and gets 
drawn into the whirlpool, one is seized by the form demons. So 
also in the case of the ocean of the ear. Here the idea of waves is 
quite apt. One is carried away by sound-waves, gets drawn into 
the whirlpool and is seized by the sound -demons. It is the same 
with the other senses inclusive of the mind. In the case of the 
mind, it is the thought-waves. That is a concept relevant to insight 
meditation. The force of thought -waves develops into breakers 
which sweep us aloft and drag us into the whirlpool to be seized 
by the demon. This is by the way, but the important point is the 
explanation of the sustained simile of the ocean.  
Then what about the eddies? We need not go in search of 
other discourses, since it is already implicit here. The word 
‘sāvaṭṭa’ (with eddies) qualifying the ocean can be taken as an 
allusion to the concept of the twelve eddies. Since the discourse 
speaks of six oceans, how are we to count twelve eddies in the six 
oceans? Worldlings regard each of the six senses as well as their 
respective objects as ‘self’. That is why, for instance, there is the 
admonition to regard them as ‘not -self’ ( anattā), in developing  
anattasaññā (perception of not-self) as a meditation subject. (e.g., 
cakkhuṁ anattā, rūpaṁ anattā – eye is not self, form is not self.) 
For instance, in the case of the eye, waves keep circling round the 
eye as well as its object, before one gets drawn into the whirlpool. 
So much for the twelve eddies. What, then, are the five oceans

The Law of Dependent Arising 

(pañcapattharaṁ)? In the Māradhītu Sutta of the  Sagāthaka 
Vagga of the Saṁyutta Nikāya, we read: 
‘pañcoghatiṇṇo atarīdha chaṭṭhaṁ’ 4 
‘Having crossed the five floods, he has here itself crossed 
the sixth as well.’ 
This is a reference to the Arahant. The five floods are the 
five arenas or expanses of sense -pleasures. Sense pleasures 
spread over the arenas of the five senses (pañcapattharaṁ) and in 
so spreading incur three stains ( timalaṁ), a reference to which 
can be traced to the Dutiyasamudda Sutta  in the Saḷāyatana 
Saṁyutta.  
‘yassa rā go  ca doso ca avijjā ca  virāji tā so ima ṁ 
samuddaṁ sagāhaṁ sarakkhasaṁ saūmibhayaṁ duttaraṁ 
accatari.’ 5  
‘He in whom lust, hate and ignorance have been made to 
fade away, has crossed this ocean, so hard to cross  – the ocean 
with its seizures, demons, and the danger of waves. This, again, is 
a reference to the Arahant.’ 
Just see how all these fa ll into place. So you may take 
lust, hate, and ignorance as the three stains.  
Then there is the term ‘ dvirāvaṭṭaṁ’, ‘double-turning’ or 
‘turning between two things’. These too we can understand 
through Salla Sutta 6 in the Vedanā Saṁyutta. In that Sutta, there 
is this statement about the ‘untaught worldling’ ( assutavā 
puthujjano). 
‘So dukkhāya vedanāya phu ṭṭho samāno kāmasukha ṁ 
abhinandati. Taṁ kissa hetu ? na bhikkhave assutavā puthujjano 
pajanāti dukkhāya vedanāya nissaraṇaṁ aññatra kāmasukhā.’

Sermon 3 

‘He, on b eing touched by painful feeling, delights in 
sensual pleasures. Why so? Monks, the untaught worldling does 
not know a stepping out from painful feeling except sensual 
pleasures.’ 
Because he doesn’t see an exit from painful feeling other 
than a recourse to sensual pleasures, the ordinary worldling keeps 
on turning back and forth between pain and pleasure. That is why 
we call it a see -sawing between these two extremes due to 
ignorance about the neither painful nor pleasant ( neutral) feeling 
at the middle. Tha t is to say, for him, ignorance underlies the 
neither painful nor pleasant feeling, while the latencies to lust and 
hate underlie pleasant feeling and painful feeling, respectively. 
Therefore these three ‘stains’ keep on growing in him. So much 
for the ‘turning twice’ in the riddle verse. 
Last of all we come to ‘the one root’ ( ekamūlaṁ). Now, 
what is this ‘one root’? That too, we can understand in the light of 
the Phassamūlaka Sutta  7 (‘Rooted in contact’)  in the Vedanā  
Saṁyutta. There we find the followin g declaration by the 
Buddha: 
‘Monks, there are these three feelings that are born of 
contact, rooted in contact, caused by contact and arisen from 
contact. What three? Pleasant feeling, painful feeling, neither 
painful nor pleasant feeling.’ 
The clue we ne ed is already there in the title of the Sutta 
(phassamūlaka). All feelings have contact as their only root 
(ekamūlaṁ).  
Although we have offered the above explanation, the 
standard commentary of the text which nearly everyone relies on 
gives a different interpretation to this riddle verse. We shall cite it 
too for the sake of those of you who prefer to follow it. We 
explained from ‘the abyss’ upwards whereas the commentator 
explains from ‘the root’ downwards. Now this is how the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

commentator explains the term ‘ ekamūlaṁ’. The root causes for 
the Sa ṁsāric existence of beings are ignorance and craving. 
However, for some reason o r other, the commentator opts for 
craving as the root in this context. So remember, according to the 
commentary, the ‘one root’ is craving. Then ‘ dvirāvaṭṭaṁ’ or 
‘turning between two things’ is explained as the alternation 
between the eternalist view and t he annihilationist view, for the 
world is said to be turning round between these two extremes. 
The five arenas are the five -fold sense pleasures as we also have 
explained. The three stains are said to be lust ( rāga), hate ( dosa) 
and delusion ( moha) whereas  in our explanation ignorance 
(avijjā) figures as the third stain. The ocean (samudda) is taken to 
be craving. The twelve eddies are explained as the twelve internal 
and external sense spheres, which tallies with our interpretation. 
But then the abyss is said to be craving itself.  
So it seems according to the commentary, three out of the 
seven similes of the riddle verse are to be interpreted as 
references to craving. You should consider whether the 
commentarial interpretation is plausible. According to it , the root 
is craving, the ocean is craving, and the abyss is also craving. 
Here is a riddle verse with a sustained simile. But the 
commentary seems to have gone off at a tangent, missing its true 
significance.  
The most important term that emerged from ou r 
discussion is ‘phassamūlaka’– ‘rooted in contact’. It is suggestive 
of the immense significance of contact. Out of the discourses 
dealing with the question of contact, the one that brings us the 
deepest analysis is the Mahā Nidāna Sutta 8 of the Digha Nikāya. 
So let me now sidetrack to that discourse.  
This Mahā Nidāna Sutta  is of fundamental significance 
like the Satipaṭṭhana Sutta and, even like it, was preached at the 
township of Kammāssadamma in the Kuru country. By way of 
introduction it is said that once when the Buddha was staying at

Sermon 3 

Kammāssadamma in the Kuru country, Venerable Ānanda 
approached him and said: 
“It is wonderful, Venerable Sir, it is marvellous, 
Venerable Sir, how deep the Law of Dependen t Arising is and 
how profound it appears! All the same, Venerable Sir, it appears 
to me as clear and clear.” The Buddha’s response was this: 
“Do not say so, Ānan da, do not say so. This Law of 
Dependent Arising is deep and it appears profound. It is through  
not understanding and not penetrating this Dhamma that this 
progeny has become a tangled skein, matted like a bird’s nest, 
interwoven like muñja and babbaja grass, unable to pass beyond 
states of woe, bad bournes, downfall and the round of birth and 
death.” 
From there onwards, the Buddha, like a teacher explaining 
a deep point to a pupil, clarifies some deep aspects of the Law of 
Dependent Arising to Venerable Ānanda who is the Treasurer of 
the Dhamma in this dispensation. As a matter of fact,  Mahā 
Nidāna Sutta is considered by many as an extraordinary and 
profound discourse. Anyway let us try to understand it without 
undue fears.  
To put it in brief, this discourse has something special to 
say about contact, which is the point we are concerned with. We 
have already mentioned that ‘name’ in name -and-form comprises 
feeling, perception, intention, contact and attention and that 
‘form’ in name -and-form amounts to the perception of form 
derived from the four great primaries–earth, water, fire and air. In 
this discourse, the Buddha explains to Venerable Ānanda, step by 
step, the mutual relationship between name -and-form on the one 
hand as well as the mutual relationship between name -and-form 
and consciousness on the other. The discourse proceeds in the 
form of a c atechism. But for facility of understanding, I shall try 
to present it in a simplified way.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

To begin with, let me draw your attention to the special 
significance of the discourse. As we have mentioned earlier, the 
traditional way of analysis of the Law of  Dependent Arising 
which many follow at present, is to start from ‘ avijjā’ or 
ignorance. However in the Mahāpadāna Sutta 9 we discussed the 
other day, the first two links ‘ avijjā’ and ‘ saṅkhārā’ are not 
mentioned. In this discourse too, those two links do not find 
mention. Instead, what is highlighted here as the basic and most 
important, is this inter -relation between name -and-form and 
consciousness. Generally, in reciting the formula of Depend ent 
Arising we are used to the following order:  
‘Dependent on ignorance, preparations, dependent on 
preparations, consciousness, dependent on consciousness, name -
and-form, dependent on name -and-form, six sense spheres, 
dependent on six sense spheres, contact, and so on.’ 
That is to say, between name -and-form and contact we 
expect to get six sense spheres. But apparently this discourse 
makes no mention of six sense spheres. Instead, it has a reference 
to eye -contact, ear -contact, nose -contact, tongue -contact, body -
contact and mind -contact. Therefore, one cannot say that the six 
sense spheres are fully omitted from this discourse. Contact is 
explained with special reference to the six senses, which makes 
good the apparent omission. The most important feature of this 
discourse is the exposition of the inter -relation between ‘ nāma’ 
(name) and ‘ rūpa’ (form). The other day we explained that 
‘nāma’ refers to what pertains to the question of recognizing 
something. There are two aspects in contact or ‘ samphassa’, 
namely, the impact and the recognition of the impact. In this 
concern, the Buddha explains an extremely subtle point to 
Venerable Ānanda catechetically.  
I shall try to give the gist of that detailed explanation 
whereby the Buddha convinces Venerable Ānanda step by step of

Sermon 3 

the rationale of his explanation. The conclusive statement 
amounts to this: 
“If all those modes, characteristics, signs and exponents 
by which the name group ( nāmakāya) is designated were absent, 
there would not be manifest any verbal impression ( adivacana 
samphassa) in the form-group (rūpakāya). You had better bear in 
mind that there are two significant terms which keep recurring in 
this discourse, namely, ‘ adivacana samphassa’ and ‘ paṭigha 
samphassa’. It is these two terms that have p uzzled many 
scholars. In connection with the concept of contact, we find the 
Buddha mentioning these two unusual terms in this discourse. 
Out of those two, ‘ adivacana samphassa’ can be easily 
explained, since we have associated the term ‘ nāma’ with 
‘naming’. ‘ Adivacana’ is a word connected with the linguistic 
medium. ‘ Adhivacana, nirutti, paññatti ’ (synonym terminology, 
designation) are part and parcel of the linguistic medium. They 
are helpful in explaining something. So with this concept of 
contact, there  is an aspect of recognition. That is what 
‘adhivacana samphassa ’ (verbal-impression) means. Then there 
is also the ‘impact aspect’ to denote which the term ‘ paṭigha 
samphassa’ (resistance-impression) is used. It is to show how 
these two have a mutually reciprocal relationship that the Buddha 
first of all declares – as we have stated above – that if all those 
modes etc. by which the name -group is designated were absent, 
there would not be manifest any verbal impression in the form -
group. That is to say, no verbal impression about the form -group 
is possible, if not for the name -group. Then the  Buddha goes on 
to give the converse. If all those modes, characteristics, signs and 
exponents by which the form -group is designated were absent, 
there would not be manifest any resistance impression ( paṭigha 
samphassa) in the name-group.  
Those of you who  listened attentively might understand 
this. If I may give a simile, contact is like the Siamese twins born 
to the parents ‘Name’ and ‘Form’. This is because for the full

The Law of Dependent Arising 

understanding of contact both the verbal impression offered by 
the name group and the  resistance impression offered by the 
form-group are essential. That is as far as the animate world is 
concerned and not with regard to the inanimate world. In the 
animate world, an impact is understood with the help of the 
constituents of ‘name’– feeling, perception, intention, contact and 
attention. What is called ‘form’ is the four great primaries which 
provide the scaffolding for the nomenclature – namely, earth, 
water, fire and air. A resistance too has to come in. On an earlier 
occasion, we gave as a s imile the case of a blind man going and 
striking against a block of ice. He would come back with a 
perception of earth. Supposing when he goes there for the second 
time, the block of ice is melting. He would come back with a 
perception of water. Next time he goes there, it is boiling. He 
would return with a perception of fire. If he goes again when it is 
evaporating, he might come back with a perception of air. The 
worldling gets acquainted with the four elements like that blind 
man and proceeds to name the m according to his impressions. 
Whatever it is, a resistance has to come in.  
So then, from the characteristics proper to the name -
group, the form -group gets recognition, and from the 
characteristics proper to the form -group, the name -group 
encounters resistance. But the Buddha goes on to add something 
more to complete the picture.  
“If, Ānanda, all those modes, characteristics, signs and 
exponents by which there is a designation of both name group 
and form group were absent, would there be manifest either any 
verbal-impression or any resistance-impression?” 
“There would not, Venerable Sir.” replies Venerable 
Ānanda. 
Lastly he asks the question which decides the issue:

Sermon 3 

“And if, Ānanda, all those modes, characteristics, signs 
and exponents by which there comes to be a designation of nameand-form were absent, would there be manifest any contact?” 
“There would not, Venerable Sir.” 
These, then, are the four conclusions. Firstly, it is said that 
if there were no characteristics proper to the name -group, there 
would not be a verbal impression on the form -group. Secondly, if 
there were not the characteristics proper to the form -group, there 
would not be any resistance impression on the name -group. 
Thirdly, it is said that if the characteristics by which both name -
group and form-group are designated were absent, there would be 
neither a verbal impression nor a resistance impression. Fourthly 
comes the culminating conclusion: If there were no name -andform there would be no contact. 
Then the Buddha goes on to point out  another important 
fact, namely, the mutual relationship between consciousness and 
name-and-form. This is the deepest point. Here too the Buddha 
questions Venerable Ānanda, convincing him step by step of the 
point at issue. He puts the questions in such a way that Venerable 
Ānanda has to reply in the negative. Now this is how the Buddha 
points out that the presence of consciousness is a necessary 
condition for name-and-form.  
“If, Ānanda, consciousness were not to descend into the 
mother’s womb, would name-and-form be left remaining?” 
“No, indeed, Venerable Sir.” replies Venerable Ānanda. 
Now let us digress a little. Some of those western 
psychologists speak only about consciousness. They never speak 
of name -and-form. Everybody is talking about the moment of  
death these days. There is so much pep talk about NDE and ADE. 
But what the Buddha tells us is that before the dying moment, 
name-and-form is already sketched out in a mother’s womb. If 
consciousness does not go there and join it, name -and-form

The Law of Dependent Arising 

would not grow. In other words, without the support of 
consciousness, name-and-form would not remain in the mother’s 
womb. The next question the Buddha puts to Venerable Ānanda 
is that, having descended into the mother’s womb, if 
consciousness slips out for some rea son or other, would name -
and-form grow up and get born into ‘this state of existence’ 
(itthatta)? The reply, as usual, is in the negative. The object of the 
last thought is ‘ nāma-rūpa’ which is indicative of the next birth. 
It makes an imprint in the mothe r’s womb, like a light shade of 
the mind but until consciousness goes and joins with it, there is 
no animation. Even if consciousness unites with it and animates 
it, if it slips out during the period of pregnancy, an apparent 
miscarriage will result. Inste ad of a child, a lifeless ball of flesh 
will come out, because consciousness has slipped out due to some 
karmic reason. Consequently, no being will be born out of that 
‘nāma-rūpa’ into ‘this state of existence’ or ‘itthatta’.  
When Venerable Ānanda underst ood this point, the 
Buddha proceeds to put another question to him.  
“If, Ānanda, the consciousness of a boy or a girl were to 
get cut off at the young age itself, would name -and-form come to 
growth and maturity?” 
“No, indeed, Venerable Sir.” 
Another impor tant fact comes to light by this question. 
What is generally known as “ nāma-rūpa” in the world is that 
which is activated by consciousness –which latter is taken for 
granted as it is invisible. But if consciousness slips out after the 
birth of a child, it is no longer reckoned as nāma-rūpa. It is only a 
dead body.  
Having convinced Venerable Ānanda of these three 
corroborative facts, the Buddha finally draws the conclusion in a 
very emphatic tone:

Sermon 3 

“Tasmātihānanda, esova hetu, eta ṁ nidānaṁ esa 
samudayo esa paccayo viññāṇassa yadidaṁ nāmarūpaṁ” 
“Therefore, Ānanda, this itself is the reason, this is the 
cause, this is the origin, this is the condition for name -and-form, 
namely, consciousness.” 
Thereby the Buddha convinces Venerable Ānanda of the 
fact that there can be no name -and-form in the absence of 
consciousness.  
Then he shows that the converse is also true just by one 
sentence: 
“Viññaṇaṁ va hi Ānanda  nāmarūpe  pati ṭṭhaṁ 
nālabhissatha api nu kho āyati ṁ jātijarāmaṇa dukkhasamudaya 
sambhavo paññāyethāti” 
“And if, Ānanda, consciousness were not to get a footing 
on name -and-form, would there be manifest an arising of birth, 
decay, death and suffering in the future?” 
“No, indeed, Venerable Sir.” 
“Therefore, Ānanda, this itself is the reason, this is the 
cause, this is the origin, this is the condition for consciousness – 
namely, name-and-form.” 
This amounts to saying that if consciousness does not get 
a footing in name -and-form, there is no state of existence. There 
is no question of birth again. What the Arahants  have done is to 
bring consciousness to such a state where it gets no footing on 
name-and-form. In other words, it is the state of unestablished -
consciousness (appatiṭṭhita viññaṇa).  
Having thus clarified the inter -relation between 
consciousness and name-and-form, the Buddha now makes a very 
strange declaration of extraordinary depth summing up this 
mutual relationship in the context of Saṁsāric existence.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Ettāvatā kho Ānanda jāyetha vā jīyetha vā mīyeth a vā 
cavetha vā uppajjetha vā, ettāvatā adhivacanap atho ettāvatā 
niruttipatho ettāvatā paññattipatho ettāvatā paññāvacara ṁ 
ettāvatā va ṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati itthatta ṁ  paññāpanāya yadida ṁ nāmarūpaṁ saha viññāṇena”  
“In so far only, Ānanda, can one be born or grow old or 
die or pass away or reappear, in so far only is there any pathway 
for a verbal expression, in so far only is there any pathway for 
terminology, in so far only is there any pathway for designation, 
in so far only is there any sphere of wisdom, in so far only is 
there a whirling round for a state of ‘t hisness’, that is to say, as 
far as name-and-form together with consciousness.” 
The full significance of the whirling round for a 
designation of this existence ( ettāvātā va ṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati itthata ṁ 
paññāpaṇāya) emerges from this declaration. This is the standa rd 
quotation asserting the validity of our simile of the vortex 
between consciousness and name -and-form ( nāmarūpaṁ saha 
viññāṇena). It is because of this whirling round, this vortex, that 
even a designation is possible. The entire problem of existence is 
traceable to this vortex and its solution through wisdom is also 
within this and not outside it. Even the price of an article is 
dependent on the whirling round of supply and demand. 
Likewise, it is between these two that is name -and-form and 
consciousness – that all concepts of a being in existence are at all 
possible.  
Perhaps our explanation of ‘ phassa’ or contact might not 
be clear enough for many of you. As usual, let me digress into the 
world of similes for further clarification. When we speak of 
contact in the sentient or animate world, the idea of two things 
automatically comes in because consciousness discriminates 
between tw o things. But what about the insentient or inanimate 
world? If we throw heavily one big stone on another, even if the 
other gets cracked, it will not complain. There is no ‘clash’. But

Sermon 3 

supposing you accidentally collide with another while walking on 
the pa vement in a rush hour, there could easily be a clash – 
verbally or even physically. There we see clearly a case of verbal 
impression ( adhivacanasamphassa) and resistance impression 
(paṭighasamphassa), unlike in the earlier instance of inanimate 
objects. There was no ‘clash’, no offence or defence between the 
two stones. 
Let us take up another simile. That is one which 
carpenters will understand easily. Suppose a carpenter is going to 
join two planks of wood to fix up a door. He might ask his 
apprentice to s ee whether the two planks properly touch each 
other. Strictly speaking, lifeless planks cannot ‘touch’. But the 
concept of touch is attributed to it in mechanical parlance in 
various branches of technology. Mechanics even infuse life into 
the tools and mac hines they work with. I am told that there is 
‘someone’ inside the computer too. Our delusion of self makes us 
attribute life into the inanimate objects also. The age of animism 
and anthropomorphism is not yet over. There was no clash when 
the two stones c ollided. But there was a clash when two 
pedestrains collided. This is enough for one to understand the two 
aspects of ‘phassa’– ‘adhivacanasamphassa’ (verbal impression) 
and ‘paṭighasamphassa’ (resistance impression). The recognition 
aspect is not there in  the case of inanimate objects. But our 
primitive animistic instinct prompts us to attribute ‘contact’ and 
‘touch’ to lifeless objects around us and arbitrarily infuse life into 
them. 
The question of contact ( phassa) brings us to an 
extraordinary feature of the Buddha’s teaching which marks it off 
from all other religious teachings in the world. No other religious 
teacher could go beyond contact. In the Brahmajāla Sutta,10 the 
Buddha dismisses all the 62 views with a brief but meaningful 
phrase ‘ tadapi phassa paccayā ’– ‘that too is dependent on 
contact.’ The implication is that the Buddha went beyond contact. 
How did he accomplish this? By his understanding of the Law of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Dependent Arising. This itself reveals the special significance of 
the Law of Depend ent Arising. But there are many who call in 
question our interpretation of Paṭicca Samuppāda  by quoting a 
discourse which has an allusion to the descent into the womb. 
The discourse they adduce in support of the commentarial 
three-life interpretation is th e Titthāyatana Sutta 11 of the 
Anguttara Nikāya . The special significance of that discourse is 
that it relates the Law of Dependent Arising to the Four Noble 
Truths. 
“Channaṁ bhikkhave dhātūna ṁ upādāya gabbhassa 
avakkanti hoti. Okkantiyā sati nāmarūpa ṁ  nāmarūpa paccayā 
saḷāyatanaṁ. Saḷātanapaccayā phasso. Phassaphaccayā vedanā. 
Vediyamanassa kho panāha ṁ bhikkhave ida ṁ dukkhanti 
paññapemi. Ayaṁ dukkhasamudayoti paññapemi. Aya ṁ dukkhanirodhoti paññapemi. Aya ṁ dukkhanirodhagāmini paṭipadāti 
paññapemi” 
 “Depending on the six elements, monks, there is a 
descent into the womb. When there is a descent, there is name -
and-form. Dependent on name -and-form, the six sense spheres, 
dependent on the six sense spheres, contact, dependent on 
contact, feeling. To one  who feels, monks, I make it known thus: 
‘This is suffering. This is the arising of suffering. This is the 
cessation of suffering. This is the path leading to the cessation of 
suffering.’” 
Now what are the six elements? Earth, water, fire, air, 
space and c onsciousness. Those of you who have read the 
Dhātuvibhaṅga Sutta 12 of the Majjhima Nikāya would remember 
how the Buddha begins his sermon to Pukkusāti.  
“Chadhāturo ayaṁ bhikkhu puriso” 
“Monk, this man is made up of six elements.” That 
means, man is a bundle of six elements, not four. The Sutta in

Sermon 3 

question also begins with the words “ channaṁ bhikkhave 
dhātūnaṁ upādāya” “monks, depending on the six elements…” 
That is to say, if there is a grasping of the six elements before the 
death of a person, ‘ gabbhassa avakkanti hoti ’ there is a descent 
into a womb. Since the presence of consciousness is already 
implied, here we have the same story of interdependence between 
name and form. This passage  is misinterpreted by many scholars 
and preachers as canonical evidence in support of the 
commentarial three -life interpretation of Paṭiccasamuppāda. All 
what the Sutta passage in question asserts is that if one grasps the 
six elements, that is to say, as long as these elements are not 
made to fade away as stated in the Dhātuvibhaṅga Sutta, there is 
a descent into the womb . ‘Okkantiyā sati nāmarūpa ṁ’. When 
there is a descent of consciousness into the womb, one can speak 
of name-and-form. Dependent on name-and-form, there is the six 
sense spheres. Dependent on six sense spheres, contact; and 
dependent on contact, feeling. Feeling is taken as the turning 
point to the Four Noble Truths ‘ Vediyamānassa bhikkhave ida ṁ 
dukkhanti paññapemi’. It is to one who f eels that I make known 
‘this is suffering’ etc. The formula branches off towards the Four 
Noble Truths, leading to the cessation of suffering. In this way, 
the law of Dependent Arising is conjoined to the Four Noble 
Truths.  
All this shows the immense impo rtance of the Law of 
Dependent Arising. There are many instances where the 
fundamental significance of the Law of Dependent Arising is 
highlighted. Once Venerable Sariputta brings up a quotation from 
the Buddha himself to emphasize the importance of the La w of 
Dependent Arising: 
“Vuttaṁ kho panetaṁ bhagavatā  yo paṭiccasamuppādaṁ 
passati so dhamma ṁ passati; yo dhamma ṁ passati so pa ṭiccasamuppādaṁ passati”13

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“This has been said by the Fortunate one: ‘He who sees 
the Law of Dependent Arising sees the Dhamma.  He who sees 
the Dhamma sees the Law of Dependent Arising.’” If this is so I 
wonder how many are there who actually know the Dhamma. It 
seems according to the words of the Buddha that no one can 
claim to know the Dhamma unless he has understood the Law of 
Dependent Arising. 
In the same connection, there is a very powerful 
peroration by the Buddha asserting in no uncertain terms the 
cardinal significance of the Law of Depdendent Arising. Even the 
tone of that declaration is so impressive that I shall try to quote it 
in full.  
‘Katamo ca bhikkhave, pa ṭiccasamuppādo?  Jātipaccayā 
bhikkhave jarāmaraṇaṁ. uppādā vā tathāgatāna ṁ anuppādā vā 
tathāgatānaṁ ṭhitā va sā dhātu dhamma ṭṭhitatā dhamma -
niyāmatā idappaccayatā.  Ta ṁ tathāgato abhisam bujjhati abhi -
sameti abhisambujjhitva abhisametvā  ācikkhati  deseti paññapeti 
paṭṭhapeti vivarati vibhajati uttānīkaroti passathāti cāha’ 14  
“What, monks, is Dependent Arising? Conditioned by 
birth, monks, is decay and death. Whether there is an arising of 
Tathāgatas or no arisin g of Tathāgatas, that element does persist, 
that stability of the Dhamma, that norm of the Dhamma, the 
specific conditionality. That, the Tathāgata awakens to, and 
intuits into. Having awakened to it and intuited into it, he 
explains it, preaches it, procl aims it, reveals it, analyzes it, 
elucidates it, and says ‘Behold’.”  
This declaration shows the greatness of the Buddha as a 
peerless teacher in that he explained, analyzed and elucidated 
such a deep Dhamma in a way that we can understand and see for 
ourselves in our experience. The specific conditionality between 
any two li nks of the formula is called Paṭicca Samuppāda as 
evidenced from the following quotation:

Sermon 3 

“avijjā paccayā bhikkhave sa ṁkhārā, yā tatra tathatā  
avitathatā anaññathatā idappaccayatā ayaṁ vuccati bhikkhave 
paṭiccasamuppādo.” 15 
“Conditioned by ignorance, O, monks, are preparations. 
That suchness therein, that invariability, that not -otherwiseness, 
that specific conditionality –this, O, monks, is called Dependent 
Arising.” 
All these decl arations make it clear that this specific 
conditionality is an invariable law true for all times whether the 
Tathāgatas arise or not. This is a lion’s roar proclaiming the 
greatness of this eternal law. 
Having come across such a Dhamma, we should not 
shrink from it, saying that it is too deep for us to understand. 
Without understanding it, one cannot be a Stream -winner. That is 
why even the poor leper Suppabuddha, when he became a 
Stream-winner, is said to have got the insight into the Law of 
Dependent Arising. Nowadays a meditator has to get a certificate 
from the meditation centre as proof of his attainment. All that was 
not necessary in the past. The sum total of the insight of a stream -
winner is expressed in the following words: 
‘Yaṁ kiñci samudayadhamma ṁ sabbaṁ taṁ nirodhadhammaṁ’ 16 
‘Whatever is of a nature to arise, all that is of a nature to 
cease.’  
As we explained the other day, the underlying principle of 
the Law obtains between any two links. One must understand the 
difference between the Law and  its illustrations. There is a lot of 
confusion in this regard. The Buddha would cite just two links as 
in this instance –‘avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā’(conditioned by 
ignorance are preparations) –and emphasize the invariability of 
this Law, or else he would say  ‘jātipaccayā 
jarāmaraṇaṁ’(conditioned by birth is decay and death) and assert

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the eternal validity of the Law implied by it. What is required is 
the seeing of this Law in one’s experience and not the recitation  
of the formula. To break up the formula into three parts as 
applicable to three lives is to make the confusion all the more 
confounded–and this despite the fact that Dhamma is declared to 
be ‘visible here and now’ ( sandiṭṭhiko)  and ‘timeless’ ( akāliko). 
It is with reference to this life itself that the Buddha presented the 
solution to this problem of suffering. There is no need to refer 
ignorance to a past life. Many scholars are puzzled by the non -
mention of ignorance in the Mahāpadāna Sutta and the Mahā 
Nidāna Sutta. Apparently, both avijjā and saṁkhārā are missing 
in these two discourses. But all the same, they are implicit there 
in the discussion of Paṭiccasamuppāda. The non-understanding of 
the inter -relation between consciousness and name -and-form 
itself is ‘ avijjā’. The going round, the whirling round resulting 
from that ignorance is sankhārā. So then one cannot say that those 
two links are overlooked. The Mahā Nidāna or the great cause in 
the Mahā Nidāna Sutta  refers to the inter -relation between 
consciousness and name -and-form. There is so much talk these 
days about the consciousness of a person at death. But very few 
talk about name -and-form. The Buddha has clearly explained the 
inter-dependence of these two in his sermons on Dependent 
Arising. It is a case of a vortex or a whirlpool.  
Then what about the freedom from this state of affairs? In 
the verse which forms the topic of this sermon, it is said that the 
sage has crossed the abyss –‘pātālaṁ atarī isī ’. W hat is the 
significance of this statement? We have explained that the abyss 
refers to the painful bodily feelings. Bodily pain is the deepest 
inescapable aspect of suffering. But the arahants have come out 
even from that abyss. On an earlier occasion, we d escribed how 
Venerable Dabba Mallaputta, an arahant, set fire to his own body 
at the moment of parinibbāna. It is not a case of rash self -
immolation. That was after he attained to Arahattaphala 
Samāpatti. The extraordinary feature of that concentration is that 
while in it one is free from all feelings. It is a well -known fact

Sermon 3 

that nibbāna is called avedayita sukha (unfelt bliss). Once when 
the Venerable Sāriputta declared “Friends, this nibbāna is bliss! 
Friends, this nibbāna is bliss!” Venerable Udāyi aske d him: 
“What bliss is there, friend, where there is no feeling?” His reply 
was “This itself, friend, is the bliss therein –the fact that there is 
no feeling!”  17 This is because all three grades of feeling –
pleasant, painful and neither painful nor pleasant – are reckoned 
as suffering in the last analysis. 
Crossing the abyss or to get over painful bodily feelings is 
to attain to that concentration peculiar to arahants. While in that 
state, the mind is said to be ‘ animitta’ (signless), appaṇihita 
(undirected) a nd ‘ suññā’ (void). Alternatively, it is called 
appatiṭṭhita viññā ṇa (unestablished consciousness). Earlier, we 
spoke of consciousness getting established in a mother’s womb. It 
is then that the concept of a “person” is valid. But the highest aim 
of this di spensation is to reach that state where consciousness 
does not get established. That is freedom. That is the 
emancipation of the mind. 
This emancipation of the mind is presented in various 
ways in various discourses. Now that we have mentioned about 
the six elements, let us briefly examine how the Dhātuvibhaṅga 
Sutta 18 approaches the problem of emancipation. Here we are 
given a method of making the elements fade away ( virājeti) from 
the mind –a sort of erasing from the mind. How can one erase 
them? These elements are there because of measuring. In our 
writings about meditation on elements, we have pointed out with 
special reference to Venerable Sāriputta’s sermons, that earth, 
water, fire and a ir are drawn on our minds due to experiences 
obtained through name-and-form. It is a case of measuring. To do 
away with this measuring, Venerable Sāriputta recommends an 
elemental meditation. Head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth etc., 
represent the interna l earth -element. It is the same with the 
external earth -element in point of solidity. Compared with the 
larger earth element outside, the internal earth -element is puny

The Law of Dependent Arising 

and insignificant. By constant reflection on those lines, the mind 
is made to get disen chanted with the earth -element, thereby 
making it fade away from the mind. It is a mind liberated from 
the four elements that does not take birth in a mother’s womb. On 
the other hand, so long as the grasp on the six elements is there, 
there is a descent i nto the womb as mentioned above. Having 
grasped the six elements or depending on the six elements, there 
is a descent into the womb. Only so long as there is a grasp on 
these elements, can one speak of a birth in a mother’s womb. 
Along with birth goes the whirling between the two. 
That is why we spoke of a vortex on an earlier occasion. 
A vortex can be recognized only so long as there is a whirling 
round. If one stretches one’s arm towards the open sea saying 
‘there, there’, others cannot guess ‘where’ he m eans unless there 
is a vortex. Where there is a vortex, one can point out a spot in 
the sea. Similarly, every being is a Sa ṁsāric vortex. In the 
previous sermon, we explained how a vortex is formed and how it 
ceases. Let us try to understand this formation  of a vortex from 
another point of view. As you know, there is a word in common 
usage in referring to the body, namely, ‘ upādinna’. This is a term 
variously interpreted by scholars. ‘ upādinna’ means ‘what is 
grasped’. It actually refers to that which is gr asped at the dying 
moment–the ‘grasped par excellence’, so to speak. That is what 
we try to protect at all costs. Isn’t it the tiny speck of ‘mud’ 
(kalala) in the mother’s womb– that foetus which we grasp as the 
first thing in this life? We grasp it with s uch tenacity that it is 
called ‘gabbha’ or ‘garbha’ (skt). Its growth inside the womb is 
not simply due to the mother’s care and caution. It is largely due 
to the tenacious ‘grab’ of the child. All this is because of the 
whirling round between consciousness and name-and-form. What 
we call ‘beings’ are so many whirlpools in the ocean of samsāra. 
This organic body as ‘the grasped par excellence’ ( upādinna) 
represents that which has been grasped as internal from the four 
elements outside. All our efforts are d irected towards the 
protection of this organic combination of elements. The

Sermon 3 

disturbance of the humours is also symptomatic of our struggle to 
preserve this organic combination intact. That clash on the 
pavement gives a hint to the danger of possessing this  conscious 
body. Birth, decay, disease, death and all the abysmal pains arise 
out of this Sa ṁsāric vortex. That is why the Buddha told 
Venerable Ānanda: ‘It is through not understanding and not 
penetrating this Dhamma that this progeny has become a tangled  
skein matted like a bird’s nest, interwoven like muñja and 
babbaja grass  unable to pass beyond states of woe, bad bournes, 
downfall and the round of birth and death.’ 
This tangled problem the Buddha successfully solved by 
pointing out that there are two aspects of contact called 
adhivacanasamphassa and paṭighasamphassa. He also pointed 
out that in relation to contact there are two things: name and form 
and that there is a mutual relationship between consciousness and 
name-and-form. Finally he showed how consciousness is made 
non-manifestative. In our earlier sermons we pointed out that 
name-and-form is like a reflection on consciousness. It is like a 
blind man’s impressi on of a block of ice he strikes against 
through feeling, perception, intention, contact and attention. 
Worldlings arouse greed, hate and delusion based on that 
impression, making the tangle all the more tangled. With this 
body born of one’s past kamma, one  breaks the five precepts, 
comes into conflict with the world just for the sake of protecting 
this body and goes on amassing defilements thereby precipitating 
a continuity of the vortex. But what did the arahants do? They 
aroused wisdom in regard to the in terrelation between 
consciousness and name -and-form, since in the last analysis that 
is the proper sphere for wisdom as the term ‘ paññāvacaraṁ’ 19 in 
that key passage implies. If one rightly understands that 
interrelation through the path of practice outli ned by the Buddha 
and frees the mind from the four primaries earth, water, fire and 
air as well as from feeling, perception, intention, contact and 
attention, one attains to that state of emancipation of the mind 
known as anidassana viññāṇa (non-manifestative consciousness) 
or appatiṭṭhita viññāṇa (unestablished consciousness). This is the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

end of ‘bhava’ or Saṁsāric existence which the Buddha has made 
known to the world.   
So then ‘bhava’ does not mean a place of existence as the 
world is prone to believe. It is an existence dependent on grasping 
(upādāna). There is another term used to indicate this kind of 
‘bhava’, namely, ‘ itthatta’. This term too is a problem to many. 
‘Itthaṁ’ means ‘in this way’. ‘Itthatta’ is thisness or ‘this state of 
existence’. ‘ Itthatta’ is in conflict with ‘aññathābhāva’ 
(otherwiseness). ‘Thisness’ is all the time turning into 
‘otherwiseness’. This is the tragedy of existence – 
‘itthabhāvaññathābhāva’ which the Buddha lays bare in the 
following verse in the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta.  
 Taṇhādutiyo puriso  
 dīghamaddhāna saṁsaraṁ 
 itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ 
 saṁsāraṁ nātivattati 20 
‘The man who has craving as his partner (lit, ‘second’) 
and keeps going round for a long time, does not transcend this 
saṁsāra which is an alternation between ‘thisness’ and 
‘otherwiseness’.’ 
The worldling allied to craving who keeps wandering in 
Saṁsāra for a long time cannot get beyond the duality of 
‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’. The moment he grasps a state of 
existence as a  ‘thisness’, it becomes subject to otherwiseness. 
This is what is called impermanence, the inexorable tragedy of 
the conceit of existence. Life is a vain struggle to withstand 
‘otherwiseness’. It is the vortex that sustains ‘ itthatta’ and the 
vortex is the  outcome of ignorance and craving. From another 
point of view, it can be attributed to the four perversions 
(vipallāsā).21 Impermanence is the nature of the world. But there 
is a perception of permanence in the impermanent. Also, there is 
a perception of b eauty in the repulsive, a perception of 
pleasantness in the painful, and a perception of self in the not -
self. The vortex is kept up by these four perversions. Having 
followed the Noble Eight -fold Path and developed concentration

Sermon 3 

and insight into the three  characteristics– impermanence, 
suffering and not -self, one gets dejected with the five aggregates 
of grasping and attains emancipation. One can experience that 
non-manifestative ( anidassana) state of consciousness. Thereby 
one would be fully convinced of the fact that ‘ bhava’ has ceased 
here and now. Because of that conviction, one is no longer 
‘qualified’ to be born since name -and-form has slipped out. It is 
in view of this possibility of freedom from rebirth that the 
Buddha addressed the following question to Venerable Ānanda in 
the Mahā Nidāna Sutta.  
‘Viññāṇaṁ va hi Ānanda nāmarūpe pa tiṭṭhaṁ 
nālabhissatha api nu kho āyatiṁ jātijarāmaraṇadukkhasamudaya 
sambhavo paññāyethā.’ 
‘Nohetaṁ bhante’ 
‘If, Ānanda, consciousness were not to get a footing on 
name-and-form, would there be manifest an arising of birth, 
decay, death, and suffering in the future?’ 
‘No, indeed, Venerable Sir.’ 
So then, you have listened to an analysis of a very 
important discourse today –the Mahā Nidāna Sutta. It is only by 
way of i ntroduction that we brought up the Ekamūla Sutta. You 
should not regard all this as mere academic stuff meant for 
scholars. We invite you to make use of this knowledge of the 
Law of Dependent Arising in your practice with the aim of 
understanding the Four Noble Truths.  
It seems today also as usual many of you have observed 
the higher precepts. Others too have listened to this sermon which 
is directed towards Nibbāna established on some precepts. May 
you all strive on diligently to attain the goal in this v ery life! 
Whatever beings there are from the lowest hell to the highest 
Brahma world, may they all rejoice in this sermon. May it 
conduce to the attainment of their aspirations! May they all 
realize the Deathless Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. S.I 32 Ekamūla Sutta 
2. S.IV 206 Pātāla Sutta 
3. S.IV 157 Samudda Sutta 
4. S.I 126 Dhitaro Sutta 
5. S.IV 158 Dutiya Samudda Sutta 
(Incorrectly titled Bālisika Sutta in the P.T.S.ed) 
6. S.IV 208 Sallattena Sutta 
7. S.IV 215 Phassamūlaka Sutta 
8. D.II 55-71 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
9. D.II 1-54 Mahāpadāna Sutta 
10. D.I 1-46 Brahmajāla Sutta 
11. A.I 176 Titthāyatana Sutta 
12. M.III 239 Dhātuvibhaṅga Sutta 
13. M.I 190-191 Mahā Hatthipadopama Sutta 
14. S.II 25 Paccaya Sutta 
15. S.II 26 Paccaya Sutta 
16. S.V 423 Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta 
17. A.IV 415 Nibbānasukha Sutta 
18. M.III 240-242 Dhātuvibhaṅga Sutta 
19. D.II 63 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
20. Sn.144 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
21. A.II 52 Vipallāsa Sutta

Sermon 4 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 186)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Antojaṭā bahijaṭā 
jaṭāya jaṭitā pajā 
taṁ taṁ gotama pucchāmi 
ko imaṁ vijaṭaye jaṭaṁ 
Sīle patiṭṭhāya naro sapañño 
cittaṁ paññañca bhāvayaṁ 
ātāpī nipako bhikkhu 
so imaṁ vijaṭaye jaṭaṁ 
Yesaṁ rāgo ca doso ca 
avijjā ca virājitā 
khīṇāsavā arahanto 
tesaṁ vijaṭitā jaṭā 
Yattha nāmañca rūpañca 
asesaṁ uparujjhati 
paṭighaṁ rūpasaññā ca 
ettha sā chijjate jaṭā 1 
– Jaṭā Sutta, Devatā Saṁyutta, S 
 
A tangle within and a tangle without 
The world is entangled with a tangle 
About that, O! Gotama, I ask you 
Who can disentangle this tangle 
The wise one established in virtue 
Developing concentration and wisdom 
That ardent and prudent monk 
It is he who disentangles this tangle

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 In whom lust as well as hate 
 And ignorance too have faded away 
 Those who are influx-free – the arahants 
 It is in them that the tangle is disentangled 
 Wherein both name and form 
 Resistance and the perception of form 
 Are cut off without any residue 
 It is here that the tangle gets snapped. 
 
Dear Listeners,  
The Fully Enlightened Buddha has preached to Venerable 
Ānanda in the Mahā Nidāna Sutta 2 that this entire progeny has 
got entangled like a tangled skein and get reborn again and again 
in woeful realms due to non-understanding the Law of Dependent 
Arising. In our last sermon we explained with reference to the 
Mahā Nidāna Sutta how name and form are inter related and how 
name and form and consciousness are mutually dependent upon 
each other. Today we have chosen as o ur topic four verses which 
serve as a prelude for a further elaboration of the same 
discussion.  
First of all, let us try understand the meaning of these 
verses. These verses are found in the Sagāthaka Vagga  of the 
Saṁyutta Nikāya . The first verse presents  a question which a 
certain deity put to the Buddha. The next three verses constitute 
the Buddha’s answer to it. The general meaning is as follows: 
Antojaṭā bahijaṭā 
jaṭāya jaṭitā pajā 
There is a tangle inside and there is a tangle outside. The 
progeny is doubly entangled.  
taṁ taṁ gotama pucchāmi 
ko imaṁ vijaṭaye jaṭaṁ

Sermon 4 

I question you Gotama, about that. Who will disentangle 
this tangle?  
The answer given by the Buddha in the first verse 
amounts to this: 
Sīle patiṭṭhāya naro sapañño 
cittaṁ paññañca bhāvayaṁ 
The wise man having established himself on virtue, 
developing concentration and wisdom – (‘citta’ signifies 
concentration) 
ātāpī nipako bhikkhu 
so imaṁ vijaṭaye jaṭaṁ 
That monk who is ardent and prudent – it is he who 
disentangles the tangle. 
Then the Buddha adds something more to the explanation: 
Yesaṁ rāgo ca doso ca 
avijjā ca virājitā 
Those ones in whom lust, hate and ignorance have been 
made to fade away –  
 
khīṇāsavā arahanto 
tesaṁ vijaṭitā jaṭā 
 
Those influx-free arahants – it is in them that the tangle is 
disentangled. 
 
Then for the fourth verse: 
 
Yattha nāmañca rūpañca 
asesaṁ uparujjhati

The Law of Dependent Arising 

paṭighaṁ rūpasaññā ca 
ettha sā chijjate jaṭā 
 
Where name and form as well as resistance and the 
perception of form are cut off without residue, it is here that t he 
tangle gets snapped. 
Out of these four verses, perhaps many of you are familiar 
with the first two, because the commentator, Venerable 
Buddhaghosa has made them the basic topic for his treatise 
Visuddhimagga. But  it seems the last verse is the most abs truse. 
In our last sermon we explained how ‘form’ gets a verbal 
impression through recognition given by ‘name’ and how ‘name’ 
gets a resistance impression by the impact offered by ‘form’. We 
mentioned in our last sermon that ‘contact’ is a combination of 
these two. 
In short, ‘name’ and ‘form’ are intertwined like a tangle 
by their respective characteristics. As far as we can see, this is the 
tangle within ( antojaṭā). The Buddha has pointed out in detail 
that ‘name and form’ and consciousness are mutually interrelated. 
This is the tangle without ( bahijaṭā). Although we explain it this 
way Venerable Buddhaghosa gives quite a different interpretation 
of the two terms in his commentary to the Jaṭā Sutta . He takes 
jaṭā to mean ‘craving’ ( taṇhā). According to him ‘antojaṭā’ 
(tangle within) is craving for one’s own requisites and ‘ bahijaṭā’ 
(tangle without) is craving for others’ requisites. Alternatively, he 
suggests as a second interpretation, craving for one’s own body is 
the tangle within and craving for another ’s body is the tangle 
without. He goes on to advance a third interpretation also. 
According to it, the six internal sense -spheres is the tangle within 
and the six external sense -spheres is the tangle without. This is 
how Venerable Buddhaghosa explains the two cryptic terms. 
Venerable Buddhaghosa takes ‘ nāma’ to be a collective 
term for the four immaterial aggregates; feeling, perception,

Sermon 4 

preparations and consciousness ( vedanā, saññā, sa ṅkhārā, 
viññṇaṁ). But last time I got you all to count your fingers and be 
sure of the Buddha word that ‘ nāma’ stands for the five 
constituents: feeling, perception, intention, contact and attention. 
Consciousness has no place in the definition of ‘ nāma’. But just 
see. All those who go by the commentarial tradition assert that  
‘nāma’ means the four immaterial aggregates. It is all wrong. 
Having defined ‘ nāma’ that way, the commentator takes up 
‘saññā’ for comment. According to him ‘ patighasaññā’ means 
‘kāma bhava’ (i.e. ‘the sensual sphere’), and ‘rūpasaññā’ means 
‘rūpa bhava ’ (i.e. the Realm of form) and when these two are 
mentioned the formless Realm or ‘ arūpa bhava ’ is already 
implied. This is how the line ‘ paṭighaṁ rūpasaññā ca ’ is 
explained in the commentary. And then, as to the place where the 
tangle gets snapped the comme ntator says that on arriving at 
Nibbāna the tangle is snapped. That is all the commentary has to 
say. But we must point out that by the very mention of the words 
‘paṭighaṁ rūpasaññā’, it is obvious that we have to understand 
this question of the ‘tangle’ i n the light of the Mahā Nidāna 
Sutta. 
 
Today there might be in this crowd those who were not 
present to listen to our last sermon. To facilitate their 
understanding of what I am going to say and also to refresh the 
memory of those who were present the othe r day. I wish to 
recapitulate the dialog ue between Venerable Ānanda and the 
Buddha. Even the method of explanation the Buddha adopted in 
regard to Venerable Ānanda in the Mahā Nidāna Sutta  is 
extraordinary. Venerable Ānanda approaches the Buddha and 
says: 
“It is wonderful Venerable Sir, it is marvelous Venerable 
Sir, how deep the Law of Dependent Arising is and how profound 
it appears. All the same, Venerable Sir, it ap pears to me as clear 
and clear”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

The Buddha’s response to it was: 
“Do not say so Ānanda, do not say so. This Law of 
Dependent Arising is deep and it appears deep.” And then the 
Buddha, like an expert teacher catechized Venerable Ānanda, 
step by step, getting him to respond rather rhetorically in the 
negative. Usually, an obedient pupil is only  too eager to ‘YES’ 
the teacher. But the Buddha addressed his questions to Venerable 
Ānanda in such a shrewd way, that the latter had to think deeply 
and come out with the same emphatic negative answer 
throughout: ‘No hetaṁ bhante’ – ‘No indeed Venerable Sir’ 3   
Unlike in reading a book, in listening to a sermon, it is 
difficult to follow the entire catechism step by step. So the other 
day we gave a summary of the procedure by which the Buddha 
convinced Venerable Ānanda of the mutual relationship between 
‘nāma’ (‘name’) and ‘rūpa’ (‘form’) in four statements. 
First of all, let us try to make some sense out of those four 
statements. ‘ Nāma’ has to be defined not with reference to the 
four aggregates as the commentary says. Feeling, perception, 
intention, cont act and attention are the constituents of ‘ nāma’. 
What is meant by ‘rūpa’ is actually ‘rūpa saññā’ – ‘perception of 
form’. It is based on the four great primaries – earth, water, fire 
and air, none of which can stand alone or be recognized per se. 
They can  be known only through the constituents of the name 
group. Now the first conclusive statement of th e Buddha which 
Venerable Ānanda accepts through conviction amounts to this: 4 
“If all those modes characteristics, signs and exponents by 
which the name group is designated were absent, there would not 
be manifest a verbal impression (‘ adhivacana saṁphassa’) in the 
form group.” 
‘Adhivacana’or synonym is a word representative of the 
linguistic medium, like paññatti (designation) and nirutti 
(terminology). So what is meant by the above statement is that

Sermon 4 

there could be a recognition of the form group only through the 
constituents of name such as feeling and perception. 
Then the second statement gives the converse: 
“If all tho se modes, characte ristics, signs and exponents 
by which the form group is designated were absent, there would 
not be manifest a resistance -impression (‘paṭigha-samphassa’) in 
the name group.” 
That is to say, if there were no characteristics proper to 
the form group based on  earth, water, fire, and air, there could be 
no resistance impression in the name group (ie. feeling, 
perception etc.). One cannot speak of resistance if there is no 
‘form’. The other day we gave a simile of a blind man to illustrate 
this. The commentary a lso makes use of a simile of a blind man 
in connection with ‘ nāmarūpa’. But that is not the one we 
brought up. Suppose a blind man goes and hits against a huge 
block of ice. He would come back with a perception of earth. 
Next time he goes there, it is melt ing. He would come back with 
a perception of water. By the time he goes there again, it is 
boiling and he would perceive the fiery element already at a 
distance. Finally, when it is evaporating, he might get the 
perception of air through it. In the same wa y, the blind worldling 
recognizes the ‘non-descript’ four great primaries with the help of 
feeling, perception, intention, contact and attention. We gave this 
simile just to show the mutual relationship between name and 
form. They are inextricably intertwined. 
Now comes the third conclusive statement whi ch drives 
home the point. 
“If all those modes, characteristics, signs and exponents 
by which a name -group and form -group are designated were 
absent, there would not be manifest either a verbal -impression or 
a resistance-impression.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Here the Buddha has adopted a very subtle way of 
argument. Firstly, it is said that the presence of one is a necessary 
condition for the other to exist. Then it is said that in the absence 
of both, there would be neither a verbal  impression nor a 
resistance impression. 
The fourth statement is all the more conclusive: 
“If all those modes, characteristics, signs and exponents 
by which name and form is designated were absent, there would 
not be manifest any contact.”    
So, it seems according to the Buddha, there is no contact 
(‘phassa’), where there is no name and form (‘ nāmarūpa’). Just 
think about this. One might be tempted to question its validity. 
Because name implies feeling, perception and intention, one can 
ask: “Well then, ar e we to assume that trees and stones have no 
contact?” We gave a little simile to explain this. While rolling a 
stone, if it goes and strikes against another hard enough to make a 
crack on it, there will be no retaliation. That is the way with the 
inanimate world. But if two pedestrians collide with each other 
on a pavement in a rush hour, there would be a ‘clash’. In the 
case of inanimate objects, ‘contact’ is something we attribute to 
them. 
In the inanimate world, there is no place for the concept of 
touch or contact. It is only something we attribute or 
superimpose. To clarify this point further, the other day, we gave 
the simile of a carpenter. When a carpenter is joining two planks 
to fix up a door, he might have to speak of the two planks as 
‘touching’ each other. Think of the way a forest fire starts. In a 
hurricane two trees go on rubbing against each other until fire 
comes up. But there is no feeling, perception or intention in them. 
In the Sutta Nipāta  there is a discourse called 
Kalahavivāda Sutta  5 (Discourse on quarrels and disputes). It is 
entirely in verse and unfold in the form of a dialogue. The

Sermon 4 

opening question is: ‘ kuto pahūta kalahā vivāda ’ – ‘Whence do 
quarrels and disputes arise?’ By way of answer, a whole chain of 
causes is given towards  the end of which there is the following 
question: 
 
“Phasso nu lokasmiṁ kuto nidānā” 
 “What is the cause of contact in this world?” 
The reply is: 
 “Nāmañca rūpañca paṭicca phasso” 
 “Depending on name and form arise contact.” 
 Those two pedestrians quarreled and disputed because 
they had name and form. That was not the case with the two 
stones. Actually, contact is something peculiar to the animate 
world where there is consciousness. So then, name and form are 
intertwined by their modes, characterist ics, signs and exponents. 
This is the tangle within (antojatā). 
 Then let us see what ‘the tangle without’ ( bahijatā) is.6 In 
regard to that too, w e can put into four conclusive statements the 
gist of the catechism the Buddha addressed to venerable Ānanda.  
First of all, the Buddha asks:  
 “Ānanda, if consciousness were not to descend into a 
mother’s womb, would name and form be left r emaining in the 
mother’s womb?” 
 The question of ‘remaining’ implies that name and form 
has already gone there. To ask whethe r name and form would be 
left remaining in a mother’s womb if consciousness were not to 
go there, is to grant that somehow name and form is already 
there. Now, how does that happen?

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 What we are going to say from now onwards could be of 
interest to those i ntellectuals who keep on dabbling with 
questions relating to consciousness, name and form and rebirth. 
Here too, we shall give some sort of illustration by way of 
clarification. Supposing a patient who has just undergone a 
serious operation in a hospital i s engaged in a struggle between 
life and death. He might see some sign of his future birth – say, in 
some mother’s womb  – in a critical moment.  But suppose the 
doctors manage to save his life. Afterwards he might say that he 
went somewhere while he was in the coma. It is only a half -truth. 
It is not that he actually went there –only a sign of that place 
became an object for his consciousness. Name and form has gone 
there for a moment but consciousness was held back. This fact is 
borne out by the following rhetoric question of the Buddha. 
 “Ānanda, if consciousness having descended in to the 
mother’s womb, were to come out, would name and form be born 
in to this state of existence?” 
 “No indeed Venerable Sir.”  
   From this it is clear that if despite the doc tors’ attempts 
the patient died, his consciousness would join that mental object 
(name and form) because we have already pointed out that the 
relationship between consciousness and name and form is a 
whirling round as in the case of a whirlpool. Think of a  flexible 
rubber-band for instance. It can get elongated if it is pressed 
down at one point and stretched away with tension. The moment 
the other end is pressed down and the former released, it would 
go and ‘join’ the latter to form a new centre. In the sa me way 
consciousness gravitates towards its object – nāmarūpa – at the 
moment of death. However, as you all know, sometimes parents 
expect a child, but what comes out in the end is a still born 
grotesque form of a child. The reason is that due to some karm ic 
force, consciousness has slipped out. This is the situation the 
Buddha points out as the second possibility.

Sermon 4 

 This fact is clarified further by the third question: 
 “Ānanda, if the consciousness of a boy or a girl were to 
get cut off at the young age it self, will name and form come to 
growth and maturity?” 
 “No, indeed, Venerable Sir.” 
 Even after the birth of a child if consciousness gets cut off 
name and form would not grow. Only a corpse will be left there. 
When Venerable Ānanda granted that point, th e Bud dha draws 
the final conclusion. 
 “Therefore Ānanda, this itself is the reason, this is the 
cause, this is the arising, this is the condition – for name and form 
– namely consciousness.” 
 This is an emphatic assertion that consciousness is a 
necessary condition for name and form. Then the Buddha goes on 
to point out  that, as far as the concept of existence is concerned, 
consciousness has to be accompanied by name and form, but if 
somehow or other, consciousness does not get established on 
name and form, the whole problem of existence is solved. 
 “If Ānanda, consciousness were not to get a footing in 
name and form, would there be manifest an arising of birth, 
decay, death and suffering in the future?” 
“No, indeed, Venerable Sir.” 
The gist of the whole di scussion can be given in two 
sentences. The consciousness of a non -arahant is an established 
consciousness (‘ patiṭṭhita-viññāṇa’).7 The consciousness of an 
arahant is an un -established consciousness (‘ appatiṭṭhitaviññāṇa’).8 Usually, in the case of an individual, consciousness is 
established on name and form. But there is a possibility of an un -
established consciousness where all the problems of birth, decay,

The Law of Dependent Arising 

death and suffering would cease. That is the consciousness of the 
arahant which is free from name and form. Now you all can 
understand the meaning of the last verse. 
Yattha nāmañca rūpañca 
asesaṁ uparujjhati 
paṭighaṁ rūpasaññā ca 
ettha sā chijjate jaṭā 
“Where name and form as well as resistance and the 
perception of form are cut off without remainder, it is here that 
the tangle gets cut off.” 
The ‘tangle-within’ between name and form as well as the 
‘tangle-without’ between name and form and c onsciousness are 
all cut off. ‘W here’ refers to that ‘ Nibbānic mind’. In an earlier 
sermon we spoke of a ‘non -manifestative consciousness’ 
(‘anidassana-viññāṇa’).9 That is the state of an arahant’s 
consciousness when he has attained to the concentration of the 
Fruit of Arahanthood (arahattaphalasamādhi). His consciousness 
does not manifest name and form. That unestablished 
consciousness (‘appatiṭṭhita-viññāṇa’) is sometimes qualified by 
the three terms. ‘ appatiṭṭhaṁ, appavatta ṁ, an ārammaṇaṁ (not 
established, not continuing, object-less). To one who has attained 
that state there can be no rebirth. 
As a rule, name and form and consciousness are found 
inter-related in the case of Sa ṁsāric beings. But the Buddha 
declared in one sentence that there is an exception to the rul e. If 
somehow or other consciousness could be made to get 
unestablished on name and form, birth, decay, death and all the 
rest of suffering would come to an end. If this much is clear, let 
me give a little more explanation about the concept of rebirth and 
the significance of the established consciousness. 
In this connection, there is a very important discourse in 
the Nidāna Sa ṁyutta of the Saṁyutta Nikāya  by the name

Sermon 4 

‘Cetanā Sutta’. 10 There the Buddha presents the point in question 
in a way that appeals to reason. It is presented in three short 
paras. The point at issue is the question as to how consciousness 
gets a footing – how consciousness gets established at the 
moment of death. I n fact, it is an attempt to show us the 
connection between two lives. First of all, the Buddha declares to 
the monks the following statement: 
“Yañca bhikkhave ceteti yañca pakappeti yañca anuseti 
ārammaṇaṁ etaṁ hoti viññā ṇassa ṭhitiyā. Āramma ṇe sati 
patiṭṭhā viññā ṇassa hoti. Tasmi ṁ patiṭṭhite viññā ṇe virū ḷhe 
āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti hoti.” 
“Monks, what one intends, what one mentally constructs, 
whatever lies latent in him, that becomes an object for the 
stationing of consciousness. There being an object , there comes 
to be an establishment of consciousness. When that 
consciousness is established and has come to growth, there is the 
production of future renewed existence.” 
In the second passage the Buddha ma kes the following 
declaration:  
“No ce, bhikkhave, ceteti no ca pakappeti, atha ce anuseti 
ārammaṇaṁ etaṁ hoti viññā ṇassa ṭhitiyā. Āramma ṇe sati 
patiṭṭhā viññā ṇassa hoti. Tasmi ṁ patiṭṭhite viññā ṇe virū ḷhe 
āyatiṁ  punabbhavābhinibbatti hoti.” 
“If monks, one does not intend and one does not mentally 
construct but one still has a latent tendency, this becomes an 
object for stationing of consciousness. There being an object, 
there comes to be an establishment of consciousness. When that 
consciousness is established and has come to growth, there is a 
production of future renewed existence.” 
There is something peculiar here. One does not intend nor 
does one mentally construct. The question very often raised is

The Law of Dependent Arising 

how one can think or intend in the case of one’s instantaneous 
death. Though there is no intention or m ental construction, there 
is that latent tendency. That is enough as an object for the 
establishment of consciousness. So there is still the possibility of 
rebirth in the future. This is the gist of the second statement. 
In the third statement there is an allusion to arahanthood. 
“Yato ca kho bhikkhave, no ceva ceteti no ca pakappeti no 
ca anuseti, āramma ṇaṁ etaṁ na hoti viññā ṇassa ṭhitiyā. 
Ārammaṇe asati pati ṭṭhā viññā ṇassa na hoti tadappati ṭṭhite 
viññāṇe avirūḷhe āyatiṁ punabbhavābhinibbatti na hoti” 
 
“But monks, when one does not intend and does not 
construct mentally and does not have a latent t endency, there is 
no object for  the stationing of consciousness. When there is no 
object, there is no establishment of consciousness. When 
consciousness is not es tablished and does not come to growth, 
there is no production of future renewed existence.” 
This passage gives a hint to the deliverance from the cycle 
of  births and deaths. If at the moment of death one has neither an 
intention nor a mental construction nor a latent tendency, then 
there is no object for the stationing of consciousness. When there 
is no object, there is no question of rebirth. Here again, we have a 
distinction between the established consciousness and t he 
unestablished consciousness. 
Sometimes the Buddha points out the relation between 
one’s last thought and the next birth. 
“Monks, having encompassed a mentally corrupted 
person’s mind with my own mind, I understand that if this person 
were to die at this time, he would  be deposited in hell as if 
brought there. 11 What is the reason? Because of the corrupted 
mind, he gets reborn in hell.” To some extent, it is like a latency. 
Then the Buddha shows the other side.

Sermon 4 

“Monks, having encompassed a mentally pleased person’s 
mind with my own mind, I understand that if this person were to 
die at this time, he would be deposited in heaven. 12 as if brought 
there.” This reminds one of the story of Ma ṭṭakunḍali. Even 
though he had not done any meritorious deed, the last thought 
moment qualified him for rebirth in heaven. All this shows the 
power of one’s last thought. Even the shade of a thought is 
enough to bring about rebirth. That shade becomes a 
‘photograph’ when conjoined with consciousness. We brought 
this up because it is relevan t to the question of rebirth wh ich 
everybody is talking about. 
Let us consider another aspect of the same problem. The 
passage of consciousness is the talking point these days. 
Particularly, the western psychologists who are in the grip of the 
personality-view ( sakkāyadiṭṭhi) whenever they speak about 
consciousness have an idea of it as a monolithic whole. They 
know nothing about name and form. They interpret consciousness 
as something jumping from one birth to another. This is not a 
recent development. The  fallacy is pre -Buddhistic. Even in the 
Upanishads of the Brahmins rebirth is expl ained with the simile 
of the leech. Think of the way a leech moves from place to place. 
This is because they conceived of consciousness as a self or soul. 
According to them r ebirth is transmigration from place to place. 
But in our Dhamma as we pointed out existence is always a 
whirling round as in the case of a vortex or a whirlpool. 13 How is 
this vortex formed? Dependent on consciousness is name and 
form and de pendent on name  and form is consciousness 
(viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpa ṁ nāmarūpapaccayā viññā ṇaṁ). 
With the help of this idea of inter -relation between consciousness 
and name and form, the Buddha broke the tenacious self -view 
which had prevailed till then. It is not a case o f just one thing. It 
is a turning round between two things as in the case of a vortex. 
In this connection there is a certain declaration by the Buddha 
which is very often misinterpreted.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Nāhaṁ bhikkhave añña ṁ ekadhammampi 
samanupassāmi ya ṁ evaṁ lahuparivattaṁ yathayidaṁ cittaṁ,14 
yāvañcidaṁ bhikkhave upamāpi na sukarā yāva  lahuparivatta ṁ 
cittaṁ.” 
“Monks, I do not see ev en one other thing which turns 
round so quickly as the mind. So much so, monks, it is not easy 
to give a simile to show how quickly the mind turns round.” 
Some Buddhist sects use the simile of a turning-round of a 
fire brand (‘aḷātacakravat’) to depict the rapidity of thought. But 
that is not what is meant by the above declaration. Between 
consciousness and name and form, there is an extrem ely rapid 
process of grasping an object and letting go of it only to grasp 
another. Think of every moment of our conscious life. How 
quickly our minds shift from one object to another. 
There is another discourse which support s this 
interpretation: 
“Varaṁ bhikkhave assutavā puthujjano ima ṁ 
cātummahābhūtikaṁ kāyaṁ attato upagaccheyya natveva citta ṁ. 
Taṃ kissa hetu? Dissatāya ṁ bhikkhave, cātummahābhūtiko kāyo 
ekampi vassa ṁ tiṭṭhamāno, dvepi vassāni ti ṭṭhamāno, tī ṇipi 
vassāni tiṭṭhamāno, cattārīpi vassāni tiṭṭhamāno, pañcapi vassāni 
tiṭṭhamāno, dasapi vassāni ti ṭṭhamāno, vīsatipi vassāni 
tiṭṭhamāno, ti ṁsampi vassāni ti ṭṭhamāno, cattārīsampi vassāni 
tiṭṭhamāno, paññāsampi vassāni ti ṭṭhamāno, vassasatampi 
tiṭṭhamāno bhīyyopi ti ṭṭhamāno. Yañca kho eta ṁ bhikkhave 
vuccati citta ṁ itipi mano itipi viññā ṇaṁ itipi ta ṁ rattiyā ca 
divasassa ca aññadeva uppajjati aññaṁ nirujjhati. 
Seyyathāpi bhikkhave, makka ṭo araññe pavane caramāno 
sākhaṁ gaṇhāti ta ṁ muñcitvā añña ṁ gaṇhāti: ta ṃ muñcitvā 
aññaṃ gaṇhāti, evameva kho bhikkha ve yamidaṁ vuccati cittaṁ 
itipi mano itipi viññā ṇaṁ itipi ta ṁ rattiyā ca divasassa ca 
aññadeva uppajjati aññaṁ nirujjhati.”

Sermon 4 

“It would be better, monks, for the uninstructed worldling 
to take as self this body composed of the four great primaries 
rather than the mind. For what reason? Because this body 
composed of the four great primaries is seen standing for one 
year, for two years, for three, four or five or ten years, for twenty, 
thirty forty or fifty years, for a hundred years or even longer. But 
that which is called thought and mind and consciousness arises as 
one thing and ceases as another by day and by night.15 
Just as a monkey roaming through a forest grabs hold of 
one branch, lets go of it and grabs another and then lets that go 
and grabs still another, so that which is called thought and mind 
and consciousness arises as one thing and ceases as another by 
day and by night.” 
The point of the discourse is that there is no justification 
whatever for taking mind as one’s self. The phrase ‘ aññadeva 
uppajjati aññaṁ nirujjhati’ – ‘It arises as one thing and ceases as 
another’ has a very deep meaning. A clue to its meaning is found 
in the simile of the monkey. It gives a hint to the rapidity of the 
process of grasping and letting go. In the same way, 
consciousness grasps name and form (its object) incessantly. The 
incessant inter -relation between consciousness and name and 
form is what is meant by the term ‘ lahuparivattaṁ’. In fact, the 
literal meaning of ‘ parivattati’ is ‘to turn round’. This turning 
round is between consciousness and name and form – the vortical 
inter-play which sustains the conceit of existence. That same 
inter-relation which goes on during one’s lifetime is instrumental 
in bringing about one’s rebirth. Consciousness does not decide 
the issue by itself. Name and form has to come in. The simile of 
the leech is misleading. There is a discourse which shows that 
during the Buddha’s time too, there were disciples who were 
influenced by this ‘leech -explanation’ of rebirth. It is the Mahā 
Taṇhāsaṁkhaya Sutta 16 of the Majjhima Nikāya.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

In that Sutta it is said that a monk called Sāti went round 
misrepresenting the Buddha declaring that the Buddha had made 
the following statement regarding the question of rebirth. 
“Tadevidaṁ viññāṇaṁ sandhāvati saṁsarati anaññaṁ 
“This same consciousness keeps running and wandering 
in Saṁsāra by itself without anything else.” 
The other monks remonstrated with him as follows: 
“Mā eva ṁ āvuso Sāti avaca,  mā bhagavanta ṁ 
abbhācikkhi. Na hi sādhu bhagavato abbhakkhāna ṁ. Na  hi 
bhagavā eva ṁ vadeyya. Anekapariyāyena hāvuso Sāti 
paṭiccasamuppannaṁ viññāṇaṁ vuttaṁ bhagavatā: aññatra 
paccayā natthi viññāṇassa sambhavoti.” 
“Friend Sāti, do not s ay so. Do not misrepresent the 
Fortunate O ne. The Fortunate One would not say so. For in 
various ways, friend, the Fortunate One has stated consciousness 
to be dependently arisen. Without a condition there is no 
origination of consciousness.” 
Despite all this criticism, Sāti did not give up his wrong 
view. Then the monks reported the matter  to the Buddha who 
summoned Sāti to his presence and questioned him. Sāti 
maintained the same  standpoint that it is the same consciousness 
that runs and wanders in Saṁsāra by itself without anything else. 
Then the Buddha asked: “What is that consciousness,  
Sāti?” and Sāti replied: “Venerable Sir, it is that which speaks 
and feels and experiences here and there the result of good and 
bad actions.” 
Sāti’s reply brings out the typical Brahmin viewpoint 
represented by the simile of the leech. The Buddha rebuked  him 
calling him a vain man ( moghapurisa) asking him: “To whom

Sermon 4 

have you known me to teach the Dhamma in that way? Have I 
not stated in various ways consciousness to be dependently 
arisen, with the words ‘without a condition, there is no 
origination of consciousness.” 
Then the Buddha goes on to explain to the monks this 
dependently arisen nature of consciousness, giving a very 
effective simile to illustrate it. 
“Monks, dependent on whatever condition a 
consciousness arises, it is reckoned by that particular condition. A 
consciousness that arises dependent on the eye and forms is 
reckoned as eye -consciousness. A consciousness that arises 
dependent on the ear and sounds is reckoned as ear -
consciousness. A consciousness that arises dependent on the nose 
and odou rs is reckoned as nose -consciousness. A consciousness 
that arises dependent on the tongue and flavours is reckoned as 
tongue-consciousness. A consciousness that arises dependent on 
the body and tangibles is reckoned as body -consciousness. A 
consciousness that arises dependent on the mind and mind objects 
is reckoned as mind -consciousness. Just as monks, a fire is 
reckoned by the particular condition dependent on which it burns 
– a fire that burns dependent on logs is reckoned as a log -fire, a 
fire that burn s dependent on faggots is reckoned as a faggot -fire, 
a fire that burns dependent on grass is reckoned as a grass -fire, a 
fire that burns dependent on cowdung is reckoned as a cowdung -
fire, a fire that burns dependent on chaff is reckoned as a chaff -
fire, a  fire that burns dependent on rubbish is reckoned as a 
rubbish-fire – even so a consciousness that arises dependent on 
the eye and forms is reckoned as eye -consciousness……… a 
consciousness that arises dependent on mind and mind -objects is 
reckoned as mind-consciousness. 
It seems, then, that dependent on whatever condition 
(yaññadeva paccaya ṁ paṭicca) a consciousness arises, it is 
reckoned by that particular condition. There is no consciousness

The Law of Dependent Arising 

in the abstract as the consciousness. It is always specific as a 
consciousness, even as there is no fire in the abstract as the fire. It 
is always specific as a fire. This simile strikes at the root of the 
animistic concept of a primordial fire. This revelation by the 
Buddha, though worded simply, revolutionizes the en tire course 
of Indian thought. This is the marvel of the Law of Dependent 
Arising. 
But then, what has happened in our own tradition? As you 
all know, in the majority of books now available for you to read, 
the position has gone topsy -turvy. It is as if we have retraced our 
steps to the Vedantic philosophy, without being aware of it. Both 
Buddhists and non -Buddhists are talking about a consciousness 
that keeps jumping from one existence to another. They are 
unaware of the significance of the deepest point of  the Law of 
Dependent Arising which the Buddha has proclaimed, namely, 
the mutual inter -relation between consciousness and name and 
form. That is the vortex of existence. Like the vortex in a river, it 
is indeed the deepest point. That is probably why the Mahā 
Nidāna Sutta  was so named. Truly it is the Mahā Nidāna – the 
Great Cause. Name and form themselves are inter -related. It is 
not something compact. There is no ‘form’ without ‘name and 
there is no ‘name’ without ‘form’. That is why we identified it 
with the cryptic ‘tangle -within’ ( antojatā). Likewise, we 
identified the inter -relation between consciousness and name and 
form with the ‘tangle -without’ (bahijatā) because when it comes 
to the question of rebirth, consciousness is ‘here’ and name and 
form is ‘there’ – in the mother’s womb. However, name and form 
has to have consciousness to complete the picture of a new 
existence. 
So then wandering in Saṁsāra is not like  the movement 
of a leech. On the other hand, it is something like the stretching 
out of a flexible circular rubber -band when pressed down at one 
point – as we have already explained. As soon as it is released at 
this end, it will go and join the far end, if it is pressed down at

Sermon 4 

that end also. Or else one can understand it as the change of the 
centre of the whirlpool. What we call our existence has at its 
centre this organic body we had grasped inside the mother’s 
womb. Once born, we reach out for the objects of t he six senses, 
somewhat like an  octopus. However far the ‘octopus’ extends its 
‘suckers’ they come back to this organic body because that is 
‘the-grasped-par excellence’. But when the time comes to 
abandon this body, consciousness gravitates towards its object 
already grasped (ie.  nāmarūpa). The phrase ‘ imasmiñca 
saviññāṇake kāye bahiddh ā ca sabbanimittesu ’ 17 – (In this 
conscious body and in all external signs) gives a hint to this same 
inter-relation. This conscious body is what comes out of the 
mother’s womb as a result of that gravitation towards the 
‘nāmarūpa object’. But once born, it pursues the objects of the 
senses as before. It is the same seething whirlpool. Only the 
centre – the rallying point – has changed. That is why it is called 
‘the established consciousness’ (‘ patiṭṭhita viññā ṇa’). The 
difficult thing is the putting an en d to this process. The deepest 
point is therefore the vortex between consciousness and name and 
form. 
There is an extremely important sutta in this connection 
where Venerable Sāriputta explains the mutual interdependence 
between consciousness and name and form with a very effective 
simile. It is the Naḷakaḷāpa Sutta 18 in the Nidāna Saṁyutta of the 
Saṁyutta Nikāya . Once, Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable 
Mahā Ko ṭṭhita were staying at the Deer park in Isipatana. One 
evening Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita, after his  meditation in 
seclusion, approached Venerable Sāriputta and asked a question 
relating to Paṭicca Samuppāda. 
“Friend Sāriputta, is decay and death created by oneself or 
is it created by another or is it created both by oneself and by 
another or has it aris en fortuitously being created neither by 
oneself nor by another?”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Venerable Sāriputta replied: 
“Friend Ko ṭṭhita, decay and death is not created by 
oneself nor is it created by another, nor is it created both by 
oneself and by another, nor has it arisen fo rtuitously being 
created neither by oneself nor by another. But with birth as 
condition, decay and death comes to be. ” Some of you might 
think it amusing to say that birth is the condition for decay and 
death, but this is the mode of conditionality. This i s the starting 
point for analyzing Paṭicca Samuppāda from the very end. Decay 
and death is the last  link and  birth is the condition for it.  Then 
Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita asks: 
“Friend Sāriputta, is birth created by oneself or is it 
created by another or is it created both by oneself and by another 
or neither by oneself nor by another?”  
Venerable Sāriputta answers in the same way rejecting the 
tetralemma and showing that existence (bhava) is the condition 
for birth. 
You had better remember that this is the p rocedure in 
radical attention ( yonisomanasikāra). Then Venerable Mahā 
Koṭṭhita poses the same tetralemma regarding existence and 
Venerable Sāriputta rejects it and points out that grasping 
(upādāna) is the condition for existence. I hope you can 
understand the sequence of question and answer. The condition 
for grasping is craving, the condition for craving is feeling, the 
condition for feeling is contact, the condition for contact is the six 
sense spheres. Now be prepared. We are now approaching the 
crux of the problem. 
Having disallowed Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita’s tetralemma 
about the six sense spheres, Venerable Sāriputta says that name 
and form is the condition for the six sense spheres. Then 
Venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita puts the same question regarding name 
and form – as if he is ignorant of it. Actually, we do not know

Sermon 4 

whether he is posing all these questions for his own sake or on 
our behalf, because both these venerables are veterans in the 
Dhamma. Well, whatever it is, this is the four cornered question 
regarding name and form. 
“Friend, Sāriputta, is name and form created by oneself or 
by another, or both by oneself and  by another or has it arisen  
fortuitously being created neither by oneself nor by another?” 
“Name and form, friend Koṭṭhita, is not created by oneself 
nor is it created by another, nor is it created both by oneself and 
by another, nor has it arisen fortuitously being created neither by 
oneself nor by another but with consciousness as condition, name 
and form comes to be.” 
“Friend Sāriputta, is  consciousness created by oneself, or 
is it created by another, or is it created both by oneself and by 
another or has it arisen fortuitously being created neither by 
oneself nor by another?” 
“Consiousness, friend Ko ṭṭhita, is not created by oneself, 
nor is it created by another, nor is it created both by oneself and 
another, nor has it arisen fortuitously being created neither by 
oneself nor by another but with name and form as condition 
consciousness comes to be.” 
So you see, to the question regarding the  condition for 
name and form, the answer is consciousness and to the question 
as to the condition for consciousness, the an swer is name and 
form. Now we are at the crux of the problem. Dramatically 
enough, Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita recapitulates Venerable 
Sāriputta’s apparently contradictory statements in a rhetoric way. 
“Friend Sāriputta, you yourself told me just now that 
consciousness is the condition for name and form but now you 
are telling me that name and form is the condition for 
consciousness. How am I to understand what you mean?”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

But Venerable Sāriputta says: 
“Well then, friend, I will make up a simile for you, for 
some intelligent people here understand the meaning of a 
statement by means of a simile.” 
So this is how the stage is set for the highly  significant 
and memorable simile of the ‘Two -Sheaves of -Reeds’ to come 
out. 
“Just as two sheaves of reeds might stand supporting each 
other, so too with name and form as condition consciousness 
comes to be and with consciousness as condition name and form  
comes to be. With name and form as condition the six sense 
spheres come to be, with the six sense spheres as condition 
contact ………… Such is the arising of this whole mass of 
suffering. 
If, friend, one were to remove one of these two sheaves of 
reeds, the other would fall and if one were to remove the other 
sheaf, the first would fall. So too, with the cessation of name and 
form comes the cessation of consciousness, with the cessation of 
consciousness comes the cessation of name and form, with the 
cessation of name and form comes the cessation of the six sense 
spheres, with the cessation of the six sense spheres, the cessation 
of contact……..Such is the cessation of this whole mass of 
suffering. 
According to this simple but profound simile, the 
interdependence between consciousness and name and form is 
like that of two sheaves of reeds standing one supporting the 
other ( aññamaññaṁ nissāya ṭiṭṭheyyaṁ). When name and form 
falls consciousness falls, when consciousness falls name and 
form falls, when name and form  falls, the six sense spheres fall 
and along with it, contact falls, feeling falls, craving falls, 
grasping falls, existence falls, birth falls, decay and death and all 
the rest of it falls. 
Imagine for a moment that the consciousness sheaf of 
reeds is standing on your left side and the name and form sheaf of

Sermon 4 

reeds is on the right and leaning on the name and form sheaf of 
reeds stand the six sense spheres and the rest of the twelve links. 
The crucial point is the removal of the consciousness sheaf of 
reeds, with which name and form is removed. That is to say, with 
the cessation of name and form consciousness ceases. Cessation 
of consciousness is not tantamount to death. It is the state of 
‘anidassana viññāṇa’ – Non-manifestative consciousness. Since 
that Non -manifestative consciousness does not manifest name 
and form, the six sense spheres also cease, as well as contact, 
feeling and all the rest of it. This is an extremely deep point in 
this Dhamma. You should try to understand this now. I wonder 
why our commentarial tradition has fully ignored this subtle point 
all this time. What we have already said about the vortex is 
implicit in this simile of the two sheaves of reeds. Just consider 
why Venerable Sāriputta did not choose for his simile two blocks 
of solid timber with pith. He probably wanted to insinuate 
voidness ( suññatā) by opting for pithless reeds. The common 
term for reed and bamboo in Pali is ‘ tacasāra’. It means: ‘having 
the bark itself as the pith’. The reed is hollow inside. It has no 
pith It is t he same with sheaf of reeds. The insinuation is that 
consciousness is not something solid and compact. It is only a 
heap. The deluded world takes it to be a monolithic whole. Name 
and form is also a heap. That is what the insight meditator 
understands as he progresses in meditation. The net result of it is 
insight in to the not self -nature of phenomena. The meditator 
understands all this as impermanent, suffering and not-self.  
The rapidity of the arising and ceasing of name and form 
is also implied. The in ter-relation between name and form and 
consciousness is extremely rapid. That is the true meaning of 
‘lahuparivattaṁ’. Existence is a conceit which tries to sit pretty 
on this inconceivably rapid  mutual inter -relation between 
consciousness and name and fo rm. Venerable Sāriputta has 
pointed out how the cessation of existence is brought about. 
When he revealed this fact, Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita came out 
with a memorable eulogy as a joyous utterance. 
“It is wonderful, friend Sāriputta. It is marvelous, friend  
Sāriputta, how well this has been stated by Venerable Sāriputta.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

We rejoice in the Venerable Sārioutta’s statement on these thirty 
six grounds. If friend, a monk preaches the Dhamma for the 
purpose of revulsion towards decay and death, for its fading and 
cessation, he can be called a monk who is a speaker on Dhamma. 
If a monk is practising for the purpose of revulsion towards decay 
and death , for its fading away and cessation, he can be called a 
monk practising in accordance with Dhamma. If a monk through 
revulsion towards decay and death, through its fading away and 
cessation, is liberated by non -grasping , he can be called a monk 
who has attained Nibbāna in this very life.” 
“If friend, a monk preaches the Dhamma for the purpose 
of revulsion towards birth  ……. existence ……. Grasping ……. 
craving ……. feeling…….contact……. the six sense-spheres 
……. name and form  ……. consciousness ……. Preparations 
……. ignorance, for its fading away and cessation, he can be 
called a monk who is  a speaker on Dhamma. If a monk is 
practising for the purpose of revulsion towards ignorance, for its 
fading away and cessation, he can be called a monk who is 
practising in accordance with the Dhamma. If a monk, through 
revulsion towards ignorance, through its fading away and 
cessation, is liberated by non -grasping, he can be called a monk 
who has attained Nibbāna in this very life.” 
This eulogy voiced by Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita has a 
practical value. That is why we quoted it in full. The thirty -six 
grounds are made up by multiply ing the twelve link s of the 
formula by the three points of eulogy concerning the preaching of 
the Dhamma, the practicing of it and liberation through it. This is 
clear illustration of the pragmatic value of the Law of Dependent 
Arising. If one rightly unde rstands each of the twelve links in the 
context of conditionality and breaks the chain at that point, the 
entire chain is broken. However, the most crucial point, the 
‘Mahā Nidāna ’– The Great Cause – is the inter -dependence 
between name and form and consciousness. 
Well then, let me wind up for today. We have dealt with 
this topic in four sermons so far, because this aspect has remained 
hidden for some reason or other. That is why so many wrong

Sermon 4 

views have come up.You had better give thought to this aspect 
without complaining that it is too deep. Of course, the Dhamma is 
deep, as the Buddha himself has said. There may be many here 
who wish to attain Nibbāna after seeing the Buddha. The other 
day we quoted the memorable words of the Buddha. 
“Yo pa ṭicca samuppād aṁ passati so dhamma ṁ passati. 
Yo dhammaṁ passati so paṭcca samuppādaṁ passati” 19   
“He who sees the Law of Dependent Arising, sees the 
Dhamma and he who sees the Dhamma, sees the Law of 
Dependent Arising.” 
Similarly, when Venerble Vakkali was alw ays gazing at 
the Buddha’s body , the Buddha dismissed him saying: “W hat is 
the use of looking at this pu trid body, he who sees the Dhamma 
sees me. ( Yo dhamma ṁ passati, so ma ṁ passati.) 20 So, dear 
listeners, if some of you wish to see the Buddha and attain 
Nibbāna, see this Law of Dependent Arising. Nibbāna is there, 
and the Buddha is there. 
Well, enough for today. Perhaps all this came out thr ough 
some inspiration. I am not  sure whether you will get the 
opportunity to hear more about these things. Try to make use of 
what you have already heard. Today you have taken the higher 
precepts and spent the day in meditation. You had better 
remember these precious admoniti ons in the Dhamma and try to 
shape your lives accordingly. If you have any wrong views, get 
rid of them. It is o nly when you take up right view  and having 
followed the path of practice, reach the goal of Nibbāna, that you 
realize the true value of those precious admonitions. May you all 
derive whatever inspiration possible from this sermon for your 
progress in your meditation, and be able to realize in this very life 
the supreme bliss of Nibbāna! Whatever beings there are, from 
the lowest hell to the highest Brahma world, may they all rejoice 
in this sermon! May it conduce to the attainment of their high er 
aspirations! May they all realize the Deathless Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. S.I 13 Jaṭā Sutta 
2. D.II 55 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
3. D.II 57-63 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
4. D.II 62 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
5. Sn. 168-171 Kalahavivāda Sutta 
6. D.II 62-63  Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
7. D.III 105 Sampasādanīya Sutta 
8. D.III 105 Sampasādanīya Sutta 
9. D.I 223 Kevaḍḍha Sutta 
10. S.II 67 Cetanā Sutta 
11. A.I 8 Paṇihita Vagga 
12. A.I 8-9 Paṇihita Vagga 
13. S.I 15 Sarā  Sutta 
14. A.I 10 Paṇihita Vagga  
15. S.II 94-95 Assutavā Sutta 
16. M.I 256-271 Mahā Tanhāsaṁkhaya Sutta 
17. S.II 253 Apagataṁ Sutta 
18. S.II 112-115 Nalakalāpiyaṁ 
19. M.I 191 Mahā Hatthipadopama Sutta 
20. S.III 120 Vakkali Sutta

Sermon 5 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 187)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Akkheyyasaññino sattā  
akkheyyasmiṁ patiṭṭhitā  
akkheyyaṁ apariññāya  
yogamāyanti maccuno 
Akkheyyañca pariññāya 
akkhātāraṁ na maññati  
tañhi tassa na hotîti  
yena naṁ vajjā na tassa atthi 1 
   – Samiddhi Sutta, Devatā Saṁyutta, S. 
Beings are aware of what can be named 
They take their stand on what can be named 
By not fully understanding what can be named 
They come back to go under the yoke of Death. 
He who fully understands what can be named  
And thinks not in terms of one who speaks 
For such things do not occur to him 
That by which they speak, that is not for him. 
 
Dear Listeners, 
 The teacher of the three realms, the Fully Enlightened 
Buddha, has revealed to us, throug h the Law of Dependent 
Arising, that a good many of the problems, controversies, debates 
and disputes in the world arise from linguistic conventions. The 
problem of Saṁsāra, which is the biggest problem, is also due to 
it. On this first full moon day of the newyear, we have taken up as

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the topic of our sermon, two verses relating to t hat aspect of 
linguistic usage. 
These two verses are found in the Samiddhi Sutta  of 
Sagāthaka Vagga in the Saṁyutta Nikāya. There is an interesting 
introductory story to these two verses which has a flavor of 
Dhamma in it. When the Buddha was staying at the Tapoda 
monastery in Rajagaha, Venerable Samiddhi woke up at dawn 
and went to the hot springs at Tapoda to bathe. Having bathed in 
the hot springs and come out of it, he stood in one robe drying his 
limbs. Then a certain deity, who was exceedingly beautiful, 
illuminating the entire hot springs, approached Venerable 
Samiddhi and standing in the air addressed him in verse:  
 Abhutvā bhikkhasi bhikkhu  
na hi bhutvāna bhikkhasi  
bhutvāna bhikkhu bhikkhassu  
mā taṁ kālo upaccagā 2 
Not having enjoyed, you go for alms, monk 
You do not go for alms, having enjoyed. 
Having enjoyed, monk, you go for alms 
Let not the time pass you by. 
 ‘Abhutvā bhikkhasi bhikkhu ’ – Monk you have come to 
this monkhood which is dependent on alms not having enjoyed 
the fivefold sense -pleasures. ‘ na hi bhutvāna bhikkhasi ’ – Not 
that you have come to monkhood after enjoying the sense -
pleasures. ‘ bhutvāna bhikkhu bhikkhassu ’ –  Monk, go to 
monkhood having enjoyed the sense -pleasures. ‘ mā ta ṁ kālo 
upaccagā’ –  Do not let the best time for enjoying sense -
pleasures –  that is youth  –  pass you by. Here is an invitation 
that goes against the Dha mma and here is the reply  Venerable 
Samiddhi gave to it. 
 Kālaṁ vo’haṁ na jānāmi  
channo kālo na dissati

Sermon 5 

Tasmā abhutvā bhikkhāmi  
mā maṁ kālo upaccagā 3 
I do not know the time of death 
Hidden is the time – it is not seen 
That is why I go for alms without enjoying 
Let not the opportune time pass me by 
 ‘Kālaṁ vo’haṁ na jānāmi’ – I do not know when I have 
to die, ‘ channo kālo na dissati’  – The time of death is hidden 
from me – it is not seen. ‘ Tasmā abhutvā bhikkhāmi’ – Therefore 
I have come to monkhood with out enjoying sense-pleasures. ‘mā 
maṁ kālo upaccagā’  – With the thought: ‘let not the opportune 
time for monkhood pass me by.’ The deity’s advice was not to let 
the time for enjoying sense -pleasures, that is youth, pass by. 
What Venerable Samiddhi says is that youth is the proper time 
for striving as a monk, since one cannot do it in decrepit old age.   
 But the deity did not give up his attempt to mislead 
Venerable Samiddhi. He came down and standing on the earth 
said: “Monk, you have gone forth while youn g with a lad’s black 
hair, endowed with the radiant youth, without having dallied with 
sensual pleasures. Enjoy human sensual pleasures, monk, do not 
abandon what is directly visible in order to pursue what takes 
time (‘….mā sandiṭṭhikaṁ hitvā kālikaṁ anudhāvī.’) 
 Venerable Samiddhi’s rejoinder is exemplary. 
 “Friend, it is not that I abandon what is directly visible 
and run after what takes time. For the Fortunate One has said that 
sensual pleasures involve time, are full of suffering and full of 
despair and that the danger in them is still greater. Visible here 
and now is the Dhamma, immediate, inviting one to come and 
see, leading one onwards, to be person ally experienced by the 
wise.”  
 And then the deity asks: “But how is it monk, that the 
Fortunate One has said that sensual pleasures involve time, full of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

suffering, full of despair and that the danger in them is still 
greater? How is it that this Dhamma is visible here and now, 
immediate, inviting one to come and see, leading one onwards 
and to be personally experienced by the wise?”   
 But the Venerable Samiddhi said: “Friend, I am newly 
ordained, a new -comer in this Dhamma and Discipline. I cannot 
explain in detail. There is that Fortunate One dwelling at the 
Tapoda monastery in Rajagaha. You had better approach him and 
question him on this point. As he explains it to you , so you 
should bear in mind.”  
 However, the deity says: “Monk, it is not easy for me to 
approach that Fortunate One. He is always surrounded by other 
deities of great influen ce. If you go and question on this matter, 
we too will come to hear the Dhamma.”  
 Venerable Samiddhi agreed to the request and approached 
the Buddha and related the whole incident. That deity also was 
present. Then the Buddha addressed the above two verses to that 
deity. 
Akkheyyasaññino sattā  
akkheyyasmiṃ patiṭṭhitā  
akkheyyaṁ apariññāya  
yogamāyanti maccuno 
These words might sound strange to some of you. If we 
go by etymology, √khyā in ‘ akkheyya’ means ‘to tell’ and 
‘akkhāna’ is ‘tale’. ‘akkheyyaṁ’ is therefore ‘what has to be told’. 
It can also mean ‘what can be named’ or verbally conveyed. The 
perception of beings is based on the ‘nameable’ – 
(‘akkheyyasaññino sattā’) They take their stand on what is named 
or expressed – (akkheyyasmiṃ patiṭṭhitā). Not ha ving fully 
understood the nameable – (akkheyyaṁ apariññāya) they come 
back again to go under the yoke of Death – (yogamāyanti 
maccuno).

Sermon 5 

  Akkheyyañca pariññāya 
akkhātāraṁ na maññati  
tañhi tassa na hotîti  
yena naṁ vajjā na tassa atthi 
Then the other side of the position is given which is 
relevant to the arahant. Having fully understood the nameable for 
what it is ( akkheyyañca pariññāya ), He does not conceive of a 
speaker – (akkhātāraṁ na maññati). If the limitations of language 
are correctly understood, on e does not take seriously the subject -
object relationship. Such imagining is no longer there in him 
(tañhi tassa na hotîti ). Not for him is that by which one may 
speak of him ( yena na ṁ vajjā na tassa atthi ). That means, the 
arahant has transcended linguistic limitations.  
Having uttered these two verses, the Buddha, as if 
challenging the deity’s powers of understanding, said – “Yakkha, 
if you understand, say so.” Sometimes in the discourses, even for 
deities and gods, the word ‘ yakkha’ is used. It is not to  be taken 
as a derogatory term here. Even the Sakka is sometimes called a 
‘yakkha’. Anyway the deity confessed that he could not 
understand in detail what the Buddha has said in brief and asked 
him to explain it in detail. As if to tease him, the Bud dha uttered 
another deep verse. 
Samo visesī athavā nihīno  
yo maññati so vivadetha tena  
tīsu vidhāsu avikampamāno  
samo visesīti na tassa hoti 4 
 He who conceives himself equal, superior or inferior 
 Might thereby get involved in debate 
 But to one unshaken in the three grades of conceit 
 A fancying as equal or superior does not occur 
 Equal (samo) superior (visesī) and inferior (nihīno) are the 
three grades of conceit. Whoever conceives in terms of these

The Law of Dependent Arising 

grades will dispute over them. But he who is unshaken by these 
three grades does not think in terms of equal or superior. With 
this verse as explanation, the Buddha again repeated the 
challenge: “ Yakkha, if you understand, say so.” The deity 
confessed that he still cannot understand and begged the Buddha 
once more for a detailed explanation. The Buddha responded by 
uttering a longer verse which goes even  deeper than the previous 
one.  
 Pahāsi saṅkhaṃ na ca mānamajjhagā  
acchecchi taṇhaṁ idha nāmarūpe 
taṁ chinnaganthaṁ anīghaṁ nirāsaṁ  
pariyesamānā nâjjhagamuṁ  
devā manussā idha vā huraṁ vā  
saggesu vā sabbanivesanesu 5 
 He cast off reckoning, no conceit assumed 
 Craving he cut off – in this name and form 
 That bond-free one – from blemish and longing free 
 Him no gods or men – in their search could ken  
 Searching here and beyond – in heavens and in all abodes. 
 The verse sums up the accomplishments of an arahant. 
‘Pahāsi sa ṅkhaṃ’ – he has given up reckoning. As we once 
explained, ‘sankhā’ is literally, ‘number.’ We pointed out that the 
numeral is the most basic or primary ingredient in a linguistic 
medium. You may have seen how dumb people converse 
counting on fingers. So we may call it a ‘reckoning’ – a term 
denoting a characteristic of language in general. An arahant has 
given up ‘reckoning’ – that is, he does not go by it. ‘ na ca 
mānamajjhagā’ – he does not take up conceit. ‘ acchecchi taṇhaṁ 
idha nāmarūpe’ 6 – he cut off craving in this name and form. We 
have pointed out that ‘name’ is not ‘bending’ as traditionally 
explained but that it is a collective term fo r feeling, perception, 
intention, contact and attention through which we get an idea of 
‘form’ ( rūpa) based on the four great primaries – earth, water,

Sermon 5 

fire and air. Worldlings are attached to this name and form but 
the arahant has cut off that craving. Ha ving severed that bond 
(‘taṁ chinnaganthaṁ’), he is free from blemish and desire 
(‘anīghaṁ nirāsaṁ’). Gods and men searching for the object of 
an arahants mind, cannot locate it in heavens or in other abodes.  
 With this profound verse, the Buddha repeated  the 
challenging words: “Yakkha, if you understand, say so.” 
 This time the deity himself utters a verse in which he 
claims to give the detailed explanation of what the Buddha has 
preached in brief. 
 Pāpaṁ na kayirā vacasā manasā  
kāyena vā kiñcana sabbaloke  
kāme pahāya satimā sampajāno  
dukkhaṁ na sevetha anatthasaṁhitaṁ  
Let one not do any evil by word or by mind 
Or else by body anywhere in this world 
Giving up sense pleasures, mindful and fully aware 
Let one not form ally with suffering bound up with woe 
 With that, the episode ends. One might wonder why the 
Buddha addressed such deep verses to the deity. It may be that 
the Buddha wanted to impress the deity of the depth of this 
Dhamma since the latter made light of it by trying to mislead 
Venerable Sa middhi. Whatever it is, these verses are highly 
significant in revealing the Buddha’s attitude to language. Let us 
try to analyse the meaning of these verses. 
 ‘Akkheyyasaññino sattā’  – The perception of the 
worldlings is language -oriented. ‘ akkheyyasmiṁ patiṭṭhitā’ – 
They rely heavily on language. They are unaware of the 
limitations imposed on language by grammar and syntax. The 
subject-object relation is part and parcel of the linguistic medium. 
But the worldlings take it seriously. ‘ akkheyyaṁ apariññāya –

The Law of Dependent Arising 

yogamāyanti maccuno’ – by not fully understanding the nature of 
language, they come again and again to go under the yoke of 
Death.  
 On a previous occasion, while talking about ‘nāma-rūpa’ 
(name and form) we brought up the simile of the dog on the 
plank. Later we improved on that simile by relating the story of 
Narcissus. The handsome Greek youth Narcissus who had never 
seen his own face, while roaming in a forest, bent down into a 
pond to wash his face. Seeing the reflection of his own face in the 
water, he imagined it to be an angel’s, and fell in love with it. 
After a vain attempt to embrace it, he pined away and died by the 
pond. ‘Narcissism’ as a term for self -love, now found in the 
Dictionary, is reminiscent of that Greek youth. The sum -total of 
the ‘nameable’ is found in name and form of which beings are 
conscious and on which they take their stand. By not 
understanding fully name and form, beings go under the yoke of 
Death. Take for instance the case of a wealthy man. What is the 
self-love that come s up at the moment of his death? “How can I 
part with this house and property? How can I leave behind my 
wife and children?” That is the name and form he grasps – the 
reflection of his own self. In that grasping there is a longing for 
another birth. “Oh! G ive me a chance to fulfill my desire!” 
“There you are” says Māra, and gives him not exactly what he 
wants but what he deserves according to his Kamma. So he 
comes back to his own house either as a rat, a snake or as a frog. 
Or else he comes back to sit on his own chair as a dog. That is 
how one takes one’s stand on the nameable – (‘akkheyyasmiṁ 
patiṭṭhitā’). Worldlings are involved in an inter -relation between 
consciousness and name and form. They are not aware that name 
and form is only a reflection. That is what the Buddha makes 
known to the world. If one takes one’s stand on name and form, 
one comes under the yoke of Death. 
 There is another reason for our choice of this particular 
topic for today’s sermon. You might remember that in a previous

Sermon 5 

sermon we discussed at length an extremely important discourse 
which our commentarial tradition has not taken seriously – 
namely, the Mahā Nidāna Sutta . We showed how the Buddha 
explained to Venerable Ānanda, the inter -connection between 
name and form as well as the  inter-relation between name and 
form and consciousness. Although we quoted the highly 
significant passage in which the Buddha sums up that exposition, 
we could not explain it the other day. It is with the aim of paving 
the way for a discussion of that pas sage that we brought up the 
above two verses, as the topic today. First of all le t me cite that 
passage in full. 
 “Ettāvatā kho Ānanda jāyetha vā jīyetha vā mīyetha vā 
cavetha vā uppajjetha vā, Ettāvatā adhivacanapatho, ettāvatā 
niruttipatho ettāvatā pañña ttipatho ettāvatā paññāvacara ṁ 
ettāvatā va ṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati i tthattaṁ paññāpanāya yadida ṁ 
nāmarūpaṁ saha viññānena.” 7 
 
 “In so far only, Ānanda, can one be born, grow old or die 
or pass away or reappear, in so far only is there a pathway for 
verbal expression,  in so far only is there a pathway for 
terminology, in so far only is there a pathway for designation, in 
so far only is there a sphere of wisdom, in so far only is there a 
whirling round for a designation of thisness, that is to say, as far 
as name and form together with consciousness.” 
 Now for an explanation – here the Buddha is telling 
Venerable Ānanda that one could be said to be born, to grow old 
or die or pass away or reappear, that there is a pathway for verbal 
expression or terminology or designati on, that there is any scope 
for wisdom and a whirling round for designating a thisness – all 
these are traceable to a connection between name and form and 
consciousness. The range of wisdom extends as far as 
consciousness and name and form. The most import ant 
declaration is that there is a whirling round for a designation of 
‘this-ness’ (‘ettāvatā vaṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati îtthattaṁ paññāpanāya’). We

The Law of Dependent Arising 

have explained earlier the meaning of the term itthatta. ‘Itthaṁ’ 
means ‘this’. So ‘ itthatta’ is ‘thisness’. It stands for ‘the state of 
this existence.’ Therefore, the phrase in question means that there 
is a whirling round for designating this state of existence. You 
had better recall the simile of the vortex. Only when there is a 
vortex or a whirlpool in the ocean, can one point out a ‘there’ or 
‘here’. In order to explain this whirling round between two 
things, we cited the change of prices in the market based on 
supply and demand. In fact, all forms of existence are traceable to 
an inter-relation between consciousness and name and form. This, 
then is the Samsāric vortex. 
 When we see how a whirlpool in the sea or in a river 
draws in the flotsam and jetsam around it, we point it out saying 
‘There’ or ‘Here.’ Likewise we call a heap of grasping – a ‘livewhirlpool’ – a Person. The ‘first person’ is of course ‘I myself.’ 
‘You are’ the ‘second person,’ and ‘He, over there’ is the ‘third 
person.’ At least there has to be the latent conceit ‘Am’ 
(‘asmimāna’) to justify ‘Existence’. With the recognition of this 
‘Person’, the en tire repertoire of grammar and syntax falls into 
place. Here ‘I’ am, yonder ‘ you’ are and there ‘ he’ is. This is the 
basic framework for grammar. The Buddha points out to us that it 
is because we are enslaved by the grammatical super -structure 
that we cann ot understand Nibbāna and put an end to Saṁsāra. 
But if one reflects deeply, one would discover that the grammar 
itself is the product of ignorance and craving. Because of these, 
the worldlings get enslaved to linguistic usages. They do not 
understand the pragmatic purpose of linguistic usage. They think 
that the grammar of language conforms to the grammar of nature. 
The Buddha, on the other hand revealed to the world that 
language is merely a convention of limited applicability.  
 Let me mention another po int that is relevant to this 
subject. Once a deity raised a question in the Buddha’s presence 
regarding a doubt which even some of you might entertain. It is 
worded in the form of a verse but we shall give the gist of it. He

Sermon 5 

asks why the arahants who have accomplished the ‘TASK’ still 
go on using such expressions as ‘I say’ (‘ ahaṁ vadāmi’) and 
‘they tell me’ (‘ mamaṁ vadanti’). Is it because they still have 
conceit ( māna) in them? The Buddha explains that the arahant 
has given up bonds of conceit but that he  uses the worldly 
parlance only as ‘a way of speaking’.  
 ‘Loke samaññaṁ kusalo viditvā 
  vohāramattena so vohareyya’ 8 
 Being skillful in knowing the worldly parlance 
 He uses such expressions merely as a convention 
 Not only the arahants but the Buddha h imself uses such 
words as ‘I’ and ‘mine’ only by way of convention. So you may 
understand that the fault is not in using worldly conventions, but 
in being unaware of the fact that it is merely a convention. It is 
due to the ignorance of this fact that all logicians, philosophers 
and scientists have got stuck in the ‘WORD’ and created a lot of 
confusion for themselves and for others to languish long in 
Saṁsāra. 
 There is a wonderful maxim made known by the Buddha 
which throws more light on this hidden aspect  of language. The 
term ‘ akkheyyasaññino’ (lit, ‘percipient of the expressible’) 
reveals the close connection between perception and linguistic 
convention. The worldlings are in the habit of taking in 
perception. This perception has a connection with lingui stic 
usage. The Buddha draws our attention to this fact with the 
following declaration, which is like a maxim. 
 “vohāravepakkāhaṁ bhikkhave saññaṁ vadāmi. 
 Yathā yathā na ṁ sañjānāti tathā tathā voharati eva ṁ 
saññī ahosinti.” 9

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Monks, I say perception has as its result linguistic usage. 
In whatever way one perceives, just in that way one makes it 
known saying: ‘I was of such a perception.’” 
 The word ‘ vipāka’ implicit in the expression 
‘vohāravepakkāhaṁ’ is not to be confused with ‘ kammavipāka’ 
or karmic result. It only means that perception matures into 
linguistic usage. In whatever way one perceives, so one makes it 
known. One does not stop at perception. There is an urge to 
express it – to make it known to others. There comes in the need 
for language. The way one conveys it to others is: “I was of such 
a perception” or “I was percipient in this way.” One is already 
involved by saying so. In our writings we have explained the term 
‘papañcasaññāsaṅkhā’ 10 as ‘reckonings born of prolific 
perception.’ Through prolific perception worldlings get caught up 
in language. ‘ Saṅkhā’ as reckoning includes not only numerals  
but linguistic usage as well.  
 It is very important to understand the connection between 
perception and linguistic usage. This understandin g helps us to 
solve the problem of existence (‘ bhava’) which is apparently 
insoluble. When it is said that perception gives rise to linguistic 
usage, one can ask whether it is possible to be free from the bane 
of perception. There are some discourses which , until recently 
have escaped the serious attention of scholars where it is said that 
the arahants, when they are in the attainment called the ‘fruit of 
arahanthood’ are free from all perception. Whatever there is in 
the world that could be regarded as an object of perception, from 
all that they are free while in that supramundane state.  There are 
quite a number of discourses describing that extra -ordinary 
attainment. For instance in the Sandha Sutta we find the Buddha 
explaining to Venerable Sandha the na ture of that Samādhi. 
Within the context of a simile about an excellent thoroughbred of 
a horse, the Buddha calls an arahant ‘an excellent thoroughbred 
of a man’ (‘bhadro purisājāniyo’) and describes the nature of this

Sermon 5 

concentration. It is said that in him  the perception of earth, water, 
fire and air as well as other perceptions are not there. 11   
 There are many who raise the question whether 
materiality is fully negated and only mind is asserted in this 
Dhamma. We gave a certain simile to illustrate the correct 
standpoint. Suppose a blind man in his groping hits against a 
block of ice. He might come back with a perception of earth in it. 
When he approaches it the next time it is getting heated and he 
would come back with a perception of fire. By the time he goes 
there again it has melted and he returns with a perception of 
water. When he goes there for the fourth time it is evaporating 
and he brings back a perception of air. To make this simile 
meaningful we may compare the worldling to that blind man. The 
four great primaries (cattāro mahābhūtā) cannot be recognized as 
they are because they are always found as a combination. They 
can be distinguished only according to their intensity by means of 
constituents of the name group – feeling, perception, intenti on, 
contact and attention. Because of the feeling of hardness at the 
collision, that blind man got a perception of earth in the block of 
ice. That way name and form are inextricably interwoven. That 
we called the ‘tangle -within’ ( antojaṭā). The ‘tangle -without’ 
(bahijatā) is the interrelation between name and form and 
consciousness, for which the doting on his own image by 
Narcissus is an illustration. The entire Samsāric puzzle is 
traceable to this vortex of existence.  
 How does word and concept aggravate  this situation? The 
worldling, like that blind man, thinks that there is a ‘thing’ called 
‘earth’, a ‘thing’ called ‘water’, a ‘thing’ called ‘fire’ and a 
‘thing’ called ‘air’. Surely, can one deny these ‘things’? In the 
Sandha Sutta  there is a complete l ist of such ‘things’, a 
perception of which is not there in the attainment of the Fruit of  
Arahanthood – the Realm of Infinity of Space, the Realm of 
Infinity of Consciousness, the Realm of Nothingness, as well as 
the seen, the heard, the sensed, and the cognized. Existence as a

The Law of Dependent Arising 

whole has ceased. Whatever perception there is characteristic of 
existence, whatever object of the mind there can be, from all that, 
that ‘thoroughbred of a man’ is free while in the Arahattaphala 
Samādhi.    
 The way the Buddha wi nds up that sermon is highly 
significant. Having said that the excellent thoroughbred of a man 
does not meditate (‘ na jhāyati’) on any of the possible objects of 
concentration, the Buddha emphatically asserts in the end that he 
does meditate (jhāyati ca pana). Now comes th e impressive final 
declaration. 
 “Evaṁ jhāyiñca pana sandha bhadra ṁ purisājānīyaṁ 
saindā devā sabrahmakā sapajāpatikā ārakāva namassanti. 
            Namo te purisājañña  
namo te purisuttama 
yassa te nābhijānāma  
yampi nissāya jhāyasīti” 12 
“Sandha, the thoroughbred of a man thus meditating the 
gods with Inda, with Brahmā and with Pajāpati even from afar 
bow down saying: 
Homage to you, O thoroughbred of a man 
Homage to you, most excellent of men 
For what it is on which you meditate  
That we can never comprehend” 
This is the marvel of a Dhamma that transcends the world. 
The Buddha has presented this transcendental Dhamma through 
the Arahattaphala Samādhi  (concentration of the Fruit of 
Arahanthood). This is none other than the experience of t he 
cessation of existence ( bhavanirodha). It is, at the same time the 
cessation of the six sense spheres (saḷāyatananirodha). All the six 
sense spheres are rendered inactive. It is within these six that all 
the turmoil of the world goes on. During that ext raordinary 
concentration, the existence has ceased. It is in fact a reverting to

Sermon 5 

an experience already gone through at the attainment of 
arahanthood. That is why we pointed out that the arahants are not 
reborn by virtue of the fact that their last thought is this cessation 
of existence: ‘Bhavanirodho nibbānaṁ.’ Nibbāna is the cessation 
of existence. The arahants experience the taste of Nibbāna while 
in this paradoxical Samādhi.  
All this shows that this is an extraordinary Dhamma. The 
question of language i s also implicit in the solution offered. 
When the mind is fully liberated from perception, it is completely 
free from objects. We have earlier mentioned the terms used with 
reference to the emancipated mind – ‘appatiṭṭhaṁ, appavatta ṁ, 
anārammaṇaṁ.’ 13 That mind is not established anywhere, It has 
no continuity or existence and it has no object. ‘ Bhava’ or 
existence has ceased. The realization of cessation is itself the 
Deliverance. That is Nibbāna – not anything else. There is a lot of 
controversy among scholars regarding Nibbāna. Some would 
even call our interpretation Nihilistic.  
 Let me therefore bring up something special from this 
point onwards. In an earlier sermon we have already mentioned 
what the Buddha had said about consciousness. The nature of the 
consciousness of an arahant and the emancipation meant by 
Nibbāna can be understood in the light of what we have 
discussed so far. If we are to clarify further in terms of the simile 
of the vortex, it is as if the vortex has ceased. As a matter of fact, 
this simile of the vortex or the whirlpool is not something we 
have arbitrarily introduced. It is there in the discourses as a word 
of the Buddha, but the commentarial tradition has ignored it. 
Commentators have not understood its true significance. There is 
a very important verse in the Udāna that can be quoted in support 
of this. It comes as a paean of joy uttered by the Buddha in praise 
of Venerable Lakuṇtakabhaddiya who was an arahant.  
 acchecchi vaṭṭaṁ byagā nirāsaṁ  
visukkhā saritā na sandati

The Law of Dependent Arising 

chinnaṁ vaṭṭaṁ na vaṭṭati 
esevanto dukkhassa 14   
The whirlpool he cut off and reached the Desireless 
Streams dried up flow no more 
The whirlpool cut off whirls no more 
This itself is suffering’s end. 
He cut off the whirlpool or vortex. That is to say, the 
whirling around between consciousness and name and form has 
been cut off. Thereby he reached the Desireless ( byagā nirāsaṁ). 
The current of water is dried up and flows no more. The 
whirlpool thus cut off no more whirls. And this itself is the end of 
suffering.  
Supposing a whirlpool in the ocean comes to cease. As 
long as there is a whirlpool we can point out a ‘here’ and a 
‘there’, ‘this place’ and ‘that place’ – or personifying it, ‘this 
person’, and ‘that person’. But once the whirlpool has ceased, all 
these words lose their point of reference. Now there is only the 
wide expanse of the ocean as it was before the whirlpool came in. 
That ‘foolish’ current of water went in search of permanence in 
an impermanent world. It was a perversion, pure and simple. If at 
any point of time that current of water got dried up there is no 
whirlpool or ‘ vaṭṭa’ anymore. This is the whole story going by 
the ‘vaṭṭa’ terminology. But strangely enough the commentators 
brought in some other kind of ‘ vaṭṭa’ to explain Paṭicca 
Samuppāda. They speak of ‘ kamma va ṭṭa’, ‘ kilesa va ṭṭa’ and 
‘vipāka va ṭṭa’ (kamma -round, defilement -round and result -
round). They have fully ignored the most important story of the 
round. You all can now form some idea about Nibbāna, about the 
arahants mind, and about the objectless mind. 
 Because of this charge of Nihilism let me touch upon 
another aspect of the problem. While discussing Mahā 
Taṇhāsankhaya Sutta  in the previous sermon, we said that the

Sermon 5 

Buddha had compared consciousness to a fire .15 As you know  
there are six consciousnesses – eye-consciousness, ear -
consciousness and so on inclusive of mind -consciousness. The 
Buddha has pointed out that each of these consciousnesses is like 
a specific fire dependent on a specific type of fuel. For instance 
consciousness dependent on eye and forms is eye -consciousness. 
It arises only in dependence and not otherwise. Apart from that 
there is no consciousness either in the eye or in forms. Because of 
eye and fo rms arises eye -consciousness. Because of ear and 
sounds arises ear - consciousness and so on. What is the simile 
that the Buddha has given to illustrate this point? A fire that burns 
dependent on logs is called a log -fire, a fire that burns dependent 
on faggots is called a faggot -fire and a fire that burns dependent 
on chaff is called a chaff -fire. There is no abstract fire. It is 
always a specific fire. The Buddha compared the six kinds of 
consciousness to six kinds of fire. There is no independent 
consciousness to be called ‘the consciousness’. Whatever has 
arisen due to causes and conditions has, of necessity, to cease 
when these causes and conditions are not there. It is when all the 
six consciousnesses, namely eye -consciousness, ear -
consciousness, nose -consciousness, tongue -consciousness, body -
consciousness and mind -consciousness, cease that there is 
deliverance which is also called: ‘ viññāṇūpasama’ (appeasement 
of consciousness). As you all know, it is compared to the going 
out of a lamp as we find in the famous verse in the Ratana Sutta.  
 Khīṇaṁ purāṇaṁ navaṁ natthi sambhavaṁ 
 Virattacittā āyatike bhavasmiṁ 
 Te khīṇabījā avirūlhicchandā 
 Nibbanti dhīrā yathāyampadīpo 16 
 Extinct is the old, nothing new to arise 
 Detached in mind as to future existence 
 They of extinct seed with no desire to sprout 
 Go out like this lamp – those Prudent Ones.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 The verse figuratively conveys the situation at the last 
moment of the life of the arahants. ‘ Khīṇaṁ purāṇaṁ’ – All past 
kamma is finished. ‘ Navaṁ natthi sambhava ṁ’ – There is no 
arising of new kamma. ‘ Virattacittā āyatike bhavasmi ṁ’ – They 
are detached in mind as to future existence. ‘Te khīṇabījā’ – Their 
consciousness seed is extinct. ‘Avirūlhicchandā’ – Therefore, no 
desire can sprout forth in them. ‘ Nibbanti dhīrā yathāyampadīpo’ 
– The prudent ones get extinguished even like this lamp. 
 The simile of the going out of a flame comes up again in 
the ‘Upasīva māṇavapucchā’ in the Sutta Nipāta. 
 Accī yathā vātavegena khitto 
 atthaṁ paleti na upeti saṁkhaṁ 
 evaṁ muni nāmakāyā vimutto 
 atthaṁ paleti na upeti saṁkhaṁ 17  
    Like the flame thrown off by the force of wind 
 Goes to its end and comes not within reckoning 
 So the sage when released from the name-group 
 Goes to its end and comes not within reckoning 
 ‘Accī yathā vātavegena khitto ’ – just as a flame thrown 
off by the force of wind. ‘atthaṁ paleti na upeti saṁkhaṁ’ – goes 
to an end and cannot be reckoned as gone somewhere . ‘ evaṁ 
muni nāmakāyā vimutto’  – even so the sage released from the 
name-group. ‘ atthaṁ paleti na upeti sa ṁkhaṁ’ – comes to his 
end and cannot be reckoned or predicated.  
Upasīva is puzzled by this verse and implores  the Buddha 
to explain further. 
Atthaṁgato so udavā so natthi 
Udāhu ve sassatiyā arogo 
taṁ ve muni sādhu viyākarohi 
tathāhi te vidito esa dhammo 18

Sermon 5 

Has he reached his end, or does he not exist at all  
Or else is he eternally hale – not ill 
That to me explain well, O’sage 
For this Dhamma as such is known by you 
Upasīva is asking reverentially whether that sage has gone 
to the end or whether he does not exist any more or else is 
eternally free from disease. Now the Buddha clarifies it further in 
the following verse with which the discourse ends. But 
unfortunately many scholars are confused over the grand finale. 
Atthaṁgatassa na pamānamatthi 
Yena naṁ vajju taṁ tassa natthi 
Sabbesu dhammesu samūhatesu 
Samūhatā vādapathāpi sabbe 19   
 Of one who has reached his end – no measure is there 
 That by which they may speak of him – that is not for him 
 When all objects of mind are rooted out 
Rooted out too are all paths of debate   
The Arahant who has reached his end is beyond 
reckoning. He cannot be measured. Name and form is that by 
which others may speak of him, but that he has given up. When 
all objects of the mind which were listed above are  eradicated, all 
pathways of debate and controversy such as the dilemma and the 
tetralemma of the logicians are rendered ineffective. Logic is 
imprisoned between ‘is’ and ‘is not’. Dhamma is beyond the pale 
of logic ( atakkāvacaro).20 It is like the fire extinguished. This is 
an extremely clear-cut answer. But scho lars have confounded the 
issue. 
However, some Buddhist philosophers have correctly 
understood this position. Aśvaghosa, both a philosopher and poet, 
has beautifully presented this simile in his Sanskrit epic 
Saundarānanda

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Dīpo yathā nirvṛtiṁ abhyupeto 
naivāvaniṁ gacchati nāntarīkṣaṁ 
diśāṁ na kāncit vidiśāṁ na kāñcit 
snehakṣayāt kevelameti śāntiṁ 
Evaṁ kṛtī nirvṛtiṁ abhyupeto 
naivāvaniṁ gacchati nāntarīkṣaṁ 
diśāṁ na kāncit vidiśāṁ na kāñcit 
kleṣakṣayāt kevalameti śāntiṁ 
Even as the flame of a lamp when it goes out 
Goes not to the earth nor to the firmament 
Not to any direction nor to a sub-direction 
By exhaustion of oil only reaches appeasement  
So too the accomplished one when gone to extinction 
Goes not to the earth nor to the firmament 
Not to any direction nor to a sub-direction 
By extinction of taints only reaches appeasement 
When the flame of a lamp goes out by the exhau stion of 
oil, one cannot say that it has gone to the earth or to the sky or to 
any direction or sub direction. All one can say is that it has got 
extinguished. The term ‘ kṛtī’ stands for an arahant who has done 
his task ( katakaraṇīya). He cannot be traced after his final 
attainment of Parinibbāna even like the flame of the lamp. 
So it seems that although we started with Paṭicca 
Samuppāda as our topic, it automatically leads to a discussion of 
Nibbāna. As a matter of fact, Nibbāna cannot be understood 
without a knowledge of Paṭicca Samuppāda . Therefore let me 
add a special message at this point that could be helpful to those 
who listen to these sermons. Twenty years ago when I was at 
Meethirigala Nissarana Vanaya, I happened to del iver thirty three 
sermons on Nibbāna to the group of meditating monks there. 
After a number of years the Dhamma Publications Trust of 
Colombo (D.G.M.B) published those 33 sermons in eleven

Sermon 5 

volumes. An English translation also came out in seven volumes 
called “Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled.” The audio trust in Kandy 
(D.S.M.B) circulated those sermons and their translation in C.D. s 
and through its website all over the world. In those sermons on 
Nibbāna, we had occasion to say something on Paṭicca 
Samuppāda as w ell. However, now a new series titled ‘Pahan 
Kanuwa Paṭicca Samuppāda Sermons’ is just coming up. This is 
the fifth sermon. I do not know how many sermons would make 
up this series. Let time decide it. Though the topic of the series is 
Paṭicca Samuppāda, we cannot help discussing Nibbāna as well. 
There is an episode which clearly shows the connection 
between these two topics. You may have heard that the Buddha 
after his enlightenment reflected on the depth of this Dhamma. It 
is said in Ariyapariyesana Sutta  that after comprehending this 
wonderful Dhamma which is so profound, hard to see and hard to 
understand, peaceful and sublime, the Buddha wondered how the 
worldlings can understand such a Dhamma. It occurred to him 
then that there are two truths which it is hard for the worldlings to 
see,21 namely, specific conditionality ( idappaccayatā) or 
Dependent Arising ( Paṭicca Samuppāda ) and the stilling of all 
preparations, the relinquishment of all assets, the extinction of 
craving, detachment, cessation Nibbāna. It is because worldlings 
are confined within linguistic conventions that they cannot 
understand the links of the formula of Dependent Arising. They 
are imprisoned by logic and compelled to assert ‘is’ or ‘is not’ – 
absolute existence or absolute non -existence. But the correct 
position is otherwise.  
We have clearly pointed out what the basic principle of 
the law of Dependent Arising is.  
This being – this comes to be 
With the arising of this – this arises 
This not being – this does not come to be 
With the cessation of this – this ceases.22

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Here itself is the transcendence of logic ( atakkāvacara). 
Logic wants us to say ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the question of existence. 
But this is what the Buddha says. Worldlings find it difficult to 
take it in. They think that when an arahant finally passes away, he 
could be located somewhere. In this Law of Dependent Arising, 
there is a direct order and a reverse order. In the direct order we 
have the nature of Saṁsāra as-it-is. Venerable Sāriputta became a 
stream-winner already  as the ascetic Upatissa, when he heard 
only the first two lines of the verse uttered by Venerable Assaji. 
 Ye dhammā hetuppabhavā 
 tesaṁ hetuṁ tathāgato āha 23 
 Whatever things that arise from causes.  
 Their cause the Tathāgata has told. 
 Upatissa inferr ed by it, that if something arises from a 
cause, it has of necessity to cease when the cause ceases. The last 
two lines are on Nibbāna. 
 Tesañca yo nirodho 
 evaṁ vādī mahāsamano. 
 And also their cessation  
 Thus teaches the great ascetic. 
 If a problem is properly understood the solution is also in 
it. The direct order of the Law of Dependent Arising is the 
statement of the problem. The reverse order gives the solution. It 
is very difficult for the worldlings to understand that they are 
incarcerated between ‘is’ and ‘is not’. 
 Given ignorance, a series of conditioned phenomena come 
to be. With the cessation of ignorance they cease to be. There is 
an extremely important discourse which highlights these 
distinctive features of the Dhamma. Let us briefly touch upon it 
for the present. It is the Kaccānagotta Sutta  24 of the Saṁyutta

Sermon 5 

Nikāya. A monk, Kaccānagotta by name, approaches the Buddha 
and says:  
“Venerable Sir, ‘Right View’, ‘Right View’ it is said. In 
what way Venerable Sir, is there right view?” 
You may have heard various definitions of right view. 
Here is something peculiar: 
The Buddha says: 
“Dvayanissito khvāya ṁ Kaccāna loko yebhuyyena 
atthitañceva natthitañca. 
Lokasamudayaṁ kho Kaccāna yathābhūta ṁ sammappaññāya passato yā loke natthitā sā na hoti.  
Lokanirodhaṁ kho Kaccāna yathābhūta ṁ sammappaññāya passato yā loke atthitā sā na hoti.” 
“This world, Kaccāna, for the most part depend s upon a 
duality – upon the notion of existence and the notion of 
non-existence. For one who sees the arising of the wor ld 
as it really is with correct wisdom, there is no notion of 
non-existence in regard to the world. And for one who 
sees the cessation of the world as it really is with correct 
wisdom, there is no notion of exi stence in regard to the 
world.” 
Here the Buddha points out that the world is resting on the 
two extreme views of existence and non -existence. Then this is 
how the Buddha shows us the middle way. For one who sees the 
arising of the world as it is with correct wisdom, there is no 
notion of non -existence. To the insight meditator who sees the 
arising aspect of the world, the notion of absolute non -existence 
does not occur. And to the insight meditator who sees the 
cessation aspect of the world, the notion of absolute existence 
does not occur. The world is  holding on to the two dogmatic 
views of absolute existence and absolute non -existence. But the 
Buddha avoids this absolutism. Paticcasamuppanna means arisen

The Law of Dependent Arising 

in dependence on causes and conditions. The world is incessantly 
arising and ceasing. But the worldling resting on the notion of the 
compact due to craving and grasping, tenaciously believes that a 
thing exists absolutely. If absolute existence is one end the other 
end should be absolute non -existence, tantamount to annihilation. 
But as we sometimes pointed out, if anything is lost, it is only the 
ignorance that ‘ there is something ’ and the craving that ‘ there 
isn’t enough .’ That is all. There is nothing to lament. This is 
precisely why Gotama Buddha as well as Vipassi Buddha made 
known their realization with the words: 
“Samudayo samudayoti kho me bhikkhave pubbe 
ananussutesu dhammasu cakkhu ṁ udapādi ñā ṇaṁ udapādi 
paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. 
. . . .        nirodho nirodhoti kho me bhikkhave pubbe 
ananussutesu dhammasu cakkhu ṁ udapādi ñā ṇaṁ udapādi 
paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi.” 
 “Arising, arising – thus monks, in regard to things 
unheard before, there arose in me the eye, the knowledge, the 
wisdom, the science, the light. 
. . . .   Cessation, cessation – thus monks, i n regard to things 
unheard before, there arose in me the eye, the knowledge, the 
wisdom, the science, the light.” 
 The process of arising and cessation is going on all the 
time, but the worldling has taken up the wrong view called 
‘sakkāyadiṭṭhi’ 25 (personality view) misconstruing the whole 
group to be existing ( sat + kāya ). Because of that view they are 
imprisoned by the limitations of language and logic which rest on 
the duality of absolute existence and absolute non -existence. Not 
only the ordinary worl dling, but the worldly philosopher as well 
as the modern scientist has got stuck there. Not being satisfied 
with the dilemma, the philosopher has created a tetralemma  26 to 
make the confusion worst confounded. But the Buddha has 
transcended all these by th is Dhamma which is atakkāvacara

Sermon 5 

(‘not moving within the sphere of logic’). He transcended logic 
the moment he gained the insight into the incessant arising and 
ceasing. He understood that it is not possible to take a defin ite 
stand on ‘is’ or ‘is not’.  
 Let me give a simple illustration for your easy 
comprehension – a simile I gave in my sermons on Nibbāna. I 
suppose you all like similes. Sometimes behind a shop window or 
in a showroom they display a ‘magic -kettle’, from which water 
flows non-stop into a b asin under it. The kettle never goes empty 
nor does the basin overflow. That is the magic. The secret is that 
there is a hidden tube which conducts the water back into the 
kettle. Well, take it that the world itself is a ‘Magic -kettle’. The 
process of arising and ceasing is going on all the time even within 
our bodies. So also in the world outside. World systems go on 
arising and ceasing – expanding and contracting ( vivaṭṭa and 
saṁvaṭṭa). This is the profound truth the Buddha has revealed to 
the world. But the worldlings committed and limited as they are 
by ‘personality-view’ and enslaved as they are by perception, by 
language and logic, come again and again under the yoke of 
Death (‘yogamāyanti maccuno’). 
 Well, enough for today. I hope you will bear with m e if 
some explanations appeared too deep. But you need not complain 
like that deity. Perhaps when the sermon comes in a form of a 
C.D. you can absorb it quietly. I take it that you all have spent the 
day observing higher precepts in a meditative atmosphere  with 
Nibbāna as your aim. I wish this sermon too will help you realize 
your noble aspirations. Whatever beings there be, from the lowest 
hell to the highest Brahma -world, may they all rejoice in our 
sermon. May the merits accrued by that rejoicing conduce  to the 
fulfilment of their higher aims!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. S.I 11 Samiddhi Sutta  
2. S.I 8 Samiddhi Sutta 
3. S.I 9 Samiddhi Sutta 
4. S.I 12 Samiddhi Sutta 
5. S.I 12 Samiddhi Sutta 
6. S.I 12 Samiddhi Sutta 
7. D.II 63-64 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
8. S.I 14 Arahaṁ Sutta 
9. A.III 413 Nibbedhikapariyāya Sutta  
10.  M.I 109 Madhupiṇḍika Sutta 
11. A.V 324 Sandha Sutta 
12. A.V 325 Sandha Sutta 
13. Ud.80 Paṭhama Nibbāna Sutta 
14. Ud. 75 Dutiya Bhaddiya Sutta 
15. M.I 256 Mahā Taṇhāsaṁkhaya Sutta 
16. Sn 41-42 Ratana Sutta 
17. Sn 206 Upasīvamāṇavapucchā  
18. Sn 207 Upasīvamāṇavapucchā 
19. Sn 207 Upasīvamāṇavapucchā 
20. M.I 167 Ariyapariyesana Sutta 
21. M.I 167 Ariyapariyesana Sutta 
22. Ud. 2 Bodhi Sutta 
23. Vin.I 38ff 
24. S.II 17 Kaccānagotta Sutta 
25. S.III 159 Sakkāya Sutta 
26. M.I 426 Cūla Mālunkya Sutta

Sermon 6 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 188)
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Jāti maraṇa saṁsāraṁ 
ye vajanti punappunaṁ 
itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ 
avijjāyeva sā gati 
avijjā hayaṁ mahā moho 
yenidaṁ saṁsitaṁ ciraṁ 
vijjāgatā ca ye sattā 
nāgacchanti punabbhavam 1 
   – Dvāyatānupassanā S. Sn. 
Those who go on wandering again and again 
Alternating in saṁsāra between birth and death 
Are involved in a change from thisness to otherwiseness 
Which is merely a journey of ignorance 
This ignorance is the vast delusion 
Whereby for long this saṁsaric journey has gone on 
But those that have come by knowledge 
Come back never again to repeated birth. 
  
Dear Listeners,  
 What is called ‘life’ is the period between birth and death. 
What is called ‘Saṁsāra’ is the alternation between birth and 
death. We have taken up as the topic of our sixth sermon on 
Dependent Arising two verses that highlight the connection 
between these two.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 The two verses are found in the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
of the Sutta Nipāta . In  the brief introductory story of this 
discourse which embodies a lot of deep points in the Dhamma, 
one can sense an intense fervour of the Dhamma. You had better 
form a mental picture of a moonlit night at Pubbārāma in 
Sāvatthi on a full moon day when the Buddha is seated in the 
open air surrounded by the congregation of monks. Having 
surveyed the company of monks with the Buddha -eye as they 
were seated quietly with rapt attention, the Buddha started a deep 
sermon with this prologue.  
 “Monks, whatever skillful contributory mental states there 
are, that are noble and effectively leading up to enlightenment, if 
there are any persons who question about the justifiable purpose 
of listening to them, they should be told: 
 “It is just for the purpose of knowing as  it is the dualities 
in this Dhamma. And what would you call a duality?  
‘This is suffering – this is the arising of suffering. This is 
one mode of contemplation. 
This is the cessation of suffering – this is the path of 
practice leading towards the cessation of suffering. This is 
the second mode of contemplation.’ 
 And therein, monks, of a monk who thus dwells diligently 
zealous and ardent, rightly contemplating the dualities, one of 
two results maybe  expected – either full comprehension in this 
very life or if there is any residual clinging, the fruit of non -
returning.” After this initial exhortation, the Buddha uttered four 
verses pertaining to the Four Noble Truths.  
 Then again addressing the company of monks, the Buddha 
said:

Sermon 6 

 “Monks, if there are any who put the question ‘Could 
there be another mode of contemplating correctly the duality? ’ –  
they should be told: ‘There is’, and how? 
 ‘Whatever suffering that originates all that is due to 
assets’ – this is one mode of contemplation. ’ But with the utter 
fading away and cessation of assets there is no origination of 
suffering – this is the second contemplation.” You had better note 
that what is here called ‘assets’ or ‘upadhi’ are the five 
aggregates of gasping we have deposited in this long Saṁsāra. So 
according to the Buddha the cause of the entire mass of suffering 
is the five aggregates of grasping. So much so that with the 
remainderless fading away and cessation of these assets there is 
no origination of suffering.  
 In the same way this discourse introduces as many as 
sixteen modes of contemplation. The special feature is that each 
mode of contemplation is introduced with the supposition that 
there are those who question the possibility of anothe r mode of 
contemplation. Firstly the Buddha describes the topic under 
consideration in prose and then gives three or four verses 
concerning its importance as a mode of contemplation. We do not 
propose to discuss fully all the topics raised in this long dis course 
but the special significance of this particular sermon preached by 
the Buddha is that at the end of it all the sixty monks who listened 
to it attained arahanthood extirpating all influxes. It is such an 
important discourse.  
 It is the third mode of  contemplation given in this 
discourse that we have taken up as the topic of our sermon today. 
Now this is the statement in prose with which the Buddha 
introduces the verses relevant to the topic.  
 ‘yaṁ kiñci dukkha ṁ sambhoti sabba ṁ avijjā paccayā, 
avijjāyatveva asesavirāga nirodhā natthi dukkhassa sambhavo.’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Whatever suffering that originates all that is due to 
ignorance, with the remainderless fading away and cessation of 
ignorance, there is no origination of suffering.” It is after this 
declaration that the Buddha utters the two verses forming our 
topic. 
 ‘Jāti maraṇa saṁsāraṁ – ye vajanti punappunaṁ 
  itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ – avijjāyeva sā gati’ 
 “Those who keep wan dering again and again in this 
saṁsāra which is an alternation between birth and deat h 
tantamount to a ‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’, are involved in a 
journey which is merely a perpetuation of ignorance.” 
 ‘avijjā hayaṁ mahāmoho – yenidaṁ saṁsitaṁ ciraṁ 
  vijjāgatā ca ye sattā – nāgacchanti punabbhavam’ 
 “Ignorance is the great delusion due to which one has 
wandered long in this saṁsāra. Those beings that are endowed 
with knowledge do not come back to repeated existence.” 
 I wish to discuss these two verses in some detail. Let me 
cite at length a certain h ighly significant discourse which I 
touched upon briefly the other day, namely the Kaccānagotta 
Sutta 2 of the Saṁyutta Nikāya . I shall give it in some detail so 
that even those of you who were not present the other day could 
easily follow it. This is how the discourse begins.  
 A monk named Kaccānagotta approaches the Buddha and 
asks him: “Venerable Sir, Right view, Right View i t is said. In 
how far Venerable Sir, does one have right view? ” 
 The Buddha replies:  
 “Dvayanissito kho aya ṁ Kaccāna loko yebhuyyena 
atthitañceva natthitañca”

Sermon 6 

 “Kaccāna, this world for the most part, rests on a duality, 
namely existence and non-existence.” 
 Then he proceeds to proclaim a wonderful middle path. 
 “Kaccāna to one who sees as it is with right wisdom the 
arising of the world, the view of non -existence about the world 
does not occur, and to one who sees as it is with right wisdom the 
cessation of the world, the view of existence about the world does 
not occur.” The reference here is to the two views of eternalism 
and annihilationism. 
 Then the Buddha goes on to say that this world for the 
most part is given to approaching, grasping and entering into 
views ( upaya upādanā -abhinivesa vinibandho ). But if one does 
not approach, grasp and take one ’s stand upon that tendency to 
approaching, grasping and that mental standpoint with the idea: 
‘This is myself ’, then one would not doubt nor waver about the 
fact that it is only suffering that arises and only suffering that 
ceases.  He would have a knowledge of it which is not dependent 
on another. With this the Buddha gives the reply to Kaccāna’s 
question saying: “In so far Kaccāna, has one right view.” In 
conclusion he says by way of explanation:  
 “Sabbaṁ atthīti kho Kaccāna, aya ṁ eko anto. Sabba ṁ 
natthīti ayam dutiyo anto. Ete te  Kaccāna ubho ante 
anupagamma majjhena Tathāgato dhamma ṁ deseti: 
avijjāpaccayā  sa ṅkharā  sa ṅkharāpaccayā viññāṇaṁ,................, 
evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti. 
avijjāyatveva asesavirāganirodhā sa ṅkhāranirodho, 
saṅkhāranirodhā viññā ṇanirodho, ..............  evametassa 
kevalassa dukkhakhhandhassa nirodho hoti.” 
 “Everything exists ’ – this, O Kaccāna, is one extreme. 
‘Nothing exists ’ – this, O Kaccāna, is the second extreme. 
Avoiding these two extremes Kaccāna, the Tathagatha preaches 
the Dhamma by the middle: “Depending on ignorance

The Law of Dependent Arising 

preparations, depending on preparations consciousness, …........... 
this is the arising of this whole mass of suffering. But with the 
remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance (comes) 
the cessation of preparations, with the cessation of preparations, 
cessation of consciousness, …......... thus is the cessation o f this 
whole mass of suffering.”  
 You all are familiar with the middle path as expounded in 
the ‘Dhammacakkapavattana Sutta ’ 3 – namely the Noble 
Eightfold Path which avoids the two extremes of indulgence in 
sense pleasures and self-mortification. Now this Kaccāna Sutta is 
also a sermon preached by the Buddha. Here the concept of the 
middle path is the avoidance of the two extreme views 
‘Everything exists’ and ‘Nothing exists’. What does this middle 
way amount to? The Law of Dependent Arising.  
 As we menti oned earlier, the formula of Dependent 
Arising has a direct order and an indirect order. In the direct order 
the formula begins with ‘Depending on ignorance, preparations, 
depending on preparations consciousness and so on and ends with 
the statement: Thus is the arising of this whole mass of suffering. 
In the indirect order the formula begins by saying that with the 
remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes the 
cessation of preparations, with the cessation of preparations the 
cessation of c onsciousness, ..... , and concludes with the 
declaration: Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering. 
You had better note the significance of the direct order and the 
indirect order. Thereby the Buddha evolves a middle path 
between the above two  extreme views. Talking about the middle 
path, all this time we are used to identifying the middle path with 
the Noble Eightfold Path. You had better understand the reason 
for it. It is true that the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta preached 
to the group of fiv e monks is undoubtedly the very first sermon 
and as such a great discourse. But there is a particular reason 
which inspired it. Those five monks entertained doubts about the 
Buddha’s enlightenment because he gave up the austerities of

Sermon 6 

self-mortification. That is why the Buddha adopted that mode of 
presentation of the Noble Eightfold Path as the avoidance of the 
two extremes of self -indulgence and self -mortification. All the 
same the Law of Dependent Arising is implicit in that discourse. 
The reason for the point of emphasis was the necessity of 
convincing them.  
 Unfortunately, however, our commentarial tradition has 
not taken sufficient cognizance of this aspect of the middle path. 
Owing to that, quite a number of very important discourses on 
Nibbāna have remained obscure. A lack of appreciation of the 
Law of Dependent Arising, or the middle path between ‘is’ and 
‘is not’ views is responsible for this neglect. As we pointed out 
earlier, that spontaneous utterance of the Buddhas, namely, 
‘arising, aris ing’ ‘ceasing, ceasing, ’ soon after their realization, 
sketches out the middle path between those two extremes in that 
it is a reflection of the incessant process of arising and ceasing 
going on in the world.  
 On various occasions we have brought up impor tant 
discourses relating to this particular middle path. One such 
popular but abstruse discourse is the ‘Bāhiya Sutta’.4 The middle 
path implicit in the Bāhiya Sutta is not understood by many who 
read it. Let us recollect it. Bāhiya Dāruciriya was an ascetic with 
a high degree of samsāric maturity. He had meditated on his own 
and reached a stage which he took to be arahanthood. A certain 
deity had pointed out to him that it is an overestimation and 
directed him to the Buddha. With an intense eagerness he came to 
see the Buddha. By that time the Buddha was on his alms round, 
and in all haste Bāhiya begged him to preach the Dhamma. For 
some reason or other the Buddha refused the request twice but 
upon the third insistent request came out with a wonderfully bri ef 
and cryptic sermon which begins with this initial injunction:  
 “Tasmātiha Bāhiya eva ṁ sikkhitabbaṁ diṭṭhe 
diṭṭhamattaṁ bhavissati, sute sutamatta ṁ bhavissati, mute

The Law of Dependent Arising 

mutamattaṁ bhavissati viññāte viññātamatta ṁ bhavissati. 
Evañhite Bāhiya sikkhitabbaṁ.” 
 “Well then Bāhiya, thus should you train yourself: ‘In the 
seen there will be just the seen, in the heard there will be just the 
heard, in the sensed there will be just the sensed, in the cognized 
there will be just the cognized.’ Thus should you train yourself.” 
 Then the Buddha outlines the final outcome of that 
training.  
 “Yato kho te Bāhiya di ṭṭhe diṭṭhamattaṁ bhavissati, sute 
sutamattaṁ bhavissati, mute mutamatta ṁ bhavissati, viññāte  
viññātamattaṁ bhavissati, tato tva ṁ Bāhiya na tena, yato tva ṁ  
Bāhiya na tena,  tato tvaṁ Bāhiya na tattha, yato tvaṁ Bāhiya na 
tattha,  tato tvaṁ Bāhiya nevidha na huraṁ na ubhayamantarena 
esevanto dukkhassa.” 
 “And when, to you Bāhiya there will be in the seen just 
the seen, in the heard just the heard, in the sensed just the sensed 
and in the cognized just the cognized, then Bāhiya you are not 
‘by it’. And when Bāhiya you are not ‘by it’, then Bāhiya you are 
not ‘in it’. And when Bāhiya you are not in it, then Bāhiya you 
are neither here nor there, nor in between. This itself is the end of 
suffering.” 
 The implication is that at whatever time one stops short at 
the seen and takes it only as a seen and not something seen, and 
likewise in the case of heard, only as a heard and not something 
heard, in the sensed only as a sensed and not something sensed, 
and in the cognized only as a cognized and not as something 
cognized, that is to say, there is no imagining a ‘thinghood’, then 
one would not be thinking in terms of it. One would not imagine 
‘by it’ (‘tena’) in the instrumental sense or ‘in it’ (‘tattha’) in the 
locative sense. As we said earlier, the problem of Saṁsāra lies 
hidden in the linguistic medium. For instance in the case of a 
seen, when one takes the concept of a chair in the substantive

Sermon 6 

sense there will be ‘by’ or ‘with’ the chair as well as a positing of 
‘in the chair ’ or else, if one does not stop short at the heard but 
imagines a ‘music’ in it there will be a ‘by music ’ and an ‘in 
music’. Thereby one takes a standpoint and tacitly identifies 
oneself with it. On the other hand, if one does not take such a 
standpoint, one is neither ‘here’ nor ‘there’ nor ‘in between the 
two’. A middle exists relative to two ends. When one  is free from 
the two ends and does not take a stand in the middle saying ‘this 
is myself’ as stated in the ‘Kaccānagotta Sutta’ one would win to 
the conviction that what arises is only suffering and what ceases 
is only suffering. That itself is the end of suffering. 
 Then there is another brief but highly significant sutta in 
the same text  – Udāna. It is a sermon specifically dealing with 
Nibbāna (‘Nibbāna patisa ṁyutta’) which the Buddha addressed 
to the monks. That sermon too app ears rather cryptic and ri ddlelike in its formulation. It is worded as follows: 
 Nissitassa calitaṁ 
 anissitassa calitaṁ natthi 
 calite asati passaddhi 
 passaddhiyā sati nati na hoti  
 natiya asati āgati gati na hoti 
 āgati gatiyā asati cutūpapāto na hoti 
 cutūpapāte asati nevidha na huraṁ na ubhayamantarena 
 esevanto dukkhassa. 5 
 The first two words are probably familiar to you by now: 
‘Nissitassa calitaṁ’. The word ‘Nissitassa’ might remind you of 
the term ‘dvayanissita’ (resting on a duality) in the Kaccāna Sutta 
discussed above. ‘Nissita’ has the sense of ‘resting on’, ‘leaning 
on’ or ‘being attached to ’. To one who rests on the duality of 
eternalist view and annihilationist view, there is unsteadiness 
(calitaṁ). If you are leaning on something, when it moves or 
shakes you have to move or shake with it. This is the basic 
principle the Buddha puts forward first of all. Then he gives the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

converse of that statement: ‘anissitassa calita ṁ natthi.’ To one 
who does not rest or lean on something, there is no unsteadiness 
or shaking. As it is said in the ‘Kaccānagotta Sutta’, if one does 
not lean on extreme views by going the middle way, there is no 
unsteadiness ( ‘anissitassa calita ṁ natthi’). When there is no 
unsteadiness, there is calm ( ‘passaddhi’). When there is calm 
there is no inclination or bending ( ‘passaddhiyā sati nati na 
hoti’). Understood deeply, it means the absence of craving. 
Where there is no inclination there is no coming and going 
(‘natiya asati āgati gati na hoti ’). When there is an inclining, 
there is a  possibility of falling somewhere – a possibility of 
‘coming and going’. When there is no coming and going there is 
no question of death and rebirth ( ‘āgati gatiyā asati cutūpapāto 
na hoti ’). When there is no death and rebirth there is neither a 
‘here’ nor a ‘there’ nor in between the two ( ‘cutūpapāte asati 
nevidha na huraṁ na ubhayamantarena’). This itself is the end of 
suffering (‘esevanto dukkhassa’). 
 Here too we find the question of linguistic conventions 
coming in. As we have already mentioned the kno tty problem of 
Saṁsāra can be traced to linguistic conventions which we 
ourselves have created. Language and logic are transcended in 
this Dhamma. That is why it is called ‘atakkāvacara’ (‘not 
moving within the sphere of logic ’). It grasps neither the two 
extremes nor the middle. This is the training which culminates in 
Nibbāna. 
 We put forward these ideas more or less as a commentary 
to the two verses in question. Let us now turn our attention again 
to these two verses.  
 ‘Jāti maraṇa saṁsāraṁ – ye vajanti punappunaṁ 
  itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ – avijjāyeva sā gati’ 
 Here we have two peculiar terms:  itthabhāva 
aññathābhāva – ‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’. What is called

Sermon 6 

‘birth’ and ‘death’ is tantamount to an alternation between 
‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’. Just ponder over this statement. 
So this alternation is merely a journey of ignorance. It is not 
someone’s journey. Only a journey of ignorance. Therefore 
ignorance is a vast delusion ( ‘mahā moho ’) as stated in the 
second verse. However the t wo most important terms are 
‘itthabhāva’ and ‘aññathābhāva’. 
 As you might recall, while discussing Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
we happened to mention that the Buddha in his questioning of 
venerable Ānanda step by step about the mutual relationship 
between consciousness and name and form posed the following 
question:  
 “Ānanda if consciousness having descended into the 
mother’s womb slips out, will name and form get born into a state 
of thisness (‘itthatta’)?” 6 
 There we came across the term ‘itthatta’; ‘Itthatta’ is none 
other than  ‘itthabhāva’ just as  ‘nānatta’ is a synonym for 
‘nānābhāva’. Granted that ‘itthatta’ means ‘itthabhāva’ we can 
gather something about it from the above reference itself. So it is 
only so long as consciousness and name and form are found 
together in a mother ’s womb, that we can expect the birth of a 
child. As we happened to mention in that context, if 
consciousness slips out only a ball of flesh would come out of the 
womb. It is only when these two continue to be together that a 
child is born into this world as a ‘thisness’. This is because when 
the new born child looks around, he finds himself born into a 
world of six sense spheres. From his point of view it is a 
‘thisness’. Therefore thisness is equivalent to ‘birth’. 
Otherwiseness is his journey towards ‘decay and death’. So then, 
‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’ is an inseparable pair. The 
worldling tries to  separate birth from death and keep back birth 
and reject death. But this is an impossibility. It is an inseparable 
pair.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 So it is clear that thisness ( itthabhāva) is birth. The 
moment one grasps something as ‘THIS’ giving it a ‘thingness’ it 
starts beco ming otherwise. He comes under the inescapable law 
of impermanence. Therefore ‘itthabhāva’ and ‘aññathābhāva’ are 
tantamount to ‘birth’ and ‘death’. The alternation between them 
in Saṁsāra is merely a journey of ignorance ( ‘avijjāyeva sā 
gati’). 
 There is an important discourse which brings out the 
implications of the two terms ‘itthabhāva’ and ‘aññathābhāva’. 
Although we happened to discuss it earlier too, we take it up 
again because it is relevant. Soon after his enlightenment the 
Buddha as he wa s seated cross legged under the Bodhi tree in 
Uruvelā on the banks of River Neranjarā, arising from his 
concentration after seven days, surveyed the world with his 
Buddha-eye and uttered this verse as a paean of joy. It is a 
powerful utterance showing how deeply he reflected on the 
pathetic condition of the world.  
ayaṁ loko santāpajāto phassapareto – rogaṁ vadati attato 
yena yenahi maññati – tato taṁ hoti aññathā 7 
This grief-stricken world given over to contact  
Speaks of a disease in terms of a self  
Whatever ‘thing’ he thinks ‘in terms of’ 
Thereby itself it turns otherwise.  
 In the introductory part of this discourse it is said that the 
Buddha in surveying the world with his Buddha -eye, saw beings 
stricken with grief due to various burning sensations  born of lust, 
hate and delusion and uttered this verse. The world is grief -
stricken and enslaved by contact ( ‘santāpajāto phassapareto ’) 
and calls a disease or a nest of di seases (i.e. the body) a self 
(‘rogaṁ vadati attato ’). What happens as a result of taking this 
nest of diseases as a self? Now comes a significant statement: 
yena yenahi maññati – tato ta ṁ hoti aññathā: whatever one

Sermon 6 

thinks in terms of, thereby it turns otherwise. The newly born 
child thinks ‘I am in this world ’ and with that very thought  the 
germ of impermanence takes over and that itself is the beginning 
of turning otherwise or change.  
 Then the Buddha goes on to explain what happens as a 
result of this ‘minding’ (maññanā) 
 ‘aññathā bhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavapareto  
 bhavamevābhinandati  
 yadabhinandati taṁ bhayaṁ 
 yassa bhāyati taṁ dukkhaṁ 
 bhavavippahānāya kho panidaṁ 
 brahmacariyaṁ vussati.’ 8 
 The world attached to becoming 
 And given over to becoming 
 Though becoming otherwise 
 Yet delights in becoming 
 What it delights in 
 Is a cause for fear 
 And what it is scared of 
 Is suffering itself 
 But for abandoning that becoming 
 Is this holy life lived.  
 This is an extraordinary analysis of the predicament the 
world finds itself in. The nature of the world is to become 
otherwise due to the inexorable law of impermanence. But the 
world (i.e. the worldlings) is attached to becoming and given over 
to becoming ( ‘Attathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavapareto ’). It 
therefore delights in becoming ( ‘bhavamevābhinandati’). The 
very fact that it del ights is a fear – a dread (‘yadabhinandati taṁ 
bhayaṁ’). What is fearful or dreadful is suffering ( ‘yassa bhāyati 
taṁ dukkhaṁ’). Then comes the solution to the problem: It is for

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the abandoning of becoming that this holy life is lived 
(‘bhavavippahānāya kho panidaṁ – brahmacariyaṁ vussati’). 
 Just ponder over this paradoxical situation. It is in the 
nature of becoming to become otherwise. But the worldling is 
attached to and given over to becoming. In fact it delights in 
becoming which itself is a cause of fear. What it is apprehensive 
of, is suffering bound up with the inexorable law of 
impermanence. 
 Then the Buddha makes this significant declaration: 
 “Whatever recluses or Brahmins spoke of release from 
existence by means of existence, I say that they are  not released 
from existence. 
 Whatever recluses or Brahmins who spoke of a stepping 
out of existence by means of non -existence, I say that they all 
have not stepped out of existence. 
 All this suffering arises due to assets. By the destruction 
of all grasping there is no arising of suffering.” 
 A peculiar word came up in this discourse namely, 
‘maññati’. Earlier too we called ‘maññanā’ a ‘minding’ – a 
‘thinking’ – in terms of: It is a fancying – in other words caused 
by ignorance. Once born into the world the child fancies itself to 
be a mannikin. Parents take it to be their own child – this 
combination of name and form and consciousness. Whether it 
likes it or not there is growth which in effect  is decay. The 
Buddha speaks only of birth decay and death – not of any growth 
as such. From birth itself change takes over. That is to say from 
birth itself there is a progress towards decay and death. The world 
is imprisoned within this duality. That is what the Buddha calls 
suffering. Scholars suggest all sorts of etymologies for the word 
‘dukkha’. We in our own way suggested a certain etymology in 
our Nibbāna sermons. ‘Duh’ means with difficulty or hardship

Sermon 6 

and ‘kha’ means bearing up. So ‘dukkha’ means though with 
difficulty one bears up. Though one bears up it is difficult. 
 Let me give a simple simile as an illustration. In fact I 
gave a simile of a ‘serpent circle ’. I borrowed the idea from a 
cartoon I saw in my boyhood. The cartoon had three cages or  
‘windows’. The first cage showed two serpents – say, a cobra and 
a viper – trying to swallow each other. In the first cage the viper’s 
tail is shown to be in the cobra’s mouth while the cobra’s tail is in 
the viper ’s mouth. The second cage showed that the  cobra has 
swallowed half of the viper and that the viper has swallowed half 
of the cobra. That means now we have a ‘serpent circle’. Try to 
guess what could be in the third cage. Let us for a moment think 
that the cobra has swallowed the viper. Then the v iper is not 
visible. If the viper has swallowed the cobra, the latter would not 
be visible. Whatever it is, the third cage only showed a few short 
lines in the centre suggestive of a “VOID”. But is it a possibility? 
can they successfully swallow each other ? It is a possibility only 
in the realm of logic – never in the world of reality. So the actual 
situation in the world is as represented by the second cage – the 
‘serpent-circle’. It is a conflict – a deadlock. The cobra has to 
bear up somehow though it is  difficult to do so. It started 
swallowing but cannot finish it. Same with the viper ’s attempt to 
swallow the cobra. Though it is difficult both have to bear up. 
Though they bear up, it is difficult. They are in a fix! 
 Well, this is our predicament too. You talk about income 
and expenditure. It is a similar attempt to swallow up – whether 
at state level or household level. Husband and wife are in conflict 
with regard to income and expenditure. ‘Income’ tries to swallow 
up ‘expenditure’ and ‘expenditure’ tries to swallow up ‘income’. 
In economics there is the risk of inflation. Between supply and 
demand there is another ‘serpent-circle’. Just think about the 
society at large -institutions and the like. ‘Duties’ try to swallow 
up ‘rights’ and ‘rights’ try to swallow up ‘duties’. The result is 
strikes. What about our in -breath and out -breath and our blood

The Law of Dependent Arising 

circulation? It is the same conflict everywhere. This is the 
suffering. But the world refuses to understand this precarious 
situation for wh at it is. Instead it goes on craving for existence – 
for birth again and again. It craves for birth but abhors death. This 
is the tragicomedy before us.  
 Talking about this liking for birth and disliking for death, 
let us bring up a little simile in the f orm of a parable. However 
much we explain this deep point some of you might not grasp it. 
But when it comes in the form of simile it is easily understood. 
Let us take one from the village life itself.  
 Simple Siyadoris, the habitual drunkard, suddenly die s. 
Usually in the case of a sudden death, a post -mortem is held. But 
before the formal inquest there is a tendency in the village to hold 
many informal inquests. First of all let us consult the venerable 
chief monk. His verdict is that his lay -supporter Siyadoris died 
because he cou ld not keep the fifth precept ( i.e. abstinence from 
intoxicants). Now let us ask the village school master. His 
opinion is that this premature death is due to illiteracy. What does 
the Member of the Parliament say? He would put i t down to 
abject poverty due to misgovernment by the ruling party. Let us 
ask the wife of the dead man who was at his bedside at the time 
of the death. She might say that her husband died because he 
could not breathe. What is the coroner ’s verdict? It states that the 
death is due to chronic cirrhosis. But all these are partial truths. If 
we ask the Buddha he would say that Siyadoris died for the 
simple reason that he was born! 
 There you are laughing – but that is the fact. Of course 
you might say “You don’t have to tell us that. We know that” But 
that is precisely what has to be told. That is what the world does 
not KNOW! 
 You may recall what we pointed out in our discussion of 
the Mahāpadāna Sutta. When we analyse the Paṭicca Samuppāda

Sermon 6 

formula these days w e usually begin with the first two lines: 
‘avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā’ (‘dependent on ignorance 
preparations’). It is very easy for us now. But how did the 
Buddha lay bare this most wonderful truth for the first time? It is 
through radical attention ( ‘yonisomanasikāra’).  
Yonisomanasikāra means attending by way of the source or 
matrix. Therefore not only our Gotama Buddha, but also Vipassi 
Buddha before him aroused the knowledge of Dependent Arising 
by attending to ‘decay and death ’ upwards. We have already 
explained these things. For instance the Bodhisatta Vipassi asked 
himself: 
 ‘kimhi nu kho sati jarāmara ṇaṁ hoti, kim paccayā 
jarāmaranaṁ.’ when what i s there (or “what being there” ) does 
decay and death come to be Dependent on what is decay and 
death? Then i t occurred to him: ‘jatiyā sati jarāmara ṇaṁ hoti, 
jatipaccayā jarāmaranaṁ.’ ‘When birth is there, decay and death 
come to be, Dependent on birth is decay and death. ’ Just see. 
There is nothing to laugh about it. Until then the world had not 
understood it. The worldlings only think up excuses for it. That is 
why they ask why a Buddha has to come and tell us that. But the 
Buddhas arouse the knowledge of this basic reaso n because they 
want to put an end to samsāric suffering. Worldlings are not 
concerned with radical solutions to the problem of suffering. 
Whether he observed the five precepts or not Siyadoris would 
die. Whether he is literate or illiterate he would die. W hether he 
held his breath or released it he would die. Whether he had 
cirrhosis or not he would die. But if Siyadoris had put and end to 
birth, he would not have died.  
 To refresh your memory a little more – now you can make 
sense of the Paṭicca Samuppāda  formula because radical 
attention starts from the very end. Then the Buddha asked 
himself: 
 ‘kimhi nu kho sati jāti hoti. kimpaccayā jāti.’ 8

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 ‘When what is there does birth come to be? Dependent on 
what is birth?’ And it dawned on him through wisdom: 
 ‘bhave kho sati jāti hoti, bhavapaccayā jāti’ 
 ‘When becoming is there does birth come to be. 
Dependent on becoming is birth’ 
 So you can infer that the condition for birth is becoming 
or existence and likewise the cause and condition for becoming or 
existence is grasping because what you grasp that you are; the 
condition for grasping is craving since you grasp because of 
craving; the condition for craving is feeling since you crave 
because of feeling; the condition for feeling is contact because 
where you contact there you feel; the condition for contact is the 
six sense spheres since you contact because you have six sense 
spheres. The condition for the six sense spheres is name and 
form. Now we come to that deep point which we discussed earlier 
too. The con dition for name and form is consciousness and then 
there is that crucial ‘turning-back’. The condition for 
consciousness is name and form. The process of questioning 
through radical attention stopped at the point of this mutual 
conditionality (‘aññamañña paccayatā’). 
 ‘nāmarupāpaccayā viññāṇaṁ 
 viññāṇapaccayā nāmarupāṁ’ 
 Dependent on name and form is consciousness 
 Dependent on consciousness is name and form. 
 Although questioning stopped there the very ignorance of 
this mental conditionality itself is avijjā or ignorance and the 
consequent fumbling or groping about in that darkness is 
sankhārā or preparations. This is what we tried to illustrate by 
various similes – the delusion arising out of the duality. The 
tragic self-love of Narcissus is the best e xample. But the Buddha 
discovered the secret of this vortical interplay – namely,

Sermon 6 

Dependent Arising ( ‘Paṭicca Samuppāda ’). That he 
accomplished through radical attention (‘yonisomanasikāra’). 
 So you may understand that this discourse which is 
regarded as deep reveals that Dependent Arising or Paṭicca 
Samuppāda’ is a middle path. It is due to a lack of understanding 
of this fact that many find it difficult to understand that the 
cessation of bec oming is Nibbāna. We might have to take up for 
discussion several other deep discourses to clarify this aspect of 
the Dhamma. 
  Then there is what is called ‘maññanā’ (lit. minding, 
thinking in terms of or imagining). Let us take up a short 
discourse to ac quaint ourselves with this term and to clarify 
further the alternation between ‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’ 
(‘itthabhāva’ – ‘aññathābhāva’). We pointed out that maññanā is 
an imagining. According to what the Buddha has pointed out to 
us we are living in a mirage of our own making. The mirage is 
mind-made. To reveal this fact to us he brings up a strange 
parable – the parable of Vepacitti in Saṁyutta Nikāya .9 It is a 
parable which conveys something extremely deep. The Buddha 
presents it to the monks as if relating an incident which actually 
happened in the past. Quite often in the discourses we find an 
allusion to a battle between gods ( sura) and demons ( asura). In 
this particular contest it is said that in the battle between gods and 
demons, demons lost an d gods won. The gods bound Vepacitti, 
the king of demons in a fivefold bondage neck, hand and foot and 
brought him into the presence of sakka – the king of gods. The 
Buddha says that the bondage of Vepacitti has a peculiar 
mechanism about it. When Vepacitti thinks: ‘Gods are righteous 
and demons are unrighteous, I will remain here in the deva world’ 
with that very thought he finds himself released from the fivefold 
bondage and enjoying divine pleasures. But as soon as he thinks: 
‘gods are unrighteous and demons are righteous. I will go back to 
the asura world ’ he finds himself bound again in that fivefold

The Law of Dependent Arising 

bondage. The point here stressed by the Buddha is that the 
bondage is ‘mind-made’. In summing up the Buddha says:  
 ‘Evam sukhuma ṁ kho bhikkhave Vepacitti bandhanaṁ. 
Tato sukhumataraṁ mārabandhanaṁ’  
 “So subtle, monks, is the bondage of Vepacitti but more 
subtle still the bondage of Māra.” 
 The bondage of Vepacitti is subtle as it is connected with 
the mind. But it seems the bondage of Māra is subtler.  
 Now comes the highly significant statement:  
 ‘maññanmāno kho bhikkhave baddho mārassa 
amaññanmāno mutto pāpimato.’ 
 “Imagining monks, one is bound by Māra, not imagining 
one is freed from that evil one.” 
 Then the Buddha goes on to explain what this  imagining 
is: 
 ‘asmīti bhikkhave maññitametaṁ 
 ayamahamasmīti maññitametaṁ 
 bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 na bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 rūpī bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 arūpī bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 saññī bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 asaññī bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 nevasaññīnāsaññī  bhavissanti maññitametaṁ 
 maññitaṁ bhikkhave gando, maññitaṁ rogo, maññitaṁ 
sallaṁ. 
 Tasmātiha bhikkhave amaññitamanena cetasā 
viharissāmāti evañhi vo bhikkhave sikkhitabbaṁ.’

Sermon 6 

 ‘(I) am’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘This am I’ – this is an imagined 
 ‘I should be’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘I shall not be’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘I shall be one with form’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘I shall be formless’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘I shall be percipient’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘I shall be non-percipient’ – monks, this is an imagined 
 ‘I shall be percipient nor non -percipient’ – monks, this is 
an imagined 
 Imagining monks, is a disease, imagining is an abscess, 
imagining is a barb.  
 Therefore, monks you must tell yourselves: 
 “We will dwell with a mind free from imaginings”. Thus 
must you train yourselves.  
 So here are nine ways of imagining. The first imagining is 
(I) am. We cannot help using ‘I am ’ according to rules of 
grammar. But that itself is something imagined. That is not 
enough. We have to say ‘This am I’  identifying ourselves with 
one or the other of five aggregates. But that again is something 
imagined. So also is the assertion ‘I shall be ’ or ‘I shall not be ’. 
Similarly even the Brahmas a re bound since ‘I shall be one with 
form’ and ‘I shall be formless ’ are imaginings. Whether one 
thinks ‘I shall be percipient ’ or ‘I shall be non-percipient’ it is an 
imagining. So also the see -sawing ‘I shall be neither percipient 
nor non-percipient’. 
 Having thus shown that the entire range of existence rests 
on imaginings, the Buddha declares: ‘Imagining is a disease, an 
abscess, a barb and advises the monks to dwell with a mind free 
from imaginings. This is the moral behind the parable of 
Vepacitti’s bondage. That is why we pointed out that delusion is 
ingrained in the linguistic medium. But we cannot afford to reject 
it altogether. That is precisely why even the Buddha uses it but 
without grasping.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 The other day, while discussing the simile of the 
whirlpool we said something about ‘that place’ and ‘this place’ or 
‘here and there ’. Corresponding to that we have the three 
‘persons’ – “I am” the first person ‘here you are ’ the second 
person in front of me and ‘he’ over there is the third person. That 
is the grammatical structure. There are verbs that go with the 
three persons. ‘Am’, ‘are’ and ‘is’. According to the Buddha all 
these are part and parcel of the disease of imagining. The world is 
imprisoned by language and logic. The Buddha on the other hand 
offered us a Dhamma that transcends logic. That in short is the 
middle path implicit in the law of Dependent Arising. I wonder 
whether you remember our simile of the magic -kettle. It is not 
something found in books. It is based on a little bit of experience 
in my young days. While on a shopping round we once watched a 
continuous flow of water from a kettle into a basin behind a shop 
window. The kettle never got empty nor did the basin overflow. 
We later learned that a hidden tube conveyed the water from the 
basin back into the kettle. The world is also such a magic-kettle. 
 ‘Samudayo samudayo ’ (arising, arising ) – there is an 
incessant process of arising, ‘nirodho, nirodho’ (ceasing, ceasing) 
there is an incessant process of ceasing. But the worldling ignores 
the ceasing aspect and emphasizes the arising aspect in order to 
hold on to the personality view (‘sakkāyadiṭṭhi’). Just ponder over 
the etymology of the term ‘sakkāyadiṭṭhi’. ‘Sat’ means ‘existing’ 
and ‘kāya’ means ‘group’. It is because we take the entire group 
or the heap as existing that we insist on proving an identity which 
we do not have in reality. We have our identity cards. How can 
there be an identity if the nature of the world is otherwiseness 
(‘aññathābhāva’). Forgetting about this fact we assert saying 
‘This is me ’ not only our present form but even the beautiful 
photographs taken in our childhood or at our wedding. That 
conceit is implicit in the stance ‘Am’. The perception of the 
compact (‘ghana saññā’) is already there. The world forgets that 
there is an incessant process of arising and an incessant process 
of ceasing. This process defies language. When we say ‘River

Sermon 6 

flows’ there is only a process of flowing. But when we give it a 
name, say Ri ver Kelani, then we presume that it is the river that 
flows. So also is the fluxional nature of this body. Which is 
concealed. Only a Buddha points it out to us. Though our 
commentators failed to notice it, some Buddhist sects highlighted 
the fact that the  middle path which avoids the two extremes is 
Paṭicca Samuppāda . They give it prominence. This does not 
mean that we accept everything in those Buddhist sects. Some 
called it ‘Sunyatā’. The important point to note is that there is an 
incessant arising and ceasing which transcends logic because 
logic is based on the duality of existence and non -existence – on 
‘Is’ and ‘Is not’. Even the four -cornered logic the tetralemma – 
moves within this same duality. In place of this the Buddha 
introduced the law of Depe ndent Arising with its philosophy of 
incessant arising and ceasing summed up in the exclamation 
‘Samudayo Samudayo – Nirodho nirodho.’ 
 Let us reflect a little more on this imagining ‘I am’. How 
does it come in? There is an important discourse which explai ns 
it for us. Once venerable Ānanda tells his fellow monks ‘Friends 
when we were newly gone forth venerable Punna Mantāniputta 
was very helpful to us. He gave us an admonition like this 
‘Ānanda, upādāya asmiti hoti no anupādāya ’.10 Ānanda the 
notion ‘I am’ occurs in-dependence not without dependence. That 
is to say, due to grasping and not without grasping. So the notion 
‘I am’ occurs due to causes and conditions – not fortuitously.  
 Then venerable Ānanda reiterates the words of venerable 
Punna Mantāniputta : 
 ‘Kiñca upādāya asmīti hoti no anupādāya 
 Rūpaṁ upādāya asmīti hoti no anupādāya 
 Vedanaṁ upādāya asmīti hoti no anupādāya 
 Saññāṁ upādāya asmīti hoti no anupādāya 
 Sankhare upādāya asmīti hoti no anupādāya 
 Viññāṇaṁ upādāya asmīti hoti no anupādāya’.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Dependent on form arises (the notion) ‘I am ’ – not 
without dependence 
 Dependent on feeling arises (the notion) ‘I am ’ – not 
without dependence 
 Dependent on perception arises (the notion) ‘I am’ – not 
without dependence 
 Dependent on preparations arises (the notion) ‘I am’ – not 
without dependence 
 Dependent on consciousness arises (the notion) ‘I am ’ – 
not without dependence 
 So it seems that the notion ‘I am’ is fostered by grasping 
or upādāna. 
 Then venerable Puṇṇa Mant āniputta gives a wonderful 
simile. It is a deep simile which you may ponder upon. 
 Just as Ānanda, a young woman or a young man who likes 
adornment looking at the reflection of her or his face either in a 
clean mirror or in a bowl of clear water would be s eeing 
depending on it and not without depending, even so Ānanda 
depending on form arises (the notion) ‘I am ’, not without 
depending. Depending on feeling arises (the notion) ‘I am ’, not 
without depending. Depending on perception arises (the notion) 
‘I am’, not without depending. Depending on preparations arises 
(the notion) ‘I am ’, not without depending. Depending on 
consciousness arises (the notion) ‘I am’, not without depending. 
It is when one grasps the mirror that one sees one’s form reflected 
on it. No w think of what happened to Narcissus. Because he had 
never seen his face as soon as he saw the reflection of his face in 
the water he imagined an angel in the pond. The notion ‘I am’ is 
the result of a similar reflection. The reflection in the mirror does  
not reveal what is inside the entrails. It only shows the external 
form. That is what the world prides on as self.

Sermon 6 

 One grasps not only form but feeling, perception, 
preparations and consciousness as well. The Buddha has clarified 
to us why each of them is called a group (khanda). On a previous 
occasion too we explained the significance of the word ‘khanda’ 
in pañcupādānakhanda (the five groups of grasping). The Buddha 
has given us an elevenfold analysis of each of the ‘groups’. For 
instance in the case of form, the formula runs as follows: 
 ‘yaṁ kiñci rūpa ṁ atītānāgata paccuppanna ṁ ajjhattaṁ 
vā bahiddā vā o ḷārikaṁ vā sukuma ṁ vā hīna ṁ vā panīta ṁ vā 
yaṁ dūre santike vā sabbaṁ rūpaṁ’,11 etc.  
 “Whatever form, whether past, future or present, internal 
or ext ernal, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all 
form.., etc.”  
 This elevenfold analysis is recommended for insight 
meditation to eradicate the conceit of self.  
 Let us try to clarify for ourselves the significance of this 
analysis. ‘yaṁ kiñci rūpa ṁ atītānāgata paccuppanna ṁ’ – 
‘whatever form whether past, future or present ’ –  even the past 
form is prided on as ‘my own’. That beautiful child in your photo 
album you claim with pride: ‘This is me ’. So that is your past 
form. What about the ‘future’ form. When you are getting ready 
to go for a wedding you do a lot of ‘make-up’ before the mirror 
and ask yourself: ‘How would I appear there? ’ That is your 
‘future form ’, you have already grasped. ‘ajjhattaṁ vā bahiddā 
vā’ – ‘internal or external ’. You grasp not only your form but 
forms you see outside. ‘oḷārikaṁ vā sukuma ṁ vā’ – ‘whether 
gross or subtle ’.  ‘hīnaṁ vā paṇītaṁ vā’ – ‘inferior or superior ’. 
‘yaṁ dūre santike vā sabba ṁ rūpaṁ’ – ‘whether far or near ’. 
Every one of the five groups is an ‘aggregate’ of these eleven 
modes. A person ‘deposits’ his experiences in life according to 
these eleven modes. This applies not only to one’s present life but

The Law of Dependent Arising 

to one ’s entire samsāric past. This is the ‘bedrock’ of samsāric 
experience which influences one as a ‘latency’ (‘anusaya’). 
 So then we have before us a stupendous samsāric problem 
of the highest order. But we are not going to blame language for 
it. Language is of our own creation. After we created it we fell 
under its spell. That is what we pointed out in our discussion of 
the term ‘papañca’. We alluded to the legend about the 
resurrected tiger. Three experts in magic while going through a 
forest saw the scattered bones of a tiger. One magic worker 
showed his skill by assembling them into a skeleton.  The second 
one gave it flesh and blood. The third one infused life into it. The 
magically resurrected tiger sprang up and devoured all of them. 
Our language and logic worked a similar tragedy on us. We have 
been imprisoned by language and logic in this Saṁsāra. That is 
why we said in an earlier sermon that the complications in 
Saṁsāra are traceable to linguistic conventions. That is not with 
the idea of stigmatizing it. In fact we cannot help using it.  Even 
the Buddha had to use it. As the grand finale of  the Poṭṭhapāda 
Sutta comes the following highly significant statement: 
 ‘Itīmā kho Citta lokasamaññā lokaniruttiyo lokavohārā 
lokapaññattiyo yāhi Tathāgato voharati aparāmasaṁ’ 12 
 “Citta, these are worldly conventions, worldly 
expressions, worldly usages, worldly concepts which the 
Tathāgatha makes use of without grasping” 
 The Tathāgatha makes use of them but does not grasp 
them. That should be the aim of following this Dhamma. 
Therefore it is from the misconceptions ingrained in the linguistic 
medium that we have to get free from. That can be accomplished 
only through insight and wisdom. By continuously seeing the 
arising and ceasing nature of phenomena in one’s experience with 
insight we can extricate ourselves from these misconceptions and 
that too each one by himself.

Sermon 6 

 So I think this is enough for today. It seems we are 
delving deeper and deeper into this Dhamma. But you shouldn ’t 
get disheartened. These sermons may not be as palatabl e as 
popular versified sermons. But it is here that we have the 
quintessence of the Dhamma. As we once told you if you wish to 
attain Nibbāna after seeing the Buddha, see Paṭicca Samuppāda. 
If you see Paṭicca Samuppāda you see the Dhamma and whoever 
sees t he Dhamma sees the Buddha. So when you see Paṭicca 
Samuppāda you see both the Buddha and the Dhamma. You had 
better reflect wisely on these words.  
 I suppose you spent the day in meditation established on 
higher precepts. Today you had the opportunity to listen to a 
sermon which is particularly relevant to insight meditation. 
Making the best use of it in your meditation, I hope you all will 
put forth your best efforts to escape this terrible Saṁsāra. May 
you all be able to attain in this very life supramun dane states and 
the bliss of the deathless Nibbāna. Whatever beings there be from 
the lowest hell to the highest Brahma world may they all rejoice 
in our sermon. May the merits accrued by that rejoicing conduce 
to the fulfillment of their higher aims!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 142  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. S. II 17  Kaccānagotta Sutta 
3. S.  V 421 Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta 
4. Ud. 6 Bāhiya Sutta 
5. Ud. 81 Catuttha Nibbāna Sutta 
6. D. II 63 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
7. Ud. 32 Lokavolokana Sutta 
8. D. II 31 Mahāpadāna Sutta 
9. S. IV 201 Yavakalāpi Sutta 
10. S. III 105 Ānanda Sutta 
11. S. III 47 Khanda Sutta 
12. D. I 202 Poṭṭhapāda Sutta

Sermon 7 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 189)
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Anattani attamāniṁ – passa lokaṁ sadevakaṁ 
niviṭṭhaṁ nāmarūpasmiṁ – idaṁ saccanti maññati 
yena yena hi maññati – tato taṁ hoti aññathā 
taṁ hi tassa musā hoti – mosadhammaṁ hi ittaraṁ 
amosa dhammaṁ nibbānaṁ – tadariyā saccato vidū 
te ve saccābhisamayā – nicchātā parinibbutā 1 
    – Dvayatānupassanā S. Sn. 
Just see a world with all its goods 
Fancying a self where none exists 
Entering into name and form 
It builds the fancy – ‘Ah! This is the truth’! 
In whatever way one fancies of a thing 
Thereby itself it turns otherwise 
And that itself is the falsity in it 
Falsifying by nature – the puny thing. 
But Nibbāna unfalsifying as it is 
Noble Ones knew as the truth 
And they by their understanding of the truth  
Are hungerless and fully appeased. 
 
Dear Listeners, 
 The Fully Enlightened Buddha has revealed to us that the 
worldlings are bound to Saṁsāra due to the conceit that there is a 
self where there is no self. The fancying or imagining caused by

The Law of Dependent Arising 

conceit is called ‘maññanā.’ The release from this imagining 
which takes name -and-form as the truth is the release from the 
bondage of Māra – that is to sa y Nibbāna itself. Today we have 
taken up as the topic of our sermon three verses which declare 
this truth. These three verses also are found in the 
Dvayatānupassanā Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta. In our last sermon, 
we introduced this discourse as one that ins tils an intense fervor 
of the Dhamma. As the word ‘dvayatā’ in the title of the 
discourse indicates this sutta analyses sixteen topics of Dhamma 
in the form of dualities. Here the Buddha analyses in sixteen 
ways the eternal law of bondage and release in a way that 
reminds us of the direct and the indirect order o f the law of 
Dependent Arising. 
 Today we have taken up for comment the three verses 
pertaining to the fifteenth mode of contemplation of dualities. As 
an introduction to those three verses the Budd ha gives this prose 
description of the fifteenth mode of duality. 
 ‘yaṁ bhikkhave sadevakassa lokassa samārakassa 
sabrahmakassa sassamanabrāhmaniyā pajāya sadevamanussāya 
idaṁ saccanti upanijjhāyita ṁ tadamariyānaṁ etaṁ musāti 
yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudiṭṭhaṁ – ayaṁ ekānupassanā’ 
 “Monks, whatever that has been pondered over as ‘This is 
true’ by the world with its gods, Māras and Brahmas with its 
recluses and Brahmins, that by the Ariyans has been seen as it is 
with right wisdom as ‘That is false. ’ This is one mode of 
contemplation.” And then the second mode of contempla tion is 
introduced as follows:  
 ‘yaṁ bhikkhave sadevakassa lokassa samārakassa 
sabrahmakassa sassamanabrāhmaniyā pajāya sadevamanussāya 
idaṁ musāti upanijjhāyita ṁ tadamariyānaṁ etaṁ saccanti 
yathābhūtaṁ sammappaññāya sudi ṭṭhaṁ – ayaṁ 
dutiyānupassanā’

Sermon 7 

 “Monks, whatever that has been pondered over as ‘This is 
false’ by the world with its gods, Māras and Brahmas with its 
recluses and Brahmins, that by the Ariyans has been seen as it is 
with right wisdom as ‘That is true. ’ This is the second mode of 
contemplation.” 
 Having thus presented the two modes of contemplation, 
the Buddha, as he did in the case of other contemplations, 
declares that if any monk, rightly contemplating in this way, 
dwells diligently, ardent and zealous, one of two fruits may be 
expected by him: knowledge of arahanthood in this life itself or if 
there is any residual clinging, N on-returnership. The Buddha 
declares that this particular contemplation is so highly beneficial. 
It is after this declaration that the Buddha summed it up in thes e 
three verses. 
 Anattani attamāniṁ – passa lokaṁ sadevakaṁ 
 niviṭṭhaṁ nāmarūpasmiṁ – idaṁ saccanti maññati 
 See the world with all its gods entertaining a conceit of 
self where there is no self. Having entered into or entrenched in 
name and form, it loves to fancy: ‘This is the truth.’ With that the 
Buddha is stating the condition of the world and then he says: 
‘yena yena hi maññati – tato taṁ hoti aññathā 
 taṁ hi tassa musā hoti – mosadhammaṁ hi ittaraṁ’ 
“In whatever way one fancies a thing thereby it becomes 
otherwise. That itself is the falsity in it – the pueri le 
deceptive thing that it is.” 
Then the third verse: 
‘amosa dhammaṁ nibbānaṁ – tadariyā saccato vidū 
te ve saccābhisamayā – nicchātā parinibbutā’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Nibbāna is unfalsifying. That the wise ones knew as the 
truth. And they by their understanding of the truth being 
hungerless are fully appeased.” 
 So from th ese words of the Buddha, it is clear that the 
entire world including gods and Brahmas are caught by this 
bondage of Māra, due to fancying by taking name and form to be 
real. This fact is borne out by the parable of Vepacitti2 we 
brought up in our last sermon. Just briefly remind yourselves of 
what we have related the other day. The Buddha once addressing 
the monks related the age -old legend of the battle between gods 
and demons. He said that demons lost and gods won in this 
particular battle and the gods bound Vepacitti, the king of 
demons, in a five-fold bondage (i.e. neck, hand and foot) and 
brought him before Sakka, the king of gods. This bondage had a 
peculiar mechanism about it. If Vepacitti thought: “Demons are 
unrighteous, gods are righteous, I will remain in the deva world”, 
he would find himself freed from that bondage and enjoying 
heavenly pleasures. But if he happened to think: “Gods are 
unrighteous, demons are righteous, I will go back to the Asura 
world”, then he fi nds himself bound again in that fivefold 
bondage. After stating that, the Buddha goes on to say: “So subtle 
monks, is the bondage of Vepacitti but more subtle still the 
bondage of Māra.” And then he explains what this bondage of 
Māra is. The Buddha declare s that even the basic postulate of 
existence, namely, the notion ‘(I) am ’ is an imagining ( ‘asmīti 
bhikkhave maññitameta ṁ’). There the Buddha mentions a nine -
fold imagining. The notion ‘(I) am’ is an imagining. ‘This am I ’ 
is an imagining. ‘I shall be’ is an imagining. ‘I shall not be ’ is an 
imagining. ‘I shall be one with form ’ is an imagining. ‘I shall be 
formless’ is an imagining. ‘I shall be percipient ’ is an imagining. 
‘I shall be non -percipient’ is an imagining. ‘I shall be neither 
percipient nor non -percipient’ is an imagining. Thus the entire 
gamut of existence extending up to the realm of neither 
perception nor non -perception, including the Sensuous Realm, 
the Realm of Form and the Formless Realm is the range of

Sermon 7 

imagining. Having declared that existence as a whole is bound up 
with imagining, he says in conclusion: “ Imagining monks, is a 
disease, imagining is an abscess, imagining is a barb ( ‘maññitaṁ 
bhikkhave rogo, maññitaṁ gaṇḍo, maññitaṁ sallaṁ’) and advises 
the monks to dwell with a mind free from imaginings 
(‘amaññitamanena cetasā’). 
 By means of the five constituents of name, that is to say, 
feeling, perception, intention, contact and attention, the 
worldlings take hold of the four great primaries, namely, earth, 
water, fire and air and due t o self -love, enact a drama of 
Narcissistic affection best exemplified by the story of Narcissus 
itself, which we brought up several times. The handsome Greek 
youth Narcissus who had never seen his own face, while 
wandering in a forest, bent down into a pon d to wash his face. 
Seeing the reflection of his own face he mistook it to be an 
angel’s and tried to embrace her. Every time he tried, the ripples 
foiled his attempt. If we bring this story in line with the point at 
issue, as soon as the worldling imagine s a ‘thing’, it turns 
otherwise. To fancy a ‘thing’ is called ‘thisness’ and the ‘ripples’ 
of impermanence is its ‘otherwiseness’ or change. For instance 
now we take this clock as a ‘thing’. When it goes out of order, it 
turns in to otherwiseness. If we had not taken it as a ‘thing’ but as 
part of a heap of rubbish, such a situation would not have arisen, 
because there is no fancying. That is only by way of illustration. 
Through all this the Buddha puts across to us the truth of 
impermanence. In our last se rmon we presented a deeper analysis 
of this truth. It is a very powerful sermon. Soon after his 
enlightenment, the Buddha surveyed the world with his Buddha -
eye and seeing how beings are afflicted with lust, hate and 
delusion, came out with an inspired utt erance which is a 
wonderful blend of prose and verse. Let us quote a portion of it.   
ayaṁ loko santāpajāto phassapareto 
rogaṁ vadati attato 3

The Law of Dependent Arising 

This anguished world given over to contact  
Speaks of a disease in terms of a self  
And then he says: 
yena yenahi maññati  
tato taṁ hoti aññathā 
Whatever one thinks in terms of  
Thereby it turns otherwise 
 
Now comes the extraordinary statement: 
 ‘Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko bhavapareto  
 bhavamevābhinandati  
 yadabhinandati taṁ bhayaṁ 
 yassa bhāyati taṁ dukkhaṁ 
 bhavavippahānāya kho panidaṁ 
 brahmacariyaṁ vussati.’ 
 The world attached to becoming, given over to becoming 
 Though becoming otherwise yet delights in becoming 
 What it delights in is a cause for fear 
 What it is afraid of is suffering itself 
 For abandoning this becoming 
 Is this holy life lived.  
 What is called existence has in it the nature of turning 
otherwise. To that existence which has the nature of turning 
otherwise, worldlings are attached. They are enslaved by it and 
they delight in i t. But that delighting is dangerous and fearful. 
Why? Because the existence they take as a ‘thisness’ is turning 
otherwise. It is inevitable. So this is the actual situation in the 
world. That is why the term ‘maññanā’ is of so fundamenta l an 
importance in this Dhamma.

Sermon 7 

 “Well, then” one can ask “where lies freedom?” we said 
that in imagining or fancying one conceives of a ‘thing’. We all 
know that there are six senses. The five external senses are eye, 
ear, nose, tongue and body. When the objects taken in b y these 
five senses reach the mind, they take on a different mould. All 
objects of the mind are called ‘dhammā’ – ‘things’. So you may 
note first of all that the problem concerns those things that come 
to the mind. About this ‘thing’ which is the object of the mind, 
there is a highly significant discourse in the Majjhima Nikāya , 
namely Mūlapariyāya Sutta . 4 It is probably because of its 
fundamental importance that those arahants who held the First 
Council placed this discourse as the v ery first in this discourse 
collection. But unfortunately nowadays teachers when they teach 
this book to their pupils ask them to skip the first sutta and start 
from the second. They say that this is so abstruse that even those 
who listened to it could not  understand it. But we wish to point 
out that this discourse is like the basic alphabet to the 
understanding of the philosophy of this entire Dhamma. Why do 
we say so? Because this Mūlapariyāya Sutta reveals the basic 
pattern of all ‘things’ that occur to the mind (mūlapariyāya). 
 Let us now describe the way this discourse is presented. It 
has a very brief introduction. The Buddha seated under a Sal tree 
in the Subhaga forest in the Ukkaṭṭhā, addressing the 
congregation of monks preached this sermon presumably because 
he wanted to bring up a very important subject. He introduces the 
subject with this exhortation:  
 “Sabbadhamma mūlapariyāya ṁ vo bhikkhave desissāmi. 
Taṁ sunātha sādhukaṁ manasikarotha bhāsissāmi.” 
 “Monks, I shall preach to you the fundamental mode of all 
things. Listen to it. Attend to it well, I shall preach.” 
 What is meant by ‘the fundamental mode of all things ’ is 
this: There is a certain mode according to which all phenome na

The Law of Dependent Arising 

occur to our mind. It is this basic mode that is found in grammar. 
Within this linguistic usage, all phenomena that occur to the mind 
present themselves according to some grammatical pattern. In 
regard to that grammatical pattern this Mūlapariyāya Sutta  
analyzes the respective attitudes of the average worldling 
uninstructed in the Dhamma, of the monk who is a learner not 
attained to arahanthood, of the arahant and of the Fully 
Enlightened One – the Tathāgata. But we can boil it down to 
three attitudes since the attitude of the arahant and of the Buddha 
are essentially the same. Because the Tathāgata, the Fully 
Enlightened One proclaimed this Dhamma as the teacher, he is in 
a category by himself. But for all practical purposes his attitude 
and that of the arahant are the same. So we are now going to 
analyze this discourse based on those three attitudes. We have 
already mentioned that this discourse describes the attitude of the 
worldling towards the grammatical pattern in usage in the world, 
the attitude of  the learner training in this Dhamma and the 
attitude of the arahant. To represent all objects of the mind 
regarded as ‘things’ the Buddha lists 24 dhammas. It is not a 
complete list of all possible dhammas, but a fair representation of 
them as instances. They may be summed up as follows in brief. 
Firstly, the four great primaries: earth, water, fire and air, then the 
eight classes of beings: namely beings, gods, Pajāpati, Brahmā, 
the Radiant Ones, the Lustrous Ones, the Vehapphala Brahmas, 
the Overlord. Then the four formless realms: the realm of infinite 
space, the realm of infinite consciousness, the realm of 
nothingness, the realm of neither perception nor non -perception. 
Then the sum -total of sense -experience: the seen, the heard, the 
sensed and the cog nized. And finally, the concepts of unity, 
diversity, universality and Nibbāna (ekattaṁ, nānattaṁ, sabbaṁ, 
nibbānaṁ).      
 Having thus introduced 24 mind -objects ( dhammā) The 
Buddha describes the different attitudes of the above three classes 
towards each of them. When we give one instance you all can 
understand the rest of it. Out of the four primaries given first, let

Sermon 7 

us take earth. This is how the attitude of the unins tructed average 
worldling towards it is described. He perceives earth as earth – 
even as the deer perceives water. Having thus perceived earth as 
earth ( ‘paṭhaviṁ paṭhavito saññatvā ’) he imagines an earth 
(‘paṭhaviṁ maññati’). There we find that maññanā coming in. 
Then he imagines: ‘In the earth ’ (‘paṭhaviyā maññati ’). He 
imagines ‘from the earth ’ (‘paṭhavito maññati ’). He imagines 
‘earth is mine ’ (‘paṭhaviṁ meti maññati ’). He delights in earth 
(‘paṭhaviṁ abhinandati’). Then the Buddha asks: ‘Why is that? ’ 
(‘taṁ kissa hetu?’) and gives this explanation: ‘It is because it has 
not been comprehended by him’ (‘apariññātaṁ tassāti vadāmi’).  
 Then about the learner ( sekha) who has not attained 
arahanthood this is what comes in the discourse: ‘paṭhaviṁ 
paṭhavito abhijānāti’. In this case it is not sañjānāti (perceives) 
but abhijānāti i.e. understands through higher knowledge. 
Through his attainment of the Fruit of the Path, even for a split 
second he had an experience of the Truth . A s if by a streak of 
lightening in a dark night, he had a glimpse of Nibbāna. Thereby 
he got an understanding which is of a higher order than mere 
perception. He has understood the true state of affairs though it is 
short of full comprehension. About him, this is what is stated in 
the sutta: ‘paṭhaviṁ paṭhavito abhijānāti ’. He understands earth 
as earth. And then: ‘paṭhaviṁ paṭhavito abhiññāya ’ – having 
understood earth as earth – now comes a peculiar expression: 
‘paṭhaviṁ mā maññi, paṭhaviyā mā maññi, pa ṭhavito mā maññi, 
paṭhaviṁ meti mā  maññi, pa ṭhaviṁ mā abhinandi .’ The use of  
‘mā’ here is a big puzzle for the commentator . 5  But it is the 
prohibitive particle in Pāli language. You may have heard the 
dictum: ‘mā nivatta abhikkama’ – ‘Do not turn back, go forward.’ 
However, the commentator goes off at a tangent here. He says 
that this particle conveys the idea that the noble disciple neither 
imagines nor does he not imagine. This is not the reason for this 
peculiar usage. The learner ( sekha) is that noble disciple w ho is 
still training. Though he has higher knowledge beyond mere 
perception, he has not yet attained full comprehension ( pariññā).

The Law of Dependent Arising 

So he has to constantly remind himself to refrain from imagining, 
drawing inspiration from the higher knowledge he has won.  
‘paṭhaviṁ mā maññi’ etc. means ‘Do not imagine earth as earth, 
Do not imagine in the earth, Do not imagine from the earth, Do 
not imagine earth is mine, Do not delight in the earth. ’ Why? 
Because he has yet to comprehend ( ‘pariññeyyaṁ tassāti 
vadāmi’). This is an injunction for self-training. 
 Well then, that is as far as the noble disciple who is a 
learner is concerned. Now as for the attitudes of the arahant and 
the Tathāgata, we said that they are the same. For Instance, this is 
what is said about the  arahant: ‘paṭhaviṁ paṭhavito abhijānāti,  
paṭhaviṁ paṭhavito abhiññāya, pa ṭhaviṁ na maññati,  paṭhaviyā 
na maññati, pa ṭhavito na maññati, pa ṭhaviṁ meti na maññati, 
paṭhaviṁ nābhinandati.’ That is to say, the arahant as well as the 
Buddha has the following a ttitude towards the concept of earth. 
The arahant by virtue of his higher understanding of earth has 
seen its voidness. He does not imagine earth as earth, he does not 
imagine ‘in the earth’, does not imagine ‘from the earth’, does not 
imagine ‘earth is mine’, does not delight in the earth. 
 We said th at there are 24 concepts listed. W ith regard to 
each of them the same mode of imagining is given in detail. What 
is said in particular about the Tathāgata, the Fully Enlightened 
One is that he is the teacher w ho revealed this Dhamma. In 
conclusion, the Buddha says: ‘nandi dukkhassa mūlanti iti viditvā 
bhavā jāti bhūtassa jarāmaranaṁ’ – ‘Having known that delight 
is the root of suffering. From becoming, birth and to the one born 
there is decay and death. ’ That is why there is no delighting in 
any of those concepts. ‘Nandi dukkhassa mūla ṁ’. Delighting is 
the root of suffering. It is by delighting that an existence comes to 
be, and that existence is turning otherwise. That is the beginning 
of suffering. Birth, decay and death and all the rest follow. 
 By way of explanation of this discourse we may cite the 
simile of the deer and the mirage. We have brought up this simile

Sermon 7 

quite often. The deer imagines water in the mirage and runs after 
it. But if a person knows that it is not water but some seasonal 
phenomena, even if he thinks at first sight that it is water, he tells 
himself: ‘No, no this can’t be water’ and trains himself. One who 
has full comprehension does not have to advise himself because 
he has perfect kn owledge. The commentator has confounded the 
whole issue. He cannot appreciate the fact that it is a step of 
training. But confusion is worst confounded when he comes to 
explain the last of all twenty -four concepts – namely Nibbāna. 
When it is said that one  should not delight in Nibbāna, quite 
understandably the question comes up: “If we don ’t delight in 
Nibbāna how can we attain it?” That may be the reason why the 
commentator says that Nibbāna here mentioned is not our 
Nibbāna but the concept of Nibbāna in other religious systems .6 
With this observation the commentator makes an attempt to 
vindicate our Nibbāna despite the fact that the Buddha has here 
leveled an attack on linguistic usage as a whole. But it is a vain 
attempt because as long as one goes on im agining in terms of 
Nibbāna as ‘in Nibbāna’, ‘from Nibbāna’ and so on and as long 
as one delights in the concept of Nibbāna, one cannot attain it. 
Some of you might take it as an awkward position. We all look 
forward to attain Nibbāna. So if we cannot delight in Nibbāna, 
what else can we delight in? This is the problem for 
commentators too. But here we have something deep concerning 
linguistic usage. To explicate it a little let us give an illustration 
from the history of this dispensation.  
 In an earlier sermon too we have mentioned to you in 
brief, some incident recorded in the annals of the history of 
Buddhism. After the Buddha ’s demise, when the time came for 
the holding of the First Council, Venerable Mahā Kassapa Mahā 
thera was f aced with a problem in selecting five hundred 
arahants for the recital of Dhamma and Vinaya. It was Venerable 
Ānanda who had committed to memory the entire Dhamma. But 
he had not attained arahanthood yet. Therefore 499 arahants were 
selected at first. They  were in a dilemma whether to take in

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Venerable Ānanda or not. However, at last they decided to take 
him on the ground that he is incapable of being influenced by 
prejudices. It is said that on the day before the Council the 
arahants reminded Venerable Āna nda of his obligation saying: 
“Friend, tomorrow is our Council. It does not behove you to 
attend it as a non -arahant. Be diligent. ” 7 Those of you who have 
passed examinations would remember how much you have 
crammed when you are reminded that tomorrow is t he exam. 
Similarly, Venerable Ānanda too made a firm determination to 
put forth his best efforts. It is said that he determined thorough 
mindfulness in regard to the body ( kāyagatāsati) and spent the 
greater part of the night in the promenade pacing up and  down 
mindfully. Probably due to tiredness, in the last watch of the 
night, he thought of taking some rest, and went and sat on his 
bed. He was going to lie down, his feet were raised from the floor 
and his head had not reached the pillow yet, and in the i nterim his 
mind was released from all influxes and he attained arahanthood. 
 Various explanations are given about this extraordinary 
illumination between two postures. The commentator says that 
Venerable Ānanda thought: “Now I am striving too hard. Let me 
balance my spiritual faculties.” That can ’t be the reason. There is 
a subtle psychological norm involved here. Now for Venerable 
Ānanda, the concept ‘Nibbāna’ appeared as a ‘certificate’ to enter 
the Council. That is to say, for him ‘Nibbāna’ was something like 
a certificate. The word ‘Nibbāna’ which stands for ‘giving-up 
everything’ became a ‘thing’ to be grasped. “I must attain 
Nibbāna. It is beneath my dignity to attend the Council as a nonarahant.” There itself is conceit and restlessness due to over -
exertion. He imagined Nibbāna to be a ‘thing’ and that implies 
ignorance as well. That is why he could not attain  Nibbāna after 
all that striving. But then, what happened at that particular 
moment? He had already determined on strenuous effort in all 
four p ostures. So if he had lied down on bed he would have 
continued to put forth strenuous effort. But there is something 
called ‘posture-junctions’. Most probably he had reckoned

Sermon 7 

without them. However, at that interim instance of bending his 
body to lie down, he suddenly became aware of an ‘interval’. In 
that INTERVAL it might have occurred to him: “Oh! I have 
made a ‘THING’ out of Nibbāna! Isn ’t it a term for giving up 
everything? So why am I struggling? ” In that moment of 
realization he realized Nibbāna and became an Arahant. That is 
our explanation. 
 On an earlier occasion too in the course of our sermons, 
we gave various similes by way of explanation. Even if you are 
driving in a hurry when you come to the cross-roads junction, you 
have to slow down. L ikewise Venerable Ānanda found a brief 
interval at a ‘posture-junction’. That is probably how he attained 
Nibbāna. So there is nothing to take delight in ‘Nibbāna’, 
because to do so is to perpetuate the subtle notion of “I” and 
“mine”. But still you may ha ve doubts. So let us bring up an 
illustration from our village life. Our National New Year Day is 
drawing near. Isn’t that so? Now among the New Year festivities, 
there is a game called ‘Blind man cracking the pot. ’ Though we 
have no pots here we shall giv e a simile somewhat closer to it. 
You all have seen the artistically painted words on the wall at the 
far end of this hall. ‘Nibbānaṁ paramaṁ sukhaṁ’ (Nibbāna is 
Bliss Supreme). After all isn ’t that our aim? Nibbāna is the 
supreme bliss and Nibbāna is over  there on the wall. Now 
supposing I blindfold a young upāsaka in this crowd and ask you 
all to get to a side to make way for him and ask him to turn 
towards that  ‘Nibbāna’. Of course he cannot see it as he is 
blindfolded. Then I ask him to do as I say. ‘Take a step towards 
it. Take another step …. another step …. another step ’. You all 
are now watching. He comes up almost against the wall, step by 
step. But he doesn ’t see it. And then I say: ‘Take another step! ’ 
What happens then? When he lifts his foot he finds that he has to 
turn back! This is a simile for you to ponder over. ‘Sankhārā’ or 
preparations have been associated with the simile of the pot. If 
you can understand this, perhaps you can crack the pot of 
Sankhārā and attain Nibbāna.  The moral behind our simile is

The Law of Dependent Arising 

that ‘Nibbāna’ as a term is a target not to be ‘grasped’ but to be 
‘seen through’. It is a question of penetration. At last you have to 
‘let-go’ of it and free the mind of imaginings about it.  
 What do we mean by ‘turning back’ at the last step? You 
may recall the lesson we taught by getting you to count on your 
fingers, while explaining the five representatives of ‘name’ in 
name and form ( nāma rūpa ). The five fingers are feeling, 
perception, int ention, contact and attention ( vedanā, saññā, 
cetanā, phassa, manasikāra ). ‘Contact’ is the nearest to 
‘attention’ even as the index finger is to the thumb. Contact as the 
index finger is the trouble -maker. The index finger (contact) is 
always fussy and busy with the THUMB (attention). So let us 
now pay more attention to this attention ( manasikāra). We have 
analyzed i t in various ways while discussing the middle -path 
tactic by which the Buddha discovered the magical illusion 
behind consciousness. There we made use of a certain simile. 
Sometimes in courts of law, a case of murder or theft would come 
up with no one to gi ve evidence. When there are no other 
witnesses, there is provision for making one of the alleged 
culprits the crown witness to get the whole story out. We pointed 
out that the Buddha had to do a similar thing. Out of the five 
representatives of name ( nāma) it was ‘attention’ (manasikāra) 
who brought us all this way in Saṁsāra in the guise of ‘nonradical attention ’ (ayoniso-manasikāra). It is due to this wrong 
attention that the deer keeps running after the mirage imagining 
water ‘over there ’. Now the Buddh a converted this non -radical 
attention to radical attention ( yoniso-manasikāra). What does 
‘yoniso’ mean? ‘Yoni’ is matrix or place of origin and ‘yoniso’ 
means ‘by way of the place of origin ’. So ‘yoniso-manasikāra’ 
could be rendered by the term ‘radical-attention’. The Buddha 
asks us to turn back and pay attention to the source or origin. The 
deer ran after the illusion of water misled by prolific 
conceptualization or ‘papañca’. The worldling is in the same 
situation. With the change over to radical attention, the meditator 
lets go of ‘papañca’, cuts off ‘vitakka’ (thought), gives up

Sermon 7 

‘saññā’ (perception), frees himself from the grip of ‘vedanā’ 
(feeling) and finally comes back t o ‘phassa’ (contact). That is the 
moment you are up against the wall!     
 If we analyze the word ‘manasikāra’, ‘manasi’ means ‘in 
the mind ’ and ‘kāra’ is ‘doing’. So ‘manasikāra’ is an activity 
within the mind. As a matter of fact, it is this ‘guy’ ‘manasikāra’ 
who is responsible for the conspiracy that is Saṁsāra. 
‘Manasikāra’ is an activity going on in our mind. We do not 
understand it as it is. The object used for this activity ‘within the 
mind’, we put before it. But the actual state of affairs th e Buddha 
has made known to us through the maxim in the two opening 
verses of the Dhammapada.     
 manopubbaṅgamā dhammā 
 manoseṭṭhā manomayā 8 
 ‘Mind-objects have mind as their forerunner,  
 mind is their chief. They are mind-made.’ 
 The worldling thinks otherwise. He argues from the other 
end. If he writes a Dhammapada he would put it the other way 
around. ‘Dhammapubbaṅgamo mano.’ ‘Mind has mind-objects as 
forerunners.’ But the Buddha points out that the mind is the 
forerunner and tha t things are mind -made ( manomayā). 
Venerable Ānanda finally realized that the term ‘Nibbāna’ is 
mind-made – that it is only a target symbolic of complete 
relinquishment. You may have heard a number of terms denoting 
Nibbāna: ‘Sabbasaṅkhārasamatho Sabbupadhipaṭinissaggo 
taṇhakkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbāna ṁ.’‘The stilling of all 
preparations, the relinquishment of all assets, the destruction of 
craving, detachment, cessation, extinction. ’ Any one of these 
terms is sufficient to denote that attainment.  
 Now ‘Sabbasaṅkhārasamatho’ means the stilling of all 
preparations. To think ‘I must somehow get this certificate of 
Nibbāna as a qualification to go to the Council’ is a saṁkhāra – a

The Law of Dependent Arising 

‘preparation.’ The thought ‘I must go ’ is also a preparation. So 
then preparations are not yet stilled. ‘Sabbupadhi pa ṭinissaggo’ 
(relinquishment of all assets) – The thought: ‘I must take this 
bundle of five aggregates and get it seated at the council ’ shows 
that all assets are not relinquished as yet. Craving is also impli cit 
in such a wish. Nibbāna implies a letting go of everything – an 
extinction. But the worldling grasps it as a term. That is why we 
say that the world is steeped in the delusion inhere nt in the 
linguistic medium.    
 The Buddha has  clearly pointed out to  us this deluding 
trait in linguistic usage. But our commentators as well as many 
Buddhist sects have not fully understood his enlightened vision 
regarding language. Due to that lack of understanding, they 
inclined to the same self -view. But here we highli ghted the role 
of ‘attention’ (manasikāra). The object for the mind is ‘dhamma’ 
(the ‘thing’). In this context the mind -object is ‘Nibbāna’. What 
happens with the sudden realization that it is only a word? Mind -
consciousness immediately goes down ‘object-less’. We have 
already said that conscious ness by definition is a discrimination 
between two things. Now if the ‘mind-object’ is seen as 
something created by the mind itself ( manomaya), how can one 
discriminate between two things? Simultaneous with the 
realization that what had so far appeared as the object of the mind 
is ‘mind-made’, there comes a moment of non -discrimination. 
Mind-consciousness ceases then and there.    
 Try to understand this deep point. Granted that 
consciousness is a discrimination between two things, the 
moment that the deer becomes conscious of water in a mirage, it 
thinks: ‘There is water over there and I am here’. That means 
there is a gap – an ‘in between the two.’ So now we come back to 
the same story of ‘two ends and the middle’. Where there are two 
ends there is a middle. The deer thinks: ‘Here I am and water is 
there. Once I pass through the intervening gap, I can reach that 
water’. That is the way the world thinks. The object is given

Sermon 7 

precedence. It is projected when one thinks: ‘I am here and the 
object is there.’  
 However, the Buddha points out to us quite a different 
way of thinking – not the imagining or fancying a ‘thing’ as 
implied by ‘maññanā’. To hark back to the Mūlapariyāya Sutta, 
the worldling makes a ‘thing’ out of ‘earth’ (paṭhavi). Not only 
earth, water, fire and air but all the 24 concepts listed there under 
the heading ‘Sabbadhamma mūlapariyāya’ (the basic mode of all 
things) are not to be taken as objects for ‘maññanā’ – not even 
gods, beings, Pajāpati and Brahmā. The Buddha tamed even 
Bhramā Baka  who boasted of his permanence. 9 Simply because 
of their long life -span Brahmas entertained the conc eit: ‘We are 
eternal.’ The ascetic Bāhiya Dārucīriya went through the 
necessary discipline within a very short time. He was able to stop 
short at the ‘seen’ in the seen. But we do not stop there. Instead 
we make (for instance) a ‘chair’ out of the seen so that we can sit 
on it. Similarly, we do not stop short at the ‘heard’ but make a 
music out of it. That way we make a ‘thing’ out of our sensory 
experience. It is due to this conceiving of ‘things’ that we linger 
long in Saṁsāra. As soon as we imagine a ‘thing’, the ripples of 
impermanence take over. The inexorable consequence is the 
‘turning otherwise ’. There lies the tragic e nd of this drama of 
existence.  
 The moment one makes a ‘thing’ for oneself, it starts 
becoming ‘another thing’. As in our illustra tion of the love scene 
enacted by Narcissus, throughout  Saṁsāra we have been 
grasping something or other with self -love at the last moment of 
our life. That is the reason for the perpetuation of mutual 
interdependence between name and form and consciousnes s 
inside a mother’s womb. But then one can ask again: “If I cannot 
take delight in Nibbāna, what is the use of it?” It may even seem 
useless to attain  Nibbāna. If it is not good to delight in Nibbāna 
after all the trouble we ta ke to attain it, one can ask:  “What is the 
purpose in attaining it?” A deity named Kakudha also had the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

same problem, according to a discourse in Saṁyutta Nikāya . 
When the Buddha was dwelling at the Deer Park in the Añjana 
forest, a deity named Kakudha approached him in the night and 
asked: “Recluse, do you rejoice?” The Buddha retorted: “On 
getting what, friend?” Then the deity asked: “If that is so, recluse, 
do you grieve?” “On losing what, friend?” asked the Buddha 
rhetorically. “Well, then, recluse, you neither rejoice nor grieve?”  
said the deity and the Buddha affirms it saying: “That is so 
friend”. The deity was also curious to know whether the Buddha 
is dissatisfied with the monk ’s life as he is sitting all alone, now 
that he says that he neither delights nor grieves. The Buddha 
responds with an instructive verse: 
Aghajātassa ve nandi 
nandi jātassa ve aghaṁ 
anandī anigho bhikkhu 
evaṁ jānāhi mārisa 10      
Joy is for him who is stricken with grief 
And grief is for him who becomes joyful 
But as for a monk – friend know this as a fact 
He is neither joyful nor does he grieve 
 What the Buddha means by this, is the bliss of equanimity 
free from joy and grief. In fact, as you know, Nibbāna is even 
called ‘avedayita sukha’ – a bliss free from feeling since all three 
grades of feeling are in  the highest sense reckoned as suffering. 11 
Even from this brief comment you may understand that Nibbāna 
is not something to be grasped. It is only a target to reach – not to 
be grasped.  In one ’s striving for it, at last one reaches a stage 
which is somet hing like a going ‘topsy-turvy’. The ultimate 
realization is a sort of turning upside down. That is why even the 
non-returner (anāgāmin) is said to have attachment and delight in 
the Dhamma ( dhammarāga dhammanandi) as a residual taint to 
be eliminated. It is true that he has ‘Nibbāna’ uppermost in his 
mind. But there is a subtle attachment to it that prevents him from

Sermon 7 

ending Saṁsāric suffering here and now, and gives him rebirth in 
the Pure abodes (suddhāvāsa) by that very attachment and delight 
(‘teneva dhammarāgena tāya dhammanandiyā …’).12        
 That attachment and delight is the last thing to be given 
up since the Buddha has declared that this Dhamma is only for 
the purpose of crossing over and not for grasping 
(‘nittharanatthāya no gaha ṇatthāya’) 13 even like a raft. 
Similarly, the Buddha has preached that by those who fully 
understand, even good things (or mind -objects) have to be given 
up, what to say of bad things ( ‘Kullūpamaṁ vo bhikkhave 
dhammaṁ desitaṁ ājānantehi dhammāpi vo pahātabbā pageva 
adhammā’). Now ‘Nibbāna’ as a term is something pertaining to 
‘dhamma’. Even that has to be given up at some juncture. The 
reason is that we use language only out of some practical 
necessity. It is not someth ing to be ‘grasped’. The moment we 
grasp it, we get into difficulties. This is the gist of what th e 
Buddha has pointed out to us. 
 There is a certain depth in all what we tried to put across 
with the help of similes. There are some discourses which show 
that after the Parinibbāna of the Buddha, Venerable Ānanda was 
highly esteemed by monks and nuns so much so that when they 
attained Arahanthood they went and informed it to him. There is 
a particular discourse which reveals this fact very clearly. Once 
Venerable Ānanda addressing the monks at Ghositārāma said 
that those monks and nuns who declare their attainments of 
Arahanthood in his presence, do so accor ding to four normative 
factors.14 The path of practice they have followed comes under 
one or the other of the following four modes.           
1. ‘Samathapubbangamaṁ vipassanaṁ bhāveti.’ 
Develops insight preceded by calm (or serenity) and as 
one goes on practicing insight meditation like this, the 
supra-mundane path arises and by following it one

The Law of Dependent Arising 

abandons fetters and latencies thereby attaining 
arahanthood.  
2. ‘Vipassanāpubbangamaṁ samathaṁ bhāveti.’ 
Develops calm preceded by insight. By this method too, a 
monk or nun can do away with the fetters and latencies 
and attain arahanthood. 
3. ‘Samathañca vipassanañca yuganaddhaṁ bhāveti.’ 
Develops both calm and insight together like yoked bulls 
pulling together. By that method also one can accomplish 
the task. 
4. The fourth method is very peculiar and its true 
significance is a problem to many scholars.  
In this context, Venerable Ānanda brings up the case of a 
monk whose mind is in conflict due to restless thoughts 
(‘… bhikkhuno dhammuddhacca viggahita mānasa ṁ 
hoti’). But then he says: “There comes a time when his 
mind becomes settled within – gets one pointed and 
concentrated.” It is then that the supra -mundane path 
arises, which he successfully foll ows to attain 
arahanthood.      
 It is very likely that here Venerable Ānanda is speaking 
out of his own experience. He had hit upon a special met hod (by 
fluke!). The usual mode of practice is classified under three 
headings: 
1. Developing insight preceded by calm. 
2. Developing calm preceded by insight. 
3. Developing both calm and insight together like yoked 
bulls pulling together. 
 
 The fourth method which  has remained a problem, most 
probably exemplifies Venerable Ānanda ’s own attainment. 
Because of his restless thoughts regarding the attainment as a 
qualification for attending the Council, he could not attain

Sermon 7 

arahanthood. But there came a time when his mi nd got settled – 
at that posture -junction between sitting and lying down. This 
exceptional method he learnt by a happy accident, shows the 
depth of this Dhamma. 
 We are taking pains to explain all this because quite a lot 
of misconceptions and wrong views about Nibbāna are rampant 
in the world today due to a lack of understanding of the depth of 
this subject. In fact, I think the Brahmins of the Buddha ’s time 
knew more about what the Buddha was speaking of than many 
Buddhist scholars today. Those Brahmins knew full well that the 
Nibbāna preached by the Buddha had nothing in it to bolster up 
the craving for existence – that it meant the cessation of 
existence. Only thing, they viewed it as tantamount to 
annihilation. That was their mistake. According to the B uddha 
there is no real self or soul to be annihilated. This is all what the 
Buddha proclaimed: “Formerly as now, I make known a suffering 
and its cessation (“ Pubbe cāha ṁ etarahi ca dukkhañceva 
paññapemi dukkhassa ca nirodhaṁ.”) 15      
   
 This much we pointed out. What remains to be abandoned 
last of all is the basic postulate of existence, namely that lingering 
notion – that conceit (I) Am. There is a significant discourse in 
the Khandha Saṁyutta of the Saṁyutta Nikāya, which reveals the 
subtleness of the path from non-returnership to arahanthood. On a 
former occasion too we brought it up. It is the Khemaka Sutta.16 It 
records a sequence of events as follows. 
  A group of Elder monks were dwelling at Ghositārāma in 
Kosambi. A monk named Khe maka who was sick, was dwelling 
at Badarikārāma in Kosambi itself. Those Elders asked a monk 
named Dāsaka to go and inquire about the health of that sick 
monk. When Dāsaka went and inquired, Venerable Khemaka told 
him that he is seriously ill and that pain s are increasing. When 
Venerable Dāsaka brought that news, the Elder monks asked him 
to go there again and ask Venerable Khemaka whether he regards

The Law of Dependent Arising 

any of the five aggregates of grasping – form, feeling, perception, 
preparations and consciousness – as “This is mine, This am I and 
this is my self”.  Venerable Dāsaka did as he was instructed and 
Venerable Khemaka answered: “Friend, in regard to these five 
aggregates of grasping I do not look upon any one of them as 
mine or myself, but I am not an influx free arahant. I have the 
notion ‘I am’ in regard to these five but I do not look upon any of 
them as “This am I”. When Venerable Dāsaka went and reported 
Venerable Khemaka ’s explanation to the Elders, they were still 
puzzled and sent back Venerable Dāsaka to get further 
clarification. This time, on hearing Venerable Dāsaka ’s request 
for clarification Venerable Khemaka said: “Enough friend, 
Dāsaka, what is the use of running up and down, get me my 
walking stick. I will myself go and see those Elders.” So he wen t 
with his walking stick to the Elders and explained: “What I said is 
true, I am not an arahant. But this is my position. I do not see any 
of the aggregates as mine. But I have a residual subtle conceit (I) 
am, a subtle desire as (I) am.  
 Then he gives a simile: “Just as, friends, there is smell in a 
blue or red or white lotus, whoever says that the smell comes 
from the petal or from the colour or from the filament, is he 
speaking rightly?” 
 “No friend” 
 “Then how can one explain it rightly?” 
 “One has to say that it is the smell of the flower. Tha t is 
all one can say about it.” 
 “Even so, friend, I do not see any of the aggregates as 
myself. However there is in me a subtle conceit as (I) am.” 
 Though there is that conceit, he illustrates the subtleness 
of the five higher fetters of a monk who has cut off the five lower 
fetters by the above simile of the smell of the flower. Then he 
says as that monk who is a non -returner goes on attending to the 
rise and fall of the five aggregates, there comes a time when even 
that residual conceit gets worn out. Then he gives a simile for it.

Sermon 7 

Someone has a dirty cloth. He gives it to the washerman to clean. 
They clean it with some soap -like substance and return it to the 
owner. Though the cloth is now clean, it has the odo ur of the 
substance used to clean it. The owner puts it away in his 
wardrobe for the time being. But after some time even that odour 
is gone. In the same way, by constant contemplation of the five 
aggregates with insight even that residual conceit is eradi cated 
and one attains arahanthood. The extraordinary thing about this 
reasoned explanation by Venerable Khemaka is that on hearing it, 
all the sixty monks who listened to him became arahants and he 
himself attained arahanthood by intuiting into his own ins ightful 
explanation. 
 
 There is such a subtle aspect in this question of language 
in the context of Nibbāna. We do make use of the linguistic 
medium like that cleaning agent. We often use the couple of 
words relative and pragmatic to describe the Middle Pa th 
principle involved. In the Buddha ’s Middle Path, there is neither 
an absolute negation nor an absolute affirmation. Instead there is 
a systematic procedure of choosing and using with an awareness 
of relative validity. Sometimes the Buddha would sum up a  
discourse with this grand finale epitomizing the basic principle 
underlying his extraordinary middle path technique. 
 “Iti kho bhikkhave dhammāva dhamme abhisandenti 
dhammāva dhamme paripūrenti apārā pāraṁ gamanāya.” 17           
       Though we say: “I am going from this shore to the farther 
shore” in the end, there is no talk about an “I”. According to the 
Buddha, what we have in this dispensation is just this:  
 “Thus, O ’ monks, mere phenomena flow into other 
phenomena, mere phenomena fulfil other phen omena for the 
purpose of passing from the not-beyond to the beyond.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 So we have now given you some deep points to ponder – 
all relevant to the Law of Dependent Arising. Just think about the 
depth of the constituents of name and form – what we told about 
‘manasikāra’ or attention. It is a doing within the mind ( manasikāra). What the Buddha has presented in the Mūlapariyāya Sutta 
is a list of those ‘things’ pertaining to that attention. If you don ’t 
adjust your viewpoint in accordance with Right View, you are 
setting off on a path not towards Nibbāna but opposite to it. 
Therefore I hope you all will make use of this sermon for 
adjusting your viewpoint. We shall be presenting more facts on 
Dependent Arising in this series from various sources. We 
happened to  quote several times the dictum: “He who sees 
Dependent Arising sees the Dhamma.” You had better remember 
it and take heart to tread this path of Dhamma. To clarify these 
points for yourselves, you should constantly dwell on the 
impermanence of the five ag gregates. As you go on doing it, you 
can proceed on the path of insight provided you have a clear 
understanding of name and form. Mere listening is not enough. 
You should apply these teachings to your own lives. The five 
aggregates are there with you. Not somewhere else. With radical 
attention you should always attend to your ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ seeing 
their rise and fall (udayabbaya) as keenly as possible. You should 
understand the aggregates for what they are. That is what is 
known as ‘knowledge of things as they are’ (yatābhūtañāna). 
 I hope you will find this sermon too helpful to your 
meditation. May you all be able to develop both calm and insight 
drawing inspiration from this sermon backed by the precepts 
observed and the meditation done today, and attai n the goal of 
your endeavours in this very life. Whatever beings there are from 
the lowest hell to the highest Brahma world, may they rejoice in 
our sermon! May the merits acquired thereby conduce to the 
fulfilment of their higher aims!

Sermon 7 

1. Sn. 147  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. S. IV 201 Yavakalāpī Sutta 
3. Ud. 32  Lokavolokana Sutta 
4. M. I 1 Mūlapariyāya Sutta 
5. M.A. I 38 (S.H.B)  
6. M.A. I 35 (S.H.B) 
7. Samantapāsādikā. 7 (S.H.B) 
8. Dhp. V1/ 1,2.  Yamaka Vagga 
9. M. I 326 Brahmanimantanika Sutta 
10. S. I 54 Kakudha Sutta  
11. Sn. 144 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
12. M. I 352 Atthakanāgara Sutta 
13. M. I 135 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
14. A. II 156 
15. M. I 140 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
16. S. III 126 Khemaka Sutta 
17. A. V 3 Cetanākaranīya Sutta

Sermon 8 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 190)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Rūpā saddā rasā gandhā  
phassā dhammā ca kevalā 
iṭṭhā kantā manāpā ca 
yāvatatthīti vuccati 
 
Sadevakassa lokassa 
ete vo sukhasammatā 
yattha cete nirujjhanti 
taṁ tesaṁ dukkhasammataṁ 
 
Sukhanti diṭṭhamariyehi 
sakkāyassuparodhanaṁ  
paccanīkamidaṁ hoti 
sabbalokena passataṁ 1 
   – Dvayatānupassanā S. Sn. 
Forms, sounds, smells 
Tastes, touches, ideas 
All what they deem desirable 
Charming pleasing things 
Of which they claim ‘it is’ 
As far as their claim extends 
The world with its gods is agreed 
That these are pleasant things 
And wherein they surcease 
That’s unpleasant indeed say they 
As bliss the Noble Ones have seen 
The curb on self-hood bias 
Behold in contrast is their vision   
With that of the entire world.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Dear Listeners, 
 The objects of the six senses – the eye, the ear, the nose, 
the body and the mind – namely, forms, sounds, smells, tastes, 
touches and ideas, are regarded by the world with its gods as 
really existing and pleasant. But Noble Ones consider that  place 
where these things that the world takes as real and pleasant cease 
itself, as pleasant. Today, we have taken up three verses 
expressing these two contradictory viewpoints. These three verses 
deal with the sixteenth contemplation of dualities found i n the 
Dvayatānupassanā Sutta  of the Sutta Nipāta . In two previous 
sermons we explained to you two contemplations of dualities in 
this Dvayatānupassanā Sutta.  As in the other two, in this 
contemplation of dualities we are going to discuss today, the 
contrast between the worldling’s point of view and the view point 
of the Noble Ones is explained. First of all, the Buddha declares  
this fact in prose as follows: 
“Monks, whatever that has been pondered over as: ‘This 
is pleasant’ by the world with its gods, Mā ras and Brahmas, with 
its recluses and Brahmins, that, by the ariyans has been seen as it 
is with right wisdom as: ‘That is unpleasant ’.  Then the opposite 
viewpoint is stated: “Monks, whatever that has been pondered 
over as unpleasant by the world with its gods, Māras and 
Brahmas, with its recluses and Brahmins, that, by the ariyans has 
been seen as it is with right wisdom as: ‘That is pleasant’. Having 
presented these two modes of contemplation, the Buddha, as he 
did in the case of the other contemplations,  declares that if any 
monk, rightly contemplating in this way, dwells diligently, ardent 
and zealous, one of two fruits may be expected by him: 
knowledge of arahanthood in this life itself or if there is any 
residual clinging, non-returnership. It is after  this declaration that 
the same fact is presented in a set of verses out of which we have 
quoted the first three. First of all, let us try to understand the  
meaning of these three verses.

Sermon 8 

Rūpā saddā rasā gandhā  
phassā dhammā ca kevalā 
iṭṭhā kantā manāpā ca 
yāvatatthīti vuccati 
Forms, sounds, tastes, smells, touches and ideas that are 
considered desirable, charming and pleasant – whatever they 
speak of as existing,  
Sadevakassa lokassa 
ete vo sukhasammatā 
 The world with its gods has agreed to call them pleasant  
yattha cete nirujjhanti 
taṁ tesaṁ dukkhasammataṁ 
 And where ever these six objects cease, that, they  are 
agreed to call unpleasant. 
 But then comes the statement:  
Sukhanti diṭṭhamariyehi 
sakkāyassuparodhanaṁ  
 But it has been seen by the Noble Ones that the cutting off 
of the Five Aggregates of Grasping which is called ‘Personality’ , 
is the bliss.  
paccanīkamidaṁ hoti 
sabbalokena passataṁ 
 But this vision of the Noble Ones is in contradistinc tion to 
that of the worldlings. 
 This is what is conveyed by these three verses. In fact the 
same idea is carried further in the four verses that follow. Those 
of you who have listened to our earlier sermons might remember

The Law of Dependent Arising 

that when we were introducing the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta for 
the first time, we said that this is a discourse which vibrates with 
a powerful fervour of the Dhamma. Rather than taking up the 
other verses one by one and paraphrasing them, I think it is better 
to give at least a foretaste of that Dhamma fervour through a se t 
of English verses with which we summed up the content of those 
verses in one of our books: 2      
Sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, ideas,  
All what they deem desirable charming pleasing things 
Of which they claim: ‘it is’ – as far as their claim extends  
The world with its gods is agreed that these are pleasant things  
And wherein they surcease – that’s unpleasant indeed, say they 
As bliss the Noble Ones have seen  
   – the curb of selfhood bias 
Behold in contrast is their vision  
   – with that of the entire world 
What others spoke of in terms of bliss  
   – that as woe the saints declared 
What others spoke of in terms of woe  
   – that as bliss the saints have known 
Behold a Norm so hard to grasp  
   – baffled herein are ignorant ones 
Murk it is to those enveloped  
   – as darkness unto the undiscerning 
But to the good wide ope’ it is  
   – as light is unto those discerning 
So near and yet they know not  
   – Fools! Unskilled in the Norm 
By those who are given to lust for becoming 
By those who are swept by the current of becoming 
By those who have slipped into Māra’s realm  
Not easily comprehended is this Norm

Sermon 8 

Who else but the Noble Ones deserve 
To waken fully unto that state 
By knowing which, being influx-free 
Tranquil Nibbāna they attain. 
 In an earlier sermon we dealt with the 15 th contemplation 
of dualities. There too we came across two viewpoints which are 
diametrically opposed to each other. To refresh our memory let 
us cite them in brief: 
“Monks, whatever that has bee n pondered over as: ‘This 
is true’ by the world with its gods, Māras and Brahmas with its 
recluses and Brahmins, that by the Ariyans has been seen as it is 
with right wisdom as: ‘That is false’.  
“Monks, whatever that has been pondered over as: ‘This 
is false’ by the world with its gods, Māras and Brahmas with its 
recluses and Brahmins, that by the Ariyans has been seen as it is 
with right wisdom as: ‘That is true’. 
In the course of that sermon we pointed out that the 
worldlings take name and form which is a reflection on 
consciousness to be real and true but that the Ariyans point it out 
as unreal and false. You all know that what comes after name and 
form in the Paṭicca Samuppāda  formula is six sense -spheres. 
Now this sermon will deal with whatever that pertains to the six 
sense-spheres. Forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touches and ideas 
pertain to the six sense -spheres. What is known as the six sense -
spheres comprise eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind and their 
respective objects – forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touches and 
ideas. Worldlings regard them as pleasant and where they cease 
as unpleasant. But the Ariyans regard them as unpleasant and 
where they cease as pleasant. Where do these six sense -spheres 
cease? Is it in another world? They cease in Nibbāna which is 
regarded as the cessation of the six sense -spheres. Nibbāna is in 
fact defined as the realization of the cess ation of the six sense -
spheres.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

So it is t he very realization of the cessation of the six 
sense-spheres that is called Nibbāna and not something in another 
world. The state of that realization Ariyans regard as pleasant – as 
happiness. It is something that can be realized here in this world. 
Many present day scholars might have doubts about this. 
However much we write and preach on this there are many who 
cling to the ‘Simple Simon ’ view of Nibbāna (‘Siyadoris 
Nibbāna’ as we nick -named it). For them it is some non -descript 
state of existence after death. There is a very important discourse 
which can be cited in support of the fact that Nibbāna is none 
other than the cessation of the six sense -spheres. It is the 
Kāmaguna Sutt a 3 in the Saṁyutta Nikāya  found among the 
Connected Discourses on the six se nse-spheres ( Saḷāyatana 
Samyutta). That discourse includes among other things a riddle -
like pronouncement by the Buddha which comes out as an abrupt 
exhortation. It runs as follows:  
“Tasmātiha bhikkhave se āyatane veditabbe yattha 
cakkhuñca nirujjhati rūpasaññā ca virajjati se āyatane veditabbe, 
yattha sotañca nirujjhati saddasaññā ca virajjati se āyatane 
veditabbe, yattha ghanañca nirujjhati gandhasaññā ca virajjati 
se āyatane veditabbe, yattha jivhā ca nirujjhati rasasaññā ca 
virajjati se āyatane veditab be, yattha kāyo ca nirujjhati 
phoṭṭhabbasaññā ca virajjati se āyatane veditabbe, yattha mano 
ca nirujjhati dhammasaññā ca virajjati se āyatane ve ditabbe se 
āyatane veditabbe” 
‘Therefore, monks, that sphere should be known wherein 
the eye ceases and the perception of forms fades away; wherein 
the ear ceases and the perception of sounds fades away; wherein 
the nose ceases and the perception of smells fades away; wherein 
the tongue ceases and the perception of tastes fades away; 
wherein the body ceases and the perception of tangibles fades 
away; wherein the mind ceases and the perception of ideas fades 
away – that sphere should be known, that sphere should be 
known.’

Sermon 8 

You might be amazed to hear this exhortation. Here the 
Buddha is repeating a certain phrase over and over again. The 
phrase: ‘se āyatane veditabbe ’ is equivalent to ‘taṁ āyatanaṁ 
veditabbaṁ’ (‘se’ ‘veditabbe’ – Māgadhisṁ) which means: ‘that 
sphere should be known ’. Strangely enough, the Buddha is 
emphatically asserting with the repetitive phrase ‘that sphere 
should be known, that sphere should be known. ’ What sort of a 
‘sphere’ is that? A sphere wherein eye ceases and the perception 
of forms fades away, that sphere should be known. Likewise ‘that 
sphere wherein the ear ceases and the perception of  sounds fades 
away’. You can understand the rest in the same way – with regard 
to the nose, tongue, body and finally, mind. The last mentioned is 
the most intriguing. ‘That sphere should be known wherein mind 
ceases and the perception of ideas fades away – that sphere 
should be known, that sphere should be known ’. But now comes 
a strange incident. After making this riddle -like exhortation the 
Buddha got up from his seat and retired to his dwelling. This is a 
clever ruse that the Buddha adopts to afford an o pportunity to his 
pupils to get a training in exegesis. 
Then the monks who listened to the sermon discussed 
among themselves: “Now the Fortunate One having made a 
concise utterance has got up from his seat and entered his 
dwelling without explaining its me aning in detail. Who will 
explain it for us in detail? Then it occurred to them: ‘this 
Venerable Ānanda has been praised by the Fortunate One so 
often and is highly esteemed by other monks. What if we 
approach him and ask him to explain this brief saying? So they 
went to him and requested him to do so. After some modest 
hesitation he agreed and gave the following commentary in just a 
few words: 
“Saḷāyatananirodhaṁ kho āvuso bhagavatā sandhāya 
bhāsitaṁ.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Friends, it was uttered by the Fortunate One with 
reference to the cessation of the six sense spheres.” 
In this context even the commentary grants that the 
cessation of the six sense spheres is Nibbāna.4 That was all what 
Venerable Ānanda said in assent to the request for a commentary. 
From this we can conc lude that Nibbāna was called ‘Saḷāyatana 
nirodha’(the cessation of six sense -spheres). The fact that the 
attainment of the six sense spheres has been emphatically 
asserted as a ‘sphere’ in this particular context is exceedingly 
important. This will serve as valid evidence in support of our 
interpretation of the following much vexed discourse on Nibbāna. 
In the Udāna there are a number of discourses on Nibbāna 
out of which one in particul ar has puzzled our commentators as 
well as modern scholars. It runs as follows: 
“Atthi bhikkhave tadāyatanaṁ yattha neva paṭhavī na āpo 
na tejo na vāyo na ākāsānañcāyatana ṁ na viññānañcāyatana ṁ 
na ākiñcaññāyatanaṁ na nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaṁ nāyaṁ loko 
na p araloko na ubho candimasuriyā. Tatra pāha ṁ bhikkhave 
neva āgatiṁ vadāmi na gatiṁ na cutiṁ na upapattiṁ appatiṭṭhaṁ 
appavattaṁ anārammaṇamevetaṁ. Esevanto dukkhassa.” 5 
“There is, monks, that sphere wherein there is neither the 
sphere of infinity of space, n or that of infinity of consciousness, 
nor that of nothingness, nor that of neither – perception – nor – 
non-perception, wherein is neither this world, nor a world 
beyond, nor moon, nor sun. There, monks, I declare is no coming, 
no going, no stopping, no pa ssing away and no arising. It is not 
established, it continues not, it has no object. This inde ed is the 
end of suffering.” 
Now this is that discourse. Let us try to understand it. 
“Atthi bhikkhave tadāyatana ṁ”, “There is monks that 
sphere.” It is just her e that the scholars get stuck. They interpret

Sermon 8 

this sphere as some kind of realm attainable after death. From the 
discourse we have already discussed, you must have understood 
that the cessation of the six sense spheres itself has been 
emphatically asserted by the Buddha as a ‘sphere’. 
But let us delve deeper in to this discourse. After 
declaring that there is ‘that sphere ’, the Buddha goes on to 
describe what sort of a sphere it is. “There is monks, that sphere 
wherein (yattha) there is neither earth, nor water, nor fire, nor air. 
That means the four primaries that are said to be there in a world 
are not to be found in this sphere. Also the immaterial states – 
namely, the sphere of infinity of space, the sphere of infinity of 
consciousness, the sphere of not hingness and the sphere of 
neither – perception – nor – non-perception are not there. This 
world and the other world too are negated. So too the sun and the 
moon. All this sounds very strange. That is why everybody is 
puzzled. Then there is also something deeper. The Buddha 
declared that there is no coming, no going, no stopping, no 
passing away and no arising in this particular sphere. Finally he 
makes known the nature of that sphere by three terms: not 
established ( appatiṭṭhaṁ), not continuing ( appavattaṁ), and 
objectless ( anārammaṇaṁ). He sums up by asserting that this 
itself is the end of suffering (esevanto dukkhassa). 
For quite a long time, in fact for centuries scholars have 
been trying to interpret this passage. They have literally turned 
this passag e inside out in search of a solution but in most 
instances their interpretation was in terms of a non -descript realm 
with no sun or moon. But we pointed out that if mind ceases in 
that sphere and perception of mind objects also cease how can 
sun and moon be there? Even this much, those scholars could not 
understand, since due to craving for existence the world tends to 
interpret Nibbāna as some sort of after death state. However from 
the foregoing it is clear enough that the cessation of the six sense 
spheres itself is Nibbāna. Be it noted that this is a sermon 
specifically dealing with Nibbāna (nibbānapaṭisaṃyutta). The

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Buddha says conclusively that this itself is the end of suffering. It 
is in Nibbāna that suffering ends, certainly not in a non -descript 
realm. Whatever it is, this particular discourse is of cardinal 
importance. From here onwards we shall string up relevant 
discourses from here and there like pearls in a necklace for you 
all to get a clearer understanding of this problem.  
Let us now take up a discourse which also appears as a 
riddle. Once the Buddha addressing the monks said:  
“Nāhaṁ Bhikkhave gamanena lokassa anta ṁ ñātayyaṁ 
daṭṭhayyaṁ pattayyanti vadāmi. Na ca panāha ṁ appatvā lokassa 
antaṁ dukkhassa antakiriyaṁ vadāmi.” 6     
“Monks, I do not say that it is possible by travelling to 
know and see and reach the end of the world. Nor do I say that 
without reaching the end of the world th ere is an ending of 
suffering.” 
Here again we have som ething of a riddle – a paradox. 
You all might think of the end of the world as some place one can 
reach by travelling. But the Buddha is telling us that by travelling 
one cannot reach the end of the world but on the other hand one 
cannot make an end of suf fering without reaching the end of the 
world. After this declaration too the Buddha got up from his seat 
and entered his dwelling as before. Again the monks were 
puzzled and approached Venerable Ānanda to get an explanation. 
This time at their request he g ave a fairly long commentary to the 
Buddha’s declaration. However it amounted to a redefinition of 
the term ‘world’ according to the Noble One ’s Discipline 
(ariyassa vinaye).  
“Yena kho āvuso lokasmi ṁ lokasaññī hoti lokamānī ayaṁ 
vuccati ariyassa vinaye loko”

Sermon 8 

“Friends, that by which one has a perception of the world 
and a conceit of the world in regard to this world, that in the 
Noble One’s Discipline is called a ‘world’.” 
The two words ‘lokasaññī’ and ‘lokamānī’ are noteworthy 
in this definition.  
Then Ven erable Ānanda himself raised the obvious 
question and offered the explanation:  
“Kena cāvuso lokasmiṁ lokasaññī hoti lokamānī”  
“By what, friends, does one have a perception of the 
world and a conceit of the world?” 
“Cakkhunā kho āvuso lokasmiṁ lokasaññī hoti lokamānī” 
“By the eye friends, one has a perception of the wor ld and 
a conceit of the world.” 
Likewise by the ear, by the nose, by the tongue, by the 
body and by the mind, one has a perception of the world and a 
conceit of the world. It is that percep tion and that conceit which 
in this Dhamma is called the world. From this it should be clear 
to you all that according to the Noble One ’s discipline, the six 
sense spheres themselves are the world. Now from here onwards 
we shall draw your attention to anot her discourse which we had 
discussed earlier too but because of its relevance to this particular 
series on Dependent Arising, we shall bring up again. It is the 
Rohitassa Sutta.7 This discourse is so important that it occurs in 
two discourse collections, namely Saṁyutta Nikāya  and 
Anguttara Nikāya.  
This is how the discourse begins. Once when the Buddha 
was staying at the Jetavana monastery at Sāvatthi a deity named 
Rohitassa visi ted him in the night and  asked the following 
question:

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Where, Venerable Sir, one does not get born, nor grow 
old, nor die, nor pass away, nor get reborn, is one able by 
travelling to come to know that end of the world or to see it or to 
get there?” 
The B uddha replies: “Where, friend, one does not get 
born, nor grow old, nor die, nor pass away, nor get reborn, that 
end of the world, I say, one is not able by travelling to com e to 
know, to see or to reach.” 
When the Buddha said this much the deity praised t he 
Buddha with these words of approbation. 
“It is wonderful Venerable Sir, It is marvellous Venerable 
Sir, how well said it is by the Fortunate One” and then went on to 
relate the whole story of his past life.”  
“In times past, Venerable Sir, I was a seer,  Rohitassa by 
name, son of Bhoja, gifted with such psychic power that I could 
fly through the air and so swift, Venerable Sir, was my speed that 
I could fly just as quickly as a master of archery, well trained, 
expert, proficient, a past master of his art,  armed with a strong 
bow, could without difficulty send a light arrow far past the area 
coloured by a palm tree’s shadow; and so great was my stride that 
I could step from the eastern to the western ocean. In me 
Venerable Sir, arose such a wish as this: I will arrive at the end of 
the world by walking. And though such Venerable Sir, was my 
speed and such my stride and though with a life -span of a 
century, living for a hundred years, I walked continuously for 
hundred years, except for the times spent in eati ng, drinking, 
chewing or tasting or in answering calls of nature and the time I 
gave way to sleep or fatigue, yet I died on the way without 
reaching the end of the world. Wonderful is it, Venerable Sir, 
marvellous is it Venerable Sir, how well sai d it is b y the 
Fortunate One.”

Sermon 8 

“Where, friend, one does not get born, nor grow old, nor 
die, nor pass away, nor get reborn, that end of the world, I say 
one is not able by travelling to come to know or to see or to arrive 
at.” 
It is at this point that the Buddha c omes out with a 
momentous declaration while granting Rohitassa’s approbation:  
“Where, friend, one does not get born, nor grow old or 
die, nor pass away, nor get reborn, that end of the world, I say, 
one is not able by travelling to come to know or to see or to arrive 
at. But neither do I say, friend, that without having reached the 
end of the world there could be an ending of suffering. It is in this 
very fathom long physical frame with its perceptions and mind, 
that I declare, lies the world, the arising of the world, the 
cessation of the world and the path leading to th e cessation of the 
world.”      
Unfortunately, the commentator is silent on this 
momentous declaration. Even western scholars wonder why the 
commentator is silent about it. The only reason we can think of is 
the fact that by then the concept of Nibbāna as an after death state 
has already won acceptance in scholastic circles. They were not 
prepared to grant the possibility of Nibbāna as purely an 
experience here in this world. That is why in our writings we 
highlighted this deplorable situation by a trenchant translation of 
a few lines from the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta as an eye opener.  
Nivutānaṁ tamo hoti – andhakāro apassataṁ 
satañca vivaṭaṁ hoti – āloko passatām iva 
santike na vijānanti – magā dhammassakovidā 
 
Murk it is to those enveloped 
As darkness unto the undiscerning 
But to the good wide ope’ it is 
As light is unto those discerning

The Law of Dependent Arising 

So near, and yet they know not  
Fools unskilled in the Norm. 
‘The light’ is the light of wisdom. ‘So near’ means within 
this fathom long body with its perceptions and mind. Suffering 
and its cessation are to be found within this fathom long body. 
That itself is the world. The world and suffering are congruent. 
The world, the arising of the world, the cessation of the world and 
the path leading to the cessation of the world are all found here, 
according to the Buddha. Only the light of wisdom is lacking in 
the worldlings to see this. The world thinks that the objects of the 
six senses are the bliss or name and f orm is the bliss. But the 
Noble Ones are saying that where they cease is the bliss. To hark 
back to the topic of our Nibbāna sermons, which is also the 
meditation topic for Recollection of Peace (upasamānussati):  
“Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ panītaṁ yadidaṁ 
sabbasaṁkhārasamatho sabbupadhipa ṭinissaggo ta ṇhakkhayo 
virāgo nirodho Nibbānaṁ.” 8  
‘This is peaceful, this is excellent, namely, the stilling of 
all preparations, the relinquishment of all assets, the destruction 
of craving, detachment, cessation, extinction.’ 
It is that same peaceful, excellent state which the 
worldlings cannot even think of – the stilling of all preparations. 
All what pertains to the six sense -spheres are preparations. So 
here is the stilling of them all ( sabbasaṁkhārasamatho). The five 
aggregates of grasping are the assets built up through the six 
sense spheres, and here is their relinquishment 
(sabbupadhipaṭinissagga). All the aforesaid objects of the senses 
are the involvements for craving and this is its destruction 
(taṇhakkhayo). That itself  is detachment ( virāgo) and cessation 
(nirodho). The cessation of the six sense -spheres ( saḷāyatana 
nirodha) is also implicated. Whether you call it cessation of 
suffering ( dukkhanirodho), the cessation of the world

Sermon 8 

(lokanirodho), or the cessation of the s ix sense -spheres 
(saḷāyatana nirodho), it is the same. Finally comes that extinction 
or extinguishment of the conflagration. We are told that the 
worldlings are unable to understand this state. Though it is ‘so 
near’ they do not know it. Why is that? The reason is stated in the 
last two verses of this discourse: 
Bhavarāgaparetehi 
bhavasotānusārihi 
māradheyyānupannehi 
nāyaṁ dhammo susambudho     
Ko nu aññatramariyehi 
padaṁ sambuddhumarahati 
yaṁ padaṁ sammadaññāya 
parinibbanti anāsavā 
 – Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, VV 764-765 Sn. 
 
By those who are given to lust for becoming 
By those who are swept by the current of becoming 
By those who have slipped in to Māra’s realm 
Not easily comprehended is this Norm 
Who else but the Noble Ones deserve 
To waken fully unto that state 
By knowing which being influx-free 
Tranquil Nibbāna they attain. 
  – M. M. P. 80 
 It is as if the Buddha is exclaiming with a tinge of 
compassionate fervour. This is the true state of affairs. This is the 
truth. However the worl d is not prepared to accept it. So at first 
sight there is such a wide gap, such a disparity. But what the 
Buddha is telling us is that if a monk rightly contemplating this 
disparity, dwells diligently and zealously devoted to the path of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

practice, he will  either become an arahant or a non -returner. So 
this is not an idle declaration meant to arouse cheap curiosity 
among scholars and intellectuals. It is to explain to those monks 
who are training on this path of practice, what the truth is and 
what the un -truth is, what the bliss is and what suffering is, that 
the Buddha has revealed the wide gulf between the two 
viewpoints. Because we are all the time quoting from Pali Suttas 
you all might get tired of these sermons. So let us bring up same 
illustration as usual.  
 It is a sort of fable from village life which perhaps you 
already know and which you might recall as I go on relating. 
‘Gamarāla’ (the legendary ‘man-about-village’) is going to hold 
a devil -dance at his house. As he is getting ready for it dark 
clouds gathered threatening a torrential downpour. So 
‘Gamarāla’ and the troupe of devil -dancers entered a huge 
gourd-shell and the devil dance started inside the thick shell of 
the gourd. Then it rained in torrents inundating the whole village. 
But blissfully unaware of it, the gourd -shell with its inmates got 
swept into the canal, and from the canal to the stream, and from 
the stream to the river and from the river to the sea. Once in the 
sea a shark swallowed it. Then the shark got caught in a net 
thrown by sea-going fisherfolk. A crowd from a wedding house 
going in search of fish bought the shark. They took it to the 
kitchen of the wedding house where they cut open the shark. And 
then – ‘believe-it-or-not’ – out stepped Gamarāla and the devil -
dancers to t he tune of the tom -tom: ‘Denna-denā-deno’! The 
dance was still going-on. 
 Now what is the moral behind this age -old legend? 
Neither Gamarāla nor his troupe of devil-dancers knew what was 
happening to the gourd -shell. Why did we bring up this legend? 
Just t o show that all worldly philosophers and all modern -day 
scientists – these ‘Gamarālas’ and ‘devil-dancers’ – are holding 
their ‘devil-dance’ inside this gourd -shell of the six sense -
spheres. In their ‘blissful-ignorance’ they are not even prepared to

Sermon 8 

grant that there is something outside it. They could not reach even 
the outskirts of that gourd-shell with their space-craft. We haven’t 
heard yet that they at least reached the lowest heaven –
’Cātummahārājika’. 
 So this is the situation in the world. But the B uddha has 
made known a supra-mundane sate called the cessation of the six 
sense spheres. Why is it called ‘supra-mundane’? It means ‘gone 
beyond the world. ’ If the world is the six sense -spheres, there 
must be a state that goes beyond the six sense -spheres and that is 
‘Nibbāna’ – the experience of the cessation of the six sense -
spheres. That itself is the end of suffering. Why is it that the 
worldlings cannot understand this much? It is because they are 
given to ‘lust for becoming ’ and are swept by ‘the cur rent of 
becoming’. They desire existence in the name of Nibbāna. For 
them Nibbāna is some sort of existence. As we sometimes 
sarcastically put it, it is that ‘Siyadoris’ Nibbāna’ or ‘Simple 
Simon Nibbāna’ which is eternally charming – some after death 
state that everyone likes to get. But that is certainly not the kind 
of Nibbāna the Buddha had made known to the world. In the 
discourse on the Noble Quest ( Ariyapariyesana Sutta 9), it is said 
that the Buddha hesitated to preach the Dhamma because it is 
difficult for the world to understand it. If Brahmā Sahampati had 
not invited him to preach we would not have h ad the opportunity 
to hear it.  
 As we mentioned earlier too, when ref lecting on the depth 
of this Dhamma, it occurred to the Buddha that there are two 
things which the worldlings delighting in and attached to 
existence find it difficult to understand. One is the Law of 
Dependent Arising or specific conditionality which we a nalyzed 
in various ways such as ‘This being – this arises. ’ This is the 
middle way between and above the two extremes of absolute 
existence and absolute non-existence summed up in the couple of 
terms, ‘samudayo samudayo  and nirodho nirodho ’ 10 – (‘arising 
arising’ – ‘ceasing ceasing’). Even that much is difficult for the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

world to understand. The fact that there is an incessant arising 
and ceasing is the first thing that the world cannot easily 
understand. Then the second thing is as the Buddha puts it in the  
Ariyapariyesana Sutta : ‘sabbasaṁkhārasamatho 
sabbupadhipaṭinissaggo taṇhakkhayo virāgo nirodho Nibbānaṁ.’ 
– ‘The stilling of all preparations, the relinquishment of all assets, 
the destruction of craving, detachment, cessation, extinction. ’ 
This, too, is something the world cannot understand. In the Law 
of Dependent Arising there are these two aspects, namely, arising 
(‘samudayo’) and ceasing (‘nirodho’). The world is always on the 
‘samudaya’ side. Worldlings keep jumping from ‘arising’ to 
‘arising’ ignoring the ‘ceasing’. In fact they are apprehensive of 
the ceasing aspect. They do not wish to see it. But it is in 
cessation that deliverance lies. The Buddha has state d this fact on 
many occasions.  
 ‘Ye ca rūpūpagā sattā 
 ye ca arūpaṭṭhāyino 
 nirodhaṁ appajānantā 
 āgantāro punabbhavaṁ’ 
 ‘Those beings that go to realms of form 
 And those who are settled in formless realms 
 Not understanding the fact of cessation 
 Come back again and again to existence’ 
 This is the situation in the world but then:  
 ‘Ye ca rūpe pariññāya 
 arūpesu asaṇṭhitā 
 nirodhe ye vimuccanti 
 te janā maccuhāyino.’ 11  
 ‘Those who having comprehended realms of form 
 Do not settle in formless realms 
 Are released in the experience of cessation 
 It is they that are the dispellers of Death.’

Sermon 8 

 However those who have comprehended form do not get 
settled even in the formless. Being released in the experience of 
cessation they dispel death. Now that we have brought up the folk 
tale of the devil -dance inside the gourd shell let us turn our 
attention to a simile that also has some connection with the 
fisherman’s net. It is a simile made use of by the Buddha himself 
in the Brahmajāla Sutta. That is a discourse which all Buddhist 
scholars are familiar with since it happens to be the very first 
discourse in the Dīgha Nikāya . As a matter of fact, it has been 
counted as the first discourse in this discourse collection because 
of its cardinal importance. As we had mentioned earlier too, 
whatever views that are in the world and whatever views that 
could arise in the world are caught in a supernet ( Brahmajāla) 
thrown by the Buddha in this discourse. There are sixty two 
views enumerated there which comprehend all possible 
speculative views. The list of sixty two is all inclusive and 
nothing falls outsid e of it. There is an extremely important point 
which is often overlooked by the scholars. The Buddha rejects 
every one of those views with just three words of a deep 
significance which recur throughout this discourse. What are 
they:  
. . . . .  ‘tadapi phassa paccayā   . . . . . .  tadapi phassa paccayā   . 
. . . . .  tadapi phassa paccayā.’ 
. . . . . ‘that too is due to contact   . . .   that too is due to contact  . . 
. . that too is due to contact.’ 
 After citing a particular view the Buddha invalidates it 
with the phrase ‘tadapi phassa paccayā ’ – ‘that too is due to 
contact or dependent on contact’  
 How is it invalidated? Why is  it regarded as the criterion? 
The answer is to be found in the Buddha ’s conclusive statement 
in the Brahmajāla Sutta. It is extremely important as it reveals the 
inherent flaw or fault in ‘contact’ (phassa).

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “. . . . . sabbe te chahi phassāyatanehi phussa phussa 
paṭisaṁvedenti. Tesa ṁ vedanāpaccayā ta ṇhā, ta ṇhāpaccayā 
upādānaṁ, upādānapaccayā bhavo, bhavapaccayā jāti, 
jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṁ sokaparidevadukkhadomanassupāyāsā 
sambhavanti.”  
 “. . . . . They all experience by continually contacting 
through the six sense-spheres. And to them, dependent on feeling 
(there is) craving, dependent on craving, grasping, dependent on 
grasping, becoming, dependent on becoming, birth, and 
dependent on birth decay, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief 
and despair arise.” 
 In summing up, the Buddha bundles up all the views 
enumerated inclusive of those proclaimed by ascetics with higher 
knowledges (abhiññā) and psychic powers and refutes them with 
the above conclusive pronouncement. All those view holders 
derive their experiences on which they base their views by 
continually contacting through the six senses. By repeatedly 
contacting they are affected by feeling (paṭisaṁvedenti). Thereby 
they are caught up by the Law of Dependent Arising with the 
result they are subject to repeated birth and consequent Saṁsāric 
suffering. 
 What can one infer from this powerful declaration? The 
Buddha has gone beyond this state called ‘contact’ (phassa). If all 
the sixty two views are invalidated on the grounds that they are 
dependent on contact, the Buddha has transcended that stage. As 
a ma tter of fact, that is what the understanding of Paṭicca 
Samuppāda means. To understand Paṭicca Samuppāda  is to be 
free from its snare. 
 Now this might appear as a riddle. It is due to the non -
understanding of Dependent Arising that one is drawn into the 
vortex between consciousness and name and form. We have told 
you about Narcissus and about the dog on the plank across the

Sermon 8 

stream. What Narcissus had done, we all have been doing 
throughout our Saṁsāra – that is to say trying to embrace our 
own shadow. What is the shadow? Name and form. It is due to 
contact that one gets involved in it. That is a deep point. But then, 
we have yet to mention that simile we alluded to. The Buddha 
sums up his sermon with the simile of a fisherman ’s net. It is a 
wonderful simile.  
 “Monks, just as a fisherman or a fisherman ’s apprentice 
were to go down into a small pool of water with a finely woven 
net. It would occur to him: “whatever sizeable creatures there are 
in this small pool, all of them are caught in this net. When they 
come up, they come up attached to this net, they come up 
included in it, caught up well within the net, even so all those 
recluses and Brahmins who assert various views are caught in this 
super-net of 62 views.” 
 The simile is highly significant. When a fin ely woven net 
is thrown over a small pool, fishes when they try to escape it by 
coming up are caught in the meshes. What is the fine mesh that 
holds back all view holders in the Buddha ’s super -net? The 
recurrent phrase: ‘tadapi phassa paccayā ’ – ‘that too is 
dependent on contact.’    
  As we said earlier, all the 62 views are dependent on 
contact. Try to understand the depth of this simile given by the 
Buddha. Like that fisherman’s finely woven net, the Buddha’s net 
of 62 views is capable of netting in all the speculative views in 
the world. All those view holders whether they be the legendary 
‘gamarālas’ and their devil -dancers or the modern scientists and 
philosophers, are well within this net. As the phrase ‘phussa 
phussa paṭisaṁvedenti’ implies, they all owe their experiences to 
‘CONTACT’. When they can’t see with the naked eye, they make 
use of a microscope or a telescope.  But isn ’t it again resorting to 
contact? When they can ’t understand at once with the mind, they 
resort to logic and reasoning. It is mind -contact all the same.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

However far they travel or speculate, they cannot reach the end of 
the world. They are still held well within the gourd shell . The 
very last sentence in that passage which repudiate s the entire 
gamut of views, is the grand finale which solves the whole issue.  
 “yato kho bhikkhave bhikkhu channa ṁ phassāyatanānaṁ 
samudayañca atthagamañca assādañca ādīnavañca 
nissaraṇañca yathābhūta ṁ pajānāti, aya ṁ imehi sabbehi 
uttarītaraṁ pajānati” 
 “In so far, monks, as a monk understands as they are, the 
arising, the going down, the satisfaction, the peril and the 
stepping out in regard to the six sense spheres, this monk has by 
far a higher understanding than all these (view-holders).” 
 One may tak e ‘monk’ mentioned above as denoting the 
arahant. This monk who understands as they are the arising, the 
going-down, the satisfaction, the peril and the stepping out 
(samudaya, atthagama, assāda, ādīnava, nissara ṇa) of the six 
spheres of sense contact has a knowledge far superio r to that of 
all view-holders.  
 In referring to the Buddha ’s deliverance too, the above 
five aspects are mentioned. One might think that the Buddha is 
always experiencing the Fruit of Arahanthood – No. He has 
attained that synoptic vision. He understands how the six spheres 
of sense contact arise and how they go down – as if seeing the 
sun-rise and sun -set. He understands the satisfaction 
characteristic of the six sense spheres as well as the perils 
inherent in them. When the Buddha is partaking of food his tastebuds are in working order – not that they are inactive. He sees 
beautiful forms with his eyes. Only that he is not attached to 
them. He is aware of the satisfying aspect as well as the perilous 
aspect. Last of all comes the s tepping-out ( nissaraṇa). This is 
what concerns us in particular here. That is to say – the 
attainment to the Fruit of Arahanthood, which is the proper range 
for the arahants.

Sermon 8 

 The state of that attainment has been described in many 
places in the di scourses. It is often worded in paradoxical terms. 
Therefore scholars are puzzled and instead of understanding it 
properly, speak of a Nibbāna that comes as an after -death state. 
Even the western scholars go astray in interpreting them. Just see 
what a del usion they are in. Right view is lacking in them. We 
have taken pains to clarify the correct position. As the Buddha 
has stated, the world is not prepared to accept the Law of 
Dependent Arising. They turn a blind eye to its most important 
aspect of cessation (nirodha). They keep on jumping from arising 
to arising ignoring the cessation aspect. That is why it is said that 
worldlings are always on the samudaya (arising) side. The 
Ariyans see the nirodha. For them it is the truth and the bliss. 
Let me say some thing more about contact. Now it is a 
discourse of a different type. A Brahmin named Uṅṅābha 12 once 
came to see the Buddha. The way he addressed the Buddha shows 
that he had no respect for the Buddha. He says: “Good Gotama, 
there are these five senses which have different ranges, different 
pastures and which do not partake of one another ’s pasture of 
objects. What are they? The eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue and 
the body. Good Gotama, for these five senses which have their 
different ranges, different pastures, and which do not partake of 
the objects of one another ’s pasture, what is the resort, who is it 
that partakes of, the objects of their different pastures?” What 
Uṅṅābha means is that every sense faculty has its own particular 
range of objects. For instance, the eye can only see forms. It 
cannot hear sounds. The ear can hear but cannot see. They have 
their own pastures and cannot trespass on other ’s pastures. 
Uṅṅābha is curious to know the resort of all these five senses. He 
is asking whether there is someone who can partake of all objects 
received through the five senses. He must have been t hinking of a 
soul ( ātman) as the one who enjoys all those objects. But the 
Buddha says that the mind is the resort and that it is the mind 
which partakes of all those sense objects ( ‘. . . mano paṭisaraṇaṁ 
mano ca nesaṁ gocaravisayaṁ paccanubhoti’). Whatever objects

The Law of Dependent Arising 

that come through the five external senses are received by the 
mind. The mind partakes of them. Then the Brahmin asks: “What 
is the resort of the mind?” The Buddha replies that ‘Sati’ or 
mindfulness is the resort of the mind. Uṅṅābha’s next question is: 
“What is the resort of mindfulness?” The Buddha says: “The 
resort of mindfulness is Deliverance.” Then the Brahmin asks: 
“What is the resort of Deliverance?” The Buddha ’s answer is: 
“The resort of Deliverance is Nibbāna.” But the Brahmin has yet 
another question: “Good Gotama, what is the resort of Nibbāna?” 
Then the Buddha corrects him with these words: “Brahmin you 
have gone beyond the scope of the question. You were not able to 
grasp the limit of questioning. Brahmin, this Holy life is to be 
lived in a way that it gets merged in Nibbāna, that it has Nibbāna 
as the Goal and consummation.” 
Then the Brahmin was pleased and rejoicing in the 
Buddha’s words worshipped him and left. But the discourse 
records something extraordinary. It is said that as soon as he left, 
the Buddha told the monks that the Brahmin attained the Fruits of 
the Path while listening to the exposition. There is something 
deep involved here. As far as we can guess it has something to do 
with the philosophy of the Brahmins. For the m the five external 
senses are all powerful. Above them stands the mind and above 
mind there is intelligence. Above intelligence there is the soul .13 
This is the hierarchy in the Hindu tradition as recorded in the 
Bhagavadgītā. But according to the Buddha instead of a soul 
there is mindfulness (sati) as the resort of the mind.  
Here is something highly significant. Why has the Buddha 
declared the Four Foundations of Mindfulness ( cattāro 
satipaṭṭhānā) as the direct way ( ekāyano maggo ) leading to 
Nibbāna? The resort of the mind is mindfulness. We happened to 
mention on an earlier occasion that all things originate from 
attention ( manasikārasambhavā sabbe dhammā ).14 The world 
thinks that the object of the mind is something far away. That is 
why we gave the simi le of the cracking -of the -pot in our last

Sermon 8 

sermon. When you come close to Nibbāna you have to give up 
even the concept of Nibbāna, just as one has to turn back when 
one finds oneself up against the wall. The final realization comes 
with the understanding that the ‘thing’ (i.e. the object of the mind 
or the ‘mind-object’) is produced by the mind itself. You may 
recall the occasion we gave you an exercise in folding your 
fingers so that you will have our definition of ‘nāma’ (name) at 
your fingertips. We had to do all that because some critics 
questioned our definition of ‘name’ in name -and-form. We got 
you to count on your fingers as an illustration of the five 
constituents of name – feeling, perception, intention, contact a nd 
attention. Attention is the ‘thumb’ and nearest to it is contact – 
the index finger. We have mentioned above that all the objects of 
the five senses flow in and accumulate in the mind and that the 
mind partakes of them. ‘Mind’ partakes of them only afte r 
converting them into ‘things’ (dhammā). Forms, sounds, smells, 
tastes and touches are all converted into ‘things’. What converts 
them into ‘things’ is attention ( ‘manasikāra’ – lit. ‘doing-in themind’). That is why we brought up various similes to expla in this 
deep point. To solve this difficult case of the magical illusion of 
consciousness – ‘this criminal case ’ against Māra – the Buddha 
adopted a Middle Path tactic. He gave crown pardon to the 
alleged culprit No 1. ‘manasikāra’ (attention) who committed the 
crime with his gang – ‘vedanā’ (feeling), ‘saññā’ (perception), 
‘cetanā’ (intention) and ‘phassa’ (contact). The ‘accused’ 
manasikā or attention had committed the crime in the guise of 
‘ayoniso-manasikāra’ (i.e. as non -radical attention). The Buddha 
made him the crown -witness on condition that he gave evidence 
as ‘radical-attention’ (yoniso manasikāra). 
Now as for radical attention, it has to play its role within 
mindfulness. That is why in the field of insight, radical attention 
is regarded as the seed of wisdom. What we have in the Four 
Foundations of Mindfulness ( cattāro satipaṭṭhānā) is the journey 
of radical attention with mindfulness as its companion. The 
course of the journey lies through the Four Foundations of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Mindfulness, the Four Right End eavours, the Four Bases for 
Success, the Five Faculties, The Five Powers, The Seven Factors 
of Enlightenment to culminate in the Noble Eightfold Path for 
attaining Nibbāna. That is why the Buddha said that mindfulness 
is the resort of the mind. So then, th e resort of the mind is 
mindfulness. If that mindfulness as Right Mindfulness ( sammā 
sati) is properly directed, the crime perpetrated by this alleged 
culprit also becomes fully exposed. Finally, not only the other 
four culprits but the biggest culprit ‘manasikāra’ or attention is 
also found guilty. As we mentioned in an earlier sermon, it is as if 
a thief is caught ‘red-handed’. What is it that was stolen? The 
‘THING’. The ‘thing’ or mind -objects which is ‘mind-made’ 
(manomaya) – a fake product of the mind . This is the clue to the 
entire Sa ṁsāric riddle. Worldlings think that ‘things’ exists in 
themselves. Now, we come back to the opening verse of the 
Dhammapada.  
‘Manopubbañgamā dhammā 
 Manoseṭṭhā manomayā’ 
‘Mind is the forerunner of mind objects 
 Mind is their chief – they are mind-made’ 
If a worldling writes his ‘Dhammapada’ he would begin 
with the words: 
‘Dhammapubbañgamo mano’ 
‘Mind has mind objects as forerunners’ 
 
That is why we asked that boy to go towards the wall so 
that he will have to turn back at the last step. When one turns 
back with radical attention one will realize that chasing the object 
of the mind is like running after a mirage, which is sense -
perception itself. The Buddha, on the other hand, asks us to turn 
back with radical attention. That is why, as we pointed out in 
discourses like ‘Mahāpadāna Sutta’ 15 the Bodhisatta discovered

Sermon 8 

the Law of Dependent Arising by reasoning from the very end, 
asking hims elf “what is the cause of decay and death?” In 
‘yonisomanasikāra’ (attention by way of the source or matrix) 
one has to come back to the source from where one already is. 
What one discovers last of all is that the ‘witness’ himself is the 
biggest culprit! The crime he committed is the concoction of a 
‘thing’. That is why in the end even the perception of mind 
objects fades away ( dhammasaññā ca virajjati ). You may recall 
now the statement: ‘mano ca nirujjhati dhammasaññā ca 
virajjati’ – ‘mind too ceases and the perception of mind -objects 
fades away.’ When a sense faculty ceases its object also has to 
cease. What was said in the verses forming the topic of this 
sermon is a description of the realization of Nibbāna. In other 
words, it is the realization of the cessation of existence 
(bhavanirodha). So then the cessation of existence is not 
something to be experienced in another realm. It is a realization 
here and now. That itself is the highest truth ( paramaṁ saccaṁ). 
That itself is the supreme bliss ( paramaṁ sukhaṁ) – as it is said 
‘Nibbānaṁ paramaṁ sukhaṁ’ (Nibbāna is the supreme bliss).  
Well, then you may understand that what we have said 
within this hour might require a long commentary. However you 
should try to grasp whatever you can. What we wish to point out 
is that this is not some intellectual stuff to satisfy the curiosity of 
philosophers or scientists. You should try to assimilate whatever 
is helpful for your practice. As the Buddha has said, whoever 
dwells diligently reflecting on the gap between the two 
contemplations ardent and zealous, overcoming defilements 
would pass from the  mundane to the supramundane level. The 
mundane level if it has such vicissitudes is false. The truth is here 
in the supramundane. One has to understand that what the world 
takes as bliss is itself the truth of suffering, and that Nibbāna is 
the bliss supr eme as is evident from that Recollection of Peace 
which formed the topic of our Nibbāna sermons:

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ 
sabbasaṁkhārasamatho sabbupadhipa ṭinissaggo ta ṇhakkhayo 
virāgo nirodho Nibbānaṁ” 
“This is peaceful, this is excellent, namely  the stilling of 
all preparations, the relinquishment of all assets, the destruction 
of craving, detachment, cessation, extinction.” 
The cessation of contact is also implicit in this. Even as 
depending on eye and forms eye consciousness arises, mind 
consciousness arises dependent on mind and mind -objects.16 
When mind consciousness arises due to mind and mind 
consciousness there is a discrimination between mind and mind -
object. With that separation, proliferation ( papañca) sets in. But 
if one sees consciousness as a dependently arisen phenomenon, as 
a fact of experience and not as a mere logical inference, there is 
no room for proliferation. What is the final conviction that comes 
when radical attention is razor -edge sharp? That the object of the 
mind is mind -made ( manomaya). Along with that conviction, 
consciousness ceases because thereby it is made ineffective. It 
has nothing to do. Since consciousness is the very discrimination 
between the two, how can there be a discrimination when the true 
state of affair s is seen? As we pointed out in our ‘Magic of the 
Mind’, when the secrets of the magic show are exposed, the 
magic-show ends. That is why it was said:  
“Murk it is to those enveloped –  
as darkness unto the undiscerning 
  But to the good wide ope’ it is –   
as light is unto those discerning” 
 You had better get the gist of what we have said so far. 
The most important thing is what we have highlighted in the 
Brahmajāla Sutta . Worldly philosophers and scientists have 
formulated various views. All those are dependent on contact 
(phassa paccayā ). But the Buddha proclaimed a supra -mundane

Sermon 8 

experience which falls outside the gourd -shell of the six sense 
spheres. It is in this transcendental experience that birth, decay, 
death and the entire mass of suffering ends. That is why the 
Buddha summed up with the words: “ esevanto dukkhassa”. This 
itself is the end of suffering. 
  Making use of the practical aspect of our sermon today 
and helped by the precepts you keep and the meditation you do, 
may you all be able to  attain that deliverance from Saṁsāra in 
this very life through the paths to Stream -winning, Once -
returnership, Non -returnership and Arahanthood. Whatever 
beings there be from the lowest hell to the highest Brahma world, 
wishing to rejoice in this sermon, may they all rejoice in our 
sermon! May the merits accrued thereby conduce to the 
fulfilment of their highest aim – the Deathless Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 148  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. The Magic of the Mind P.79f. 
3. S.IV 98 Kāmaguna Sutta 
4. Sāratthappakāsinī. S.A. III 25 (S.H.B)   
5. Ud. 80 
6. S. IV 93 Lokakāmaguna Sutta I. 
7. S. I 61 ; A. II 47 
8. Nibbāna The Mind Stilled Vol.I.P2 
9. M. I 167 Ariyapariyesana Sutta 
10. S. II 10 Gotama Sutta 
11. Itiv. 62 
12. S. V 217 Uṇṇābha Sutta 
13. Bhagavadgītā III 42 
‘Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyah paraṁ manah 
manasas tu parā buddhiryo buddheh paratas tu sah’ 
‘Senses they say are great, but greater than the senses is 
mind. But greater than the mind is intelligence and that 
which is greater than intelligence is (that soul)’. 
14. A. V 106f. 
15. D. II 31 
16. M. I 111 Madhupiṇḍika Sutta.

Sermon 9 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 191)
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Yo ubhante viditvāna 
Majjhe mantā na lippati 
taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
sodha sibbanimaccagā 1 
     – Majjhe S. A. 
He who having known both ends 
Gets not attached at the middle with wisdom 
Him I call a Great Man 
He has gone beyond the seamstress here. 
 
Dear Listeners, 
 It is on a Vesak Full Moon day like this, that the Fully 
Enlightened One, the Teacher of the  Three Worlds realized the 
Deliverance from repeated birth in Saṁsāra. Through the 
understanding h e achieved along with Full Enlightenment, he 
discovered the secret of S aṁsāric existence.  He understood that 
for an incalculable period, beings in the world have been 
wandering in Saṁsāra hindered by ignorance and fettered to 
craving.  We have chosen as the topic of our ninth sermo n on 
Dependent Arising, a verse with a deep meaning that helps one to 
dispel ignorance and break free from the fetter of craving.  This 
verse which according to the Pārāyaṇa Vagga  of the Sutta 
Nipāta, was preached by the Buddha to the Brahmin youth Tissa 
Metteyya, was so deep in meaning that when the Buddha was 
dwelling at Isipatana in Benares, a group of monks there, made it 
the topic for a Dhamma discussion as evidenced by the Majjhe 
Sutta in the Anguttara Nikāya.  A group of elder monks gathered

The Law of Dependent Arising 

at the a ssembly hall and in the course of their Dhamma 
discussion, took up this verse as the topic for a sort of 
symposium. This is how the topic was introduced: 
“Friends, this was said by the Fortunate One in the 
Metteyya question of Pārāyaṇa Vagga. 
Yo ubhante viditvāna 
Majjhe mantā na lippati 
taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
sodha sibbanimaccagā 
 He who having understood both ends, does not get 
attached at the middle with wisdom, him I call a Great Man.  He 
has gone beyond the seamstress here.” 
 Having cited the verse, t hey extracted four questions out 
of it. 
"What friends is the first end? 
What is the second end? 
What is the middle? 
Who is the seamstress?" 
 The four questions resemble a topic for a symposium. 
When these four questions were put forward one Venerable Thera 
offered the following explanation: 
"Contact, friends, is one end, arising of contact is the 
second end, cessation of contact is the middle, craving is the 
seamstress, for it is craving that stitches up for the birth of this 
and that specific existence.” 
 After giving this explanation, he goes on to say: 
 "In so far friends, does a monk understand by higher 
knowledge what is to be understood by higher knowledge, 
comprehend by full understanding what is to be compre hended

Sermon 9 

by full understanding. Understanding by higher knowledge what 
is to be understood by higher knowledge, comprehending by full 
understanding what is to be comprehended by full understanding, 
he becomes an ender of suffering in this very life." 
 That is to say, this verse is in itself a meditat ion topic that 
takes one as far as Arahanthood. The term for higher knowledge 
is ‘abhiññā’ and the term for full understanding or 
comprehension is ‘pariññā’. 
 Then a second Venerable Thera offers his opinion.  
According to his point of view the past is one end, the future is 
the second end, the present is the middle and craving is the 
seamstress. He too sums up the depth of the verse in the same 
words as the other Thera. 
 A third Venerable Thera giv es a different interpretation. 
For him one end is pleasant feeling, the second end is unpleasant 
or painful feeling and the middle is neither un pleasant nor 
pleasant feeling. Craving is again the seamstress. 
 A fourth Venerable Thera opines that one end is name, the 
second end is form, the middle is consciousness and the 
seamstress is craving. 
 A fifth Venerable Thera puts forward the view that the 
one end is the six internal sense spheres, the second end  is the six 
external sense spheres, consciousness is the middle and craving is 
the steamstress. 
 A sixth Venerable Thera is of the opinion that one end is 
sakkāya – a term for the five aggregates of grasping (lit. the 
existing body), the second end is the arising of sakkāya, the 
middle is the cessation of sakkāya and the seamstress is craving. 
 When six explanations had come up in this way one monk 
made this suggestion:

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Now that we have explained the verse according to our 
abilities, let us approach the Fortunate One and report our 
discussion. In whatever way the Fortunate One explains, so shall 
we bear it in mind.” 
 Approving that suggestion, they all went to the Buddha 
and after reporting the discussio n in full, asked: "Venerable Sir,  
whose words are wel l spoken (‘ Kassa nu kho bhante 
subhāsitam?’). The Buddha replied:  
 "Monks, what you all have said is well said from some  
point of view or other, b ut that for which I preached that verse in 
the Metteyyapañha is this: and quoting the verse in question, the 
Buddha explains: 
 "Monks contact is one end, and the arising of contact is  
the second end, the cessation of contact is in the middle, cravi ng 
is the seamstress for it is craving that puts the stitch for the birth 
of this or that existence. 
 In so far Monks, does a monk understand by higher 
knowledge what is to be understood by higher knowledge and 
comprehend by full understanding what is to be comprehended 
by full understanding, understanding by higher knowledge what 
is to be understood by higher knowledge and compr ehending by 
full understanding what is to be comprehended by full 
understanding, he becomes and ender of suffering in this very 
life." 
 From this we can see that the Buddha ’s explanation 
happens to coincide with the interpretation given by the first 
speaker at the symposium.  However the interpretation s given by 
the other five monks are also correct. From this we can see how 
profound in meaning this cryptic verse is. It may be that the six 
Theras presented their own meditation topics through  these

Sermon 9 

interpretations. The common feature of these six interpretations is 
that the seamstress is identified with craving. 
 Let us now turn our attention to craving. Why is craving 
called the seamstress?  Cravi ng has a number of nicknames. It is 
called the ‘glue’ ( lepa) o r the ‘sticker’ (visattikā).  In such 
discourses as the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta 2 this seamstress 
craving has been given a number of titles. By the way, since 
taṇhā happens to be in the feminine gender the idea of a 
seamstress is quite apt, and those titles are like her qualifications. 
‘yāyaṁ tanhā ponobhavikā nandirā gasahagatā 
tatratatrābhinandinī’. S he is the one responsible for bringing 
about rebirth ( ponobhavikā) accompanied by delight and lust 
(nandirāgasagatā) delighting now-here, now -there 
(tatratatrābhinandinī). Notoriously licentious as she is, this 
flirting trait of delighting now here, now there helps the 
seamstress in putting stitch after stitch in rapid s uccession as in 
the case of a sewing machine. The net result is the  sewing 
together of two folds. Though this may sound as an anachronism, 
the sewing machine is a good illustration of the role of the 
seamstress. As soon as the needle goes down, the shut tle hastens 
to put the stitch. So the epithet ‘seamstress’ is quite apt since 
craving puts together the two ends ignoring the middle, even as 
the sewing machine stiches the two folds in sewing. 
 Let us now try to clarify for ourselves the characteristics 
of craving with reference to the six interpretations. First of all we 
may take up the first interpretation which was approved d irectly 
by the Buddha himself. According to it, one end is contact, the 
second end is the arising of contact, the middle is the cessa tion of 
contact and craving is the seamstress. What can we understand by 
saying that contact is one end? Now as for contact, it is 
customary for the world to think of o ne who contacts, when the 
word ‘contact or touch’ comes up. For instance, one might say ‘it 
touched my body’ or ‘I touched it’. We come across something to 
that effect in the Nidāna Saṁyutta of the Saṁyutta Nikāya where

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Venerable Mo ḷiya Phagguna asks the Bu ddha: ‘Who is it 
Venerable Sir, that touches?’ 3 The Buddha disallows the question 
with the words ‘na kallo pañho’ – ‘not a proper question.’ There 
the Buddha says: ‘I do not say one touches’  and instructs 
Venerable Phagguna to under stand the occurrence of touch as  a 
dependently arisen phenomenon. The correct mode of 
understanding according t o the Buddha is: ‘saḷāyatana paccayā 
phasso, phassa paccayā vedanā ’ – ‘Dependant on the six sense 
spheres is contact and dependant on contact is feeling’. So it 
seems that what happens due to contact, the world attributes to a 
person because of the ‘personality-view’ (sakkāyadiṭṭhi). The 
phrase ‘yo ubhante viditvāna ’ means ‘he who having understood 
both ends’. By understanding correctly both ends, with wisdom 
one does n ot get attached at the middle. The correct 
understanding of contact is in the way t he Buddha has pointed 
out: ‘saḷāyatana paccayā phasso’ – ‘Dependant on t he six sense 
spheres is contact.’ 
 ‘Arising of contact ’ (phassa samudaya) is a question that 
goes even deeper.  It is not easy for one to understand how 
contact arises. We get a clue t o its understanding from the 
Madhupiṇḍika Sutt a 4 of the Majjhima Nikāya . On previous 
occasions too, we may have explained to you in various ways the 
exposition by Venerable Mah ā Kaccāna of the work ings of the 
six sense spheres. There he says; 
 ‘cakkhuñcāvuso pa ṭicca rūpe  ca uppajjati 
cakkhuviññāṇaṁ. Ti ṇṇaṁ saṅgati p hasso. P hassa paccayā 
vedanā ....’ 
 ‘Friends, depend ing on eye and forms arises eye -
consciousness. The concurrence of the three is contact.  
Dependent on contact, feeling .....’ 
 Therein the wo rds: ‘cakkhuñcā paṭicca rūpe uppajjati 
cakkhuviññāṇaṁ’ are note worthy. The two words ‘paṭicca’ and

Sermon 9 

‘uppajjati’ reminds us of the term ‘paṭicca samuppāda.’ It seems 
then that the arising of eye consciousness itself gives a clue to the 
understanding of the Law of Dependent Arising.  Even 
consciousness is dependently arisen.  The world t akes 
consciousness to be self. But the Buddha points out that eye -
consciousness aris es depending on eye and forms. For a further 
clarification of this point one has to turn to the exposition given 
by Venerable S āriputta in the Mahā Hatthipadopama Sutta . 5 
Usually we think that if something comes before our eyes we 
ought to see it.  But that is not exactly the case.  Venerable 
Sāriputta tells us that something subtle is involved in a perceptual 
situation. 
 First of all in order to see, the ey e must be in working 
order. Even if the eye is unimpaired and forms come within the 
visual range, still the eye consciousness does not arise. 
 The third requirement is expressed with an unusual 
phrase: ‘tajjo samannāhāro’.  ‘Tajjo’ means ‘born thereof’, that 
is to say ‘specific’. ‘Samannāhāro’ has the sense of coming into 
proper ‘ focus’. But t hat focussing is part and parcel of that 
particular perceptual situation.  It is not a focussing directed from 
elsewhere. 
 So then, simply because the eye is intact, one does not see. 
Even if forms come within the p roper range, one does not see. 
The third essential factor is what is called ‘tajjo samannā hāro’. 
The focussing or the ‘bringing together ’ implied by 
‘samannāhāro’ is ‘born of that ’ (tajjo), i .e. the percept ual 
situation itself. That mea ns it is conditionally arisen. It seems, 
therefore, that even  eye consciousness arises  due to causes and 
conditions. This is something the worldl ing is not prepared to 
accept. Instead he brings in the idea of a self.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Venerable Mahā Kaccāna goes on to say something more. 
‘cakkhuñca pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ tiṇṇaṁ 
saṅgati phasso’ 
 ‘Depending on eye and forms arises eye consciousness, 
the concurrence of the three is contact’. 
 Now, what is the ‘three’? The eye , forms and eye -
consciousness. It is not proper to count eye, forms and eye -
consciousness as ‘three’ because the third is  the outcome of the 
other two. But the world doesn’t see it because of ignorance. Just 
try to understand this.  Depending on eye and forms eye -
consciousness arises, but it is by putting the three together that 
the situation called  ‘contact’ comes to be. That means contact is 
something ‘made-up’ – something ‘prepared’ (saṅkhata). It is by 
forgetting or ‘ignoring’ the fact that consciousness is dependently 
arisen, that one puts together ‘the three’ to make up contact. So at 
whatever moment the dependently arisen nature of consciousness 
is seen as a matter of experience that contact ceases then and 
there. 
 Well, that is the cessation of contact,  what prevents its 
occurrence? Craving. It stitches together contact and the arising 
of contact without allowing the worldling to see the cessation that 
is in the middle. One can see it only with keen insight. It is by 
seeing penetratively the impermanence of contact, that one gets 
the ability to see its cessation. Since this is the first int erpretation 
which tallied with the Buddha’s own explanation, we discussed it 
at length. 
 Let us now take up the second interpretation. According to 
it, one end is the past, the second end is the future and the middle 
is the present. There too it is craving that puts the stitch. The best 
illustration is found in the Bhaddekaratta Sutt a 6 which we had 
discussed earlier too. There we get the following instructive lines:

Sermon 9 

Atītaṁ nānvāgameyya 
Nappatikaṅkhe anāgataṁ 
Yadatītaṁ pahīnaṁ taṁ 
appattañca anāgataṁ 
paccuppannañca yo dhammaṁ 
tattha tattha vipassatī 
Let one not trace back the past 
Or yearn for the future – yet to come 
That which is past is left behind 
The yet-to-come is unattained 
And that which is present he discerns 
With insight as and when it comes 
 The advice is not to run after the past nor to have 
expectations about the future because the past is gone and the 
future has not come yet. Even the present has nothing in it to hold 
on to when one sees it with insight. That is to say, as insight gets 
keener and keener, one finds nothing to grasp there. But what 
craving does is to stitch up past and future ignoring the present. 
On a previous occasion, we cited a highly significant verse in that 
connection based on the story of the acrobat Uggasena. 7 That 
verse the Buddha addressed to Uggasena as he stood on top of the 
sixty-cubit bamboo pole, served as the meditation subject for him 
to attain arahanthood. 
Muñca pure muñca pacchato 
Majjhe muñca bhavassa pāragū 
Sabbattha vimutta mānaso 
Na puna jātijaraṁ upehisi 
Let go what has gone before 
Let go that which comes after 
Let go thy hold on the middle as well 
And get well beyond all existence 
Thus with mind released in every way 
Thou comest never more to birth and decay

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 As soon as he heard that verse, the acrobat Uggasena 
attained arahanthood even as he stood on top of the bamboo pole. 
He stood balanced on the bamboo pole having given up thoughts 
of the past a nd the future. It was for him a very critical moment. 
The middle is the present moment. To let-go of the mid dle is to 
give up the present. To the acrobat who has given up thoughts of 
the past and future to stand precariously balanced with 
concentration, it is easy to let go of the present. What the 
seamstress craving keeps doing is to temp t us to forget  the 
present and hold us confused between memories of the pas t and 
dreams about the future. Instead of it, if one gets used to 
attending to the present preparations then and there, at the peak of 
insight meditation, one can by -pass the seamstress and win 
freedom. 
 Now as for the third interpretation, the pleasant feeling is 
one end, the unpleasant feeling is the second end and the middle 
is the neither un pleasant nor pleasant feeling. There too, craving 
is the seamstress. What is her job there? The Buddha says that the 
uninstructed worldling when touched by painful feeling, delights 
in the pleasant feeling because he doesn ’t see an escape from it 
other than sense pleasures . 8 On a previous occasion when we 
were discussing this problem we said that the ordinary worldling 
is ‘see-sawing’ between pain and pleasure ignoring the neither 
unpleasant nor p leasant feeling in the middle. The Buddha puts 
across to us this truth in another  way saying that what underlies 
pleasant feeling is the latency to lust, what underlies unpleasant 
feeling is the latency to hate and that what underlies neither 
unpleasant nor pleasant feeling is the latency to ignorance. That is 
why generally the neither  unpleasant nor pleasant feelin g is 
slurred over and ignored. It is by exploiting this ignorance that 
the seamstress craving puts the stitch between pleasant feeling 
and unpleasant feeling. 
 However, the Buddha shows us a way out through insight 
here too b y a peculiar analysis. He says that the counterpart of

Sermon 9 

pleasant feeling is painful feeling and the counterpart of 
unpleasant feeling is pleasant feeling. But between these two, at 
the fulcrum of the see -saw, there is ignorance as the counterpart 
of the nei ther un pleasant nor pleasant feeling. Luckily, the 
counterpart of ignorance is knowledge, the counterpart of 
knowledge is deliverance and the counterpart of deliverance is 
Nibbāna. So instead of the ‘dead-end’ between pain and pleasure 
the Buddha points to a way out at the middle that goes deep.  For 
deliverance, one has to delve deeper at the middle. In removing 
the ignorance underlying the neither unpleasant nor pleasant 
feeling, one hits upon knowledge. In other words, to give up 
ignorance is to arouse k nowledge. Along with knowledge comes 
deliverance leading to Nibbāna. Exploiting the ignorance of the 
worldling of this exit at the middle, craving lures the worldling 
into an endless ‘see-sawing’ between pain and pleasure . So then 
here too, in order to byp ass the seamstress, one has to have 
insight directed on the neither unpleasant nor pleasant feeling and 
understand it in the light of preparations ( saṅkhārā) and attain 
deliverance. That is as far as the third interpretation is concerned. 
 Now for the fourth interpretation. Once again we are at a 
deep point. One end is name ( nāma), the second end is form 
(rūpa) and the middle is consciousness (viññāṇa). This is a telling 
argument against the popular definition of nāma as the four 
immaterial aggr egates – feeling, perception, p reparations and 
consciousness. The aggregate of ‘form’ is taken as ‘form’ (rupa) 
in name and form ( nāmarūpa). The fact that this popular 
definition is utterly ill founded is clearly revealed by this fourth 
interpretation since according to this interpretation consciousness 
comes in between name and form, it can in no way be included 
under name. Besides, we have quoted the words of the Buddha as 
well as of Venerable Sāriputta 9 in support of the fact that feeling, 
perception, in tention, contact and attention are the five 
constituents of name and that form is tantamount to the 
perception of form based on the four primaries as amenable t o the 
constituents of name. In fact once we got you to count on your

The Law of Dependent Arising 

fingers so that you will ha ve the constituents of name literally at 
your finger tips . On several occasions we pointed out that name 
in name and form is formal name and form in name and form is 
nominal form . Now what does the seamstress craving do?  She 
makes one forget about conscio usness and stitches up name with 
form. The deer runs after the mirage imagining it to be over there. 
It thinks the form it sees is real.  
 In this connection we brought up another simile – the 
story of the Greek youth Narcissus. Handsome Narcissus who 
had never seen his own face while roaming in a forest bent down 
into a pond to wash his face. Seeing the reflection of his face in 
the water he i magined an angel in the pond and made a vain 
attempt to embrace her and pined away and died by the pond. 
Here too Narcissus was deceived by the seamstress craving. This 
is an apt illustration of ‘nāmarūpa’ since the five factors of name 
can be clearly understood through it. Now, feeling is the love or 
lust giving rise to the ‘perception’ of an angel prompting an 
intention to look again and again and there is an apparent 
‘contact’ to sustain ‘attention’. But as it was non -radical attention 
or ‘ ayonisomanasikāra’ Narcissus was deluded enough to think 
that he looked because the ‘angel’ appeared , but the truth is that 
an angel appeared because he looked. So he imagined an angel in 
the pond. Consciousness also has a reflective quality like that of 
water. That is the magical illusion about it. Psychologically, it 
makes ‘reflection’ a possibility. Reflection invites attention. 
Wrong or non radical attention creates delusion but radical 
attention enables one to understand the delusion. Here we can 
clearly see that consciousness is in the middle between name and 
form. 
 All this conclusively shows that in no way can 
consciousness b e included in name ( nāma) as traditionally 
explained. In order to bypass the seamstress craving with her 
tactful stitching up, one has to have a proper understanding of the 
nature of consciousness. Only when one understands the magical

Sermon 9 

illusion in it, can one attain freedom from name and form 
(nāmarūpa). 
 The interpretation advanced by the fifth Venerable Thera 
has as the two ends the six internal sense spheres and the six 
external sense spheres. There too the middle is consciouness. 
 The sixth interpretation refers to a ‘sakkāya’ which means 
the ‘five aggregates of grasping ’, since the Buddha has said that 
‘sakkāya’ is a synonym for these five.10 The one end according to 
this interpretation is ‘sakkāya’ or personality and the second end 
is ‘sakkāya samudaya’ or arising of personality and the middle is 
‘sakkāya nirodha ’ or cessation of personality . It is due to not 
seeing the cessation of personality that beings keep on arousing 
the notion of personality. Worldlings are always on the samudaya 
(arising) side . The seamstress craving hastens to put the stitch 
under the veil of ignorance . What helps to eradicate ignorance is 
the perception of impermanence . By developing it one comes to 
understand all these as ‘preparations’ (saṅkhārā). It is easy 
enough to understand the impermanence of past preparations. It is 
also not so difficult to understand the impermanence of future 
preparations. But what is difficult is the understanding of the 
present preparations . The fact that the perception of 
impermanence is helpful in  winning freedom is clearly revealed 
by the story of the Arahant Venerable Adhimutta .11 When he was 
going through a forest, a bandit chief caught him and was about 
to kill him as a human oblation. He addressed the bandit chief in 
some verses which are highly insightful. 
 He says: 
‘Na me hoti ahosinti 
bhavissanti na hoti me 
saṅkhārā vibhavissanti 
tattha kā paridevanā’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

It does not occur to me ‘I was’ 
Nor does it occur to me ‘I will be’ 
Mere preparations get destroyed 
What is there to lament? 
 The next verse is all the more meaningful in the light of 
the simile of the seamstress. 
Suddhaṁ dhamma samuppādaṁ 
suddaṁ saṅkhāra santatiṁ 
passantassa yathābhūtaṁ 
na bhayaṁ hoti gāmaṇī 
To one who sees as it is 
The arising of pure preparations 
And the sequence of pure preparations 
There is no fear O! headman 
 ‘Seeing as it is pure preparations – that is to say , influx 
free preparations – arising and ceasing as a process of pure 
preparations, there is no fear, O! headman.’ 
 If we bring this in line with the simile of the sewing 
machine, while the sewing is going on the shuttle may run out of 
its load of cotton . Then the needle will pierce through one fold 
giving a semblance of contact to the second fold but as it comes 
up there is no stitch, though the cloth has moved forw ard. There 
has been a cessation in the middle as there was no grasping . 
Craving puts the knot so long as there is grasping. That is why the 
Buddha says that there is deliverance when there is no grasping . 
Apparently stitching goes on and there seems to be  a seam, but 
there is no seam. To go deeper  into this simile of the sewing 
machine, we may say that what happens during the period an 
Arahant is in the Arahattaphala-samāpatti (attainment to the 
Fruit of Arahanthood) is similar to what we have already said 
about the sewing machine. His ‘shuttle-free’ mind is experiencing 
the cessation of existence . It is free from TIME and SPACE . It is

Sermon 9 

‘time’ and ‘space’ that ‘prepare’ this world – which is a 
‘prepared’ (saṅkhata). 
 So then, as soon as grasping ceases this m ind is free from 
the shackles of Time and S pace. The needle goes down but there 
is no stitch . When there is no grasping there is no Death . What 
helps one to attain this Deathless is insightful attention directed 
on preparations ( saṅkhārā). They have to be seen then and there 
with razor-edge sharp attention . Whether it is the name and form 
or the sense spheres there are these two ends and the middle . The 
world is imprisoned in the middle . The true state of affairs comes 
to light in the course of insight meditation. To understand the two 
ends the perception of impermanence has to be developed . The 
personality view (sakkāyadiṭṭi) has to be done away with in order 
to see preparations as and when they come up with keen insight. 
 To non -radical attention conta ct appears as something 
done by a person . But when one arouses radical attention it is 
seen as a phenomenon arisen due to causes and conditions. In that 
understanding craving loses its hold on the mind. 
 Craving seeks to stitch up the two ends with the hel p of 
the notion of the compact nurtured by the perception of 
permanence. The two ends could even be contact and the arising 
of contact . The worldling is said to be on the ‘arising side ’ 
because he cannot see the cessation of contact . But at the peak of 
insight meditation generally known as the ‘knowledge of 
breaking up’ (bhaṅgañāṇa) one sees cessation at each  and every 
touch, as it is said: 
‘phussa phussa vayaṁ passaṁ’ 12 
‘touch after touch seeing how it wanes’ 
 
 The Buddha is telling us that deliverance com es by seeing 
the fact of cessation . Venerable Nandaka explains the same fact 
to the nuns.13 He asks them: ‘If the six internal sense spheres and

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the six external sense spheres are impermanent how  can 
consciousness arising out of them could be permanent? ’ Their 
response to that question is: 
 ‘Tajjaṁ tajjaṁ bhante paccaya ṁ paṭicca tajjā tajjā 
vedanā uppajjanti . Tajjassa tajjassa paccayassa nirodhā tajjā 
tajjā vedanā nirujjhanti’ 
 ‘Venerable sir , due to each and every specific condition 
each and every specifi c feeling arises. With the cessation of each 
and every specific condition, each and every specific feeling 
ceases.’ 
 As one goes on directing penetrative radical attention  to 
preparations, one comes to understand that  each contact is 
specific (lit. ‘born thereof’ – ‘tajjo’). The eye is impermanent and 
forms are impermanent and consciousness arising out of them is 
also impermanent . As the perception of impermanance develops 
by accelerating attention , one comes to unders tand this state of 
affairs. Thereby the skill in attending to preparations then and 
there grows. In non-radical attention the notion of mine prevails . 
But in radical attention one is able to discern the process of 
arising and ceasing of preparations . By wa y of a simile, what 
happens at the peak of accelerating attention can be compared to 
the rapidity of parry and thrust of the sword in duelling . If one 
wields radical attention with such rapidity holding Māra at bay, 
one can see the present preparations as and when they come up . 
That is what is meant by the phrase ‘tattha tattha vipassati ’ 14 
(‘seeing with insight then and there ’) in the Bhaddekaratta Sutta. 
As we said earlier, it is easy enough to understand what is past as 
past and what pertains to the future as future . But the present 
poses the biggest problem to the worldling . The present seems to 
be real . But to one who has developed the perception of 
impermanence by accelerating attention, in deep insight 
meditation the present crumples up then and t here giving rise to 
dejection. It is as if while walking along a precipice with two

Sermon 9 

steep slopes (i .e. Past and Future) on either side one is clutching 
on to a fence for safety . But as one proceeds one gets to know 
that the fence is rickety. The fence is present preparations. 
 As a matter of fact, attention is kept up through these 
preparations. However it dawns on him at last that even these 
preparations are brittle . That is what gives rise to dejection . This 
is the middle path in insight shown by the Budd ha. The 
instruction is to go on attending to these as preparations . But as 
one goes on attending, there comes a stage when they are seen to 
be breaking up at a dreadful rate . With that comes the knowledge 
of breaking up ( bhaṅgañāṇa). At the start  the understanding of 
impermanence is in terms of seeing the rise and fall . As that 
understanding deepens, one tends to see the falling more 
prominently and with it the cessation aspect reveals itself. 
 As soon as the cessation aspect becomes clear, a fear  
arises as the first reaction because what one is holding on to is 
breaking up. The question may come up: ‘What should be done in 
such a situation? ’ Nothing other than deepening the insight into 
impermanence to such a level that one realizes the reason for  that 
fear – namely the mis -taking of those fragile preparations to be 
one’s own. The only solution is to let -go of the notion of I and 
mine with regard to them. 
 In fact all these interpretations when regarded as 
meditation topics, have to do with the per ception of 
impermanence. On the one hand the line ‘ yo ubhante viditvāna’ – 
‘He who having known both ends’ refers to the two ends. To 
understand the two ends is to see their impermanence. Ignorance 
becomes active through the notion of the compact – i.e. through 
the perception of permanence. If instead of it the meditator 
constantly attends to their impermanent nature, the understanding 
comes when they appear as name and form that everything is of a 
nature to arise and cease. When greater attention is direct ed 
towards the cessation aspect of preparations, their breaking up

The Law of Dependent Arising 

appears all the more vividly giving rise to the series of insight 
knowledges such as bhaṅga (breaking up) and ‘ bhaya’ (fear) 
leading on finally to what is called ‘anupadā parinibbāna, perfect 
extinction through not grasping. Since existence depends on 
grasping (upādāna paccayā bhavo ) cessation of existence ( bhava 
nirodha) comes with the giving up. Though craving as the 
seamstress puts the knots, if the mind is set in such a way as to by 
pass the seamstress, there is deliverance. 
 There is one discourse which clearly shows that for birth 
in this and that existence craving itself becomes the grasping. It is 
the Kutūhalasālā Sutta  of the Saṁyutta Nikāya. 15 There the 
wandering ascetic Vacchagotta puts forward a certain simile to 
the Buddha which became the subject for a controversy on 
‘antarābhava’ or ‘intermediate existence’. Vacchagotta asks the 
Buddha what acts as the grasping ( upādāna) when a flame 
thrown off by the wind travels even far – probably in the case of a 
forest fire. The Buddha says that at that time the flame has wind 
as the grasping. Vacchagotta’s next question is when a being 
abandons this body and approaches a particular body, what is the 
grasping involved in it. The Buddha answers that craving itself is 
the grasping at that time. By misunderstanding this passage, some 
cite it as an argument for an intermediate existence between death 
and rebirth. This is definitely not a case of intermediate existence. 
It is craving that puts the stitch for this and that existence as it is 
stated after every one of the six interpretations in the explanatory 
note. The episode of Vacchagotta offers us a clear illustration of 
this phenomenon. At the moment of death, craving itself serves as 
the grasping (upādāna). If one has not abandoned grasping during 
one’s life time, at the moment of death craving prompts a desire 
for another existence because one is holding on to name and 
form. On the other hand, if one has given up the attachment to the 
five aggregates of grasping, then there is nothing to be grasped as 
a future existence.

Sermon 9 

 With regard to the Five A ggregates of Grasping known as 
‘sakkāya’ a certain m onk once asked the Buddha a peculiar 
question. He asked whether the Five Aggregates of Grasping and 
grasping mean the same thing or whether grasping is something 
apart from the Five Aggregates of Grasping .16 The Buddha says 
that the Five Aggregates of Grasping and grasping do not mean 
the same thing nor does gras ping exist apart from the Five 
Aggregates of Grasping . But whatever desire and lust 
(chandarāga) there is in t he Five Aggregates of Grasping, that is 
the grasping therein . So the advice of the Buddha is to get rid of 
the desire and lust for the Five Aggregates of Grasping. Once that 
is given up there is no possibility of a birth into a future 
existence. The conviction that no future existence is possible is 
received in the attainment of the Fruit of Arahanthood . The 
experience of the cessation of existence (bhavanirodha) can be 
compared to the seamless sewing we described above. The needle 
goes down piercing the two folds as the machine goes into action 
but there is no seam . This is the miracle of the arahant ’s ‘shuttlefree mind ’, where grasping is no more . What everyone is 
grasping can be boiled down to the five groups – form, feeling, 
perception, preparations and consciousness . The term ‘group’ is 
defined as eleven-fold in each case, namely: past, future, present, 
internal, external, gross or subtle, infer ior or superior, far or near . 
We grasp these groups in these eleven ways .17 They are 
embedded in our memory as ‘This is my form, this is my feeling ’ 
etc. 
 If at any time the desire and lust for these five groups are 
abandoned, then at the moment of death t here will be no 
grasping. Not only at the moment of death, but even during the 
lifetime too when the arahant is in his attainment to the Fruit of 
Arahanthood, he experiences Deathlessness . It is like death but 
there is no fear because attachment is n o more . That is the 
Ambrosial Deathless ( amata) – the deliverance from existence . 
During that attainment name and form, which is the sum -total of 
existence, does not occur. The mind is emancipated.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 The world is imprisoned within the six sense-spheres or in 
name and form – within spatial and temporal limitations . 
Consciousness is based on a duality – ‘Dvayaṁ bhikkhave 
paṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti’ – ‘Monks, depending on a dyad 
consciousness arises .’ Even consciousness arises depending on 
two things. Consciousness ceases on seeing their impermanence . 
The cessation of consciousness is the stilling of consciousness .18 
Consciousness by definition is the discrimination between two 
things. The deer runs forward taking the mirage it sees in the 
distance to be water . What impels it to run towards it, is craving 
the THIRST. At every step the deer thinks it is coming closer to 
water. But the mirage recedes . The Buddha has preached that not 
only what appears to the eyes but objects of all the six senses 
keep on receding the more we approach them. But the world does 
not understand it . Instead craving prompts: ‘It is over there . Go 
further.’ 
 What craving does is to put the knot under the veil of 
ignorance, kept up by the perception of permanence . Whether it 
be the past and the f uture or name and form, all the time craving 
keeps on putting the knot . The world doesn’t see the workings of 
the preparations . Instead it grasps the personality view with the 
thought: ‘This am I, This is mine ’. Due to that grasping – that 
upādāna – they get pushed on from existence to existence. That is 
what is called the ‘Saṁsāric journey ’. What happens at the 
moment of death is not different from what is happening at this 
moment. Just as at this moment the mind keeps grasping this and 
that object, so also at the time of death since the lust for existence 
is there, one grasps the object presented to the mind by one ’s 
kamma. That is why craving itself is said to be the grasping 
(upādāna). 
 From all th is it appears that all the six E lder monks have 
presented meditation topics leading to arahanthood . Out of them 
it is the first one that the Buddha directly approved . The world 
finds itself held between contact and the arising of contact . With

Sermon 9 

its partiality for the arising aspect, it forgets about the cessat ion. 
Craving puts the knot blindfolding the worldling . Likewise the 
world leans on the past and the future . It revels in memories of 
the past and dreams about the future, ignoring the present . The 
world is see -sawing between pain and pleasure without seeki ng 
release through the neither unpleasant nor pleasant feeling . 
Between name and form it is entangled like Narcissus who tried 
to embrace his own reflection on water unaware of the magical 
illusion of consciousness in the middle . Similarly between the six 
internal spheres and the six external spheres there is a duality that 
ignores consciousness which is in the middle . Lastly comes the 
question of ‘sakkāya’. The cessation of the Five Groups of 
Grasping is not seen and due to that they go on accumulating . 
The Buddha points out that if one sees the impermanence of the 
eye, the forms, the consciousness and the rest, the five Groups get 
diminished. Impermanence has to be seen then and there  to 
prevent that accumulation. The two terms ‘upacaya’ and 
‘apacaya’ 19 are used in this connection. ‘ Upacaya’ is 
accumulation and ‘apacaya’ is effacement. As the phrase ‘tattha 
tattha vipassati ’ indicates by seeing with insight the 
impermanence then and there, one can attain deliverance. 
Yo ubhante viditvāna 
Majjhe mantā na lippati 
taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
sodha sibbanimaccagā 
 ‘Mahāpurisa’ (Great Man) refers to the arahant . To 
understand the impermanent as well as the suffering fr aught and 
not self nature is the higher level of understanding called 
‘abhiññā’. The perfection of that understanding is ‘pariññā’ – full 
comprehension. The stream-winner has higher understanding an d 
he attains full comprehension on attaining arahanthood .20 This 
verse succinctly presents the course of tr aining leading to 
arahanthood. Whether it be the F ive Groups of Grasping or the 
six spheres of contact or name and form, by constantly reflecting

The Law of Dependent Arising 

on their impermanent, suffering fraught and not -self nature, one 
can realize the state indicated by this verse. 
 The Buddha has proclaimed the path to deliveran ce from 
Saṁsāra. As we have mentioned, ignorance is like the father and 
craving is like the mother 21 to beings in Saṁsāra. Hindered by 
ignorance and fettered to craving beings keep running round . The 
Buddha has o ffered the solution to this Sa ṁsāric problem in the 
form of the Three Signata  – impermanence, suffering and not -
self. Seeing everything as not-self with insight if one liberates the 
mind from this condition by passing the seamstress craving, one 
can realize the cessation of existence here and now. That is why 
the dictum goes ‘ Bhavanirodho nibbāna ṁ’ 22 – ‘Cessation of 
existence is Nibbāna.’ 
 You should seriously consider why the Buddha has 
declared that beings have wandered in Saṁsāra for an 
incalculable period because of ignorance and craving . The verse 
we have discussed also says that if one understands the two ends 
and with wisdom does not get attached at the middle, by passing 
the seamstress one can attain deliverance . Getting whatever help 
you can from this sermon for your meditation, you sho uld put 
forth your best efforts to atta in deliverance from this Saṁsāra by 
realizing the Fruits of the Path to Stream -winning, Once -
returning, Non -returning and Arahanthood . We wish you all 
success in that endeavour. 
 Whatever beings there be from the lowe st hell to the 
highest Brahma world wishing to rejoice in this sermon, may they 
all rejoice in our sermon . May the merits accrued thereby 
conduce to their highest aim – the Deathless Nibbāna!

Sermon 9 

1. A. III 399 
2. S. V 421 
3. S. II 13 Phagguna Sutta 
4. M. I 111 
5. M. I 190 
6. M. III 187 
7. Dh.A. 2.605-608 (S.H.B.) 
8. S. II 207ff. 
9. S. II 3, M. I 53 
10. S. III 159 Sakkāya Sutta 
11. Thag. vv, 715, 716 
12. Sn. V 739 
13. M. III 274 
14. M. III 187 
15. S. IV 399 
16. M. III 16 Mahā Puṇṇama Sutta 
17. M. III 16 Mahā Puṇṇama Sutta 
18. Sn. V. 735 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
19. M. III 287f. Mahāsalāyatanika Sutta 
20. M. I 4 Mūlapariyāya Sutta 
21. S. I 37f., Janeti Sutta 
22. A. V 9

Sermon 10 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 192)
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Lobhajaṁ dosajaṁ ceva – mohajaṁ cāpaviddasu  
yaṁ tena pakataṁ kammaṁ – appaṁ vā yadi vā bahuṁ 
idheva taṁ vedanīyaṁ – vatthu aññaṁ na vijjati 
Tasmā lobhañca dosañca – mohajaṁ cāpi viddasu 
vijjaṁ uppādayaṁ bhikkhu – sabbā duggatiyo jahe. 1
    – Devadūta Vagga A.  
 ‘In the case of an ignorant one, whatever deed born of 
greed, hate or delusion done by him, be it little or much, 
has to be experienced here itself – there is no other site for 
it. 
 Therefore let the wise monk, arousing knowledge, give up 
deeds born of greed, hate an d delusion and all bad 
bournes’ 
 
Dear Listeners,  
 Poson Poya  day is, for the Buddhists of this country, a 
day, which arouses a great enthusiasm in the Dhamma. Due to the 
establishment of Buddha ’s dispensation in this country by the 
mission of the arahant Venerable Mahinda Thera and his group 
of monks, King Devānampiyatissa and the inhabitants were able 
to build up a vision of life in accordance with the Right View. 
They formed a correct vision of values regarding good and bad, 
skilful and unskilful and merit and demerit.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 By taking up two verses pertaining to that p hilosophy of 
life as the topic of our tenth sermon on Dependent Arising, we 
hope to present this sermon as a Poson sermon befitting the 
occasion. These two verses are found in the Devadūta Vagga of 
the Anguttara Nikāya . Even from the first paragraph of tha t 
discourse the relation between kamma and the Law of Dependent 
Arising is made clear.  
 This is how the Buddha begins the discourse:  
 “Monks, there are these three causes for the arising of 
deeds. What are the three? 
 Greed is a cause for the arising of deeds. Hate is a cause 
for the arising of deeds. Delusion is a cause for the arising of 
deeds.” 
 Then the Buddha says: “Monks, whatever deed that is 
done with greed, born of greed, caused by greed, arisen from 
greed, wherever his selfhood is born, there th at deed ripens, 
where that deed ripens, there he experiences the result of that 
deed either in this very life or in the next birth or in any 
subsequent birth.” 
 A similar pronouncement is made in regard to deeds born 
of hate and delusion. Then a certain si mile is given as an 
illustration.  
 “Just as, monks, when seeds unbroken, not putrid, not 
affected by wind and sun, and capable of sprouting and well 
stored up, are sown on a good field well prepared, if the rain also 
comes down in plenty, then those seeds , monks, will come to 
growth and plenitude, even so, monks, whatever deed that is done 
with greed.............. hate.............. delusion wherever his selfhood 
is born, there that deed ripens. Where that deed ripens, there he 
experiences the result of th at deed either in this very life or in the 
next birth or in any subsequent birth.”

Sermon 10 

  We can see that this simile about seeds has some relation 
between cause and effect. Then about skilful deeds the following 
pronouncement is made.  
 “Monks, there are three  causes for the arising of deeds. 
What are the three? Non-greed is a cause for the arising of deeds. 
Non-hate is a cause for the arising of deeds. Non -delusion is a 
cause for the arising of deeds. 
 Monks, whatever deed that is done with non -greed, born 
of non-greed, caused by non -greed, arisen from non -greed, when 
greed is gone thus is that deed abandoned, uprooted made like a 
palm tree divested of its site, made non existent incapable of 
arising in the future.” 
 The same is said about deeds born of non -hate and non -
delusion and then a simile is given as an illustration.  
 “It is as if, monks, in the case of seeds unbroken, not 
putrid, not affected by wind and sun, capable of sprouting and 
well stored up, a man were to burn in a fire and having burnt it in 
a fire reduce them to ashes, and having reduced them to ashes 
blow off in a strong wind or get it swept away in a swift -flowing 
current of a river and thereby, monks, would those seeds be 
abandoned, uprooted, made like a palm tree divested of its site, 
made non-existent and incapable of arising in the future, even so, 
monks, whatever deed that is done with non -greed............ non -
hate....... non-delusion...... when greed is gone.......... when hate is 
gone......... when delusion is gone thus is that deed b e abandoned, 
uprooted, made like a palm tree divested of its site, made non -
existent and incapable of arising in the future.” 
 The meaning of this peculiar simile is that deeds done 
with non -greed are exhausted with the ending of greed. Why is 
that? Because the net result of deeds done with non -greed is the 
ending of greed itself. Similarly, deeds done with non -hatred get 
exhausted with the complete ending of hate. So also deeds done

The Law of Dependent Arising 

with non -delusion get exhausted with the complete ending of 
delusion. What we have here is the norm of rise and fall. Though 
it seems simple enough, there is something deep involved here. 
Deeds done with greed, hate and delusion germinate like seeds on 
getting rain. In fact, craving, in some contexts is compared to 
rain. As a synonym, for craving “ sineha” signifies moisture. 2 
Beings in Saṁsāra go on with greed, hate and delusion given the 
rain or moisture of craving. Then the results of those deeds  have 
to be experienced, either in this very life, or in the next birth, or 
else in subsequent births. But the roots of skilful deeds, namely 
non-greed, non -hate and non -delusion behave differently. For 
instance deeds done with non -greed get exhausted with the 
ending of greed. They are abandoned, uprooted and destroyed. It 
is as if someone, instead of sowing seeds, which could germinate, 
were to burn them, reduce them to ashes and blow off against the 
wind or throw into a swift flowing river. When the Buddha gives 
a simile, it is thorough and conclusive. 
 Here we have something deep. This Saṁsāra goes on due 
to greed, hatred and delusion. What we call skilful deeds  – 
namely those born of non -greed, non-hate and non-delusion – are 
those that we make use of for putting an end to Saṁsāra. In the 
last analysis they conduce to our deliverance from Saṁsāra. 
There too we have something like the norm of arising and 
ceasing. Now let us take up the moral law of deeds (Kamma). 
Here we propose to discuss kamma from the point of view of the 
Law of Dependent Arising. Nibbedhikapariyāya Sutt a 3 of the 
Anguttara Nikāya is a discourse revealing some highly significant 
aspects of the moral law of kamma. There the Buddha gives a six 
fold analysis of ‘Kamma’ (deeds). 
 “Monks, kamma should be understood, the source and 
origin of kamma should be understood, the diversity of kamma 
should be understood, the result of kamma should be understood, 
the cessation of kamma should be understood, the way of practice 
leading to the cessation of kamma should be understood.

Sermon 10 

 Having presented these six topics, the Buddha himself 
analyses them one by one. The analysis given to the first  topic 
‘Kamma should be known’ is one that you all are familiar with.  
 “Cetanāham bhikkhave kammaṁ vadāmi. Cetayitvā 
kammaṁ karoti kāyena vācāya manasā.” 
 “Monks, intention, I say, is kamma. Having intended one 
does kamma by body, by word, by mind.” 
 This definition of kamma in terms of intention has quite a 
deep dimension in meaning . We can connect it with the analysis 
of Dependent Arising we have presented earlier. For the benefit 
of ‘new comers ’ in this crowd let us mention it in brief. While 
analyzing name and form we brought up a certain simile. We 
compared the constituents of name to the five fingers of our hand. 
Feeling is the little finger, small but mischievous. Perception is 
the ring finger both popular and notorious. Intention is the middle 
finger prominent and intrusive. Contact is the forefinger, fussy 
and busy all the time Attention is the thumb standing apart but 
approachable to the rest. It is with these five members of the 
name group that we get hold of what constitutes “for m”. Here 
too, it is the prominent and intrusive intention that the Buddha 
has called kamma. Of course it must be confessed that the simile 
of the five fingers is not found in the discourses.  
 Whatever it is, our comparison of intention to the 
‘prominent a nd intrusive middle finger ’ seems quite apt. As a 
matter of fact it is at the stage of intention that the notion of self 
becomes prominent and intrusive – and has to pay for that 
intrusion. Then the second point the Buddha has stated is the 
source and orig in of Kamma. According to the Buddha, the 
source and origin of Kamma is contact. Just see , there again our 
simile is meaningful. We compared contact to the fore -finger 
fussy and busy all the time. It is the most proximate cause for the 
origin of kamma because next to it is ‘attention’ – the THUMB. It

The Law of Dependent Arising 

is attention that is instrumental in a change of focus from one 
thing to another. Those of you who have listened to our earlier 
sermons might remember our Narcissus simile. Narcissus was 
tempted to embrace his own reflection in water at the stage of 
intention. Then came contact and attention. Whatever it is, the 
Buddha has stated that contact is the source and origin of kamma. 
 Then comes the third point – the diversity ( vemattatā) of 
kamma. This is explained as follows: 
 “There is monks, that kamma which has to be experienced 
in hell, there is that kamma which has to be experienced in the 
animal realm, there is that kamma which has to be experienced in 
the realm of ghostly beings, there is that kamma which has t o be 
experienced in the human world, there is that kamma which has 
to be experienced in the deva world.” 
 The diversity shown is according to the place where 
kamma has to be experienced. Then the result of kamma is said to 
be threefold.  
 “Monks, I say tha t the result of kamma is of three types: 
in this very life, in the next birth, or in a subsequent birth.” 
 The fifth point – the cessation of kamma is explained 
briefly: “Monks, the cessation of contact is the cessation of 
kamma.” This is understandable. Since the origin of kamma is 
contact, its cessation has to be with the cessation of contact itself. 
Lastly comes the way of practice leading to the cessation of 
kamma. It is said to be the Noble Eightfold Path. In this way there 
is a six-fold analysis given in that context.  
 There are many other discourses on kamma some of 
which we will bring up as we go on. Now according to the 
doctrine of the Nigaṇṭhas there are three types of kamma – 
namely bodily kamma, verbal kamma and mental kamma out of 
which they give first place to bodily kamma. But according to the

Sermon 10 

Buddha mental kamma takes precedence. It is clearly stated in the 
Upāli Sutt a 4 of the Majjhima Nikāya where the Buddha tells 
Dīgatapassi – the disciple of Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta  that mental 
kamma is more serious. One can understand the reason for it even 
from the first verse of the Dhammapada: 
 Mano pubbaṅgamā dhammā 
 mano seṭṭhā manomayā 
 manasā ce paduṭṭhena 
 bhāsati vā karoti vā 
 tato naṁ dukkhamanveti 
 cakkaṁ va vahato padaṁ 
 Mind is the forerunner of mind-objects 
 Mind is their chief – they are mind-made 
 If with a mind corrupt with hate 
 One speaks or does an act 
 Then suffering trails him close behind 
 Like the wheel the ox that draws the cart. 
 The primacy of the mind is emphasized in the Dhamma 
whereas the Nigaṇṭhas give first place to the body. Because of 
this primacy of the mind, if one speaks or acts with a corrupt 
mind, one has to suffer the consequences. Morally culpable deeds 
are by defini tion intentioned. It is because the Nigaṇṭhas did not 
recognize the relevance of intention that they went to the extreme 
of self-mortification. The reason for the Buddha ’s Middle Path is 
the identification of kamma with intention. 
 Another important discou rse portraying the results of 
kamma is the Devadūta Sutta 5 of the Majjhima Nikāya. As you 
may have heard it is a discourse preached as a sermon by the 
Venerable Arahant Mahinda in Anuradhapura to acquaint the 
people of this island with the dreadful consequences of evil 
deeds.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 In that discourse the Buddha first of all analyzes the way 
in which beings are born in various realms according to their 
good and bad conduct. There he mentions heavenly realm, human 
world, the realm of ghostly beings, the animal realm and lastly 
hell. However it is about the hell that the Buddha describes in 
particular in this discourse. The Buddha gives a vivid description 
of the terrible suffering undergone by beings i n various hells. 
That is probably why the Venerable Mahinda preached this 
discourse to the people of  this country. The sutta instil s moral 
dread of this Saṁsāric existence. On a Poson Full moon poya day 
like this we should call to mind such instructive tea chings of the 
Buddha. 
 Generally such discourses like Cūla Hatthipadopama 
Sutta 6 in the Majjhima Nikāya , which also was preached to the 
people of this country by Venerable Arahant Mahinda have an 
appeal to the intellect. But we should consider why he thoug ht of 
preaching a discourse like Devadūta Sutta. He probably wished to 
wean the people ’s minds from evil and turn them towards the 
good and skilful according to the word of the Buddha.  
 Another important discourse worth mentioning in this 
context is the Cūla Kammavibhaṅga Sutt a 7 preached by the 
Buddha to the Brahmin youth, Subha. There the pre -eminence of 
kamma and its pervasive influence on the lives of beings in 
Saṁsāra is brought out. Subha, the Brahmin youth asks the 
Buddha why there is a diversity am ong human beings. He says: 
‘Some human beings are short -lived, some are long -lived, some 
have many ailments, some have few ailments, some are ugly, 
some are comely, some are inferior, some are superior, some are 
poor, some are rich, some are low -born, some  are high -born, 
some are unwise, some are wise. ’ He asks the Buddha the reason 
for this disparity. Then the Buddha comes out with the famous 
dictum on kamma.

Sermon 10 

 “Kammassakā, mā ṇava, sattā kammadāyādā kammayoni 
kammabandhu kammapaṭisaranā. Kammaṁ satte vibhajati 
yadidaṁ hīnappaṇītatāya.” 
 “Young man, beings are owners of their kamma, they 
have kamma as their inheritance, kamma is their origin, kamma is 
their relative, they have kamma as their resort. Kamma 
differentiates beings as inferior or superior.” 
 ‘Kammassakā’: What one can call one ’s own is kamma. 
‘Kammadāyādā’: What one inherits is one ’s own kamma. 
‘kammayoni’: The place of one’s birth is also decided by kamma. 
‘kammabandhu’: Kamma is one ’s true relative. 
‘kammapaṭisaranā’: Kamma is one’s resort in Saṁsāra. Kamma 
is also responsible for the distinction as high or low among 
beings. Therefore the Buddha has recommended the constant 
reflection of this pervasive influence of kamma as a means to 
refrain from misconduct in the Ṭhāna Sutta 8 as follows:  
 “Kammassakomhi kammadāyādo kammayoni 
kammabandhu kammapaṭisarano. Ya ṁ kammaṁ karissāmi 
kalyānaṁ vā pāpakaṁ vā tassa dāyādo bhavissāmi.” 
 “I am the owner of my kamma. I am the inheritor of my 
kamma. Kamma is my matrix. Kamma is my relative. Kamma is 
my resort. Whatever kamma I do whether good or bad I will be its 
inheritor.” 
 Though it is stated like that there is in this Dhamma a way 
of freedom from kamma. On the other hand Nigaṇṭhas or Jains 
had an extreme view of kamma. They held that ever ything is due 
to past kamma. (Sabbaṁ pubbekatahetu) 9 and put down all 
pleasures and pains one experiences now to things done in the 
past. Therefore they advocated self -mortification as a means of 
paying off past kamma – a way of practice called ‘nijjarā’ – 
‘wearing out ’; They also observe d rigorous vo ws and ascetic 
practices in order to prevent accumulation of new kamma. The

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Buddha sometimes interrogated the Nigaṇṭhas and refuted their 
views. He asked whether they can keep an account of kamma so 
far ‘paid off’ and ‘to be paid off’, thereby proving that the wanton 
infliction of bodily pain on oneself is meaningless.  
 In fact there were other extreme views on kamma in the 
contemporary society. They were sometimes put forward within 
the framework of a tetralem ma or four -cornered logic. Some – 
like the Nigaṇṭhas – held the view that all pleasure and pain one 
experiences is of one ’s own making ( sayaṁ kataṁ 
sukhadukkhaṁ).10 Some others said it is done by others ( paraṁ 
kataṁ sukhadukkhaṁ). Yet others combined these  two views and 
said that it is done by both oneself and others ( sayaṁ katañca 
paraṁ katañca sukhadukkha ṁ). Still others rejected both self 
agency and external agency and asserted that pleasure and pain 
one experiences is of fortuitous origin. ( adhicca samu ppannaṁ 
sukhadukkhaṁ). 
 The Buddha rejected all four types of view and introduced 
the correct view by declaring that kamma is dependently arisen 
(paṭicca samuppannaṁ). As he sometimes put it: “ Kim paṭicca? 
Phassaṁ paṭicca”. “ Dependent on what?  Dependent o n 
contact.” So the correct position is this. It is not a case of self -
agency nor of external agency nor both nor neither but due to 
contact ( Phassaṁ paṭicca). The term ‘paṭicca’ represents 
paṭiccasamuppāda and negates the idea of fortuitous origin fairly 
and squarely. (Cp. The two terms: adhicca-samuppanna and 
paṭicca-samuppanna). That is why the Buddha concludes: 
“Monks the cessation of contact is the cessation of kamma.” Now 
we are going deeper and deeper.  But in the traditional analysis of  
Paṭicca Samuppāda an unfortunate trend is seen though it cannot 
be compared to the Nigaṇṭha view. 
 As you know there are 12 links in the Paṭicca Samuppāda 
formula. In the Visuddhi Magga  and other later works these 12 
links are divided into three periods of time in the analysis of

Sermon 10 

Paṭicca Samuppāda.11 Ignorance and preparations are said to 
belong to the past. The eight links  – consciousness, name and 
form, six sense spheres, contact, feeling, craving, grasping and 
becoming are included in the present. Birth and decay and death 
are referred to the future. The attempt is to prove that 
consciousness has arisen from a past cause. We have already 
shown that this explanation is untenable. 
 The most important point in the formula is the vortex 
between consciousness and name and form. Even from the 
Buddha’s analysis of the Law of Dependent Arising in the 
Saṁyutta Nikāya , the term saṅkhāra is defined in a way quite 
different from later definitions of the same term. Later analysis 
interpreted saṅkhāra as equivalent to kamma. But that is not the 
way the Buddha explained saṅkhāra in that context. He says:  
 “Katame ca bhikkhave sa ṅkhārā? tayo ṁe bhikkhave 
saṅkhāra. Kāyasa ṅkhāro, vacīsa ṅkhāro, cittasa ṅkhāro. Ime 
vuccanti bhikkhave saṅkhāra.” 
 “And what, monks, are preparations? Monks, there are 
these three preparations. Body prepa ration, speech preparation, 
thought preparation. These, monks, are called preparations.” 
 It is noteworthy that in this definition, the term saṅkhāra 
is used in  the singular as Kāyasaṅkhāro (body preparation) , 
vacīsaṅkhāro (speech preparation ) and cittasaṅkhāro (thought 
preparation). These three are defined in the Dhamma as follows: 
 Body preparation – in breath and outbreath 
 Speech preparation – thinking and pondering  
 Thought preparation – perception and feeling 
 So then in the Vibhaṅga Sutta 12 where the Buddha defines 
each of the twelve links, the term saṅkhāra is defined as 
threefold. In breathing and out breathing cannot be taken as 
kamma that prepares another birth. Likewise thinking and

The Law of Dependent Arising 

pondering generally rendered as initial and sustained thought as 
well as perception and feeling are not reckoned as kamma. In fact 
whoever is wishing to put an end to existence ( bhava) has to 
appease them. That is why they are called preparations. 
 Another instance of misinterpretation is the definition of 
consciousness. In the Visuddhi Magga  and other later treatises 
consciousness is defined as ‘re-linking consciousness ’ 
(paṭisandhi viññā ṇa) resulting from so -called ‘saṅkhāras’ 
interpreted as past kamma. In other words it is supposed to be the 
outcome of past ignorance and preparations. Such an 
interpretation is unwarranted since the Buddha himself has 
defined consciousness as being sixfold in that particular context, 
in the Vibhaṅga Sutta. 
 “Katamañca b hikkhave viññā ṇaṁ. Chayime bhikkhave 
viññāṇakāyā. Cakkhu viññā ṇaṁ sotaviññāṇaṁ ghānaviññāṇaṁ 
jivhāviññāṇaṁ kāyaviññāṇaṁ manoviññāṇaṁ. Ida ṁ vuccati 
bhikkhave viññāṇaṁ.” 
 “And what, monks, is consciousness? Monks, there are 
these six groups (lit. bodies) of consciousness. Eye -
consciousness, ear -consciousness, nose -consciousness, tongue -
consciousness, body -consciousness, mind -consciousness. These 
monks are called consciousness.” 
 Since saṅkhāra and viññāṇa are defined as above by the 
Buddha, by no means can they be referred to the past. We have 
pointed out that all the twelve links pertain to the present. 
 Of course one may ask: “Well then where do ignorance 
and preparations come in? That we have already explained. The 
very non -understanding of the mutual int er-relation between 
consciousness and name and form is itself ignorance. The activity 
sustained by that ignorance is preparations. To go back to our 
parable of Narcissus – that Greek youth Narcissus who imagined 
an angel in the reflection of his own face i n the water, was

Sermon 10 

tempted to embrace it again and again by that ignorance – that 
murk of delusion . S o also are the worldlings. What we have in 
ignorance and preparations is the background or setting. The 
crucial point however, is the vo rtex between consciou sness and 
name and form – that vortical interplay or mutual inter -relation. 
That is something pertaining to the present. That precisely, is why 
it is possible to put an end to suffering here and now by 
experiencing the cessation of becoming or  existence. W e 
mentioned all this in particular because there is some confusion in 
explaining kamma in the context of Paṭicca Samuppāda by 
attributing it to something in the past. 
 However one can still raise a question regarding the 
significance of what are called ‘puññābhisaṅkhāra, 
apuññābhisaṅkhāra and āneñjābhisaṅkhāra and their relevance 
to saṅkhāra: In that context, what is called ‘abhisaṅkhāra’ are 
special preparations, that is to say, specially performed kamma. In 
the former context, saṅkhāra referred to such activities as in -
breathing and out -breathing which are like the ‘bedrock’ of 
saṅkhāras. But here what is called abhisaṅkhāra are volitional  
preparations where intention comes in. Puññābhisaṅkhāra are 
meritorious special preparations, apuññābhisaṅkhāra are 
demeritorious special preparations and āneñjābhisaṅkhāra 13 are 
imperturbable special preparations, which have to do with the 
meditative absorptions – which bring about rebirth in Brahma 
worlds. Of course these three forms of preparations are also the 
outcome of ignorance, but by dispelling that ignorance in this 
very life those forces of preparations are stilled. These special 
preparations are kept up by egotism. All in all, kamma is 
dependently arisen. Our aim should be the cessation of kamma. 
 The path of practice leading to the cessation of kamma is 
the Noble Eightfold Path. As you know the Right View in the 
Noble Eightfold Path is the Four Noble Truths of suffering, its 
arising, cessation and the path to that cessation. But there is 
another Right View called ‘kammassakatā sammādi ṭṭhi’ – the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Right View that has kamma as one’s own. It is the Right View 
which has ten points (dasa vatthuka) namely: gifts, donations and 
offerings are not worth less. There is fruit and result  of 
wholesome and unwholesome actions. There is this world and 
there is the next world. There is mother, there is father. There are 
in this world recluses and Brahmins of right practice who have by 
themselves understood and realized both this world and the next 
and are able to explain them. This Right View of ten points is 
called ‘kammassakatā sammādi ṭṭhi’ because in the context of 
Saṁsāra, this is the view which helps beings to avoid rebirth in 
bad bournes and win rebirth in heavenly realms.  
 That view which asserts just the opposite of thes e ten 
points is called a pervert view.14 You all can guess what it is like. 
It says for instance, gifts, donations, and offerings are worthless; 
there is no fruit or result in wholesome and unwholesome actions. 
There is no this world no next world and so on. 
 The term ‘kammassakatā’ has a deep m eaning. It means 
‘taking kamma as one’s own’. This is where ‘the prominent and 
intrusive middle finger ’ (i.e. intention) has to pay with 
responsibility for his prominence and intrusion – to hark back to 
our simile of the five fingers. Due to that prominenc e and 
intrusion one may do merit or demerit or attain jhānic states. 
From a supramundane ‘point of view ’ even the high jhānic 
attainments of Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka Rāmaputta are of no 
account. That is why the Buddha left them with dejection. 15 
Deliverance from Saṁsāra is not to be found in puññā – apuññā 
and āneñjābhisaṅkhāra (meritorious, demeritorious and 
imperturbable special preparations). However they have their 
relevance in Saṁsāra. One should give up what is demeritorious 
and develop the  meritorious and above all the imperturbable. 
They are useful for the development of the mind. But for 
deliverance from Saṁsāra there is only the Noble Eightfold Path, 
that is to say, Supramundane Noble Eightfold Path. You mustn ’t 
confuse the two views.

Sermon 10 

 Some intellectuals dismiss the ‘kammassakatā 
sammādiṭṭhi’ as irrelevant and say that there is no this world, no 
next world, no mother, no father and so on calling it ‘suññatā’ or 
voidness. That is going to an extreme. The  Buddha calls it a 
pervert view. 16 Worldlings if they blunder end up in hell. If one 
trains in the view that is based on the recognition of one ’s 
responsibility for one ’s deeds, one could at least get rebirth in 
heavens because one knows the results of good and evil and 
trains accordingly. But in the last analysis all these are 
preparations. Therefore the final aim should be the release from 
preparations.  
 As we pointed out our aspiration should be the cessation 
of becoming – bhava nirodha . In the journey towards that 
cessation of becoming,  the Buddha had to take a Middle Path. 
The Right View which takes kamma as one ’s own 
(kammassakatā sammādi ṭṭhi) has its place in that Middle Path. 
He did not go to an extreme to approve a pervert view like 
Annihilationists who even went to the extreme of self-indulgence. 
As the Buddha proclaims in the Devadūta Sutta  he could see 
beings getting reborn in heavens and hells according to their 
kamma as if someone standing between two houses would see 
human beings entering and leaving those houses. So if that is  the 
position it cannot be contradicted. That is the situation in the 
world.  
 It is due to that condition in the world that the Buddha 
recognized the relevance of a Right View that takes kamma as 
one’s own. We should now pay attention to this aspect too 
because some have confused issues. Of course from a deeper 
perspective what is helpful in attaining deliverance is the Noble 
Eightfold Path. It is based on the view that this is an entire mass 
of suffer ing. There is no question of oneself or another. But in 
truth that vision arises only at the moment of the Supramundane 
Path. Although it comes in to some extent even before it, only at 
the moment of the Supramundane Path moment it rightly

The Law of Dependent Arising 

surfaces. We bro ught up these deeper aspects to show that the 
analysis of the twelve links according to the three periods of time 
is incorrect and that kamma is conditionally arisen. ( Paṭicca 
Samuppanna) Since kamma is conditionally arisen release from 
Paṭicca Samuppāda is tantamount to release from Saṁsāra. 
Kamma is dependently arisen due to not seeing the Law of 
Dependent Arising. Therefore to see it is to be free from it. In 
other words, the wrong course of action is the result of not seeing 
the inter-dependence between consciousness and name and form. 
Comprehension of it dispels the darkness of ignorance. In short, 
in the light of wisdom the vanity of that course of action is 
realized. 
 This then, is the supramundane freedom – the deliverance 
from Saṁsāra. As far as thi s Middle Path is concerned, it is 
obvious that the Buddha avoided both extremes, namely that of 
the Nigaṇṭhas and that of the Annihilationists. The Middle Path 
shown by the Buddha is extraordinary in that it implies the two -
fold Right View to enable beings in Saṁsāra to avoid bad 
bournes and get rebirth in heavens and gradually to leave behind 
both hell and heaven  and attain final deliverance from Saṁsāra. 
On one side there is the Right View that takes kamma as one’s 
own and on the other there are the Four Noble Truths that lead 
one out of Saṁsāra. 
 There are a number of discourses in which the Buddha has 
preached about kamma. There is for instance, a very important 
sutta which shows the connection between kamma and views 
with an instructive simile. He declares that in the case of a person 
with a wrong view, whatever bodily, verbal or mental kamma he 
performs follows the pattern of the wrong view he has taken up 
and accepted, and whatever intention, aspiration, determination 
and preparations he has ( yā ca  cetanā yā ca patthanā yo ca 
paṇidhi, ye ca  saṅkhārā) all those things will conduce to 
unwelcome, unpleasant, disagreeable, unwholesome and painful

Sermon 10 

consequences because the view is evil.17 Then the Buddha gives a 
simile for it that you can easily understand. 
 When a m argosa seed or a kosātakī seed or a bitt er 
pumpkin seed is planted on wet ground, whatever essence of 
earth or essence of water it absorbs, all that will conduce to 
bitterness, gives a bitter fruit. Similarly in the case of one who 
has taken up a wrong view, whatever bodily, verbal or mental 
kamma he has, all that produces a bitter and unpleasant result. On 
the other hand, in the case of a person who has right view, all his 
bodily, verbal and mental kamma – all intentions, aspirations and 
determinations he has, all that gives a sweet fruit and br ings 
happiness. The simile given in that case is: just as a sugar-cane 
seedling, a sweet paddy seed or a grape seed when planted on wet 
ground whatever essence of earth or essence of water it absorbs, 
all that gives a sweet fruit. This shows the importance  of the 
correctness of views. That is why we should always try to avoid 
wrong views and going to extremes. From the worldly point of 
view that Right View which takes kamma as one’s own is helpful 
in the context of Saṁsāra. But when one is thinking of 
transcending the world what is helpful is the Noble Eightfold 
Path. Then there is no reference to persons. No talk of oneself or 
another. Just a whole mass of suffering. What is called the Five 
Aggregates of grasping is a mass o f suffering. The cause of it is 
craving. The aim is the cessation of craving. The path to it is the 
Noble Eightfold Path. One should not mix up the two types of 
Right View. The Buddha has pointed out both because they 
pertain to the Middle Path. That is as  far as views are concerned. 
There are many deep discourses on this subject, which are not 
easily understood.  
 On one occasion the Buddha addressing the monks, said: 
“Monks, I shall preach to you the new and old kamma. What, 
monks, is old kamma? The eye, monks, is old kamma specially 
prepared ( abhisaṅkhātaṁ) and specially intentioned 
(abhisañcetayitaṁ) which should be known as something to be

The Law of Dependent Arising 

experienced. ( ‘vedanīyaṁ daṭṭabbaṁ’).18 So also are the other 
senses – the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind. 
That means the senses are the product of our own kamma. Then 
what is called ‘new kamma’ is what one performs now by body 
speech and mind. So it is a fact that this being with his senses is 
produced by kamma. But one has to get free even from these 
senses that are the product of kamma, sometime or other. It is that 
freedom that on several occ asions we pointed out as something 
realizable here and now. In the end when describing the 
attainment of the Fruit of Araha nthood, it is said that the eye 
ceases and the perception of forms fade away, the ear ceases and 
the perception of sound s fade away a nd so on. Even the six 
senses which are produced by the force of our intentions and 
kamma generated in Saṁsāra can be made to cease in this very 
world. It is an experience of cessation realizable here and now. 
That is what has been called the cessation of the six sense spheres 
(‘saḷāyatana nirodha’). By seeing it as a fact of experience the 
arahants realize a state of freedom from all the six senses that are 
made up or prepared by kamma. Through it one can understand 
what is called the release from the prep ared (saṅkhāta), which in 
other words is ‘asaṅkhāta’ – the Unprepared.  
 The Buddha has pointed out that beings have kamma as 
their own ( kammassakā). Because of the responsibility for one ’s 
actions which is the result of ignorance and craving, one has to 
suffer the consequences. That is a norm common even to 
Buddhas and Arahants. As you all know, even Venerable Mahā 
Moggallāna had to undergo the result of a bad kamma he had 
committed in the  distant past by killing his parents. This body is 
the product of our kamma. As a way of saying we call it the work 
of Māra. It is as if Māra has given us this body with a curse: ‘you 
suffer!’; That is why in explaining what ‘old kamma’ is the 
Buddha said:  
 “cakkhuṁ bhikkhave purāna ṁ kammaṁ abhisaṅkhataṁ 
abhisañcetayitaṁ vedaniyaṁ daṭṭhabbaṁ”

Sermon 10 

 “The eye, monks, is old kamma specially prepared and 
specially intentioned which should be known as something to be 
experienced.” 
 The eye, for instance, is something given to us ‘to suffer’, 
though we take pride in our eye. That is what the Buddha is 
telling us. Just think of one who has no eyes – a blind man 
deprived of vision. Or take the case of a person with only one 
eye. See how  much they suffer. So also are the other senses. 
These are the result s of our kamma. But we have to transcend 
them. It is for that purpose that we need the Noble Eightfold Path. 
 Then there are the three kinds of ‘preparations’ 
(saṅkhārā) – body preparatio n (kāyasaṅkhāro), speech 
preparation (vacīsaṅkhāro) and thought preparation 
(cittasaṅkhāro). Why are in-breathing and out-breathing regarded 
as a body preparation? It is because they prepare the body. No 
one can be blamed for breathing in and breathing out. However 
ignorance and craving are hidden beneath them. That is why 
every Buddha is said to have attained Buddhahood through 
Mindfulness of Breathing. There is something wonderful about it. 
Worldlings even entertain absurd views of self by taking it as 
‘prāna’ the principle of life. But the Buddha pointed out that this 
process of in -breathing and out-breathing which is an illustration 
of arising and ceasing is itself a suffering. Worldlings are 
ignorant of it. They are sometimes not even aware that they are 
breathing. They take it for granted. Only the outward activities 
which we called ‘abhi-saṅkhāra’ – ‘special preparations ’ they 
take seriously. That is what appears prominently like that fraction 
of the iceberg visible above the surface. Like the vast portion 
submerged is the above mentioned body -preparation 
(kāyasaṅkhāro). In-breathing and out-breathing are kāyasaṅkhāro 
in the sense that they prepare the body for activity. Similarly 
thinking and pondering are vacīsaṅkhāro – speech preparation. 
There is far more thinking and pondering going on within a 
person than what comes out in speech. In f act, ‘vitakka-vicāra’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

can be regarded as sub -vocal speech. It is after a good deal of 
thinking and pondering that one breaks into speech. That again is 
like the submerged portion of an iceberg. That is a ‘preparation 
for speech’. 
  Then there are the perceptions and the feelings, which 
prepare our thoughts and intentions. In the final reckoning they 
also have to be conquered. They have to be appeased or stilled. 
As you may have heard, when one is developing meditative 
absorptions on e has to calm down thinking and pondering at 
some stage. Then he finds even breathing troublesome and calms 
that too. And finally he has to calm down perceptions and 
feelings. That is what the Buddha revealed to the world by the 
attainment of the cessation of perceptions and feelings. Until then 
the worldlings found their progress blocked by perceptions and 
were unable to make a breakthrough. That was due to egoism  – 
the notion of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. The Buddha showed the way to 
deliverance through the cessatio n of perceptions and feelings. It 
seems, therefore that there is a subtle level of preparations which 
escape our attention. It is incorrect to limit the meaning of 
‘saṅkhāra’ to kamma as such. 
 The term ‘saṅkhāra’ has quite a broad meaning. There are 
many who interpret the term to mean only kamma. But there is a 
subtle nuance of the term which goes deeper than the implications 
of kamma. That is ‘bhava saṅkhāra’ – the preparations pertaining 
to existence. They tend to perpetuate existence. In the last 
analysis even perceptions and feeling are preparations which have 
to be calmed down. All these the Buddha understood as 
preparations. Within the dictum: ‘sabbe saṅkhārā aniccā ’ (All 
preparations are impermanent) which w e take lightly the entire 
Dhamma is included. All these are a heap of preparations. Not 
only the kamma that is outwardly visible. Even the underlying 
layers of in-breathing and out -breathing, thinking and pondering, 
perceptions and feelings have to be calm ed down to attain that

Sermon 10 

state of ‘the stilling of all preparations ’ (‘sabba sa ṅkhāra 
samatha’). 
 On the one hand the Buddha has pointed out to beings in 
Saṁsāra the way of moulding their courses of action without 
involvement in wrong views so as to avoid rebirth in bad bournes 
and with Right View to get reborn in heavenly realms. On the 
other hand he has also pointed out the Noble Eightfold Path for 
transcending b oth good and evil and winning freedom from the 
entire heap of preparations. In the latter case it is not a question of 
persons. It is only a question of this whole mass of suffering. 
Internally or externally, it is just a case of suffering. What 
underlies it is craving. The cessation of craving itself is Nibbāna. 
And the path to it is the Noble Eightfold Path. 
 There is a wonderful discourse which describes that state 
of perfect stilling.19 There Venerable Sāriputta says: 
 “Ānanda, when the body is there, due to bodily intention, 
there arises inward pleasure and pain. When speech is there, due 
to verbal intention, there arises inward pleasure and pain. When 
mind is there, due to mental intention, there arises inward 
pleasure and pain – all conditioned by ignorance.”  
 But he points out that with the remainderless cessation of 
ignorance, neither the body nor the speech nor the mind will be 
there. 
 “...... avijjāyatveva asesavirāganirodhā so kāyo na hoti 
yam paccayāssa taṁ uppajjati ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. Sā vācā 
na hoti yampaccayāssa ta ṁ uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. 
So mano na hoti yampaccayāssa ta ṁ uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ 
sukhadukkhaṁ.Khettaṁ taṁ na hoti, vatthu ṁ taṁ na hoti, 
āyatanaṁ taṁ na hoti, adhikarana ṁ taṁ na hoti yampaccayā ssa 
taṁ uppajjati ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “....... But with the remainderless fading away and 
cessation of ignorance, that body is not there owing to which 
there can arise for him inward pleasure and pain. That speech is 
not there owing to which there can arise for him inward pleasure 
and pain. That mind is not there, owing to which there can arise 
for him inward pleasure and pain. That field is not there, that site 
is not there, that base is not there, that reason is not there, owing 
to which there can arise for him inward pleasure and pain.” 
 Now what does this mean? It is by taking this body as a 
unit – as my body – that all pleasure and pain arise. We do not 
understand it as a heap. We take the whole heap as a unit. We do 
not have an insight ful understanding of it as a heap. By taking it 
as a unit, there is that experience of pleasure and pain. It is the 
same in the case of speech. Speech involves language. All 
depends on the meanings we attribute to a language. Supposing 
we go on scolding a person who doesn’t know any language, with 
a smile on our face. However much we scold him, he wouldn ’t 
know that he is being scolded. It is according to the meanings we 
infuse into some words we use that we experience pleasure and 
pain. So long as there is speech, in relation to the speech, we 
experience pleasure and pain. Isn ’t it the same with what we call 
the mind?  A flux of thoughts that arise and cease we have 
grasped as a unit called ‘the mind ’ with our personality view 
(‘sakkāyadiṭṭhi’). There comes a time when even that mind 
ceases. It is as long as we have this mind that we suffer. So it 
seems this discourse has an extremely deep meaning. 
 Here is a journey towards the cessation of existence. All 
the same, we should try to understand why the Buddha has 
declared that beings in Saṁsāra tend to drift towards two 
extremes – self-indulgence and self -mortification. There is the 
view of eternalism on one side and the view of annihilationism on 
the other. If by taking dogmatically the idea that there is a self 
one holds on to the view that suffering is of one ’s own making 
(sayaṁ kataṁ dukkhaṁ), there is no possibility of deliverance.

Sermon 10 

Due to that view of self one will go on in Saṁsāra. If on the 
contrary, one puts down suffering to fortuitous origin and forgets 
one’s responsibility one will get reborn in hell. The Buddha 
avoided both these extremes and proclaimed the Noble Eightfold 
Path as the Middle Path. While discussing the Noble Eightfold 
Path we mentioned the Right View that takes kamma as one ’s 
own ( kammassakatā sammādi ṭṭhi) because it brings out a deep 
point. In ordinary life worldlings are living with the two sections 
oneself and others. Therefore if one through selfishness acts 
under the influence of the three roots of evil greed, hate and 
delusion one will e nd up in hell. Instead of it the Buddha 
recommends a course of action which is conducive to one ’s own 
welfare (attahita) as well as to the other’s welfare (parahita). 
 Now in the case of virtuous deeds such as observing the 
moral precepts we see that crite rion of taking care of ones own 
and another’s welfare. One may like to kill beings for food or for 
revenge. One may like to steal. But the Buddha disapproved of it 
as it means harm to another. Thinking of the society at large the 
Buddha has pointed out tha t what is ‘skilful’ (kusala) in such 
contexts is whatever that is beneficial to both sides. The term 
‘kusala’ is often misunderstood and misinterpreted. The basic 
meaning is to be skilful. That ‘skill’ – so long as one is in 
Saṁsāra – is in avoiding rebirth in miserable realms and in 
getting reborn in heavenly realms. But to be skilful in the highest 
sense of the term is to give up both merit and demerit 
(puññapāpapahīna) and get beyond Saṁsāra for good. So then 
the term ‘kusala’ has a deeper dimensio n of meaning than 
‘puñña’ (merit). Generally both terms are used together in some 
contexts. For instance in some discourses we find the terms 
‘puññābhisandā’ and ‘kusalābhisandā’ (streams of merit and 
streams of the skilful) used more or less like synonyms . However 
out of the two terms ‘kusala’ is of greater influence and intrinsic 
worth than ‘puñña’. It is directly connected with the mind.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 We started with the roots of the skilful and the unskilful. 
The roots of the unskilful are greed, hate and delusion. The roots 
of the skilful are non -greed, non-hate and non-delusion. But have 
you ever heard of ‘roots’ of merit and demerit. Is there anythi ng 
like that?  There you are. Now you can understand the essential 
difference between ‘puñña’ and ‘kusala’. ‘Kusala’ or skilful has a 
direct relation to the mind. 
 The two words ‘puñña’ and ‘pāpa’ have been used from 
ancient times to denote deeds with plea sant and unpleasant 
results. The ten ways of making merit which you are familiar 
with namely liberality, morality, meditation, dedication of merits, 
rejoicing in merits, rendering service, honoring, preaching, 
listening to Dhamma and straightening of one ’s views – all these 
are reckoned as ways of making merit . But what is reckoned as 
skilful are the ten skilful deeds which apparently are negative in 
formulation for the most part. What is unskilful are killing, 
stealing, unchastity, lying, slandering, harsh  speech, frivolous 
talk, avarice, ill-will and wrong views. What are called skilful are 
the abstention from killing, from stealing, from unchastity, from 
lying, from slandering, from harsh speech, from frivolous talk, 
non-avarice, non -illwill and right vie w. In the case of unskilful 
what is difficult is abstaining. But one has to be skilful in 
abstaining.  
 The very distinction between the ten meritorious deeds 
and the ten skilful deeds shows the difference between ‘puñña’ 
and ‘kusala’. As we mentioned abov e from the standpoint of the 
supramundane level, the highest ‘kusala’ is to be skilful enough 
to transcend even the subtlest preparations that perpetuate 
existence – that is to say not only merit and evil but also in and 
out breathing, thinking and pondering, perception and feeling. 
The Buddha made known to the world a wond erful state of 
cessation of existence in the attainment to the Fruit of 
Arahanthood in which all that is prepared ( saṅkhata) even eye, 
ear, nose, tongue, body and mind are made to cease.

Sermon 10 

 In this age many wrong views about kamma are rampant 
in the world. People are thinking of big things but ignore kamma. 
In fact it is the intellectual approach that is holding sway in the 
world. Because of this intellectualism there is a neglect of such 
topics as kamma which tendency will eventually pave the way to 
hell. V enerable Arahant Mahinda did not preach only the Cūla 
Hatthipadopama Sutta . He also preached the Devadūta Sutta to 
arouse fear about Saṁsāra in the minds of the people. Venerable 
Mahinda Thera described to our people the dreadful sufferings in 
hell, which the Buddha had seen with his divine -eye, in order to 
acquaint them with the distinction between good and bad in 
conduct. In an age like this you should make it a point to ponder 
over these things. 
 Although this is the tenth sermon in our series of sermons  
on Paṭicca Samuppāda, we dealt with the topic of kamma 
because today happens to be the Poson Poya Day. So on this 
hallowed day you had better take in whatever that is conducive to 
the future of the dispensation of the Buddha as well as to your 
own Nibbāna out of this sermon. If by any chance you have any 
wrong views, if instead of the Right View that takes kamma as 
one’s own you entertain some pervert or distorted view, you 
should do well to rectify them. Or else if you have any doubts 
about the Four Noble  Truths, which is basic to the Noble 
Eightfold Path, try your best to dispel them in the light of this 
sermon. 
 We wish that this sermon will help you to understand the 
Middle Path preached by the Buddha and encourage you all to 
develop virtue, concentrati on and wisdom. May that skilful 
kammic force enable you to attain deliverance from this dreadful 
Saṁsāra as soon as possible. Whatever beings there be from the 
lowest hell to the highest Brahma world wishing to rejoice in this 
sermon, may they all rejoice in our sermon! May the merits 
accrued thereby conduce to the fulfillment of their highest aim  – 
the Deathless Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. A. I 136 
2. Sn. V 209  Muni Sutta 
3. A. III 410 Nibbedhika Sutta 
4. M. I 371ff. 
5. M. III 178ff.  
6. M. I 175ff. 
7. M. III 203 
8. A. III 71 
9. M. III 178ff. Devadūta Sutta 
10. S. II 37f. Bhūmija Sutta 
11. Vism. 435 (S.H.B) 
12. S. II 2 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
13. D. III 217 Sangīti Sutta 
14. M. III 71ff. Mahā Cattārīsaka Sutta 
15. A. I 268 
16. M.I 160 Ariyapariyesana Sutta 
17. A. I 32 
18. S. IV 132 Kamma Sutta 
19. A. II 157f. Sañcetanā Sutta

Sermon 11 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 193)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Ye ca rūpūpagā sattā  
ye ca arūpaṭṭhāyino 
nirodhaṁ appajānantā 
āgantāro punabbhavaṁ 
Ye ca rūpe pariññāya 
arūpesu asaṇṭhitā 
nirodhe ye vimuccanti 
te janā maccuhāyino 
Kāyena amataṁ dhātuṁ 
phusayitvā nirūpadhiṁ 
upadhipaṭinissaggaṁ 
sacchikatvā anāsavo 
deseti sammāsambuddho 
asokaṁ virajaṁ padaṁ   
    – Itivuttaka Tika Nipāta 1 
 Those beings that go to realms of form  
 And those that are settled in formless realms 
 Not understanding the fact of cessation 
 Come back again and again to existence 
 
 Those who having comprehended realms of forms 
 Do not get settled in formless realms 
 Are released in the experience of cessation 
 It is they that are the dispellers of death  
 
 Having touched with the body the deathless element

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Which is free from all assets 
 And realized relinquishment of assets 
 Being influx-free the perfectly enlightened one  
 Proclaims the sorrowless taintless state 
Dear Listeners,  
 The Four Noble Truths, which the Fully Enlightened 
Buddha proclaimed to the world on an Esa la Full Moon Poya 
day, is a wonderful teaching the world has never heard before. 
 Suffering, its arising, the cessation and the Path to it – all 
these Four Noble Truths are based on the norm of Dependent 
Arising. Therefore on this Esala Poya Day we have chosen as the 
topic of our eleventh sermon, in this series of sermons on 
Dependent Arising, the Noble Truth of Cessation. We have taken 
up three verses which declare that this truth of cessation is 
something that the world has never heard. Among the Threes of 
the Itivuttaka these three verses are introduced with this 
statement: ‘Vuttaṁ hetaṁ bhagavatā vuttaṁ arahatāti me sutaṁ.’ 
– ‘I have heard that this was said by the Fortunate One, the 
Worthy!’ What was said is mentioned in brief as follows: 
‘Rūpehi bhikkhave arūpā santatarā  
arūpehi nirodho santataroti’    
“Monks, more peaceful than Realms of Form are the 
Formless. More peaceful than the Formless Realms is Cessation.” 
Then comes the brief introductory note: 
"This fact the Fortunate One uttered. Therein it is said 
thus:" and then those three verses are given. Let us try to get at 
the meaning of these verses.  
 ‘Ye ca rūpūpagā sattā ’ – Whatever beings there are that 
go to Realms of Form. ‘ Ye ca arūpa ṭṭhāyino’ – and whatever 
beings that are in Formless Realms. ‘ nirodhaṁ appajānantā’ –

Sermon 11 

Not understanding cessation. ‘ āgantāro punabbhava ṁ’ – come 
back again and again to existence. 
 ‘Ye ca rūpe pariññāya’ – But those who having 
comprehended the nature of forms. ‘ arūpesu asaṇṭhitā’ – do not 
get settled in Formless Realms. ‘nirodhe ye vimuccanti’ – and are 
released in the cessation. ‘ te janā maccuhāyino ’ – They are the  
dispellers of death.  
 ‘Kāyena amata ṁ dhātuṁ – phusayitvā nirūpadhi ṁ’ – 
Having touched with the body the Deathless Element that is 
assetless, ‘ upadhipaṭinissaggaṁ – sacchikatvā anāsavo ’ – And 
being influx free, realized the relinquishment of assets, ‘ deseti 
sammāsambuddho – asokaṁ virajaṁ padaṁ’ – The Fully 
Enlightened One preaches the sorrowless taintless state. 
 Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 2 of the Dīgha Nikāya  is a highly 
significant discourse which clearly portrays the ideas expressed in 
those three verses. The introductory episode is as follows: 
 When the Buddha was dwelling at Jetavana monastery in 
Sāvatthi, the wandering ascetic Po ṭṭhapāda was staying at 
Mallikārāma built by Queen Mallikā for ascetics of other sects, 
together with hundreds of wandering ascet ics. One day the 
Buddha set out in the forenoon on his alms round and it occurred 
to him: “It is too early for me to go for alms in the city of 
Sāvatthi. What if I were to meet the wandering ascetic Poṭṭhapāda 
in Mallikārāma.” Then the Buddha turned in the  direction of 
Mallikārāma and as he was approaching, Po ṭṭhapāda saw him 
from afar and silenced his crowd saying that the Buddha liked 
silence.  
 When the Buddha came there, Po ṭṭhapāda welcomed him 
with the compliment: “Venerable Sir, it is a long time sinc e you 
have done us the favor of paying a visit” and offered him a high 
seat. Seated on it the Buddha asked him what sort of a talk they 
were engaged in when he came in as an interruption. Po ṭṭhapāda 
simply replied: “Venerable Sir, let that talk be. That is  not the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

type of talk which is not rare for your reverence to hear.” and 
raised a topic which he considered more important.   
 “In days past, Venerable Sir, among recluses and 
Brahmins of various sects assembled in the hall for discussing 
moot-points, a talk arose concerning the cessation of higher levels 
of perception ( abhisaññānirodha). The topic of discussion was: 
‘How does the cessation of higher levels of perception come 
about?’ When that topic came up, some put forward the view: 
“Without a cause or co ndition a man’s perception arises and 
ceases. At the time it arises, one is percipient. When it ceases, one 
is not percipient.” This is how some explained the cessation of 
higher levels of perception. Then another said: “No, no. That is 
not the way it happ ens. Perception is a man’s self. It comes and 
goes. When it comes, one is percipient. When it goes one is non -
percipient.”  Then a third interposed: “No no. That is not the way 
it happens. There are recluses and Brahmins of great psychic 
power and influenc e. They insert perception into a man and 
withdraw it. When it is inserted, he is percipient, when it is 
withdrawn he is non-percipient.” Then a fourth objected: “No no. 
That is not the way it happens. There are deities of great psychic 
power and influence.  They insert perception into a man and 
withdraw it. When it is inserted he is percipient, when it is 
withdrawn he is non -percipient.” Having given a report of that 
discussion Po ṭṭhapāda said: “And then Venerable Sir, I 
remembered the Fortunate One with the  thought: ‘If only the 
Fortunate One, the Well-gone One were here who is proficient in 
those issues! The Fortunate One is knowledgeable in the 
cessation of higher levels of perception’.” And then Po ṭṭhapāda 
formally invited the Buddha to explain it with th e words: 
“Venerable Sir, how does cessation of higher levels of perception 
come about?”  
 Before presenting the Buddha’s answer to this question, 
let me mention something that enhances the relevance of the 
Buddha’s sermon. It was a time when yogins of Indi a in their

Sermon 11 

spiritual quest found themselves in a dilemma. They had reached 
the highest level in the development of perception. There were 
some who had attained the jhānic level of neither-perception-nornon-perception (nevasaññānāsaññāyatana). You may have  heard 
of the two teachers our Bodhisatta prince Siddhattha approached 
after his renunciation namely Ālāra Kālāma  and Uddaka 
Rāmaputta. Out of them, Ālāra Kālāma had attained the Formless 
Realm of Nothingness. ( Ākiñcaññāyatana) and Uddaka 
Rāmaputta had attained the Realm of Neither -perception-nornon-perception ( nevasaññānāsaññāyatana). But our Bodhisatta 
aroused both those jhānic levels as soon as the two teachers 
uttered a few words about them and even as they were offering 
equal status as teachers he left them with the thought: “This is not 
the way to Nibbāna.” 
 From this we can infer that those yogins were in a 
problematic situation. The dilemma they were in is briefly 
mentioned in the Pañcattaya Sutt a 3 of the Majjhima Nikāya  as 
follows: 
 “Saññā rogo saññā ga ṇḍo saññā salla ṁ, asaññā 
sammoho. Eta ṁ santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ nevasaññānāsaññaṁ.” 
 “Perception is a disease, perception is a boil, perception is 
a dart, and absence of perception is delusion. This is peaceful, 
this is excellent, that is to say neither -perception-nor-nonperception.”    
 They understood the limitations of perception – that it is a 
disease, a boil, a dart. But on the other hand, to give up 
perception according to them – is tantamount to delusion. So for 
the nonce, they foun d a solution in the intermediate position – 
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. In an earlier sermon we 
compared it to a see -sawing. In short those yogins were see -
sawing between perception and non -perception. It was in such a

The Law of Dependent Arising 

context that the Buddha wa s confronted with this problem. Let us 
see how he tackles it.  
 First of all, the Buddha tells Po ṭṭhapāda: “If any recluses 
and Brahmins had said that perception arises in a man without 
any cause or condition, they have blundered at the very outset. 
Then t he Buddha declares the conclusion that accords with the 
Dhamma. 
 “Sahetuhi Poṭṭhapāda sappaccayā purisassa saññā 
uppajjantipi nirujjhantipi.” 
 “For, Poṭṭhapāda, it is due to causes and conditions that a 
man’s perceptions arise and cease.” Now comes a highl y 
significant statement which embodies a first principle. You all 
had better bear it in mind. It comes up again and again like a 
refrain in a song throughout the Buddha’s disquisition that 
follows. This is it: 
 “Sikkhā ekā saññā uppajjanti, sikkhā ekā saññ ā 
nirujjhanti” 
 “Through training some perceptions arise, through 
training some perceptions cease.” 
 Having presented that first principle, the Buddha himself 
offers to substantiate it with the explicatory question: “ Kā ca 
sikkha?” “What is that training?”  Since the long account that 
follows is very often met with in the discourses, we shall only 
give the gist of it.  
 A Tathāgata, Fully Enlightened, arises in the world and 
preaches the Dhamma which is excellent in the beginning, 
excellent in the middle, ex cellent in the end, having realized 
through higher knowledge the nature of the world as it is, in the 
world with its gods, Maras, Brahmas, recluses and Brahmins.  
 A householder or a householder’s son listens to that 
Dhamma, arouses faith in it and goes forth in the dispensation. 
Having gone forth, he becomes endowed with virtue, sense -

Sermon 11 

restraint, mindfulness and full awareness and contentment. With 
that he goes into solitude and cleanses his mind of the five 
hindrances – avarice, ill-will, sloth and torpor, restlessness, worry 
and remorse and doubt. Even from there one can see how the 
Law of Dependent Arising works in the mode of approach to the 
First Jhāna. That monk, as he reflects on the fact that the 
hindrances are abandoned within him, rapture arises.  He subdues 
it and experiences joy. Due to his joyous mind, the body becomes 
tranquil. With the tranquil body, he experiences happiness and in 
that happiness his mind gets concentrated. About that monk, the 
Buddha says this much. Secluded from sense pleasu res and 
unskillful mental states, he attains to and abides in the First Jhāna 
which is accompanied by thought applied and sustained with joy 
and bliss born of seclusion. In him, the former perception of 
sensuality ceases and the subtle but actual perception of joy and 
bliss born of seclusion is there at that time. And then the Buddha 
citing this as an illustration of the above first principle, makes the 
following declaration: 
 “Evampi sikkhā ekā saññā uppajjanti, sikkhā ekā saññā 
nirujjhanti” 
 “Thus it is that through training some perceptions arise 
and through training some perceptions cease.” 
 Then the approach to the Second Jhāna, briefly stated, is 
as follows: When that monk attains to the First Jhāna again and 
again, he realizes that some Jhāna factors are gross. First of all 
thoughts, initial and sustained, are found to be gross and he calms 
them down and attains to the Second Jhāna, which is 
accompanied by joy and bliss born of concentration. About that 
monk the Buddha says that in him the former subtle perception of 
joy and bliss born of seclusion ceases. Instead of it the subtle 
perception of joy and bliss born of concentration arises. Then 
again the Buddha comes out with the refrain -like corroborative 
formula: “Evampi sikkhā ekā saññā uppajj anti, sikkhā ekā saññā 
nirujjhanti”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Thus it is that through training some perceptions arise 
and through training some perceptions cease.” 
 And then the Third Jhāna is attained by getting rid of joy 
which is felt to be gross and by arousing a bliss of equ animity. 
About him it is said that the former subtle perception of joy born 
of concentration ceases and in its place a subtle perception of 
bliss born of equanimity arises of which he is now conscious. 
Then that monk abandons both bliss and pain and having  already 
done away with happiness and unhappiness arouses the Fourth 
Jhāna which is free from both pain and bliss and has pure 
mindfulness of equanimity. In him, it is said that the former 
subtle perception of bliss of equanimity has ceased and the subtle 
perception of the absence of pain and bliss has arisen. Again the 
same refrain-like formula comes up. 
 “Thus it is that through training some perceptions arise 
and through training some perceptions cease.” 
 Then the way of going beyond Spheres of Form is g iven. 
That monk by transcending perceptions of form, putting an end to 
perceptions of resistance and not attending to perceptions of 
multiplicity takes up the sign – ‘space is infinite’ and attains to 
the Sphere of Infinity of Space. In him, the perception  of Form 
that he earlier had, ceases and the subtle perception of Infinity of 
Space arises. He becomes one with a subtle perception of bliss in 
the Sphere of Infinity of Space. Thus through training some 
perceptions arise and through training some perceptions cease. 
 Transcending the Sphere of Infinity of Space, that monk 
makes that consciousness which was directed to space itself the 
object and develops the Sphere of Infinity of Consciousness. And 
in him the former subtle perception of the Infinity of Spac e 
ceases and the subtle perception of the Infinity of Consciousness 
arises. He becomes one with the subtle perception of bliss in the 
Sphere of Infinity of Consciousness. Thus some perceptions arise 
through training and some perceptions cease through training.

Sermon 11 

 Then he transcends the Sphere of Infinity of 
Consciousness and developing as the meditation object, the idea 
‘There is nothing’, attains to and abides in the Sphere of 
Nothingness. And in him the former subtle perception of Infinity 
of Consciousness ceases and the subtle perception of the Infinity 
of Nothingness arises. Thus through training some perceptions 
arise and through training some perceptions cease. 
 Now comes a turning point at this stage. The Sphere of 
neither-perception-nor-non-perception is too subtle to be made 
the base for developing insight. The Sphere of Nothingness is 
regarded as the central spot from which one turns either towards 
the Sphere of neither -perception-nor-non-perception or towards 
the attainment of Cessation of Perception s and Feelings. But as 
mentioned above, until the advent of the Buddha, ascetics of 
other sects were not aware of this latter possibility. Instead they 
were see -sawing between perception and non -perception. The 
Buddha now goes on to describe how a monk in this dispensation 
makes the breakthrough.  
 “Poṭṭhapāda, when a monk in this dispensation is aware of 
his perception, he passes from one level of perception to another 
and gradually touches the peak of perception called ‘ saññagga’ – 
which is a term for the  Sphere of Nothingness. As he stands there 
at the peak of perception it occurs to him: “To go on intending is 
bad for me. It is better for me not to intend. (‘ cetayamānassa me 
pāpiyo acetayamānassa me seyyo’). And he weighs pros and cons 
thus: “If I were t o go on intending and engage in specially 
preparing (‘ āhañceva kho pana ceteyya ṁ abhisaṁkhareyyaṁ’) 
these perceptions would cease and other grosser perceptions 
would arise. Then he makes a decision which it is not possible for 
one in an ordinary level of p erception to make. It is worded as 
follows: 
 “yannūnāhaṁ na ceva ceteyyaṁ nābhisaṁkhareyyaṁ” 
 “What if I were not to intend and specially prepare”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 And in accordance with that decision he neither intends 
nor prepares specially (‘so na ceva ceteti na abhisaṁkharoti’). 
 Now the Buddha explains what happens to the monk who 
carries out that crucial decision. “As he does not intend and 
prepare specially, those perceptions cease and other grosser 
perceptions do not arise. He touches cessation (‘ So nirodha ṁ 
phusati’). Finally the Buddha sums up the whole account with 
this sentence: 
 “Evaṁ kho Poṭṭhapāda, anupubbābhisaññānirodhasampajāna-samāpatti hoti.” 
 “It is in this way, Po ṭṭhapāda that the attainment with full 
awareness to the gradual cessation of higher levels of perception 
comes about”  
 The long compound which marks the grand finale of this 
extraordinary discussion might need analysis. ‘ Anupubba’ means 
gradual or by stages. ‘ Abhisaññā’ we have already explained as 
higher levels of perception and  ābhisaññānirodha is cessation of 
those higher levels of perception. ‘ Nirodha-sampajānasamāpatti’ means the attainment to the cessation with full 
awareness. By the way, the term ‘ anupubba’ merits a little 
comment, as it is a very important term in this dispensation. You 
may have come across the phrase: ‘ anupubbasikkhā 
anupubbakiriyā anupubbapatipadā.’ 4 In this dispensation there is 
a gradual training, a gradual course of action and a gradu al 
treading of the path. The term ‘ anupubba’ (gradual) reminds one 
of the Law of Dependent Arising. Just think of a flight of steps. 
Like that by gradual stages, proceeding by stage to stage in the 
higher levels of perception, a monk in this dispensation g radually 
arrives at the cessation of perceptions and feelings.  
  Now that you are familiar with the constituents of ‘name’ 
in name-and-form (‘nāmarūpa’) that is to say feeling, perception, 
intention, contact and attention , 5 you may note that the problem

Sermon 11 

of yogins till then was how to get rid of feelings and perceptions. 
They were unable to give up perceptions for fear of falling into 
delusion. What is the reason? They were clinging to preparations. 
(saṅkhārā). In the context of name -and-form preparations a ppear 
as intention (cetanā). So this is the crucial point. That monk when 
he took the extraordinary decision: “Let me not have intentions or 
preparations” was ready to give up even intention. Form is 
already gone and out of the constituents of name, feelin gs, 
perceptions and intentions are made to cease by that decision. So 
what is there to ‘contact’? Cessation itself. This is enough for you 
to understand the difference between the philosophy of those pre -
Buddhistic yogins and the philosophy behind the Law of 
Dependent Arising with its Middle Path approach. At the end of 
this wonderful disquisition the Buddha asks Poṭṭhapāda: 
 “What do you think, Po ṭṭhapāda? Have you ever heard of 
an attainment with full awareness to the gradual cessation of 
higher levels of perception like this?” 
 “No, indeed Venerable Sir.” 
 After that Poṭṭhapāda raises a number of questions. Let us 
take them up one by one.  
 The first question is: 
 “Venerable Sir, does the Fortunate One make known one 
peak of perception ( saññagga) or does he make known several 
peaks of perception?” 
 To this question the Buddha gives a very strange answer: 
 “Poṭṭhapāda, I make known one peak of perception as 
well as several peaks of perception.” 
 Then Poṭṭhapāda asks: 
 “How is it, Venerable Sir, that the Fortunate One makes 
known one peak of perception as well as several peaks of 
perception?”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “In whatever way one touches cessation, in that way I 
point out a peak of perception. Thus it is Po ṭṭhapāda that I point 
out one peak of perception as well as severa l peaks of perception. 
As far as we understand this is how it should be understood. 
There is in the Dhamma a conclusive statement as follows: 
 ‘yāvatā saññāsamāpatti tāvatā aññāpaṭivedho.’ 6  
 ‘As far as is the range of attainments of perception, so far 
is there a penetration into full understanding.’ 
 It means there are as many possibilities of penetration into 
arahanthood as there are attainments of perception. That is to say, 
the possibilities of reaching cessation through insight and 
realizing Nibbāna. Not only through attainment of cessation by 
gradual stages but through any one of the jhānic attainments 
(except the eighth) one can reach the peak of perceptions by 
ending intentions ( cetanā) and special preparations 
(abhisaṅkhārā) mentioned above. That i s how the Buddha’s 
answer should be interpreted.  
 Then Poṭṭhapāda asks a second question: 
 “Venerable Sir, does perception arise first and later 
knowledge or knowledge arises first and later perception? Or else 
do perception and knowledge arise simultaneously?”  
 To this question the Buddha gives a straightforward 
answer: 
 “It is perception, Po ṭṭhapāda that arises first. Knowledge 
arises later. Through the arising of perception is the arising of 
knowledge. And he understands. It is through this specific 
condition that knowledge has arisen in me.” 
 Here too, the commentator is in doubt and quotes several 
interpretations given by various teachers.7 
 According to our understanding, this is how the above 
subtle statement has to be explained.

Sermon 11 

 Now what was the problem in regard to perception that 
the yogins were grappling with? For them perception was some 
sort of a ‘bug -bear’– a mystery. They either took it as self or as 
some mysterious thing which someone else infused into them 
from outside. It was the Buddha who blasted the myth. Let us 
examine the implications of a certain term recurring in this 
discourse. That pregnant term is ‘ sakasaññī’ – ‘with one’s own 
perception’ or ‘percipient of oneself’ It occurs in the decisive 
phrase:  
 “Yato kho Poṭṭhapāda bhikkhu idha sakasaññī hoti.....” – 
When Po ṭṭhapāda  a monk in this dispensation is percipient of 
oneself....  
There is in this sutta the mention of the term 
‘sampajañña’ – full awareness; So from the very beginning a 
monk is accompanied by ‘ sati-sampajañña’ – mindfulness and 
full awareness. Then there is no place for mystic concepts, for 
mystery mongering with a ‘self’ or ‘soul’; instead from moment 
to moment he is proceeding in accordance with the Law of 
Dependent Arising. There is nothing to grasp. It is like climbing a 
flight of steps. All along it is the story of perception and 
knowledge of perception. For instance if you read this discourse 
you will come across the two highly significant phrases: 
i. ‘vivekaja pītisukha sukhumasaccasaññā hoti’ 
‘There is subtle and factual perception of joy and 
bliss born of seclusion.’  
ii. ‘vivekaja pītisukha sukhumasaccasaññī hoti’ 
‘.... He is percipient of the subtle and factual joy and 
bliss born of seclusion.’ 
 So the two terms ‘ saññā’ and ‘saññī’ used by the Buddha 
side by side are highly significant. Perception arises and one is 
aware of that perception. It is that awareness of perception 
(‘saññī’) that has to be understood as knowledge (‘ ñāna’) in this 
context. It is not the case that perception has arisen and the monk 
is unaware of it. Because he has full awareness (‘ sampajañña’)

The Law of Dependent Arising 

he gets to know it. That is the knowledge. But the commentator 
goes on dabbling with conflicting views of teachers. 8 The issue is 
clear enough. 
 Well, the Buddha has answered that question too. But 
Poṭṭhapāda has yet another question – a serious one at that. He 
asks: 
 “Venerable Sir, is perception a man’s self or is perception 
one thing and self something else?” 
 Now this is a tricky question the type clever lawyers go  
on asking. Po ṭṭhapāda here brings in a self as from nowhere. 
Why? Because he still has ‘ sakkāyadiṭṭhi’ or ‘Personality View’. 
He was probably disappointed that the Buddha’s disquisition 
made no mention of a self. That is why he dragged in the 
question. Su ch questions put one in a dilemma. If you give a 
categorical answer, you get into difficulties. Take for instance a 
case like this in the law courts. A driver who has never taken 
intoxicants appears before the judge, but a lawyer wants to get 
him to admit that he has taken drinks. If the lawyer asks him 
sternly “Say ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. Are you still drinking or have you 
stopped it?” – the man would be in a fix. Whether he answers 
‘yes’ or ‘no’ he would get caught in the lawyer’s trap. 
Poṭṭhapāda’s question is al so of the same type. But the Buddha 
didn’t get caught. Instead he counter questioned Poṭṭhapāda: 
 “What do you mean by ‘self’, Poṭṭhapāda?” 
 The Buddha asked Poṭṭhapāda for a definition of the word 
‘self’ because he himself has no conception of a self or s oul. In 
discourses like Alagaddūpama Sutta , he called the concept of a 
‘self’ an entirely foolish idea. (‘ kevala paripūro bāladhammo ’) 9 
which the world is clinging on to. 
 The commentator reprimands Po ṭṭhapāda for dragging in 
a self with a pungent simile.10 He says as if a pig, after it has been 
bathed clean and anointed with perfumes goes back and plunges 
into a pit of excreta, Po ṭṭhapāda, in spite of the fact that he has

Sermon 11 

been bathed and anointed with perfumes in the form of a subtle 
sermon emphasizing the  three characteristics, went back and 
plunged into the same cesspit of self view. But the Buddha as if 
to retrieve him counter -questioned him. Poṭṭhapāda, what do you 
mean by ‘self’? 
 Some questions admit of a categorical answer but some 
do not. Sometimes you have to get the question clarified by the 
questioner himself. Such questions are called ‘ paṭipucchāvyākaranīya pañha ’ – questions that have to be answered after 
counter-questioning. This is such a question. Now Po ṭṭhapāda 
gives a definition of the word ‘attā’.  
 ‘Venerable Sir, I have the concept of a self that is gross 
and has form made up of the four great primaries and consuming 
food taken in mouthfuls. In short it means this body as it is. Now 
the Buddha says:  
‘Poṭṭhapāda, if that is the self y ou are speaking of, then 
perception is one thing and self something else. Then he gives the 
reason. 
“The perception I am speaking of is of this nature. Some 
perceptions arise and some other perceptions cease. ( aññā va  
saññā uppajjanti aññā va  saññā nirujjhanti). There is something 
deep in this statement. It means ‘perceptions arise as one thing 
and cease as another because they are subject to otherwiseness 
every moment. Take for instance the case of one attaining the 
First Jhāna. The perception that was the re at the moment of 
attaining is not the same by the time it is transcended for it 
undergoes change by the training ( sikkhā). That is to say, one 
level of perceptions arises, another level of perceptions ceases. 
There is no place for a self or soul in that  explanation. When that 
definition is invalidated Po ṭṭhapāda comes out with another 
definition. 
“Venerable Sir, I mean a self that is mental replete with 
all limbs major and minor with senses intact. That in effect is

The Law of Dependent Arising 

their concept of Jhānas with Form ( rūpajjhāna). Then the 
Buddha says: “Poṭṭhapāda, even if your self is of that description, 
perception is one thing and self is something else. When that 
attempt also fails, Po ṭṭhapāda puts forward yet another definition 
of self: 
“Venerable Sir, I mean a self t hat is formless and 
consisting of perception.” 
But the Buddha dismissed that too, saying: 
“Even if your self is formless and consisting of 
perception, still the position is that perception is one thing and 
self another.” 
Finally Poṭṭhapāda in his exasperation asks: 
“Is it possible Venerable Sir, for me to know whether 
perception is a man’s self or else perception is one thing and self 
another?” 
Poṭṭhapāda, however, is disappointed when the Buddha 
replies: 
“It is difficult for you to know whether perception is a 
man’s self or else perception is one thing and self another, since 
you are of a different view with different convictions, with 
different predilections, practicing elsewhere under other 
teachers.” 
When even that attempt failed Po ṭṭhapāda as a last res ort 
asks: 
“If that is so Venerable Sir, may I know whether the 
world is eternal – this alone is true all else is false?” 
Those of you who have read our books must have come 
across the ten questions known as Unexplained Points with which 
the Buddha was conf ronted by many but which the Buddha laid 
aside as unexplained ( avyākata). In our earlier sermons we have 
explained why the Buddha laid them aside. Now Po ṭṭhapāda

Sermon 11 

comes out with that questionnaire. Briefly stated, they are as 
follows: First, a dilemma. Is t he world eternal? Is the world not 
eternal? Next comes another dilemma. Is the world finite? Is the 
world infinite? Then another set of two questions which again 
poses a dilemma: ‘Life -principle (‘jīvaṁ’ – a term suggestive of 
Soul or self) is the same as body. Life principle is one thing and 
body another.’ Then comes a tetralemma a four -cornered 
question: ‘Does the Tathāgata exist after death? Does the 
Tathāgata not exist after death? Does he both  exist and not exist 
after death? Does he neither exist nor not exist after death?’ The 
tetralemma seeks to ‘corner’ the answerer into granting one or the 
other of possible alternatives. But the Buddha could not be 
cornered by dilemmas and tetralemmas. He rejected the 
questionnaire in toto every time he was confron ted with it and 
refused to give a categorical answer. He simply laid them aside 
(‘avyākata ṭhapita’)  because they were ill -founded. In this 
instance too, his response to every one of those ten questions was: 
“It has not been explained by me Po ṭṭhapāda.” Then Poṭṭhapāda 
asks: “Venerable Sir, if that is so, is there anything you have 
explained categorically?” And the Buddha says that he has 
categorically explained the four propositions. “This is suffering. 
This is the arising of suffering. This is the cessat ion of suffering. 
This is the way of practice leading to the cessation of suffering – 
that is to say, the Four Noble Truths.”  
Poṭṭhapāda, however, seemed satisfied with that 
explanation and with the assent: “That is so, Fortunate One. That 
is so, Well-gone One” (‘ Evametaṁ Bhagavā, evameta ṁ 
Sugatha’) relieved the Buddha from the barrage of questions and 
the Buddha left on his alms -round. As soon as he left, the crowd 
of wandering ascetics got around  Poṭṭhapāda and chastised him 
with verbal pricks, s aying: “This Po ṭṭhapāda approves of 
everything Recluse Gotama says. He doesn’t seem to have 
answered any one of the ten questions categorically.” Po ṭṭhapāda 
rejoined saying: “I also don’t see any of those questions answered 
categorically. But Recluse Gotam a lays down a true and factual

The Law of Dependent Arising 

path of practice, a statute of Dhamma, a norm of Dhamma. When 
Recluse Gothama is laying down a true and factual path of 
practice, a statute of Dhamma, a norm of Dhamma, how can I, as 
an intelligent man, not approve of the wel l-spoken words of 
Recluse Gotama as well-spoken. 
 That phase of the discussion ends there. The sequence of 
events from there onwards is recorded in the discourse as follows. 
After two or three days, Citta Hatthisāriputta (Son of an elephant 
trainer) and th e wandering ascetic Po ṭṭhapāda came to see the 
Buddha.  
 The first thing Po ṭṭhapāda came out with was a report of 
what happened after the Buddha had left the other day. 
“Venerable Sir, soon after the Fortunate One departed that day, 
they got around and gav e me a shower of verbal pricks.” When 
he had reported all what had transpired, the Buddha said: 
“Poṭṭhapāda, all those wandering ascetics are blind. They lack 
vision. Only you are the one with vision. There are, Po ṭṭhapāda, 
Dhammas that I have preached and  laid down non -categorically 
and there are also Dhammas I have preached and laid down 
categorically. The former refers to the ten Indeterminates and the 
latter refers to the Four Noble Truths. Then the Buddha goes on 
to relate some of his own experiences with recluses and Brahmins 
in regard to the question of views of a self. 
 There are some recluses and Brahmins who declare and 
entertain such a view as this: ‘ Ekantasukhī attā hoti arogo 
parammaraṇā’ – After death, self is of unmixed bliss and 
healthy’ I approach them and ask: “Is it true you declare and hold 
on to such a view as this?” They say, “Yes”. Then I ask them: 
“Do you dwell knowing and seeing a world of unmixed bliss?” 
They reply “No” I ask them: “Have you for one night or for one 
day, for half a n ight or half a day experienced an all -blissful 
self?” They say “No”. I ask them, “Do you have that knowledge 
to declare, “This is the path, this is the practice for seeing with 
one’s own eyes an all -blissful world?” They say “No”. I ask

Sermon 11 

them: “ Have you he ard the voice of deities reborn in an all -
blissful world who go on saying: “Friends, be well -established on 
the path, be uprightly established on the path for seeing with your 
own eyes a world all -blissful for we on our part, friends, with 
such a practice are reborn in an all blissful world?”  They say, 
“No”. Then he asks Po ṭṭhapāda: “What do you think Po ṭṭhapāda 
when that is the position, does not the assertion of those recluses 
and Brahmins turn out to be baseless?” A peculiar word 
‘appāṭihīraka’ is used in that context, which we have rendered by 
baseless: It means an assertion that lacks proof or evidence to 
substantiate it. The Buddha himself gives two similes to illustrate 
the connotations of the word.  
 The first simile is about a beauty queen “Suppose  a man 
goes about saying: “I like and love the beauty queen of this 
province.” Others ask him: “ Good man, do you know of what 
clan she is?” He says, “No”. “Do you know her name?” He says, 
“No”. “Do you know whether she is tall or short or black or grey 
or brown?” He says “No”. “Do you know in what village or town 
she is?” He says: “No”. And then others ask him; “So you like 
and love a beauty queen whom you do not know or see?” After 
giving this simile the Buddha asks: “What do you think 
Poṭṭhapāda? In that case does not that man’s talk turn out to be 
baseless ( appāṭihīraka)? Po ṭṭhapāda says: “Indeed that is so 
Venerable Sir.” 
 Comparing it to the undemonstrable assertion of those 
recluses and Brahmins, the Buddha gives another simile to 
convince Poṭṭhapāda of the absurdity of it. “Supposing a man is 
building a staircase at the four cross -roads for climbing into a 
mansion. People ask him: “Good man, that mansion for which 
you are building this staircase do you know in which direction it 
is – whether in the Ea st or West or North or South? Whether it is 
tall or short or medium -sized? He says “No”. Then they tell him: 
“Well then, good man, you are building a staircase for a mansion 
you do not know or see.” He says, “Yes”. Giving this simile the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Buddha asks Po ṭṭhapāda again: “What do you think Po ṭṭhapāda? 
In that case, doesn’t that man’s talk turn out to be baseless? 
“Indeed that is so, Venerable Sir” replies Poṭṭhapāda. 
 Having thus invalidated the soul theories of those recluses 
and Brahmins the Buddha now explai ns the concept of Jhānas in 
this dispensation with the help of a peculiar term ‘ attapaṭilābhā’ 
(acquisition of self). Instead of the term ‘ attā’ the Buddha brings 
in the concept of ‘ attapaṭilābhā’. He says: “ Tayo kho ’me 
Poṭṭhapāda attapaṭilābhā o ḷāriko att apaṭilābho manomayo 
attapaṭilābho arupo attapaṭilābho” 
 Poṭṭhapāda, there are these three acquisitions of self, 
(namely), the acquisition of a gross self, acquisition of a mental 
self, acquisition of a Formless self. They are defined with the 
same words as  in the earlier discussion on self but they are not 
presented as states of a self but as acquisitions ( paṭilābhā). The 
gross acquisition of self is qualified with the words 
‘cātummahābhūtiko’ (made up of four great primaries) and 
‘kabaliṅkārāhārabhakkho’ (consuming food taken in mouthfuls). 
The mind-made (manomaya) acquisition of self is described with 
the words ‘sabbaṅgapaccaṅgī ahīnindriyo’ (replete with all limbs 
major and minor, with senses intact). The Formless ( arūpa) 
acquisition of self is described with the term ‘ saññāmayo’ 
(consisting of perception). 
 So these are the three acquisitions ( paṭilābhā). Let us try 
to get at the nuances of this term ‘ paṭilābhā’ (lit. ‘profit’). For 
acquiring something you have to follow some course of action. In 
this context, what is the course of action? The ‘training’ ( sikkhā). 
It is to indicate that these states are the outcome of some training 
that the Buddha introduced this term on this occasion. Where 
Poṭṭhapāda and other ascetics used the term ‘ attā’ (self) to 
explain these  Jhānic states, the Buddha used the term 
attapaṭilābhā’ because they are to be attained through some 
training. Now here is a revolutionary change in outlook. These 
three acquisitions of self ( attapaṭilābhā) are given the same

Sermon 11 

standard definitions.  The first one is ‘ oḷāriko rūpī 
cātummahābhūtiko kabaliṅkārāhārabhakkho’ (gross, has form, is 
made up of the four great primaries, consuming food taken in 
mouthfuls). The second, is ‘ manomayo sabba ṅgapaccaṅgī 
ahīnindriyo (mental, replete with all limbs maj or and minor, with 
senses intact). The third is ‘ arupī saññāmayo ’ (formless and 
consisting of perceptions).  
 But the Buddha didn’t stop with redefinition. He declares 
now: “Po ṭṭhapāda, for the abandoning of the acquisition of the 
gross self, I preach the Dhamma by practicing according to which 
your defiling mental states would be abandoned, purifying mental 
states would be developed and you would by yourself realize with 
your higher knowledge the perfection and fulfillment of wisdom 
here and now and abide in it.” You may now recall what I have 
told about ‘ saññāgga’ – the peak of perception. Even from the 
First Jhāna or from Formless ( arupa) Jhānas one can attain 
Nibbāna provided one develops insight based on them. Then the 
Buddha tells Po ṭṭhapāda that he pr eaches the Dhamma for the 
abandonment of all three types of acquisitions of self (i.e. gross, 
mind made and formless) or attapaṭilābhā. Thereby one attains to 
the perfection of wisdom here and now. 
 After the Buddha had answered Po ṭṭhapāda’s questions to 
his satisfaction, Citta Hatthisāriputta  comes out with his 
questions. In fact his questions go deeper into the subject of 
‘attapaṭilābhā’ introduced by the Buddha. He asks: 
 “Venerable Sir, at the time there is the gross acquisition of 
self, is the mental acquisition of self and formless acquisition of 
self false ( moghā – lit. empty) at that time? Is the gross 
acquisition of self alone real for him at that time? 
 Venerable Sir, at the time the mental acquisition of self is 
there, is the gross a cquisition of self and the formless acquisition 
of self false at the time? Is only the mental acquisition of self real 
for him at that time?

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Venerable Sir, at the time, the formless acquisition of self 
is there, is the gross acquisition of self and the m ental acquisition 
of self false at that time? Is only the formless acquisition of self 
real for him at that time?” 
 The Buddha’s answer brings out quite a deep aspect of the 
whole problem of self. He says: “ Citta, at the time the gross 
acquisition of self is there, it is not reckoned (‘saṅkhaṁ gacchati’ 
– lit. go into reckoning ) as mental acquisition of self. It is not 
reckoned as formless acquisition of self. At that time, it is 
reckoned only as the gross acquisition of self.” He applies the 
same criterion  to the other two acquisitions of self. At the time 
the mental acquisition of self is there, it is not reckoned in terms 
of the other two. Similarly when the formless acquisition of self 
is there, it is not reckoned as any of the other two, but only as 
formless acquisition of self. 
 Here the Buddha is trying to draw the attention of Citta to 
the problem of confusing the three periods of time – quite a deep 
point at that. To drive home the point, the Buddha poses the 
following questions to Citta. 
 Now Citta, if people ask you “ Were you in the past – not 
that you were not? Will you be in the future – not that you will 
not be? Are you now – not that you aren’t? What will you say in 
reply?” 
 Citta says: “Venerable Sir, if they question me like that, I 
would answer: 
  I was in the past – not that I wasn’t. I will be in the future 
– not that I will not be. I am now, not that I am not.” 
 Then the Buddha asks: 
 “If they ask you Citta , that acquisition of self you had in 
the past, is that acquisition of self alone re al and the future 
acquisition of self false and the present acquisition of self also 
false? Whatever acquisition of self you will have in the future, is

Sermon 11 

that alone real and the other two false? Whatever acquisition of 
self you have now that alone is real and the other two false?” 
 Then Citta says: “Venerable Sir, if they ask me that, I 
would reply: 
 Whatever acquisition of self I had in the past, at that time 
that acquisition of self alone was real and the other two false. 
Whatever acquisition of self I wil l have in the future at that time  
that acquisition of self alone will be real and the other two false. 
Whatever acquisition of self I have now, only that acquisition of 
self is real and the other two false at that time.” 
 Then the Buddha completes the anal ogy saying: “Even so 
Citta at whatever time the gross acquisition of self is there, at that 
time, it is not reckoned as mental acquisition of self nor as 
formless acquisition of self. At that time it is reckoned only as 
gross acquisition of self. So also in the case of the other two. 
 The illusion in the world which was the reason for the self 
view is the idea that the past and the future exist even as the 
present. In short, the confusion of the three periods of time. It is 
this myth that the Buddha is trying to explode. He does it with the 
following wonderful homely simile which is sure to help you 
understand this deep point.  
 “Just Citta, as from the cow comes milk, from milk curd, 
from curd butter, from butter ghee, and from ghee cream of ghee, 
at the time it is milk, it is not reckoned as curd, nor as butter, nor 
as ghee, nor as cream of ghee. At that time it is reckoned only as 
milk. Similarly, when it is curd, it is reckoned as curd, not 
assuming that there is milk in it or that there is ghee which is yet 
to come is hidden in it.” I shall give you a little story, a sort of 
parable found in Western literature to help you understand this 
point. A miserly man had a goose that lays a golden egg 
everyday. He thought of getting today itself the eggs that she will 
be laying tomorrow and the days to follow. He split it open and 
was disappointed. It is a similar fallacy to think that future exists

The Law of Dependent Arising 

or that past exists. These are only worldly usages. Simply because 
milk can become ghee in the future it is wrong to think that 
already there is ghee in it. 
 After giving this simile as an illustration of what he had 
told about the three acquisitions of self ( attapaṭilābhā) the 
Buddha sums up the discussion with the following memorable 
statement: 
 “Itīmā kho Citta lokasamaññā lokaniruttiyo lokavohārā 
lokapaññattiyo, yāhi Tathāgato voharati aparāmasaṁ.” 
 “For these, Citta, are worldly appellations, worldly 
expressions, worldly usages, worldly designations which the 
Tathāgata makes use of without tenacious grasping.” 
 It is due to tenacious grasping of these that all the 
confusion has arisen. We ourselves agree to give names to those 
various stages of milk preparations and then we go on wondering 
whether milk is found in curd or butter in curd. Indian philosophy 
with i ts involvement in soul theories was caught up in this 
confusion. In the Taittiriya Upanishad  there is a theory of five 
selves encased in concentric shells. ( pañcakoṣa) such as the 
‘annamaya’ and ‘ prāṇamaya’ (made -of-food, made -of-breath). 
This confusion ab out the three periods of time gave rise to 
dogmatic views of self. 
 The momentous declaration of the Buddha quoted above 
shows that he regarded all those concepts as mere worldly 
appellations, worldly expressions, worldly designations, which he 
used but did not grasp tenaciously. It is by that tenacious grasping 
that self-created problems of cause and effect arise. Whether the 
cause preceded the effect or whether the effect is already 
embedded in the cause. It is noteworthy that in a standard work 
on linguistics written by two modern scholars, 11 the milk simile 
of the Buddha is quoted expressing their surprise that 2,500 years 
ago the Buddha has revealed a truth which is enough to awaken 
modern semantic philosophers today.”

Sermon 11 

 After this powerful declaration by the Buddha, Poṭṭhapāda 
confessed faith in him with great fervour.  
 “It is marvelous Venerable Sir, it is marvelous Venerable 
Sir, even as one were to set upright what had been overturned or 
reveal what had remained hidden, or tell the way to one who has 
lost his way or hold up an oil -torch in the darkness, so that those 
with eyes may see. So has the Fortunate One, in many ways 
declared the Dhamma. Venerable Sir, here I go for refuge to the 
Fortunate One, to the Dhamma and the Order of monks. Let the 
Fortunate One accept me as a lay -follower who has gone to him 
for refuge f rom today as long as life endures. Then Citta 
Hatthisāriputta, with a similar confession of faith went to his 
refuge and even begged for the going forth and higher ordination. 
He did go forth and was given higher ordination. Not long after 
his higher ordin ation he went into solitude and with diligent and 
ardent endeavor attained arahanthood. 
  So that is how the discourse ends. But in the remaining 
few minutes let me clarify whatever knotty points there could be 
in our explanation. 
Regarding the three significant terms we brought up, there 
is an important discourse which mentions them in the Saṁyutta 
Nikāya – namely Niruttipatha Sutta. 12 There the Buddha 
pointedly deals with the confusion caused by mixing up the three 
periods of time. It begins with these words: 
 “Tayome bhikkhave niruttipathā adhivacanapathā 
paññattipathā.” – “Monks, there are these three pathways of 
linguistic usage of synonyms and of designations.” The Buddha 
says that these three should not be mixed up and cites them 
separately. For instance, as regards the aggregate of form he says: 
 “Whatever form, monks that is past ceased, transformed 
‘it was’ is the reckoning (‘ saṅkhā’) appellation or designation. It 
is not reckoned as ‘it is’, or it will be. In the same way the 
reckoning used for any form that is future, the reckoning is ‘it

The Law of Dependent Arising 

will be’, and not ‘it was’ or ‘it is’. Likewise the reckoning for any 
form that is present  is ‘it is’ and not the other two. The Buddha 
says the same thing about each of the other four aggregates. He 
declares that whatever wise recluses and Brahmins there were, 
there will be and there are, have not, will not and do not mix up 
these three period s of time. Whatever is past is gone. It is a 
delusion to think that it exists. Whatever is future has not come 
yet. It may exist only when it comes. 
 It is in view of that tendency in mixing up, that the 
Buddha introduces the term ‘ attapaṭilābhā’ – ‘acquisition of 
self’. A special phrase is used in that connection – ‘tasmiṁ 
samaye’ (at that time). That is highly significant as a term for 
specification. For instance when there is the formless acquisition 
of self the other two acquisitions of self do not come in. 
 There too the Buddha warns against mixing up the three 
periods of time. It is by such a ‘mixing up’ that the Personality -
view (‘ sakkāyadiṭṭhi’ – lit. ‘existing body view’) has arisen. 
However language is not to be blamed for it. It is the fault of 
man’s defilements. The ‘father’ and the ‘mother’ are to be 
blamed. Who is the father? Ignorance. Who is the mother? 
Craving. The hindrance of ignorance with its notion of the 
compact, covers up the perception of the heap in the world and 
presents it as a ‘th ing’. Craving with its glue pastes the heap 
together. Thereby the worldling is made to think that the body 
exists so that it clings to ‘ sakkāyadiṭṭhi’ ignoring the extremely 
rapid process of change going on within the body. So also in the 
case of other thi ngs. It is here that the self -view lies hidden. The 
purpose of this Poṭṭhapāda Sutta, therefore is to expose this 
fallacy. It is a wonderful discourse. Po ṭṭhapāda as well as Citta 
Hatthisāriputta, are asking the same question which we ourselves 
would have asked had we not known the Dhamma. It was the 
same problem that blocked the progress of the yogins. They 
reached some high level of spiritual development, but they 
mystified it. They never thought that it is brought about by causes

Sermon 11 

and conditions as shown in this discourse. Instead they attributed 
it to some non-descript soul or self or else they thought that some 
agent is manipulating perception. Why were they unable to 
extricate themselves from pe rception? Because they had not 
recognized ‘ Saṅkhārā’ or preparations. The most distinctive 
feature of the Dhamma proclaimed by the Buddha is the 
recognition of the part played by Saṅkhārā – a term that is 
integral to the Law of Dependent Arising. Even in m aking that 
extraordinary decision, the monk was directing his attention to 
saṅkhāras. “yannūnāham na ceva ceteyyam nacābhi -
sankhareyyam” – “What if I were not to intend  and specially 
prepare?” He was keen on getting free from intentions and 
preparations. H e has been clinging on to intentions and 
preparations all this time. A simile given in the Visuddhimagga 
comes in useful here . 13 Suppose there is a broad stream of water 
and no bridge to crossover. One way to get across is to hang on to 
a creeper hanging d own from a tree on this side and go on 
swinging until enough momentum is gathered just to be well 
above the other bank. As soon as you can see the other bank 
below you when you look down, you have to let-go of the hold on 
the creeper -daring the drop. Other wise the creeper would swing 
you back. That is why the Buddha compared this Dhamma to the 
raft. This simile smacks of the same technique.  
 Meditation for serenity ( samatha) and insight ( vipassanā) 
is only a creeper to hang on like that. After you have bui lt up 
sufficient momentum by swinging holding on to it, you must let -
go. But you are scared of the THUD. That is why until the 
Buddha showed the way to do it, yogins went on ‘see -sawing’ 
with the dilemma “ to-be or not -to-be” in the ethereal plane of 
neither perception nor non -perception because of their soul -
prejudice. They were scared of losing the ‘I’. The Buddha 
showed them that there is no ‘I’ to suffer the ‘thud ’ through this 
novel concept of ‘ sikkhā’ or training. To hark back to the 
wonderful refrain:

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 ‘Sikkhā ekā saññā uppajjanti, sikkhā ekā saññā 
nirujjhanti’ 
 “Through training some perceptions arise, through 
training some perceptions cease!” 
 It is the Law of Dependent Arising that blasts the view of 
self or soul. From beginning to end this discours e vibrates 
through and through with the Law of Dependent Arising. This is 
a marvelous discourse. So you had better bear in mind every one 
of the similes you have come across. Remember the breaking of 
‘sakkāyadiṭṭhi’ or personality view is not something tha t happens 
with an audible sound. By assiduously developing insight on the 
Five Aggregates of grasping somehow or other you realize the 
vanity of grasping and let -go. Actually it is not that you let -go 
with an effort. It is an effortless letting –go in spite of yourself – 
so to say. What you touch by that letting -go is ‘ contact with 
cessation’ (‘nirodhaṁ phusati’). One awakens from the Cessation 
of Perceptions and Feelings into Nibbāna – to Arahanthood. 
Why? Because on arising from the cessation of Perceptio ns and 
Feelings one is aware of the ‘ signless’ (‘ animitta’) 
‘unestablished’ (‘ appaṇihita’) and void (‘ suññata’). That is the 
awakening from the THUD on the other bank . If one has attained 
the Cessation of Perceptions and Feelings, one invariably 
awakens fr om it to Nibbāna. Why so? Because wisdom is the 
End. With it one wins to the conviction; ‘Exhausted is birth, lived 
is the Holy Life, done is what had to be done!’ (“khīṇā jāti, 
vusitam brahmacariyaṁ kataṁ karaṇīyaṁ”).  
Well then, this is enough for you all . If life endures I 
might be able to expatiate in sermons to come. On this 
memorable Esala Poya  day within this hour we have said 
something on the Law of Dependent Arising on which the Four 
Noble Truths are founded. If you can imbibe anything useful for 
the development of your serenity and insight meditations from 
this sermon, please do so and put forth your best efforts to win 
deliverance from this dreadful samsāric suffering and by going

Sermon 11 

through the Fruits of the Paths to Stream -winning, Once -
Returning an d Non -returning realize the deathless Nibbāna! 
Whatever beings there be, from the lowest hell to the highest 
Brahma world wishing to rejoice in this sermon, may they rejoice 
in our sermon! May the merits accrued thereby conduce to their 
realization of the highest aim – the Deathless Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Itiv. pp 64, Saṁtatara Sutta  
2. D. I p 178 – 203, Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 
3. M. II 231 Pañcattaya Sutta 
4. M. III 1 Gaṇaka Moggallāna Sutta 
5. S. II 2 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
6. A. IV 426 Kṭhana Nissaya Sutta 
7. Sumaṅgala Vilāsini D. A. I 246 ( S.H.B.) 
8. Sumaṅgala Vilāsini D. A. I 245 ( S.H.B.) 
9. M. I 138 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
10.  Sumaṅgala Vilāsini  D. A. I 246 
11. The Meaning of Meaning – Ogden and Richards 
12. S. III 71 Niruttipatha Sutta 
13. Vism. 505 (S.H.B.)

Sermon 12 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 194)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Cirassaṁ vata passāmi – brāhmaṇaṁ parinibbutaṁ 
appatiṭṭhaṁ anāyūhaṁ – tiṇṇaṁ loke visattikaṁ1 
 – Oghataraṇa Sutta, Saṁyutta Nikāya. 
 It’s long since I see a Brahmin who has attained Nibbāna 
 Crossing over the sticky craving without st opping and 
 without struggling.  
 
Dear Listeners,  
 The Buddha has on many occasions compared the 
crossing over of saṁsāra to a crossing over of the four floods. He 
taught the world the Middle Path as the technique of overcoming 
the four floods, namely lust ( kāma), becoming ( bhava), views 
(diṭṭhi), and ignorance ( avijjā). We see the emphasis given to 
Paṭicca Samuppāda, the Law of Dependent Arising even in t his 
Middle Path. Therefore we have selected a verse on crossing the 
floods as the topic for this twelfth discourse on Paṭicca 
Samuppāda. This verse is found in the Oghataraṇa Sutta, the first 
sutta in the Saṁyutta Nikāya. This is how it goes. 
 When the Buddha was residing at the Jetavana Monastery 
in Sāvatthi, a certain deity called on the Buddha one night and 
respectfully stood on a side. He had a question to ask. “ Kathaṁ 
nu tvaṁ mārisa oghaṁ atari?”  “How, friend did you cross over 
the flood?” The Budd ha replied, “ Appatiṭṭhaṁ khvāhaṁ āvuso 
anāyuhaṁ oghaṁ atariṁ” “Friend, without stopping, without 
struggling I crossed the flood.” Unable to grasp the implication of 
this statement the deity asked for further clarification. ‘How

The Law of Dependent Arising 

exactly did you, friend, cro ss the four floods?” Then the Buddha 
explained “Friend, whenever I stopped, I sank. Whenever I 
struggled, I got swept away. Therefore, I crossed over without 
stopping and without struggling.” The deity uttered this verse in 
praise of the Buddha, venerated him and vanished. 
 Now let us take up this verse for discussion.  
 ‘Cirassaṁ vata passāmi - brāhmaṇaṁ parinibbutaṁ’ 
 It’s long since I see a Brahmin who has attained 
Extinction, Nibbāna 
 appatiṭṭhaṁ anāyūhaṁ - tiṇṇaṁ loke visattikaṁ 
 It’s long indeed since  I see a Brahmin who has attained 
Nibbāna by crossing over the sticky craving called ‘ visattikā’ 
without stopping and without struggling.  
 The earlier reference to a forceful flood will not be a 
problem to you because it is common knowledge that if we sto p 
having gone a little way, we get drowned. If we struggle we 
would get swept away. Only a systematic middling effort will 
take us across. Similarly the Buddha has offered a Middle Path in 
this Dhamma, for crossing over the four floods, lust ( kāma), 
becoming (bhava), views (diṭṭhi) and ignorance (avijjā). 
 Let us take them one by one for discussion. The flood of 
lust comes first. Ascetics and Brahmins contemporary of the 
Buddha had presented two extreme types of solutions for crossing 
the floods. As you have often heard about, they are 
kāmasukhallikānuyoga and attakilamathānuyoga (indulgence in 
sense pleasure and self  mortification). Ascetics such as Pakudha 
Kaccāyana, Makkhalī Gosāla and Ajita Kesakambalī, who 
belonged to the group of six heretics ignored the significance of 
wholesome and unwholesome action s and their resultant effects. 
They were critical of this theory. They disregarded the idea of a

Sermon 12 

“this world and a next world”. They presented the theories of 
ucchedavāda (annihilation) nāstikavāda (nihilism) or ahetu 
appaccayavāda (causeless conditionless fortuity). This resulted in 
more and more people inclining towards kāmasukhallikānuyoga 
(indulgence in sense pleasures). If there is no next world, and no 
results in good and bad actions, the only alternative is self -
indulgence. Although this idea is not mentioned in the suttas, the 
Chārvākins of later origin taught this view which is embodied in 
a Sanskrit verse familiar to many.  
 Yāvat jīvet sukhaṁ jīvet 
 ṛṇaṁ kṛtvāpi ghṛtaṁ pivet 
 bhasmī bhūtasya dehasya  
 punarāgamanaṁ kutah 
 Even today we hear young people expressing this idea 
“Let us enjoy ourselves as long as we live.” “ ṛṇaṁ kṛtvāpi 
ghṛtaṁ pivet” “Drink ghee even if you run into debt.” Ghee was 
recognized as an expensive drink those days. 
 bhasmī bhūtasya dehasya  
 punarāgamanaṁ kutah 
 How could a charred dead body return? That was one type 
of philosophy. The other aspect was self -mortification 
(attakilamathānuyoga) taught by Niga ṇṭha Nāthaputta, as you 
may have heard about. Rejecting both clothes and food, this 
group followed extremely strict vows.  What was their 
philosophy? Pubbekata hetu . 2 There are past actions, the results 
of which have to be paid off. New kammas should not be 
accumulated. They followed a code of torturous vows for that 
purpose known as attakilamathānuyoga. 
 These were the two e xtremes. In fact as you may have 
heard, the Buddha himself once followed self -mortification, until 
realization dawned on him. After renouncing the luxurious life of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

royalty, the Buddha entered upon the other of extreme socially 
approved life of self torture. The Mahāsaccaka Sutta records how 
he realized after six years of self torture, its uselessness in 
achieving his goal. With this conviction he searched for a more 
effective path. 3 Gradually it dawned on him how he entered the 
first jhāna under the cool shade of a rose apple tree at a 
ploughing ceremony of his father. Recalling this incident, he 
questioned himself “Why should I fear comforts ( sukha) as long 
as they are free of sense pleasures and evil mental states?” “ Kiṁ 
nu kho ahaṁ tassa sukhassa bhāyāmi yaṁtaṁ sukhaṁ aññatreva 
kāmehi aññatra akusalehi dhammehi ?”  Finally, motivated by 
this reasoning, he entered upon the Middle Path. Here I would 
like to mention briefly that those who accepted self -indulgence, 
by their ‘stopping’ (in the flood) actually sank into hell. Those 
who took up self -mortification, struggled through self torture. It 
did not lead them to enlightenment either. 
 The Buddha taught the Ariya A ṭṭhaṅgika Magga , the 
Noble Eightfold Path which steers clear of those two extr emes, 
and is  known to you as the Middle Path. One cannot at a glance 
identify the Law of Dependent Arising, Paṭicca Samuppāda  
concealed within the Eightfold Path. But the Mahā Cattārīsaka 
Sutta  in the Majjhima Nikāy a 4 offers the following explicit 
clarification of Paṭicca Samuppāda within the Eightfold Path. 
 Sammā diṭṭhissa sammā saṁkappo pahoti 
 Sammā saṁkappassa sammā vācā pahoti 
 Sammā vācassa sammā kammanto pahoti 
 Sammā kammantassa sammā ājīvo pahoti 
 Sammā ājīvassa sammā vāyāmo pahoti 
 Sammā vāyāmassa sammā sati pahoti 
 Sammā satissa sammā samādhi pahoti 
 Sammā samādhissa sammā ñāṇaṁ pahoti 
 Sammā ñāṇassa sammā vimutti pahoti

Sermon 12 

 This shows how beautifully each factor is closely linked 
with the other. When I explain one, you can easily understand  the 
rest. 
 “Sammā diṭṭhissa sammā saṁkappo pahoti” 
 Right thought dawns on him who has the right view. Right 
thought gives rise to right words. Right words give rise to right 
action. In this way the Middle Path is amazingly linked with each 
other. That itself is the Middle Path. 
 A superficial glance at the Middle Path does not reveal the 
Law of Dependent Arising within. One may argue that there is 
not even a reference to Paṭicca Samuppāda  in the 
Dhammacakka-ppavattana Sutta which we all regard as of prime  
importance. If that is so, how did Venerable Aññā Ko ṇdañña 
describe his attainment of Sotāpanna (Stream Entrant) as the 
realization of the vision that ‘Whatever is of the nature of arising, 
all that has the nature of ceasing’ ( Yaṁ kiñci samudayadhammaṁ 
sabbaṁ taṁ nirodhadhammaṁ)? 5 It follows the norm found in 
the Paṭicca Samuppāda . We have often explained to you that 
whatever has the nature of arising, all that is of the nature of 
ceasing. It is clearly evident in the Eightfold Path which begins 
with the f ourfold truth. It closely follows the pattern of the 
Paṭicca Samuppāda. 
  Now that we have touched on the subject, let us see how 
the Buddha highlights other aspects of the Middle Path. The Jains 
by giving up clothes and food, followed a path of extreme se lfmortification. In contrast to it, the Buddha allowed the monks the 
use of the four requisites ( paccaya). Even the word paccaya has 
the idea of ‘dependent on’. The monks depended on the four 
requisites in order to fulfill their objectives. The ordinary l aymen, 
the worldly people use them for sheer enjoyment. But you may 
have heard that the monks always reflect on the purpose behind 
the use of the requisites when using each of them. Taking food as

The Law of Dependent Arising 

an example, monks reflect on the purpose of eating “Neva davāya 
na madāya, na maṇḍanāya, na vibhūsanāya”. This food is not for 
enjoyment, nor for pride, nor for adornment, nor for 
beautification.  
 “Yāvadeva imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā yāpanāya vihi ṅsūparatiyā brahmacariyānuggahāya.” 
  “Only for the purpose of maintai ning this body, for its 
sustenance, to prevent possible harm through hunger, as a support 
for holy life”. It is interesting to note here that the requisites 
rejected by the Jains, were converted into objects of meditation 
by the Buddha. You may have heard that the monks contemplate 
on the four elements ( dhātu) found in their food as ‘ dhātu 
manasikāra’ (attention on elements). 
  Let me explain the general idea behind it. This food is 
made up of the four elements. The pure food becomes impure as 
it enters thi s repulsive body. This becomes a very effective 
subject for meditation. You can see what an amazingly practical 
Middle Path the Buddha has taught. On the one hand, one avoids 
the extreme of self -indulgence, and does away with the idea of 
eating for embellishment. On the other hand, the process of eating 
is converted into a subject for meditation, instead of totally 
condemning food. 
 Another important factor attracts our attention. The ideal 
qualities of a monk and a meditative layman are simplicity 
(appicchatā) and contentment (santuṭṭhi). Yet another quality of a 
monk is viriya – effort, not to be wasted in practicing vows of self 
torture, as in Jainism, but to strive to cultivate the factors in the 
Middle Path in a balanced way called ‘viriya samatā’. 
 Now it is clear that the Buddha highlights Dependent 
Arising or Paṭicca Samuppāda  in his Middle Path, and also 
deviates sharply from the two extremes. That is my brief 
explanation of the kāmogha, ‘the flood of lust’.

Sermon 12 

 The next is bhavogha, ‘the flood of be coming’. In the 
second Nipāta of the Itivuttaka, there is a sutta that discusses 
bhavogha in detail. “ Dvīhi bhikkhave di ṭṭhigatehi pariyu ṭṭhitā 
devamanussā olīyanti eke atidhāvanti eke. ” 6 Obsessed by two 
views, monks, are gods and human beings. Some of the m lag 
behind, some overreach. Both these tendencies are described as 
“bhavārāmā bhikkhave devamanussā bhavaratā bhava 
samuditā.” These gods and men take delight in becoming, are 
attached to becoming, take pride in becoming. When the 
Dhamma is being preache d for the cessation of becoming, they 
are not pleased with it. They fall back. They are displeased. The 
Buddha’s teaching based on the Middle Path, for the cessation of 
becoming does not appeal to the eternalists who have grasped the 
soul theory. Generally  those who like becoming, dislike the 
cessation of becoming. They get drowned in the flood of 
becoming. They sink in the current of becoming. Their grip on 
the ‘soul’ prevents them from striving for an escape.  
 There is another group called the annihilati onists,  
developing a revulsion towards becoming. (“ Bhaven’eva kho 
pana eke a ṭṭiyamānā harāyamānā”). They treat this body as the 
soul and reject the idea of a life beyond death. That is an 
overreaching. This is called ‘ vibhava’. They go to the other 
extreme by denying re-becoming. They are those who overreach.  
 Here I would like to repeat a simile I had given earlier, 
though it is not found in the text. Some run forward hoping to 
step on their own shadow like little children who do it for fun. Of 
course they never succeed in doing so. Some others are scared of 
the shadow and try to run away from it, but on turning back, see 
the shadow right behind them. Now the two extremes are like 
that. The Buddha has proclaimed his Middle Path avoiding these 
two extremes. What did the Buddha do? Having referred to those 
two extremes with the words ‘olīyanti eke’ (some lag behind) and 
‘atidhāvanti eke’  (some overreach), as the third alternative the 
Buddha declared ‘ cakkhumanto va passanti ’ (only they do see

The Law of Dependent Arising 

who have eyes t o see). This is how he really presents it. “ Dvīhi 
bhikkhave di ṭṭhigatehi pariyu ṭṭhitā devamanussā olīyanti eke  
atidhāvanti eke cakkhumanto va passanti. ” The third factor 
‘cakkhumanto va passanti ’ means ‘only those with eyes, see’. 
What does he mean by it? The two earlier groups of extremists 
were gripping on ‘ bhava’ (becoming). Discarding them, the 
Buddha introduced a new word ‘bhūta’. 
 Bhūta means, what has arisen. You might recollect this 
word in connection with the phrase ‘ yathābhūta ñā ṇadassana’ 
‘knowledge and vision of things as they are’. Therefore the 
Dhamma does not go to the extreme of existence as eternalists do. 
Nor does it go to the extreme of destruction of existence as 
nihilists. Instead, seeing what is arisen as ‘arisen’ is called 
‘yathābhūta dassana’ (vision of things as they have arisen). If the 
simile of the shadows is brought in here, it is like understanding 
the shadow as a shadow. One who understands shadow as 
shadow will not run after it nor will he run away from it in fear. 
The shadow i s a simile for nāmarūpa (name-and-form) as we 
have mentioned earlier. 
 You have already heard me use the simile of the dog on 
the bridge and the simile of Narcissus, in order to explain the 
Buddha’s teaching on ogha ‘floods’ and bhava ‘becoming’. He 
has al so explained how viññāna or consciousness regarding 
which people had many rigid theories, is interdependent with 
nāmarūpa. We have referred to this shadow of nāmarūpa many a 
time. The Buddha avoided that extreme since he saw the shadow 
as the shadow. There too, we find a Middle Path. 
 Let us take up diṭṭhogha next. I am sorry we have to be 
very brief since there are four oghas to deal with. As I have 
mentioned earlier, it has been discussed in the Kaccānagotta 
Sutta7. Let me mention in brief its background because of its 
relevance to this question. Venerable Kaccānagotta once 
approached the Buddha and asked “To what extent does

Sermon 12 

sammādiṭṭhi (right view) become sammādiṭṭhi?” ‘Right view’ had 
been given various suitable interpretations on various occasions, 
particularly by the Buddha and Venerable Sāriputta. But they are 
not contradictory to one another.  
 As the occasion demanded, here the Buddha explained 
sammādiṭṭhi as follows. “Dvayanissito khvāya ṁ kaccāyana loko 
yebhuyyena atthitañceva natthita ṁ ca” ‘Kaccāyana, the 
worldlings for the most part rest on two extremes.’ Dvayanissita 
means holding on to a dyad. What are they? Atthitā ‘Is’ 
(everything exists) and natthitā ‘Is not’ (nothing exists). The 
world either says everything is or nothing is. Then the Buddha 
explains the Middle Path in his dhamma. “ Lokasamudayaṁ kho 
kaccāyana yathābhūta ṁ sammappaññāya passato yā loke 
natthitā, sā na hoti ”. When one sees with wisdom, the n ature of 
constant arising in the world, the view of non -existence does not 
occur. Then he explains the other aspect. “ Lokanirodhaṁ kho 
kaccāyana yathābūta ṁ sammappaññāya passato yā loke atthitā 
sā na hoti ”. When one sees as it is with wisdom, the nature of  
ceasing in the world, the view of existence ( atthitā) does not 
occur. Just think about it. It is amazing. The world is constantly 
arising and ceasing. Some are caught up in the extreme view that 
the world really is or the world does not exist. What the Bu ddha 
says is that when one sees as it is with wisdom that the world is 
constantly arising, the extreme view that “The world is not” loses 
its hold on him. On the other hand when one sees as it is with 
wisdom, that the world is constantly ceasing, the extre me view 
that “The world is” fades away. When one sees with wisdom the 
nature of arising of the world, the extreme of non -existence 
disappears. When one observes the nature of ceasing in the world, 
the extreme view of existence of the world disappears.  
 Now the Budhha explains what lay between the two 
extremes. “Ete te ubho ante anupagamma ”. Without approaching 
either of these extremes, “ majjhena tathāgato dhamma ṁ deseti” 
The Tathāgata takes a Middle Path in preaching the dhamma.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

This Middle Path is the t eaching on the Law of Dependent 
Arising that we have discussed so far. 
 Then he explains the Middle Path beginning with “ Avijjā 
paccayā sa ṁkhārā” as you may have heard. Dependent on 
ignorance are preparations etc. and finally he explains how the 
five aggregates of grasping which is suffering, arises. He shows 
how with the cessation of ignorance, all that suffering ceases. So 
it is a philosophy of a Middle Way. Arising and ceasing. How the 
entire mass of suffering arises and then how it ceases. 
 The Buddha i n this manner rejects both extremes. When 
both views of existence and non -existence are given up, what 
remains there, is a question of suffering. The notion of the soul is 
shattered then and there. Instead of a soul what actually exists is a 
problem of suf fering, and its cessation. That is the Middle Path 
implied there. That means there is only the arising and ceasing or 
samudaya and vaya, free from the extreme views of existence and 
non-existence. As we have earlier mentioned, here too one might 
wonder why  these facts are not found in the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta. But we know that in the Noble Eightfold Path, 
what is shown as the right view is suffering, its arising, its 
cessation and the path leading towards it. Within these four 
truths, is found a rig ht view, which avoids the extremes of 
absolute existence and absolute non -existence. Although many 
cannot comprehend it, right view begins right from the Middle 
Path shown by the Buddha. In fact we can treat the Kaccānagotta 
Sutta as a concise commentary o n the Dhammacakkappavattana 
Sutta. 
 I would like you to think deeply on this point. A 
superficial glance at the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta  might 
make one think that the Law of Dependent Arising  
is missing there. But what we wish to point out is that 
sammādiṭṭhi embodies the Middle Path of the Paṭicca 
Samuppāda. It should be clear that there is no absolute existence

Sermon 12 

or absolute non -existence. Instead, there is an arising and a 
ceasing dependent on causes and conditions. If at all, what arises 
is an entire mass of suffering, and what ceases is an entire mass 
of suffering. Towards the end of the Kaccānagotta Sutta , the 
Buddha further explains that those who hold and cling to the 
aforementioned extreme views, thereby conceive an idea of a 
soul. The eternalists believe in an eternally present soul while the 
nihilists imagine that the body is the soul. The reason for this is 
their taking up a rigid stand point, their firm grip on a view. 
 The Buddha on the other hand proclaims right vision 
showing that where ther e is no grasping of a view, what arises is 
only suffering and what ceases is only suffering, “ dukkhaṁ eva 
uppajjamānaṁ uppajjati, dukkha ṁ nirujjhamānaṁ nirujjhati”. 
That is why one who has this vision entertains no doubt or 
uncertainty regarding the past o r the future. If at all, what had 
been there in the past was only these five aggregates of grasping. 
So will it be in the future. He realizes that there is nothing 
worthwhile here, but only suffering. With regard to that suffering 
what the Four Noble Truths imply is that very Middle Path.  
 Generally when we speak of the Middle Path, we are not 
aware that Paṭicca Samuppāda  is implicit in it. It is to pinpoint 
that fact, that I say all this. In fact the Kaccānagotta Sutta serves 
as a concise commentary to th e Right View in the Noble 
Eightfold Path.  
 So we have pinpointed that the Buddha offered a Middle 
Path to cross over the flood of sensuality ( kāmogha) and he 
offered a Middle Path to cross over the flood of becoming 
(bhavogha). Moreover he offered a Middl e Path to cross over the 
flood of views ( diṭṭhi ogha ). Rejecting both extreme views of 
existence and non -existence, he brought out the fact of suffering 
in the guise of arising and ceasing. “ dukkhaṁ eva uppajjamānaṁ 
uppajjati, dukkha ṁ nirujjhamānaṁ nirujjhati” ‘What arises is

The Law of Dependent Arising 

only suffering, what ceases is only suffering’. There too 
Dependent Arising is highlighted. 
 Now we come to the avijjogha, the flood of ignorance. 
This might sound unusual. Ignorance is here treated as a flood. 
This is the most difficu lt of the four to comprehend. The 
Sammādiṭṭhi Sutt a 8 expounded by Venerable Sāriputta provides 
an explanation as to why the Buddha called it a flood. In fact we 
come across several definitions of the term sammādiṭṭhi, at 
different levels. They are not cont radictory to one another. They 
all are correct from different perspectives. 
 Here is one of them, “Monks, if a noble disciple 
understands ignorance (avijjā) its arising, its ceasing and the path 
leading to its cessation, even to that extent he is one with Right 
View, sammādiṭṭhi. “ Avijjaṁ ca pajānāti, avijjā samudaya ṁ ca 
pajānāti, avijjā nirodha ṁ ca pajānāti, avijjā nirodhagāminī 
paṭipadaṁ ca pajānāti ” A knowledge of these four is sufficient 
for sammādiṭṭhi. What is called ignorance (avijjā) in that context? 
It is already analyzed as “ Dukkhe aññā ṇaṁ, dukkhasammudaye 
aññāṇaṁ, dukkhanirodhe aññā ṇaṁ, dukkhanirodhagāminiyā 
paṭipadāya aññā ṇaṁ” Ignorance of suffering, ignorance of its 
arising, ignorance of its cessation and the ignorance of the pat h 
leading to its cessation. That is ignorance.  
 Then what is the arising of ignorance? How does 
ignorance come about? That is the crux of the problem. A 
surprise awaits us here. “ Āsava samudayā avijjā samudayo ”. It is 
with the arising of influxes that ign orance arises. This causes 
confusion in those who analyze Paṭicca Samuppāda  because 
what precedes is ignorance. They presume that ignorance has no 
root cause but is simply present and other factors arise from it. 
Here is the solution to the problem. On beh alf of the Buddha, 
Venerable Sāriputta explains “ Āsava samudayā avijjā samudayo, 
āsava nirodhā avijjā nirodho ”. With the arising of influxes 
ignorance arises. With the cessation of influxes ignorance ceases.

Sermon 12 

The ‘avijjā  nirodhagāminī patipadā’ or the path that leads to the 
cessation of ignorance is none other than the Noble Eightfold 
Path.   
  From here onwards, I have something special to tell you. 
Perhaps you have already heard or even read the Sabbāsava 
Sutta, 9 which appears as the second discourse in t he Majjhima 
Nikāya. It explains how one could restrain all the influxes. That is 
why this Sutta enjoys so much recognition. Herein it gives 
influxes as the cause of the ‘arising’ of ignorance. 
 This particular term āsava is not easy to explain. It has 
been given different interpretations. We often resort to examples 
and similes to facilitate understanding. Let us take the term ogha 
(flood) to denote a body of flowing water. When speaking about a 
body of flowing water, we are not bothered about it. We are 
unharmed because it is just flowing downwards. Suppose we get 
down into this rapidly flowing body of water with the idea of 
crossing it. How would we feel about it then? Then, we feel it as 
flowing forcefully towards us. That is the obstacle we have. So 
far, we had seen it flowing away. Once we get into it to cross 
over we see it as flowing towards us . That is the basic idea of  
āsava or influxes. 
 The Sabbāsava Sutta  speaks of seven ways in which 
influxes flow in. This is an extremely profound discourse. But  let 
me condense it for our purpose. The Buddha begins his 
explanation as follows: “ Sabbāsava sa ṁvara pariyāyaṁ vo 
bhikkhave dhammaṁ desessāmi” ‘Monks, I shall teach you a way 
to restrain all influxes.’  
 ‘Saṁvaro’ means restraint. You may be familiar with  the 
term ‘ indriyasaṁvara’ ‘sense -restraint’. Then the Buddha says: 
“Jānato aha ṁ bhikkhave passato āsavāna ṁ khayaṁ vadāmi, no 
ajānato no apassato ” ‘I declare that the extinction of influxes 
should be done knowing and seeing – that is with awareness and

The Law of Dependent Arising 

wisdom’. The Buddha himself asks and answers the question 
Knowing what? Seeing what? What are the two helpful factors 
for the restraint of influxes? 
 We have often mentioned the importance of 
understanding the ayoniso manasikāra  and yoniso manasikāra . 
These are the two factors that help one to restrain the influxes. 
The Buddha’s advice is to understand yoniso manasikāra and 
ayoniso manasikāra  correctly with their specific characteristics. 
To put it in simple language,  ayoniso manasikāra means 
unsuitable, wrong, disorderly, contemplation with a wrong 
approach. Yoniso manasikāra means to drive at the origin or the 
cause of a thing and understand it correctly.  
 Incorrect contemplation as well as correct contemplation 
should be clearly understood for the purpose of taming the 
influxes. Earlier I mentioned that seven types of āsavas are 
discussed in this sutta. Let me introduce them to you first. “ Atthi 
bhikkhave āsavā dassanā pahātabbā ” ‘Monks, there are some 
influxes that should be abandoned through visio n (dassanā). That 
is the first group. Another group has to be abandoned through 
restraint (saṁvarā). The third group has to be abandoned through 
utilizing ( paṭisevanā). Some others are removed through 
endurance ( adhivāsanā). The fifth group is expelled thr ough 
warding off or avoiding ( parivajjanā). The sixth group has to be 
got rid of through vinodanā, dispelling. There seems to be a 
closeness between the fifth and the sixth. Parivajjanā and 
vinodanā appear to have some closeness in meaning. Let us 
understand parivajjanā as avoiding, shunning or keeping away. 
Vinodanā is eliminating through dispelling. It will be clear when 
you listen to my explanation. The seventh method is eliminating 
by developing – bhāvanā. Dassanā pahātabbā, sa ṁvarā 
pahātabbā, paṭisevanā pahātabbā, adhivāsanā pahātabbā, 
parivajjanā pahātabbā, vinodanā pahātabbā  and lastly, bhāvanā 
pahātabbā. This is a fascinating Sutta with subtle meaning. Some 
have even confounded the facts in it.

Sermon 12 

 Now, let me explain them as time permits. First let us 
discuss “ dassanā pahātabbā ”. The Buddha speaks of influxes 
that should be eliminated through vision. But there are certain 
people in the world who resort to wrong ways of attention, for 
instance recluses and Brahmins of the past. What is this 
unsuitable method of attention? Certain people presume that a 
person called ‘I’ really exists. With that presumption they go on 
asking themselves in terms of the three periods of time. 
Regarding the past they have fivefold doubts. “Was I in the past? 
Was I not in th e past? Who was I in the past? How was I in the 
past? Having been what, what did I become in the past?” 
Regarding the future too they go on attending on the fivefold 
questions. Will I be in the future? Will I not be in the future? 
What will I be in the fut ure? How will I be in the future? Having 
been what, what will I be in the future? Regarding the present 
they would think, Am I now? Am I not now? Who am I? How am 
I? Where has this being come from and where will it go? Taking 
the proposition I as the subje ct, as a permanent individual and 
indulging in irrelevant contemplation, they finally end up in the 
extreme ‘I have a soul’ or in the other extreme ‘I do not have a 
soul’. They are both extremes. That is the result of unwarranted 
contemplation, placing ‘I’  on a pedestal. It ends up in ayoniso 
manasikāra. People are engulfed in doubt very often regarding 
the past ‘Was I? Wasn’t I?’ The Buddha explains that the noble 
disciples who have the right vision, are not obsessed by such 
doubts since they think in term s of suffering, its arising, its 
cessation and the path leading to cessation. 
 When the mind is fashioned according to the four noble 
truths, such doubts do not arise. If at all, there would have been 
only the five aggregates of grasping ( pañca upādānakkhandā) in 
the past, and the future will hold out only suffering. Therefore 
there exists only suffering, its arising, its cessation and the path 
leading to cessation. The Buddha ascertains that if the mind is 
cultivated (developed) in accordance with the four  truths the 
inevitable result would be the arising of the Sotāpanna 
Maggañāṇa (the wisdom of the Stream Entrant) wherein the first 
three fetters - sakkāyadiṭṭhi, vicikicchā and sīlabbataparāmāsa

The Law of Dependent Arising 

(view of self, doubt and clinging to rites and rituals) are ex pelled. 
We can see that dassanā pahātabbā refers to the controlling of 
the first three saṁyojanas. If the mind is cultivated in accordance 
with the four truths, one can eliminate them. That is the 
explanation to “dassanā pahātabbā” 
 Let us now discuss “ saṁvarā pahātabbā ” elimination 
through restraint. This is closely associated with indriya  
saṁvara, restraint of the senses. Here, the Buddha uses the term 
‘paṭisaṁkhā yoniso ’ one of his stunning stock of meaningful 
words. paṭisaṁkhā means scrutinizing wit h wisdom. After the 
noble disciples identify the difference between yoniso 
manasikāra and ayoniso manasikāra , they conduct themselves 
carefully as befits the occasion. The Buddha in trying to explain 
the rewards of practicing them and evils of neglecting t hem, uses 
another phrase, āsavā vighātapariḷāhā, which means the influxes 
that cause exhaustion and burning.  
 Giving an example the Buddha explains thus. If the eye is 
not guarded well, various lustful influxes are likely to sweep in. 
They could arouse th e lust dormant within. They could bring 
about vighāta pari ḷāha, exhaustion and burning within. One 
should scrutinize oneself with wisdom ( paṭisankhā yoniso ), and 
restrain one’s eye. Since our subject is restraint of the senses, this 
procedure applies to the other senses as well, the ear, the nose, 
the tongue, the body and the mind. Why does the Buddha 
emphasize restraint? If restraint is lacking those tiresome 
oppressive influxes come flooding in. That is all about saṁvarā 
pahātabbā. 
 Next comes paṭisevanā  pahātabbā, elimination through 
utilizing. The Buddha refers to the use of the four requisites here. 
We mentioned earlier that the Niganṭhas discarded food an d 
clothes, claiming they could thereby become free of craving. But 
the Buddha shows that the use of the four requisites – robes, alms 
food, shelter and medicine is essential for maintenance of life. All 
four are absolutely essential in order to avoid the d iscomfort and 
hardship that would otherwise crop up. The Buddha had

Sermon 12 

experienced it when leading a rigorous life. One has to follow the 
Middle Path here. The reflection on food goes as “ paṭisaṁkhā 
yoniso piṇdapātaṁ paṭisevāmi”. I shall partake of my alms fo od 
reflecting with wisdom. Next comes the purpose “ Neva davāya 
na madāya na man ḍanāya na vibhūsanāya” – not for delectation 
or gratification or adornment or beautification but simply to 
sustain my life. Now we are told how to convert this into a 
subject fo r meditation. The use of essential requisites in life, 
without which one would have to experience discomfort and 
hardship has been permitted, because the body has to be 
maintained at least for the worthy cause of crossing the saṁsāra. 
But they must be used reflecting wisely as a source of meditation. 
With the use of the four requisites, lustful thoughts of lay life 
may flood in. They have to be minimized through simplicity 
(appiccatā) and contentment ( santuṭṭhi). That is paṭisevanā or 
utilizing. 
 Adhivāsanā pahātabbā comes next, elimination through 
endurance. It simply means that, meditators have to endure cold, 
heat, physical ailments, insects or even severe pain. Why endure? 
Otherwise exhaustion and burning will add up to his already 
unbearable pain. Take an example. Unable to bear up the pain of 
a wound, we shout and yell. This shouting and yelling will only 
add up to the pain. Enduring without reacting to problems, brings 
us closer to Nibbāna. That is why the Buddha has taught us to 
endure “adhivāsanā pahātabbā. Even criticism has to be endured. 
It helps in controlling the influxes. 
 Parivajjanā pahātabbā  follows  next, elimination through 
avoiding. Although this is treated very lightly by some, the 
Buddha attaches great importance to avoiding risks, thre ats to our 
lives and blemish to our conduct. One must not have confidence 
when confronted with wild animals like elephants, horses, cattle 
and dogs, trusting in one’s power of meditation. A monk must not 
frequent questionable places or develop friendship w ith people 
with bad reputation. Reflecting wisely a monk must avoid any 
situation that would affect his spiritual life adversely.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 The next restraint vinodanā pahātabbā is perhaps more 
familiar to you. It appears in the Girimānanda Sutta  as pahāna 
saññā. 10 Since pahāna appears in all these seven factors, the term 
vinodanā is used to express the idea of pahāna. It means 
removing. What must be removed? This is how it is clarified. A 
noble disciple or a monk, “ uppannaṁ kāmavitakkaṁ nādhivāseti 
pajahati, vinode ti, byantikaroti anabhāva ṁ gameti” does not 
tolerate any lustful thoughts that arise, but discards them, 
removes them, terminates them and eradicates them. Here 
vinodanā pahātabbā means the elimination of kāma vitakka  
(thoughts connected with lust), vyāpāda vitakka (thoughts 
connected with ill -will), vihiṁsā vitakka (thoughts connected 
with harm) and the resultant evil thoughts immediately. Those are 
the influxes that have to be controlled by removing.  
 The next and the last is bhāvanā pahātabbā . These are  
influxes that have to be eliminated through mind development. 
This refers to the development of the seven bojjhañgas or 
enlightenment factors. I am sure you are familiar with them. Sati, 
dammavicaya, viriya, pīti, passaddhi, samādhi and upekkhā. Each 
of these has to be developed in an environment of seclusion 
(vivekanissitaṁ),dispassion (virāganissitaṁ), cessation ( nirodhanissitaṁ) and relinquishment ( vossaggapariṇāmiṁ). It must not 
be forgotten that paṭisaṁkhā yoniso, wise reflection runs through 
each of these steps like a web. 
 The Sabbāsava Sutta introduces a process of eliminating 
the influxes ( āsavas) in seven ways. They all lead to the same 
goal. “ Āsava samudayā avijjā samudayo āsava nirodhā avijjā 
nirodho.” When influxes arise, ignorance arises. Wh en influxes 
cease, ignorance ceases. This statement caused confusion. Many 
wondered from where ignorance came into the scene. Now it is 
clear that influxes give rise to ignorance. Due to ayoniso 
manasikāra incorrect contemplation, influxes arise and alread y 
arisen influxes increase. Due to  yoniso manasikāra , correct 
contemplation, the already arisen influxes cease and no new ones 
arise. That shows how rewarding yoniso manasikāra is.

Sermon 12 

 Finally we can arrive at the conclusion that the ultimate 
purpose of the Sutta is avijjā pahāna , elimination of ignorance. 
Influxes have the nature of flowing in, every moment. As 
mentioned earlier watching the water flowing forcefully, while 
seated on the river bank, one cannot guarantee that one could 
swim across it in a strai ght line. No one could. One has to swim 
while allowing the water to flow. That is similar to the Middle 
Path, the Paṭicca Samuppāda. Each step is linked to the next. 
 Let me now summarize today’s discourse as time permits. 
By way of summary let me quote a wonderful statement made by 
Venerable Ānanda in praise of the Buddha’s technique of 
explaining the path. “Nissāya nissāya bhante, Bhagavatā oghassa 
nittharaṇā akkhātā.” 11 The method the Buddha has advocated in 
order to cross the great flood is nissāya niss āya. It means 
manipulating (improvising) one thing after the other, but not 
clinging to any. It is a technique of proceeding systematically 
forward, step by step. 
 You may have heard of crossing the floods by means of 
saddhā. “Saddhāya tarati oghaṁ.” 12 That kind of crossing has to 
be undertaken with balanced effort viriya samatā. 
 Once a youth called Kappa questioned the Buddha 
regarding the crossing of the flood. 13  
 Majjhe sarasmiṁ tiṭṭhataṁ, oghe jāte mahabbhaye 
 jarā maccu paretānaṁ, dīpaṁ pabrūhi mārisa 
 tvañ ca me dīpam akkhāhi, yathāyidaṁ  nāparaṁ siyā 
 Friend, those marooned in the strong floods, 
 threatened by decay and death 
 are stranded in the lake  
 Show the island to them 
 since there is no other, please 
 show the island to me.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Responding to Kappa’s request to show the refuge to 
those caught up in the strong floods, the Buddha gives an 
amazing reply. 
 “Akiñcanaṁ anādānaṁ - etaṁ dīpaṁ anāparaṁ 
   Nibbānamiti taṁ brūmi -  jarā maccu parikkhayaṁ” 
 Akiñcanaṁ anādānaṁ means not possessing anything, not 
grasping anything. This is a reference to Nibbāna the highest 
goal. Nothing called mine and nothing to grip, getting washed 
away makes no difference. 
 “Possessing nothing, not desirous of grasping anything, 
where birth and death ceases is this island called Nibbāna.” 
 Kappa inquired what island is found beyond the floods. It 
does not correspond to any attractive island in our imagination - 
or rather the Nibbāna of Siyadoris (i.e. Simple Simon Nibbāna). 
The Buddha explains “Possesing nothi ng and grasping nothing. 
None other than that. I call it Nibbāna.” The Buddha finally 
winds up saying “Decay is decayed and death is dead” “ Jarā 
maccu parikkhayaṁ”. If there is nothing possessed how can there 
be decay? If there is nothing grasped, how can there be death? 
“akiñcanaṁ anādānaṁ”. Please try to reflect deeply on the 
implication of this fascinating account. Nibbāna is merely a 
name. That alone is the island. 
 If there is nothing to protect, there is nothing to be washed 
away. If there is nothing grasped, again there is nothing to be 
washed away. That is why the Buddha calls it Nibbāna. The final 
result of crossing over the flood is “ akiñcanaṁ anādānaṁ etaṁ 
dīpaṁ anāparaṁ” Possesing nothing, grasping nothing. This is 
the island and no other. We exp lained ‘jarā maccu parikkhayaṁ’ 
as ‘where decay has decayed and death is dead’. 
 Friends, we have attempted to condense this story of 
crossing over the floods into one hour. Treating kāma (lust), 
bhava (becoming), diṭṭhi (view) and avijjā (ignorance) as on e 
forceful flood, our challenge is to cross over this saṁsāra. There 
lies before us a very delicate Middle Path to tread, possessing

Sermon 12 

nothing, grasping nothing, leaning against nothing, but carefully 
working one’s way one step to the next to reach the final goal.  
 The path “ paṭipadā” with each step leaning towards the 
other, or each step supporting the other is condensed in the 
Dhamma into three words: ‘ anupubba sikkhā, anupubba kiriyā  
and anupubba pa ṭipadā’. It involves a gradual process of 
disciplining, a gradual process of training and a gradually 
ascending path. The Paṭicca Samuppāda  is well incorporated 
within this path, as it was mentioned earlier. “ Sammā di ṭṭhissa 
sammā saṁkappo pahoti ”. Right thinking  dawns on him who 
holds right view and pr oceeds up the ladder gradually. The 
Buddha’s clarification of the path in order to cross over the strong 
flood of saṁsāra, avoiding the two extremes is praiseworthy 
indeed. He has made clear what our destination is like after 
crossing. It is not another birth, or an extraordinary world as we 
imagine. That destination is where the desire to possess and the 
desire to grasp anything in the floods have been totally 
relinquished.  
 I have attempted to briefly explain a subject that deserves 
more elaborate treatment. I b elieve you are regular listeners of 
my discourses. I advise you to make use of Paṭicca Samuppāda 
and other related topics, in your attempts at meditation. Today 
you have made a good start with the practice of sīla. From now 
onwards follow the Dhamma path of sīla, samādhi and paññā and 
utilize this knowledge for the advancement of your samatha  and 
vipassanā meditation. I hope this discourse will contribute to 
some extent, towards your attempt to attain the Paths and Fruits 
of Sotāpanna, Sakadāgāmi, Anāgāmi and Arahant, which is 
called freedom from saṁsāra, before the light of the sāsana is 
extinguished. 
 Whatever beings there be, from the lowest hell to the 
highest Brahma world, may they all rejoice in our sermon. May 
the merits accrued by that rejoicing con duce to the fulfillment of 
their higher aims

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. S. I 1 Oghatarana Sutta  
2. M. II 214 Devadaha Sutta 
3. M. I 246 Mahā Saccaka Sutta 
4. M. III 76 Mahā Cattarīsaka Sutta 
5. S. V 423 Dhammacakkappavatthana Sutta 
6. Itiv. 43 Diṭṭhigata Sutta 
7. S.  II 17 Kaccānagotta Sutta 
8. M. I 46 Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta 
9. M. I 6 -12 Sabbāsava Sutta 
10. A. V 108-112 Girimānanda Sutta 
11. M. II 265 Sn. Āneñjasappāya Sutta 
12. Sn. 33 Ālavaka Sutta 
13. Sn. 211f. Kappa Sutta

Sermon 13 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 195)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Yaṁ kiñci dukkhaṁ sambhoti – sabbaṁ saṁkhāra paccayā 
Saṁkhārānaṁ nirodhena – natthi dukkhassa sambhavo 
Etamādīnavaṁ  ñatvā – dukkhaṁ saṁkhāra paccayā 
Sabbasaṁkhāra samathā – saññāya uparodhanā 
Evaṁ dukkhakkhayo hoti – etaṁ ñatvā yathātathaṁ 
Sammaddasā vedaguno – sammadaññāya paṇditā 
Abhibhuyya mārasaṁyogaṁ – nāgacchanti punabbhavaṁ1 
– Dvayatānupassanā S., Sutta Nipāta 
Whatever suffering arises, it is all dependent on 
preparations. When preparations cease, the arising of 
suffering ceases. 
Knowing the evils of suffering dependent on preparations,  
with the stilling of all preparations, unobstructed by 
perceptions, that is the way suffering ceases. Thus, knowing 
this as it is,  
The wise, endowed with correct vision and well versed in 
knowledge, realizing this as it is, overpowering the bonds 
of Māra, do not go into another birth.  
 
Dear Listeners, 
 Sabbasaṁkhāra samatha  or the stilling of the 
preparations, stands foremost in the phrase that declares the 
peaceful excellent nature of Nibbāna. 2  It is the saṇkhāras or

The Law of Dependent Arising 

preparations that take the first plunge into the endless misery of 
Saṁsāra in the darkness of ignorance. Therefore it is clear that an 
intensive and an extensive clarification of the cluster of 
interpretations of the Law of Dependent Arising   is essential. To 
venture into that subject we have chosen three verses in the 
Dvayatānupassanā Sutta  of the Sutta Nipāta, as the title for the 
13th discourse on Paṭicca Samuppāda . Since this Dvayatānupassanā Sutta  was the topic of three earlier discourses, I am 
sure you remember the technique, the pattern the Buddha 
followed. The speciality about this Sutta is that the Buddha has 
followed a technique of duality, a dual contemplation in 
clarifying the dhamma. 
 This is how the Buddha presents the problem about the 
saṇkhāras (preparations) to the monks. “Monks, if a question 
arises as to whether there is another method of practicing dual 
contemplation, do affirm that there is. Let me explain how it can 
be done.  
 “Yaṁ kiñci dukkha ṁ sambhoti - sabbaṁ saṁkhāra 
paccayā. Ayaṁ ekānupassanā.”  One method of contemplating is 
that whatever suffering arises, it is entirely dependent on 
saṁkhāra. “ Saṁkhārānaṁ ceva asesa virāga nirodhā, natthi 
dukkhassa sambhavo.”  With the total detachment and cessation 
of preparations, suffering ceases. That is the second method of 
contemplation. These two methods have been explicitly clarified 
by the Buddha in the three verses I recited earlier.  
Yaṁ kiñci dukkhaṁ sambhoti - sabbaṁ saṁkhāra paccayā 
Saṁkhārānaṁ nirodhena - natthi dukkhassa sambhavo 
 Whatever suffering arises, it is all dependent on 
preparations. When the preparations cease, the arising of 
suffering ceases. 
 Etamādīnavaṁ  ñatvā - dukkhaṁ saṁkhāra paccayā 
 Knowing the evils of suffering dependent on preparations,

Sermon 13 

Sabbasaṁkhāra samathā - saññāya uparodhanā 
Evaṁ dukkhakkhayo hoti - evaṁ ñatvā yathātathaṁ  
With the stilling of all preparations, unobstructed by 
perceptions, that is the way suffering ceases. Thus, knowing this 
as it is  
Sammaddasā vedaguno - sammadaññāya paṇditā 
The wise, endowed with correct vision and well versed in 
knowledge, realizing this as it is  
Abhibhuyya mārasaṁyogaṁ - nāgacchanti punabbhavaṁ 
Overpowering the bonds of Māra, do not go into another 
birth.  
That is the meaning of the verses. 
Coming back to our subject saṁkhāra, we see it occurs as 
the second factor in the Paṭicca Samuppāda , following avijjā. 
You know we have many a time repeated avijjā paccayā 
saṁkhārā, sa ṁkhāra paccayā viññāna ṁ,  viññāna paccayā 
nāmarūpaṁ, nāmarūpa paccayā sa ḷāyatanaṁ and so on. The 
Buddha has himself given a clarification of the term saṁkhāra, in 
the Vibhanga Sutta , 3 in the Nidāna Sa ṁyutta of the Saṁyutta 
Nikāya. 
“Katame ca bhikkhave sa ṁkhārā. Tayo me bhikkhave 
saṁkhārā. Kāya sa ṁkhāro, vacī sa ṁkhāro, citta sa ṁkhāro”  
Monks, what are the preparations? There are three, preparations 
of the body, speech and mind. Remember they are in the singular. 
There is yet another c lear analysis of these terms in the Cūla 
Vedalla Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya. 4 We meet Arahant Therī 
Dhammadinnā making a comprehensive analysis of them in reply 
to lay disciple Visākha’s questions. He wished to know what 
exactly is meant by kāya sa ṁkhāra, vacī saṁkhāra, citta 
saṁkhāra.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Arahant Therī Dhammadinnā explained, “ assāsa passāsā 
kho āvuso visākha kāyasa ṁkhāro, vitakka vicārā vacī sa ṁkhāro, 
saññā ca vedanā ca citta saṁkhāro.” 
Let me give the meaning. “Friend Visākha, inhalation and 
exhalation are the preparation of the body, reasoning and 
deliberation are the preparation of speech. Perception and feeling 
are the preparation of the mind.” 
Again the layman Visākha questions, “Noble lady, how 
do inhalation and exhalation be the preparation for the bod y? 
How do reasoning and deliberation be the preparation for speech? 
How do perception and feeling be the preparation for the mind?” 
Then the Arahant Therī  had to explain further.  
“Assāsa passāsā kho āvuso visākha kāyikā ete dhammā 
kāya paṭibaddhā. Tasmā assāsa passāsā kāyasaṁkhāro.” 
“Friend Visākha, inhalation and exhalation are physical 
and bound to be associated with the body. They are therefore the 
preparation of the body.”  
Then she continues. “Pubbe kho āvuso visākha, vitakketvā 
vicāretvā pacchā vācaṁ bhindati. Tasmā vitakka vicārā vacī 
saṁkhāro.” Here she explains something special. “Friend 
Visākha, first, one reasons out and deliberates. Then expresses in 
speech. Therefore, reasoning and deliberation are the preparation 
of speech.” Then she cont inues, “ saññā ca vedanā ca āvuso 
visākha cetasikā. ete dhammā cittapa ṭibaddhā. tasmā saññā ca 
vedanā ca citta sa ṁkhāro.” Perceptions and feelings are mental 
phenomena. They are associated with the mind. Therefore they 
are the preparation of the mind. 
Now let us explore the implications behind these words. 
According to the accepted theory of Paṭicca Samuppāda , 
consciousness leading to another birth is fashioned by saṁkhāra 
or preparations. But, this reveals something more fantastic. You

Sermon 13 

know that your breath ing does not take you to the Deva world or 
to the lower realms. Respiration is not considered as an action – 
kamma. But inhalation and exhalation provide the rehearsal for 
the drama of becoming. You know that inhalation and exhalation 
establish the first c ontact with the atmosphere, at birth. They 
represent the subtle act of grasping. Similarly, they make the last 
effort at death. Let me explain this with the help of a simile. 
Imagine an iceberg in the ocean. What you see is only one tenth 
of it. Nine tenth s are hidden below the sea level. Similarly, the 
wholesome and unwholesome deeds we consider as greatly 
significant are merely the visible section. The nine tenths that lie 
below is inhalation and exhalation. Remember I said just now 
that breathing does no t drag you to hell. But if you take a deep 
breath and deal a mighty blow on someone with a rod, you’ll 
definitely end up in hell. What I want you to understand is that 
our breath is similar to the invisible portion or the rehearsal of the 
drama of becoming. 
Next vitakka vicāra, reasoning and deliberation in speech 
are similar. It was specifically mentioned that before a word is 
uttered vitakka and vicāra are activated. We see that the word 
‘rehearsal’ is ideally applicable to this process as well. The mind 
dwells on the word by way of reasoning and deliberation before it 
is uttered, similar to decorating the stage before the drama begins. 
Lying beneath the words are the invisible preparation called 
vitakka vicāra – reasoning and deliberation. 
Now look at saññā and vedanā – perception and feeling –
as the process of preparation for thought. Thought, according to 
the Buddha is more fascinating than a painting – cittaññeva 
cittataraṁ. 5 But that thought is prepared by perception and 
feeling. Therefore the thought is essentially a preparation, a 
planning, a rehearsal.  
What serves as the background for this rehearsal? It’s 
avijjā ignorance. Avijjā paccayā sa ṁkhārā. It is familiar to you

The Law of Dependent Arising 

but let’s go back to Vibhanga Sutta for further explanation. How 
does the Buddha interpret avijjā – “dukkhe aññā ṇaṁ, dukkha 
samudaye aññā ṇaṁ, dukkha nirodhe aññā ṇaṁ, dukkha nirodha 
gāminiyā pa ṭipadāya aññā ṇaṁ.”  In brief, it is ignorance of the 
four Noble T ruths. Aññāṇaṁ  means ignorance. That is the 
background. The rehearsal is done in this dark background, by 
inhalation and exhalation, reasoning and deliberation, perception 
and feeling. 
 Now, for what purpose is this rehearsal? Let us find out. 
Saṁkhāras (preparations) are followed by viññāna 
(consciousness). Viññāna is followed by nāmarūpa (name-andform). We have already discussed viññāna and nāmarūpa at 
length. Certain books, when discussing paṭicca samuppāda,  talk 
of a paṭisandhi viññāna, consciousness leading to a birth. But the 
Buddha has defined viññāna as six-fold. “Katamaṁ ca bhikkhave 
viññāṇaṁ? Cakkhu viññā ṇaṁ, sota viññā ṇaṁ, ghāna viññā ṇaṁ, 
jivhā  viññā ṇaṁ, kāya  viññā ṇaṁ, mano viññā ṇaṁ.”  
Consciousness was explained this way, as six -fold. We hav e on 
an earlier occasion given the analysis of  nāmarūpa, in Venerable 
Sāriputta’s words. In the Buddha’s words, this is how it is 
defined;  
 “Katamaṁ ca bhikkhave nāmarūpa ṁ? saññā, vedanā, 
cetanā, phasso, manasikāro. Ida ṁ vuccati bhikkhave nāma ṁ. 
Cattāro ca mahābhūtā catunna ṁ ca mahābhūtāna ṁ upādāya 
rūpaṁ. Idaṁ vuccati bhikkhave rūpaṁ.” 6 “What monks is name -
and-form? Perception, feeling, intention, contact and attention – 
this is called name. The four primaries and the form that arises 
with a grip on the primaries – this, monks, is called form.” That’s 
the explanation. The words of the Buddha. As we earlier 
remarked contact or phassa cannot be brought forward. We have 
compared the five -fold factors of nāma to the five fingers, 
although later interpretations  varied. “ Cattāro ca mahābhūtā  
catunnaṁ ca mahābhūtāna ṁ upādāya rūpaṁ.”  This means the 
perception of rūpa arises in accordance with the four elements,

Sermon 13 

that is, with a grip on the four elements. On either side of rūpa 
are viññāna and nāmarūpa. The vortex or whirlpool that we have 
often referred to, is also found between these two. The drama of 
becoming is also manifested between them. 
 This can be well explained as aññamañña paccayatā – 
mutual interdependence. The bodily preparation (kāya saṁkhāra) 
the ver bal preparation ( vaci saṁkhāra) and the mental 
preparation (citta saṁkhāra) are shown as only the rehearsals for 
this interdependence. The final outcome of the interdependent 
drama between viññāna and  nāmarūpa is the preparation of the 
five aggregates of grasping (pañca upādānakkhanda ). We have 
drawn many a comparison such as the game of draughts, the 
game of cricket etc. to illustrate the dual nature of viññāna. 
Becoming ( bhava) is dependent on the performance between 
these two teams, and an apparent cont inuity is thereby prepared. 
The final outcome of this process is the accumulation of the five -
fold aggregates of grasping. 
 Following the identification of consciousness as two -fold, 
the six sense spheres begin to function as a duality. And within 
the six sense spheres are produced the preparations that weave the 
web of becoming. 
 It is very significant that cetanā, intention is included 
among the five -fold nāmadhamma – constituents of name. The 
meditative yogins prior to the Buddha had already realized tha t 
respiration was suffering, that reasoning and deliberation ( vitakka 
vicāra) were suffering, that perception and feeling were suffering. 
Although they had no clear idea of saṁkhāras or the background 
of ignorance, through the attainment of Jhānas they bec ame 
aware of the coarseness of preparations. As a result they were 
playing a game of see -saw, as I have already mentioned. 
According to the Buddha, there are six kinds of pacification s. 7 
You will understand them as I explain. What are the six?

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Speech is pacified in him who enters the first Jhāna. 
 Reasoning and deliberation is pacified in him who enters 
the second Jhāna. 
 Joy is pacified in him who enters the third Jhāna. 
 Respiration is pacified in him who enters the fourth 
Jhāna. 
 Perception and feeling are pacified in him who enters the 
attainment of cessation of perceptions and feelings. 
 Finally, it is said that lust, anger and delusion are pacified 
in the monk whose influxes are extinct. 
 These six steps of pacification – passaddhi – are 
mentioned in the Saṁyutta Nikāya. The contemporary meditators 
of the time had attained the pacification of speech, reasoning and 
deliberation as well as inhalation and exhalation through jhāna 
practice, but were unable to move beyond that. Freein g 
themselves from perception – saññā – was a problem, a 
challenge. We referred to it as a game of see-saw. 
 Their highest attainment nevasaññānāsaññāyatana  the 
realm of neither perception nor non-perception is explained in the 
Pañcattaya Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya as follows: 
 “saññā  rogo, saññā ga ṇḍo, saññā salla ṁ, asaññā 
sammoho eta ṁ santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ  
nevasaññānāsaññaṁ.”8 They realized that saññā  is a disease, a 
wound, a dart but the absence of saññā  is delusion. It was not 
possible to relinquish it. That’s why they were playing a game of 
see-saw. They held on to nevasaññā nāsaññā , an excellent 
peaceful position, santaṁ paṇītaṁ, which is neither perception 
nor non-perception. 
 What is found beyond nevasaññā nāsaññā  I have 
discussed it, if you remember, drawing facts from Poṭṭhapāda 
Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāy a 9 which holds an amazing store of 
facts. It records how some ascetics and Brahmins asked the

Sermon 13 

Buddha for an explanation of abhisaññā  nirodha . The B uddha 
said it is the stage where even cetanā is given up. 
 Why was there a confusion regarding abhisaññā  
nirodha? I wonder whether you remember I explained it earlier. 
Natthi kiñci  conveys the idea that ‘there is nothing’ (nothing 
exists). These ascetics with their yearning for becoming, saw 
natthi kiñci as referring to some ‘thing’. They made a samāpatti 
out of it, which took them to Brahma worlds with an unlimited 
life span. They could not attain anything beyond this due to 
ignorance of preparations - saṁkhāras. 
 Let us see what the Buddha has to say regarding this 
mental state. Poṭṭhapāda Sutta  has a valuable statement as 
follows;  A monk who attains ākiñcaññāyatana thinks “ cetayamānassa me pāpiyo, acetayamānassa me seyyo. Yannūnāha ṁ na 
ceva ceteyyaṁ na cābhisaṁkareyyaṁ ti.” 10  
 Using cetanā (intention) at this stage is not correct. I shall 
refrain from cetanā. Cetanā is a gross mental state. With the 
determination to avoid saṁkhāras finally he attains saññā  
vedayita nirodha. 
 Let me explain this with the simile of the five fingers, 
though it was not used by the Buddha. The last finger stands for 
feeling (vedanā). The fourth finger represents perception ( saññā). 
The stubborn middle finger is intention ( cetanā). With the 
pacifying of cetanā i.e. bringing the middle finger under control, 
one experiences nirodha (cessation) which is not a ‘thing’. 
Nibbāna is signless (‘ animitta’), undirected  (‘appaṇihita’) and 
void (‘ suññāta’). It is the furthest end of the three signata – 
impermanence, suffering and not-self. 
 When you arise from the attainment of cessation – 
nirodha sam āpatti – your attention is focused towards the 
signless state (animitta), the undirected state ( appaṇihita) and the 
void state with no soul, no continuity ( suññata). This is the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

special message from the Buddha to the world, the significance of 
which was unknown to the meditators of the time. You could 
remember this mental state as Vimokkha.  
 Since preparations – saṁkhāras – is our main topic, let us 
discuss it further depending o n the time available. Saṁkhāra 
which we compared to the hidden part of the iceberg, is used here 
in the singular. In this background called saṁkhāra there is a 
drama of becoming between consciousness viññāna and  name -
and-form nāmarūpa. We have used simile s such as the game of 
draughts, and the game Narcissus played with water. The ultimate 
outcome of this drama is the accumulation of the five aggregates 
of grasping.  
 Now we come to a significant aspect of the five 
aggregates of grasping. There is referenc e to saṁkhāra in the 
aggregates but used in the plural as saṁkhārā. This is the point 
that misleads us. It is also the most intricate point in our effort to 
understand Paṭicca Samuppāda. The end result of the activity of 
Paṭicca Samuppāda is the five aggregates of grasping. You know 
ignorance means the ignorance of the four Noble Truths. Due to 
that ignorance, preparations such as inhalation and exhalation are 
activated. It is followed by another step where, instigated by 
ignorance and the delusion of consc iousness, a duality arises – 
viññāna and nāmarūpa. This is followed by a drama. As the final 
outcome of the drama, a multitude of forms appear. A multitude 
of feelings appear. A multitude of perceptions appear. A 
multitude of preparations appear. A multitu de of consciousness 
appear. It is important to understand them as prepared 
preparations – saṁkhata saṁkhārā. It is in the plural. 
 The Buddha has offered a clarification to the preparations 
– saṁkhārā – found in the five aggregates of grasping. 11 
 “Katame ca bhikkhave sa ṁkhārā? Chayime bhikkhave 
cetanā kāyā. rūpa sa ṁcetanā, sadda sa ṁcetanā, gandha

Sermon 13 

saṁcetanā, rasa  sa ṁcetanā, pho ṭṭhabba sa ṁcetanā, dhamma 
saṁcetanā.” How does the Buddha explain saṁkhārā in the 
context of pañca upādānakkhandha? Not the same interpretation 
as in vacī saṁkhāra. ‘cetanā kāyā’ means a mass of intentions. 
 Intentions are of six kinds. Rūpa saṁcetanā is intention 
based on form. Sadda sa ṁcetanā is intention based on sound. 
You can understand the rest in relation to th e six sense bases. 
Preparations are generated through intention. They are called 
saṁkata saṁkhāra. They are intentionally prepared.  
 We know that inhalation and exhalation, reasoning and 
deliberation, perception and feeling can be compared to stage 
settings. The end result of the drama of becoming performed on 
the stage is the five aggregates of grasping. The Mahā 
Saḷāyatanika Sutta 12 sheds enough light to clarify this matter. To 
explain the coming together and the falling apart of the five 
aggregates of g rasping, it uses the terms upacaya and apacaya. 
The Buddha takes the six āyatanas – sense bases one by one. The 
eye, the form, the consciousness resulting from those two, the 
contact that arises and its resultant feeling. Unless this process is 
understood clearly as it is, it might lead to conflict, delusion and 
result in the arising of the five aggregates of grasping. One may 
fall into the deception of believing “this is my form, this is my 
feeling, this is my perception, these are my preparations and this  
is my consciousness.” The Khajjanīya Sutt a 13 in the Saṁyutta 
Nikāya deals with this subject at depth very clearly. The Buddha 
begins the Sutta as follows; “Monks, among ascetics and 
Brahmins, whoever recalled their past births, they did so basing 
their re collection on the five aggregates of grasping or at least 
one aggregate.”  What the Buddha means is that their insight into 
the past births is not clear enough. They see a mass of forms that 
belong to the past. They identify the forms as “I”. They conclude  
“In the past I was”. In recalling the past, in bringing the past 
births back to memory, certain forms come to one’s view and 
thinks “In the past I was”. The same process takes place

The Law of Dependent Arising 

regarding vedanā (feeling) and other aggregates. We can see here 
the saṁkata pattern. 
 The Buddha then proceeds to give an amazing analysis of 
each word. Rūpa, we said, is an aggregate of grasping 
(upādānakkhanda) upādāna means a mass or cluster in one’s 
grip. As we often remind you, the ordinary worldling has the 
notion of com pact. Within the view of self ( sakkāya di ṭṭhi) this 
notion of substance is apparent. Let us break up the term sakkāya 
diṭṭhi. ‘ Sat’ means ‘there is’. ‘ Kāya’ is a ‘bundle’ (collection). 
With this notion of ‘There is a bundle’ one attempts to establish 
one’s identity as “I am”. What is rūpa? It is only a collection. It is 
the same with the other aggregates. 
 Next, let us discuss the similes associated with the  
khandhas. Form ( rūpa) is like a cluster of foam . 14 Feelings 
(vedanā) are like bubbles. Perception saññā is similar to a 
mirage. Preparations are compared to the banana trunk. 
Consciousness is like an illusion. Why are these called saṁkata 
saṁkhāra? They a re deceptive. These similes bring out their 
deceptive nature. At a distance a cluster of white foam appears 
like a stone. It reveals itself only if you look at it scrutinizingly at 
very close quarters.  Rūpa is similar to foam but an ordinary man 
of the wo rld will not be able to see through rūpa (form). 
Similarly, feeling is comparable to a bubble of water floating in 
mid-air. When it bursts (breaks) one realizes it is nothing more 
than a bubble. Feeling is only a mirage. You realize a mirage is 
an illusion  only when you chase after it. You have to keep 
peeling to the centre of the banana trunk to realize it has no hard 
core. Such is the nature of saṁkhāras. Only with penetrative 
wisdom could one realize that viññāna  is a magical illusion. 
 These similes we re given by the Buddha to enable the 
meditators to realize the intricate nature of the subject at depth, 
but the ordinary people are not prepared to accept it.

Sermon 13 

 The Buddha offers a very interesting etymological 
interpretation of the words rūpa, vedanā etc. “ kiñca bhikkhave  
rūpaṁ vadetha?”  Monks, what is called rūpa? “ Ruppatīti kho 
bhikkhave tasmā rūpanti vuccati ”. Monks, it is rūpa because it 
hurts, is oppressed. Then comes a further analysis. “ kena ruppati, 
sītena pi ruppati, jighacchāya pi ruppati, pipāsāya pi ruppati, 
ḍaṁsamakasa vātā tapa siriṁsapa samphassena pi ruppati.” This 
rūpa or body, by what is it oppressed? By cold, heat, hunger, 
thirst, flies.  
 By ruppati, the Buddha meant that rūpa is a boil. One’s 
attention is drawn towards the body wh en one is oppressed by 
cold, heat, hunger etc. This interpretation of ‘ ruppati’ as 
‘oppressed by’ has a very deep meaning.  
 Next vedanā is explained as vediyati. It means one feels, 
one experiences. That’s not a complicating word. What does one 
feel? One feels happiness, unhappiness and neither happiness nor 
unhappiness. Saññā  means sañjānāti. Perceives, identifies. What 
is perceived (identified)? In terms of colours, blue, red, yellow, 
white. That is how saññā is explained. Now comes the 
introduction to saṁkhāra. It is extremely deep in meaning. The 
Buddha’s technique of explaining saṁkhāra is different. “Kiṁ ca 
bhikkhave sa ṁkhāre vadetha. Sa ṁkataṁ abhisaṁkarontī ti 
saṁkhārā.” “Monks, what is meant by saṁkhārā? A special 
preparation of the prepared.” Abhisaṁkaronti  here means, 
making a special preparation. Saṁkhāra also has the idea of 
preparing. Abhisaṁkāra means special preparing. Here we must 
remember that the Buddha explains saṁkhāra in his discussion of 
pañca upādānakkhandha  as “ saṁkhataṁ abhisaṁkharontī ti 
saṁkhārā”. That is ‘a special preparation of the prepared.’ The 
Buddha called the body an abscess. When afflicted by cold, heat 
hunger, discomfort, our attention is drawn towards it.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Then comes another intricate question about saṁkhāra. 
“Kiñca sa ṁkhataṁ abhisaṁkharontī?” “What preparation is 
specially prepared?” 
 Rūpaṁ rūpattāya  saṁkhataṁ abhisaṁkharontī ti. Form is 
prepared into form by a process of specially prepared preparation. 
In a similar manner, vedanā feeling is prepared into feeling by a  
process of specially prepared preparation. “ Vedanaṁ vedanattāya  
saṁkhataṁ abhisaṁkharontī.” The third one saññā has to be 
understood in a similar manner. The most wonderful 
interpretation is given to  saṁkhāra. Saṁkhāre  saṁkhārattāya 
saṁkhataṁ abhisaṁkharontīti sa ṁkhārā. Sa ṁkhārā or 
preparations are so called because preparations are prepared into 
prepared form by a process of special preparation.  
 Then comes consciousness, “ viññāṇaṁ viññāṇattāya 
saṁkhataṁ abhisaṁkharonti”. “Consciousness is formed into  
consciousness by a process of specially prepared preparation.” 
 This explanation of the Buddha is enough proof of the 
importance of saṁkhāra. 
 All the saṁkhāras that come under these four categories 
are transformed into prepared form – specially prepared form. In 
that case all the people live within the ‘prepared’ state. Saṁkhata  
means prepared but the ordinary people do not understand it due 
to the perception of the compact  or ghana saññā. The purpose of 
giving those similes such as ‘a mass of foam’, ‘a mirage’ etc., 
was to clarify the perception of the compact.  
 We came across some important words such as cetanā, 
saṁcetanā, saṁkhāra, abhisaṁkhāra, saṁkhata and its opposite 
asaṁkhata. Let’s study them. Cetanā. Going by its etymology, it 
means adding up. Adding together. Think of feeling – vedanā – 
arising in you when a sense organ meets the sense object. It is 
followed by perception. With perception there is a tendency to 
add up everything. That is cetanā, intention. We said that cetanā

Sermon 13 

is stubborn. Then comes saṁcetanā. Saṁcetanā arises as rūpa 
saṁcetanā, sadda saṁcetanā, gandha sa ṁcetanā and so on. In 
rūpa saṁcetanā, form is treated as a thing and a process of 
adding up takes place. In sadda saṁcetanā sound is treated as a 
thing and cetanā or adding up takes place accordingly. 
Understand the others in the same way. That’s why the Buddha 
explained the term saṁkhāra as saṁcetanā in relation to pañca 
upādānakkhandha. “ cha ime bhikkhave cetanā ”. There are six 
intentions, kāya cetanā  (bodily intentions) such as rūpa 
saṁcetanā, sadda sa ṁcetanā and so on. Now we have given a 
brief account of saṁcetanā. 
 We have already discussed saṁkhāra or preparation. 
Those who are interested in Indian literatur e and history know 
how stage make -up is done before a drama. To those who watch 
the modern tele -dramas, ‘make -up’ is nothing new. Such is the 
change brought about by make -up, that even the actor cannot be 
identified. That deception is indicated by the term  saṁkhāra. So 
we see that drama actors make full use of the saṁkhāra 
technique. The kitchen is another place where saṁkhāra or 
preparation is done before food is brought to the table. That 
preparation is called saṁkhatiyo. 15 The term ‘susaṁkhata’ is used 
for a well prepared meal. Once placed on the table, it is totally 
unidentifiable. There lies deception. The term saṁkhāra has this 
quality of deception within it. ‘ Saṁkhata’ is the word used to 
indicate things prepared for deception. They are tota lly 
misleading. 
 Then the term ‘ abhisaṁkhata’  means specially prepared. 
Beneath this superficial meaning abhisaṁkhata has a deeper 
meaning. Let us try to explore it. These different interpretations 
are all expressed in the suttas. Pabbajjābhisaṁkhāro 16 indicates 
the urgency one feels for ordination. One’s impatient urge for 
ordination. Gamikābhisaṁkhāro refers to one’s anxiety to 
undertake a journey. The keenness to start on it is so strong that, 
one’s wish is somehow fulfilled.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 In the Pacetana Rathakāra  Vagga of the Anguttara 
Nikāya, 17 the Buddha uses an ideal simile in a discourse. This 
etymological analysis is based on that simile. The carpenter of 
King Pacetana built two wheels. He let one roll forward. When a 
wheel is made to roll forward, it is give n some momentum. This 
is how it is described “ yāvatikā abhisaṁkhārassa gati tāvatika ṁ 
gantvā ciṁgagulāyitvā bhūmiyaṁ papati.” As long as the infused 
force lasted, the wheel rolled forward, twirled and collapsed on 
the ground. Here, we are interested in the  term abhisaṁkhāra. It 
conveys the idea of momentum, urgency, impatience. That is 
exactly why the term abhisaṁkhāra is used in discussing kamma. 
 Kāya sa ṁkhāraṁ abhisaṁkharoti, vacī sa ṁkhāraṁ 
abhisaṁkharoti, mano sa ṁkhāraṁ abhisaṁkharoti. 18 It’s here 
that the serious problem of the resultant aspect of actions come in 
– kamma vipāka. Cetanā or intention plays a major role here. We 
have mentioned that mere breathing does not pave the way to 
hell. With reference to wholesome and unwholesome actions, the 
three terms used are puññābhisaṁkhāra, apuññābhisaṁkhāra and 
āneñjābhisaṁkhāra. 
 Puññābhisaṁkhāra consists of the preparatory force to 
prepare another birth in the deva worlds and the human world. A 
pleasant birth. Apuññābhisaṁkhāra on the other hand prepares 
the environment for birth in hell. 
 The third one, āneñjābhisaṁkhāra is more complex in 
meaning. Āneñja means steadfast, unshakable. It is closely 
associated with the jhānas. It is interesting to note that 
unshakability is also a moving force. I shall explain it with a 
simile. You know how to spin a top. You wind the thread round 
it, jerk it and let go. The force enables it to spin round remaining 
in an erect position. The top stands erect but keeps spinning 
round. It is similar to being born in formless spheres – arūpa loka 
– and continuing to live for aeons and aeons. They experience the 
results of the jhānas they have attained, like the never ending

Sermon 13 

twirl of a top. You can now understand how terrifying the 
saṁkhāras are. Although one never committed unwholesome 
actions, one has to take birth in a Brahma sphere and keep 
spinning endlessly. That is āneñjābhisaṁkhāra. 
 Consider these important facts. They indicate the 
fearfulness of preparations. The Buddha has always emphasized 
the fearful nature and the sorrowful nature of these preparations. 
“Jigacchā paramā rogā, sa ṁkhāraparamā dukhā, eta ṁ ñatvā 
yathābhūtaṁ - Nibbānaṁ paramaṁ sukkhaṁ. 19 
 This too has come under discussion in an earlier 
discourse. Jigacchā paramā rogā . Hunger is the most severe of 
illnesses. Modern medical men will not agree with this statement. 
Today what are called ‘diseases’ are those severe deadly diseases 
now known. But even if all those diseases are cured, what will 
endure is hunger. It has been called the disease that makes you 
groan. Hunger makes you groan automatically although you are 
healthy. That’s why hunger is the most serious of diseases. 
Jigacchā paramā rogā. 
 Saṁkhāraparamā dukhā . That statement too has a deep 
meaning. We grieve over th e superficially manifested physical 
ailments. The story of the spinning top suggests how deep rooted 
the problem is. Saṁkhārā paramā dukkhā  means, suffering 
originated by preparations continue, even after all the other 
sufferings are allayed, that it is th e furthermost of sufferings. The 
top spins by the force of preparations. Saṁkhāras activate the 
continued becoming. Saṁkhāraparamā dukhā . Etaṁ ñatvā 
yathābhūtaṁ – If one realizes this as it is, Nibbānaṁ paramaṁ 
sukkhaṁ – Nibbāna is the highest bliss. At th e very outset we 
pointed out that the very first words expressing the peaceful 
excellent nature of Nibbāna were ‘stilling of all preparations’ –  
‘sabbasaṁkhāra samatho’. Can you imagine how deep it is?

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 In order to free oneself from continued existence, 
wholesome and unwholesome preparations and specific 
preparations have to be stilled. Inhalation and exhalation have to 
be stilled. Reasoning and deliberation have to be stilled. 
Perception and feeling have to be stilled. The ordinary people, 
infatuated by d esire for becoming, cannot comprehend this 
message. This subject is discussed in detail in the Saṁcetanā 
Sutta 20 of the Catukka Nipāta of the Anguttara Nikāya. It simply 
takes us by surprise “kāye vā bhikkhave sati, kāyasa ṁcetanāhetu, 
uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. Vācāya vā bhikkhave sati, 
vacīsaṁcetanāhetu uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ sukhadukkhaṁ, mane vā 
bhikkhave sati, manosa ṁcetanāhetu uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ 
sukhadukkhaṁ avijjāpaccayā va.” 
 Let us try to simplify this to our level. Kāye vā sati, means 
there being a body, due to specific preparations of the body, there 
arise happiness (pleasant feelings) and suffering within. There 
being speech, due to  intentions based on speech (words, 
language, vocal usage) there arise happiness and suffering within. 
If we c onsider mind to be something existing, there being mind, 
due to intentions based on mind, happiness and suffering arise 
within. One prepares these preparations for oneself, and others 
too prepare them and pass them to you. One experiences the 
happiness and suffering intentionally or unintentionally. Then the 
Buddha explains the more interesting and more important part of 
the story ‘ avijjā paccayā va ’. It is due to ignorance that we take 
the body to be real, speech to be real and mind to be real. Then 
the Buddha explains it in the reverse order. “ Avijjāyatveva asesa 
virāga nirodhā so kāyo na hoti ya ṁ paccayāssa ta ṁ uppajjati 
ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ, sā vācā na hoti ya ṁ paccayāssa ta ṁ 
uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ sukhadukkhaṁ  so mano na hoti ya ṁ 
paccayāssa taṁ uppajjati ajjhattaṁ sukha dukkhaṁ.”  
 This is a fantastic statement, a revelation. With the 
complete cessation of ignorance, the body ceases to be. Speech 
ceases to be and mind ceases to be. Whatever happiness and

Sermon 13 

suffering arose dependent on those three, they cea se. The Sutta 
ends this way “ khettaṁ taṁ na hoti, vatthu ṁ taṁ na hoti, 
āyatanaṁ taṁ na hoti, adhikaraṇaṁ taṁ na hoti, yampaccayāssa 
taṁ uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ dukhadukkhaṁ.” “Whatever field there 
was, whatever ground there was, whatever land there was, 
whatever reason there was, dependent on which suffering arose 
within, that is no more.” That is how suffering is brought to an 
end. This explanation enlightens us on the deeper implication of 
saṁkhāra . They play their part first as a rehearsal, and then assist 
in the drama of becoming, and finally act as the specific 
preparations for another birth. Such is saṁkhata. 
 There are certain verses that confuse most people. Here is 
one; 
 Sabbe saṁkhārā aniccāti 
 Yadā paññāya passati 
 Atha nibbindatī dukkhe 
 Esa maggo visuddhiyā 21 
 Considering all preparations as impermanent, if one 
realizes it with wisdom, one would be disillusioned about 
suffering. That is the path towards purity. 
 The second verse begins with “ sabbe saṁkhārā dukkhāti  
yadā paññāya passati ”. If one rea lizes through insight that all 
preparations are suffering, that is the path to purification. The 
third verse poses a problem to everybody with “ sabbe dhammā 
anattāti yadā paññāya passati. ”  The problem is the use of the 
term ‘ dhammā’ instead of ‘ saṁkhārā’. The first verse says “All 
preparations are impermanent”. The second verse says “All 
preparations bring suffering”. The third verse says “All dhammas 
are essenceless”. That is the problem. We have explained 
dhammā as mind objects or ‘things’. According to our ancient 
teachers, Nibbāna is not a ‘thing’ but it has been misinterpreted 
as a ‘thing’. The Mūla Pariyāya Sutta  which deals with this

The Law of Dependent Arising 

subject is beyond the understanding of many. Some tend to 
misinterpret  saṁkhata (prepared), asaṁkhata (non-prepared) and 
Nibbāna as asaṁkhata dhamma  or asaṁkhata dhātu  – a non -
prepared ‘thing’, which has resulted in a lot of confusion. But 
what really is asaṁkhata? It is the cessation of preparation.  
 This point is further explained in the verse “saṁkhārāṇaṁ 
khayaṁ ñatvā akataññūsi brāhmaṇa.” 22 If one can understand the 
elimination of preparations as described in the Dhammapada, 
then the state of asaṁkhata (non-prepared) referred to as akata 
becomes clear. To make it more lucid,  take the pattern woven on 
this mat. If the pattern is taken as a solid object the mind may get 
attached to it. If one takes a penetrative look at the straws 
illusively woven this way and that, the mind can detach itself 
from the pattern. Asaṁkhata – non-preparation is similar to that. 
The danger here lies in considering even  asaṁkhata as a ‘thing’. 
 In the statement ‘ sabbe dhammā anattā ti’ , Nibbāna is 
also included. When we think of Nibbāna as the goal we wish to 
reach, it takes the form of an object for the mind. I hope it is clear 
to everybody. It has to be taken as an object to the mind. But in 
the end, if Nibbāna is treated as a ‘thing’, we will be misled like 
the ancient yogis. 
 ‘Natthi kiñci ’ or ‘There is nothing’ is mistakenly 
understood as a reference to a thing. If Nibbāna is also treated as 
a thing, one can enter Saṁsāra again. This is a subtle point in the 
Buddha dhamma. Asaṁkhata must be correctly understood. The 
verse “ anekajātisaṁsāraṁ” ends with visaṁkhāragataṁ cittaṁ 
taṇhānaṁ khayamajjhagā. 23  Here the phrase visaṁkhāragataṁ 
cittaṁ is very significant. The mind once dominated by 
preparations is now free of them. The mind is liberated. That is 
why it is said that the moment intentions  (cetanā) and specific 
preparations are abandoned, one experiences nirodha – cessation. 
There is yet another important phrase that describes Nibbāna, 
from another perspective. “ Viññānaṁ ca anabhisa ṁkhacca

Sermon 13 

vimuttaṁ.” The consciousness (viññāna) of an ordina ry person is 
prepared, saṁkhata. But if the mind is liberated from the specific 
preparations of name -and-form, we have a special term to 
describe that mind, anidassana viññāna. It is the consciousness 
that does not display any name -and-form, and is totally  liberated. 
Anabhisaṁkhacca vimutta ṁ24 also refers to the same state of 
mind. Similarly, asaṁkhata simply means to emancipate oneself 
from the ghana saññā or the perception of the compact, and begin 
to see through the perception of a cluster. 
 I would like to draw your attention to another point, at this 
juncture. Earlier I pointed out to you that the word saṁkhāra is 
used in the singular as kāya saṁkhāro, vacī saṁkhāro and citta 
saṁkhāro, but with reference to kamma, it is used in the plural. 
For example kāya saṁkhārā, vacī saṁkhārā but mano saṁkhārā 
instead of citta sa ṁkhārā. This may be slightly confusing. We 
have told you that the three preparations – inhalation and 
exhalation, reasoning and deliberation, and perception and feeling 
– make up the underneath layers. But they encroach the top layer 
when mana gets recognition, that is when the mind receives 
objects ( dhamma) for thought. The moment these objects or 
dhammā are treated as ‘things’, cetanā or intention arises. It is the 
objects that f low into the mind that activate the stubborn middle 
finger. 
 Let us now arrange everything in its proper order. First we 
used the three words kāya sa ṁkhāro, vacī sa ṁkhāro and citta 
saṁkhāro with reference to the three types of preparation. If we 
move on to  the topic of kamma, kamma that prepares the ground 
for another birth, the terms used are kāya saṁkhārā (in the 
plural), vacī saṁkhārā and instead of citta saṁkhārā, the third is 
mano saṁkhārā. Why? When the sense objects grasped by the 
sense faculties reach the mind, they are transformed into ‘things’. 
Chandamūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā. 25 All dhammas have desire 
(chanda) as their root. These are complicated points, although we

The Law of Dependent Arising 

try to summarize them. You know saṁkhāra is a term with deep 
implications. 
 Beneath saṁkhata or ‘the prepared’ runs an undercurrent 
of taṇhā, craving. These are the words of the Buddha. “ Avijjā 
samphassajena bhikkhave, vedayitena phu ṭṭhassa assutavato 
puthujjanassa ta ṇhā uppa ṇṇā tatojo so sa ṁkhāro.” 26 Craving 
(taṇhā) arises in ord inary worldly people, who are afflicted by 
ignorance. Preparation or saṁkhāra is born out of this craving. 
Think of respiration for example. You may give up everything 
but you cannot give up breathing. It’s called the most elementary 
level of grasping. You  know how hard a person gasps for breath 
at death. That shows that becoming is dependent on the three 
subtle preparations. The external factors come in later, and 
continue to follow from birth to birth.  The fundamental force that 
helps in preparation is taṇhā, craving. The preparation done in the 
darkness of ignorance is three -fold, kāya sa ṁkhāro, vaci 
saṁkhāro, citta sa ṁkhāro. The third preparation citta saṁkhāro 
becomes a mano saṁkhāra, a preparation of the mind, when it 
assumes a gross state, when it becomes a prepared. With the mere 
arising of feeling and perception, there is no accumulation of 
kamma. That is called mano saṁcetanā. You know the first two 
verses in the Dhammapada.  
 As the last point in the talk, we have come to the first two 
verses of the Dhammapada. 
 Mano pubbaṁgamā dhammā 
 Mano seṭṭhā manomayā 
 Manasā ce paduṭṭhena 
 The subject discussed here is the mind – mana. The mind 
takes the responsibility, being in the forefront of mental objects – 
dhammā. Wholesome or unwholesome intentions cetanā are 
activated at this point. Kamma is thus accumulated.

Sermon 13 

 Try to understand all the points we discussed today. We 
talked about saṁkhāra, abhisaṁkhāra, cetanā, saṁcetanā, 
saṁkhata and asa ṁkhata. The summary of the talk is contained 
in these words. You  can now understand the significance of the 
Buddha’s words “ Yaṁ kiñci dukkha ṁ sambhoti - sabbaṁ 
saṁkhāra paccayā.” But it is not a very popular statement.  
It is very amusing to see that the most fascinating (interesting) 
‘song’ in the Buddha’s teaching is  the last thing we hear on 
earth. 27 
 Aniccā vata saṁkhārā 
 Uppāda vaya dhammino 
 Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti 
 Tesaṁ vūpasamo sukho. 
 To tell you the truth, my first impulse was to begin this 
discourse with this verse. But I knew you would walk out on 
hearing it. That’s why I brought it out last. “ Aniccā vata 
saṅkhārā” is one of the most profound verses. But it has faced the 
same fate as the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta . Both have been reduced to 
the level of a pumpkin among the funeral rites. But you can see 
that this v erse carries a message at its very depth. Aniccā vata  
saṁkhārā – uppāda vaya dhammino  – Impermanent are all 
preparations. They are of the nature of arising and passing away. 
Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti – They arise and cease. Tesaṁ vūpasamo 
sukho – Their pacification is bliss.  
 Now let’s enrich this treasure of a verse with another 
Buddha word. 
Aniccā vata saṁkhārā 
 Uppāda vaya dhammino 
 Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti 
 Tesaṁ vūpasamo sukho.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 That is all the verse says, but let us expand on it. In the 
saṁkhāras referred to in the above verse, from inhalation and 
exhalation to the more gross preparations called abhisaṁkhāra, 
the nature of arising and ceasing is evident. “ Uppāda vaya 
dhammino”. But there occurs a more revealing exposition of 
saṁkhata. 28 “Tīṇimāni bhikkhave sa ṁkhatassa sa ṁkhata 
lakkhaṇāni” Monks, three main characteristics are seen in 
preparations that have been prepared. What are they? “ Uppādo 
paññāyati, vayo paññāyati, ṭhitassa aññathattaṁ  paññāyati.” An 
arising is visible, a cessation is v isible. Furthermore, “ ṭhitassa 
aññathattaṁ”  ‘ ṭhiti’ means ‘being’ “continuing”. While being, 
(while continuing) a change is visible. We saw that saṁkhāra has 
only an arising and ceasing. But regarding saṁkhata there is an 
arising, a passing away and an ot herwiseness of the (apparently) 
static. The Buddha explains ‘ ṭhitassa aññathatta ṁ’ – ‘a turning 
otherwise of the apparently static state’ –  what is mistakenly 
seen as ‘being, continuing, enduring’ undergoes change. The 
essence of the problem lies hidden there.  
 Now let us understand what is called asaṁkhata dhātu . 
You have heard that asaṁkhata refers to Nibbāna. This is how it 
is described. “ Tīṇimāni bhikkhave asa ṁkhatassa asa ṁkhata 
lakkhaṇāni”. In the non -prepared state three non -prepared 
characteristics are to be found. What are the three? Arising is not 
found, cessation is not found, a change of an apparent static state 
is not found. With the cessation of consciousness, with the 
cessation of name -and-form, with the cessation of six sense 
spheres, everything ceases. There is no possibility of arising and 
ceasing again. That is the point we tried to drive in, through our 
sermons on Nibbāna. A sphere or āyatana 29 is mentioned. Many 
did not understand the use of the term āyatana here. In this 
sphere, there is no going. There is no coming. There is no being. 
There is no continuing. There is no anything. 
 That is the explanation to asaṁkhata. We have tried our 
best to put across as much as we could within one hour. Try to

Sermon 13 

digest them well. Try to unders tand them from diverse 
perspectives. What do I mean? All these years you have been 
listening to the conventional interpretation of Paṭicca Samuppāda 
where saṁkhāra (preparations) are supposed to prepare a 
paṭisandhi viññāna (a consciousness leading to anot her birth). 
Now you know it is not correct. It has two meanings, within the 
terms saṁkhāra, abhisaṁkhāra saṁkhata.  
 The purpose behind our explanation is not to argue or 
challenge, but merely to put the listeners into correct view. 
Meditation cannot proce ed on misconceived views. Try and 
maintain the perfectly correct understanding in order to continue 
on this journey. 
 You have observed the valuable precepts and spent the 
day in meditation, as usual. You have developed awareness and 
mindfulness. You must also apply to your meditational practices, 
the contents of this discourse which will lead you to insight. 
Make the determination to attain the four stages on the path to 
emancipation, before the light of the Dhamma goes out.  
 Whatever beings there are, fr om the lowest to the highest 
state of existence, who wish to share in the merits of listening to 
this discourse, may they accomplish their aspirations and attain 
the peace of Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 142  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. A. V 110 Girimānanda Sutta  
3. S. II 4 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
4. M. I 301 Cūla Vedalla Sutta 
5. S. III 151 Dutiya Gaddulabaddha Sutta 
6. S. II 3f. Vibhaṅga Sutta 
7. S. IV 217f. Rahogata Sutta 
8. M. II 231 Pañcattaya Sutta 
9. D. I 180 Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 
10. D. I 184f. Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 
11. S. III 60 Upādāna Privattha Sutta 
12. M.III 287-290 Mahā Saḷāyatanika Sutta 
13. S. III 86-91 Khajjanīya Sutta 
14. S. III140-143 Pheṇapinḍūpama Sutta 
15. M. I 448 Laṭukikopama Sutta 
16. Ud. 57 Soṇa Sutta 
17. A. I 111f. 
18. M. I 389f. Kukkuravatiya Sutta 
19. Dhp. v 277 Sukha Vagga 
20. A. II 157-159 Saṁcetanā Sutta 
21. Dhp. v 277 Magga Vagga 
22. Dhp. v 383 Brāhmana Vagga 
23. Dhp. v 154 Jarā Vagga 
24. S. III 53f. Udāna Sutta 
25. A. IV 339 Kiṁ Mūlaka Sutta 
26. S. III 96 Pārileyyaka Sutta 
27. D. II 157 Mahā Parinibbāna Sutta 
28. A. I 152 
29. Ud. 80 Paṭhama Nibbāna Sutta

Sermon 14 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 196)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Idaṁ jātu vedagu – idaṁ jātu sabbaji 
idaṁ jātu apalikhataṁ – gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhaṇinti 1 
This is the perfect mastery of the Veda 
This is called victory over all 
This is the extraction of the root of the abscess hitherto 
unextracted 
    – Uddaka Sutta, Saṁyutta Nikāya 
Dear Listeners, 
Any person with an inquiring eye could see that all 
activities pertaining to the continuum of life of beings in Saṁsāra 
take place within the six sense spheres. The internal sense 
spheres, namely the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind are 
referred to as  saḷāyatana in the teaching of the Law of 
Dependependant Arising . These six internal sense spheres 
coordinate with the six external sense bases i.e. external objects, 
sound, smell, taste, body contact and mental objects ( dhamma). 
They attract the worldling s towards the vortex between 
consciousness and name-and-form. 
We have chosen as the topic for this fourteenth discourse 
on Paṭicca Samuppāda  a verse from the Uddaka Sutta  of the 
Saḷāyatana Sa ṁyutta in the Saṁyutta Nikāya . On a certain 
occasion the Buddha addressing the monks recalled a certain past 
incident. “Monks, Uddaka Rāmaputta used to declare thus:”  
“Idaṁ jātu vedagu  – idaṁ jātu sabbaji 
 idaṁ jātu apalikhatam – gaṇḍamūlam palikhaṇinti”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Let’s go through the meaning first. ‘ Idaṁ jātu vedagu ’ 
means “Th is is the perfect mastery of the Veda.” “ idaṁ jātu 
sabbaji” means “This is called victory over all.” “ Idaṁ jātu 
apalikhataṁ - gaṇḍamūlaṁ palikhaṇinti” “This is the extraction 
of the root of the abscess hitherto unextracted.” After uttering this 
verse the B uddha makes an unusual remark. “Monks, although 
Uddaka made this joyous utterance, it is only a monk in this 
dispensation who is qualified to do so.” Then he proceeds to 
reinterpret this puzzle -like verse. “Monks, how does one gain 
mastery over the Vedas? “Yato kho bhikkhave bhikkhu channa ṁ 
phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca atthagamañca assādañca 
ādīnavañca nissaranañca yathābhūta ṁ pajānāti, eva ṁ kho 
bhikkhave bhikkhu vedagu hoti .” “To the extent a monk realizes 
with wisdom, the six spheres of contact as they really are, with 
regard to their arising, ceasing, satisfaction, perils and stepping 
out, to that extent, he will have mastery of the Vedas.” 
The second question is then taken up. “Monks, how can 
one become a sabbaji, one who is victorious over all”? Then 
comes the explanation, similar to the first one. “ Yato kho 
bhikkhave bhikkhu channa ṁ  phassāyatanānaṁ samudayañca 
atthagamañca assādañca ādīna vañca nissaranañca, yathā -
bhūtaṁ viditvā  anupādāya vimutto hoti. ” He who realizes with 
wisdom the six spheres of contact earlier mentioned, with regard 
to their arising, ceasing, satisfaction, perils and stepping out, and 
will attain release with total detachment, such a person is sabbaji, 
a man who is victorious overall. 
“Monks, how can one say that the root of the abscess so 
far unextracted, has now been extracted?” This is a more puzzling 
statement than the earlier two. “Monks gaṇḍa or abscess is a 
synonym for the body composed of the four primaries earth, 
water, heat and wind, born of mother and father, composed of 
gross food, inheriting the quality of impermanence, having the 
nature of rubbing, massaging, breaking up and scattering”

Sermon 14 

“What, monks, is th e root of the abscess ( gaṇḍamūla)?” 
The root of the abscess is a synonym for craving. “Monks to what 
extent can you say that the root of the abscess has been extracted? 
If a monk has eliminated craving, uprooted it, destroyed it like an 
uprooted palm, reduced to a state of non-arising, such a monk can 
be called one who has extracted the root of the abscess hitherto 
unextracted.” 
According to this explanation offered by the Buddha, we 
see that vedagu is a term borrowed from the Brahmins. From a 
religious poi nt of view it means a person who has reached 
mastery over all knowledge. According to the specific 
interpretation of the Buddha, surpassing all knowledge means the 
perfect realization of the fivefold activity of the six sense spheres. 
Similarly victory ove r all refers to the above mentioned perfect 
realization of the sense spheres accompanied by the perfect 
release from all clinging towards them. It is by now clear that 
both “Mastery over all” and “Victory over all” must be 
understood in relation to the six sense spheres. 
Since we have been referring to ‘ sabba’ – ‘all’, I would 
like to introduce to you the Sabba Sutta of the Saḷāyatana 
Saṁyutta 2 for the purpose of supportive proof. Sabba means all. 
Once the Buddha addressed the monks and said “Monks, I shall  
explain to you ‘all’. Listen to me carefully.” “ Kiñca bhikkhave 
sabbaṁ? Cakkhuñca rūpāca, sotañca saddā ca, ghānañca 
gandhā ca, jivhā ca rasā ca, kayo ca pho ṭṭhabbā ca, mano ca 
dhammā ca.” “The eye and external objects, the ear and sounds, 
the nose and sm ells, the tongue and tastes, the body and body 
contacts, the mind and mental objects. This is called ‘all’ – 
‘sabba’. Following this explanation the Buddha offers an 
amazing challenge as follows; “ Yo bhikkhave eva ṁ vadeyya.” 
Monks if anyone were to say thus, “ Ahametaṁ sabbaṁ 
paccakkhāya añña ṁ sabbaṁ paññāpessāmi”  I disprove of that 
sabba, and declare another sabba in its place.” “Monks, that 
would amount to nothing more than foolish prattling. If

The Law of Dependent Arising 

questioned he would be dumbfounded. Why? Because he has n o 
understanding of the subject.” The Buddha thus confirms the 
meaning of sabba. 
We come across another similar explanation in the 
Saḷāyatana Saṁyutta itself. Venerable Samiddhi approaches the 
Buddha with a question. “ Loko loko ti Bhante vuccati, kittāvatā 
nu kho bhante loko vā assa lokapaññatti vā ti.” 3  “Lord, reference 
is made to a world, a world. To what extent is there a world or the 
manifestation of a world?”  The Buddha replies as follows; 
“Yattha kho Samiddhi atthi cakkhu, atthi rūpā, atthi 
cakkhuviññāṇaṁ, atthi cakkhuviññāṇā viññātabbā dhammā, atthi 
tattha loko vā lokapaññatti vā. ” Since the detailed explanation of 
the other senses is similar to that of cakkhu, let us confine our 
explanation to cakkhu. You will understand the rest. “Samiddhi, 
wherever an eye is present, and external objects are present, 
visual consciousness is present, phenomena that should be known 
through eye consciousness are present, there exists a world or the 
manifestation of a world.” This is followed by the description of 
other sense organs and lastly the mind. “Samiddhi wherever a 
mind is present, mental objects are present, mind consciousness is 
present, phenomena that should be known through mind 
consciousness are present, there exists a world or the 
manifestation of a world .” Now, he explains the reverse of it. 
“Samiddhi, wherever  the eye does not exist, external forms do 
not exist, eye consciousness does not exist, phenomena that 
should be known through eye consciousness do not exist, there 
exists neither a world nor the m anifestation of a world.” This 
explanation indicates that there is a state where the six sense 
spheres become non-existent.  
Let us now change over to a Sutta we have often referred 
to earlier, the first Sutta of the Dīgha Nikāya. It’s the Brahmajāla 
Sutta that casts a net over sixty two views by way of rejecting 
them. After a critical review of these views the Buddha says that 
whatever views exist then, whatever views existed in the past,

Sermon 14 

and whatever views may arise in the future, can be categorized 
under these sixty two views. Then the Buddha has some 
interesting comment to make about the formulators of these 
views. “Monks, all those ascetics and Brahmins who hold views 
under these sixty two categories, .... to quote the Pāli words 
“sabbe te chahi phassāyatanehi phussa phussa paṭisaṁvedenti.” 4 
The different views they declare are based on various sense 
contacts they experience through the sense spheres. 
What is the outcome of formulating views based on 
feelings gained through sense spheres? Vedanā paccayā taṇhā, 
taṇhā paccayā upādāna ṁ, upādāna paccayā bhavo, bhava 
paccayā jāti, jāti paccayā jarā mara ṇa soka parideva.” To them, 
from feeling as condition there arises craving, from craving as 
condition there arises grasping, from grasping as condition there 
arises becoming, from becoming as condition there arises birth, 
from birth as condition there arises decay, death, grief, 
lamentation. Since all these views have sprung up from feelings 
generated through contact with sense spheres, the ascetics and 
Brahmins who profess them are led from feeling to craving, from 
craving to grasping, from grasping to becoming. You see, they 
have no escape from Saṁsāra. 
Next the discussion turns towards the identification of the 
real monk. In defining the term vedagu as ‘one who has mastery 
over all’ ascetics and Brahmins have based their interpretation on 
views. But the Buddha’s declaration is founded on a different 
footing. “channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ samudayaṁ ca atthagamaṁ 
ca assāda ṁ ca ādīnava ṁ ca nissara ṇaṁ ca yath ābhūtaṁ 
pajānāti. Aya ṁ imehi sabbeheva uttarītara ṁ pajānāti.” At any 
time in my dispensation a monk who understands with wisdom, 
the six bases of contact as they really are, with regard to their 
arising, ceasing, satisfaction, perils and stepping out, he far excels 
those others in his wisdom.” That is how the Buddha explains the 
word vedagu.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

The discussion about Saḷāyatana continues further. There 
is another Sutta similar to the Sabba Sutta mentioned earlier. On 
this occasion the Buddha takes the monks by s urprise by 
addressing them thu s: 5 “Dvayaṁ vo bhikkhave desessāmī ”  
Monks I will teach you ‘two’. What are the two? “ Cakkhuñceva 
rūpā ca, sotañceva saddā ca, ghānañceva gandhā ca, jivhāceva 
rasā ca, kāyoceva po ṭṭhabbā ca, manoceva dhammā ca. ” Each 
internal sense organ is stated together with its external sense 
object, the eye with forms, the ear with sounds, the nose with 
smells, the tongue with tastes, the body with body contacts and 
the mind with mental objects. 
Here too the Buddha’s challenge vibrates: “T his is the 
‘two’. Anyone who says there is another ‘two’ apart from this, is 
only jabbering away like a fool. He cannot prove it.” It is further 
confirmed by the Dvayaṁ Sutta as well. 
In this discussion about saḷāyatana, we made reference to 
saḷāyatana nirodha.” We have time and again explained in our 
discourses, that Nibbāna means the release from the six sense 
spheres in this world itself. It is the same as nissaraṇa. Now you 
see that cessation of the six sense spheres – saḷāyatana nirodha –  
is attainabl e within this life. That realization dawns within the 
Arahatphala samāpatti . Nibbāna is really the attainment of that 
samāpatti. 
Now I wish to switch over to another sutta to continue my 
explanation . After the evening retreat Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita 
came to meet Ven Sāriputta one day. He asked him a very 
complicating question indeed . 6  “Friend Sāriputta, channaṁ 
phassāyatanānaṁ asesa virāga nirodhā atthañña ṁ kiñci?” “At 
the total cessation of the six spheres of contact, is there anything 
else left?”  Vener able Sāriputta rejects the question altogether by 
saying “māhevaṁ āvuso” “Do not ask thus.” But Venerable Mahā 
Koṭṭhita  pursued his questioning. “At the total cessation of the

Sermon 14 

six spheres of contact, isn’t there anything else left?”  Venerable 
Sāriputta’s response was the same as earlier. 
The third question was a combination of the first two 
questions. Is there and isn’t there anything else left? That 
alternative was also rejected by Venerable Sāriputta. The final 
question was “At the total cessation of th e six spheres is there 
anything that neither exists nor non -exists.” Venerable Sāriputta 
again said “ māhevaṁ āvuso.” Then Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita 
plainly asked him “Friend, how can I understand what you say?” 
Now comes Venerable Sāriputta’s explanation. If one says 
that at the total cessation of the six sense spheres of contact there 
is something left, it would amount to – here he uses an unusual 
word – appapañcaṁ papañceti. I have explained this word 
papañca on earlier occasions to you. ‘ Appapañcaṁ papañceti’ 
means using linguistic jargon in an inappropriate place. Seeing it 
at depth, it is proliferating or arguing where argument must not 
take place. 
The question whether there remains anything at the total 
cessation of the six sense spheres is in itself fla wed. So are all the 
dilemmas and the quadrilemmas. They are all proliferations of 
theorists, as we have often reminded you. 
That is why Venerable Sāriputta rejected them all as 
irrelevant. All four aspects of the argument are labeled as 
‘appapañcaṁ papañceti’, ‘proliferating where proliferation must 
not take place’. 
And finally he concludes by saying “ Yāvatā āvuso 
channaṁ phassāyatanānaṁ gati, tāvatā papañcassa gati. Yāvatā 
papañcassa gati, tāvatā channa ṁ phassāyatanānaṁ gati.” 
“Friend, as far as the six sense spheres reach, that far the 
proliferation reaches. As far as the proliferation reaches, that far 
the six sense spheres reach.” “ Channaṁ āvuso phassāyatanānaṁ 
asesa virāga nirodhā papañcanirodho papañcavūpasamo .”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

“Friend, with the total cessation of t he six sense spheres, 
proliferation ceases, proliferation pacifies.” Papañcanirodha is a 
synonym for Nibbāna. Proliferation is impossible where the six 
sense spheres have ceased. We can see this sutta is extremely 
enlightening although it is deep. 
In order to delve a little deeper into the subject, I wish to 
recall another sutta very briefly for our purpose. At the end of a 
discourse the Buddha once spoke thus to the Monks. “ Tasmātiha 
Bhikkhave, se āyatane veditabbe yattha cakkhuñca nirujjhati, 
rūpasaññā ca  virajjati. se āyatane veditabbe, yattha sotañca 
nirujjhati saddasaññā ca virajjati .” 7  It goes on in a similar 
strain. I shall explain the first. You must try to understand the 
rest. 
“Monks, therefore this sphere should be understood, this 
sphere which is very unusual. The eye is extinct there. Perception 
of external forms fade away. The ear is extinct. Sounds fade 
away. The nose is extinct. Smells fade away.” He continues until 
he winds up with “ mano ca nirujjhati, dhammasaññā ca 
virajjati.” The mind is e xtinct. Perception of cognizable objects 
fade away. Thereby the Buddha finally firmly establishes the fact 
that “this sphere must be understood, this sphere must be 
understood.” 
After this brief admonition, the Buddha leaves the 
assembly and withdraws to t he monastery. He left his statements 
unexplained. The monks thought “The Buddha left us steeped in 
an unexplained puzzle. Perhaps we could seek a clarification 
from Venerable Ānanda who has been often complimented by the 
Buddha for his lucid explanations.”  When the puzzle was 
presented to Venerable Ānanda, he though reluctantly, responded 
thus. “Well, let me give my brief comments to the problem, the 
way I understand it: Saḷāyatana nirodhaṁ kho āvuso bhagavatā  
sandhāya bhāsitam .” “Friends, the Buddha has s poken with 
reference to the cessation of the six sense spheres.” Earlier we

Sermon 14 

have explained that saḷāyatana nirodha is a synonym for 
Nibbāna. Here the Buddha refers to the cessation of the six 
spheres as a special āyatana. This has often posed a problem to 
the scholars. 
It is now clear that crossing over this world is the 
extinction of the saḷāyatana, the six sense spheres. It is a state 
where one acquires mastery over all. There are many more 
references to this attainment in the texts. On one occasion, two 
giant tuskers in wisdom, Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita and Venerable 
Sāriputta, accost each other over a very subtle doctrinal issue. 
You must understand that their discussions are done solely for 
our benefit. Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita questions. 8 “The 
saṁyojanas or fetters are bonds. Is the eye bonded by external 
forms, or are external forms bonded by the eye? Is the ear bonded 
by sounds, or are sounds bonded by the ear? Is the nose bonded 
by the smells or are the smells bonded by the nose?”  He goes on 
and lastly asks “Is the mind bonded by cognizable objects or are 
cognizable objects bonded by the mind?”  Venerable Sāriputta’s 
response was as follows; “No friend, the eye is not bonded by 
external forms, neither are forms bonded by the eye. The ear is 
not bonded b y sounds, neither are sounds bonded by the ear. But 
if lustful sensuality arises dependent on those two, that is the 
bond.” Next in order to illustrate this point, he cites an example. 
“In case, friend, a black ox and a white ox are tethered by the 
same ch ain, one cannot say that the black ox is bonded by the 
white ox or the white one is bonded by the black one, which 
statements are both inapplicable. The bond is the chain between 
them. Similarly friend, the eye is not bonded by forms, neither are 
external forms bonded by the eye. The bond is the lustful 
sensuality that is generated between the two. The bond is 
attachment.” 
Let me bring in another episode by way of a simile. I 
know you like stories. This was related to a group of monks on a 
certain occasion. 9 “Monks, one evening, a certain tortoise crossed

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the river, and was going in search of food. At the same time a fox 
was also walking about in search of food. The tortoise saw the 
fox at a distance and withdrew his limbs and head into the shell. 
He lay the re as good as dead. The fox too saw the tortoise and 
kept guard by him hoping to snatch off a limb the moment one 
comes out. But the tortoise continued his vigil, remaining 
perfectly still. The fox was compelled to give up hopes and 
depart. 
Next comes the comparison. “Monks, remember that 
Māra is keeping constant vigil over you just like that fox, hoping 
to break in through your eye, or to break in through your ear.” 
The Buddha teaches the technique of guarding oneself from the 
Māra. He brings in the secret  of restraining one’s senses, as he 
often does. “ Cakkhunā rūpam disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti, 
nānubyañjanaggāhī hoti .” “Monks, on seeing an external object 
do not take in its characteristics or occupy yourself with its 
attributes.” The two terms nimitta and anubyañjana have to be 
differentiated. To cite an example, seeing an attractive form is 
nimittaggāhī, being drawn towards it, observing more attributes 
that make the form attractive is anubyañjana. That is 
nimittaggāhī and anubyañjanaggāhī. Here the Buddha  tries to 
explain the results of getting attracted to form and searching for 
more of its attractive attributes. It generates influxes and leads 
one to deterioration. “If monks, you keep the six doors closed, 
Māra will withdraw defeated.” Due to that restra int of the senses, 
one could avoid committing evil actions through the six sense 
doors, like the tortoise who keeps his limbs withdrawn. 
Next see the beauty of that simile converted into verse by 
the Buddha. 
Kummova aṇgāni sake kapāle 
samodahaṁ bhikkhu manovitakke 
anissito aññamaheṭhayāno 
parinibbuto na upavadeyya kañci

Sermon 14 

Just as a tortoise withdraws his head and limbs into its 
shell, a monk withdraws into himself against the mental 
reflections that are generated by the five sense bases – with the 
eye chas ing behind visual objects and the ear chasing behind 
auditory objects etc. He keeps guard over the sense bases. Then 
‘anissito aññamahe ṭhayāno’ he does not lean against anything 
and ‘ na upavadeyya ’ does not blame anybody, does not harass 
anybody. ‘Parinibbuto’ He attains extinction. 
Here we see that with reference to sense restraint the 
Buddha has taught the path leading to cessation or the total 
departure from the six sense spheres. When we touch on 
saḷāyatana, the topic of contact crops up. Since we have referred 
to the spheres of contact when discussing the Paṭicca 
Samuppāda, I think the following sutta will be of interest to you, 
though deep in meaning. 10 The monk Moḷiya Phagguṇa asked the 
Buddha “ ko nu kho bhante phusati ?”  “Lord, who is it that 
touches?”  This monk, due to his notion of self, seems to imagine 
there is a person who touches. The Buddha replies, “I do not say 
there is anyone who touches. Had I said so, your question would 
have been relevant. But since I do not say so, your question 
should be “ kimpaccayā nu kho bhante phasso ?” The Buddha 
corrects the question Moḷiya Phagguṇa had asked. “Dependent on 
what is contact Sir?” It is not appropriate to refer to ‘anybody’ 
touching. “And my answer would be Saḷāyatana paccayā phasso, 
phassa paccayā vedanā.” “Dependent on the six sense spheres is 
contact. Dependent on contact is feeling.” Feeling being a new 
topic for Mo ḷiya Phagguṇa, he got hold of it for further probing. 
He questioned “ ko nu kho bhante vedeti ?”  Who is it Lord, who 
feels?” 
Again the B uddha replied, “I do not say a person feels. 
Had I said so, your question would have been relevant. Since my 
statement is different, your question is inapropriate. This is how 
you should have questioned me. “ Kiṁpaccayā nu kho bhante 
vedanā?”  Conditioned b y what, Lord, is feeling? If you put the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

question in that form, I would answer thus: Phassa paccayā  
vedanā, vedanā paccayā ta ṇhā.” The Buddha introduced a term 
hitherto unspoken of i.e. taṇhā. Being in a questioning mood, 
Moḷiya Phagguṇa’s immediate response was “Lord, who is it that 
craves?”. This is the Buddha’s reply: “I do not say that anyone 
does the craving. The appropriate question would be “ Kiṁ 
paccayā nu kho bhante ta ṇhā?” and the Buddha continues in his 
own style “ vedanā paccayā ta ṇhā, ta ṇhā pacca yā upādāna ṁ.” 
Concealed within this style of replying is something amazing. 
Please try to understand its significance. I shall explain it with a 
simile. Imagine an artist who wishes to draw a link in a chain. If 
he draws only one solitary link, identifying  it would be difficult, 
don’t you think? He has to at least draw half of a link on either 
side, for the chain to take shape. Now I hope you understand why 
the Buddha added an extra link which Mo ḷiya Phagguṇa did not 
inquire about. It is to make him realize that this is a chain. 
Saḷāyatana paccayā phasso” ‘Dependent on the six sense 
spheres contact comes to be’. The Buddha did not stop at that. He 
introduced phassa paccayā vedanā. I am sure you understand that 
the Buddha very effectively introduces the Law of Dependent 
Arising at each link. He overstepped the valid answer by 
annexing vedanā to his explanation. Venerable Mo ḷiya Phagguṇa 
got caught up in it. The Buddha led him on to tanhā and finally to 
upādana. Ultimately it shows that, whatever we speak in day to 
day usage, the Buddha firmly makes explicit the depth of the 
reality of Paṭicca Samuppāda. No one does the contacting. From 
saḷāyatana arises contact, phassa. From phassa arises feeling –
vedanā. So it continues. You see what an important sutta this is. 
If we were to go deeper into the subject, I am reminded of 
an occasion where a group of monks relate an experience of 
theirs to the Buddha . 11  “Lord, certain ascetics and Bra hmins in 
other sects ask us “For what purpose do you lead the higher life 
under the Buddha? What is the aim of your renunciation? Then 
Lord we reply like this ‘We have renounced for the realization of

Sermon 14 

dukkha, suffering. Our aim is to understand dukkha.’ Lo rd, in 
replying so, are we speaking in accordance with your teaching, or 
are we contradicting you? We have come to you for 
clarification.” 
The Buddha replies, “Well done monks. Your replies are 
perfectly correct. Suppose they ask you what this dukkha is that 
you wish to realize, then you must reply as follows.” To put it in 
English “The eye is suffering, material forms are suffering. Eye 
consciousness is suffering. Eye contact is suffering, all the 
feelings both pleasant and unpleasant that arise through ey e 
contact are suffering.” You have to understand the other sense 
spheres similarly. You know quite well that under the four Noble 
Truths, the five aggregates of grasping are referred to as dukkha. 
Here the Buddha explains dukkha in terms of saḷāyatana, instead 
of the pañca upādānakkhandha. It exposes the nature of suffering 
with the six sense spheres.  
There are several suttas of this nature that try to reveal the 
impermanent nature of the saḷāyatanas. One is the Dutiya 
Dvayaṁ Sutta12 which closely follows the Dvayaṁ Sutta we 
discussed earlier. There the Buddha declares “ Dvayaṁ bhikkhave 
paṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti.” Monks the consciousness arises 
dependent on two. It does not arise without a cause. Two come 
together to give rise to consciousness. “ Cakkhuṁ ca paṭicca rūpe 
ca uppajjati cakkhu viññā ṇaṁ.”  Dependent on the eye and the 
visual object, there arises visual consciousness. In a similar 
manner, the ear and sound give rise to auditory  consciousness. 
Each consciousness is dependently arisen. It goes to pr ove that 
always “arising takes place dependent on two.” 
The next important statement is “ tiṇṇaṁ saṁgati phasso”. 
The implication here is quite deep. Let us discuss it now. The eye 
consciousness arises depending on the eye and the material 
object. Not being  aware of this dependent nature, not being able 
to understand it, the moment it is treated as ‘three’ it becomes

The Law of Dependent Arising 

contact. Based on the eye and form, there arises eye 
consciousness. But at this point if it is treated as three, “ tiṇṇaṁ 
saṁgati phasso” then, contact arises. This is a very deep aspect of 
phassa, contact. We usually say “somebody touched”  in ordinary 
language, being ignorant of reality as it is. But here it is 
specifically explained that contact does not arise devoid of a 
dependent cause. We have repeatedly reminded you that an 
unspecified viññāna does not arise just as a fire does not arise 
without a dependent cause. If it is consciousness, it has to be 
either eye consciousness, or ear consciousness, nose 
consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness or 
lastly mind consciousness. But y ou must remember, neither of 
these is stored up somewhere. They arise with the coming 
together of two. That is where the ‘ dvayaṁ’ interpretation comes 
in. That alone is the secret in the Paṭicca Samuppāda. Fire never 
arises on its own independently. Whatev er causes a fire, that fire 
is identified by that name . 13  A fire caused by paper or firewood 
or straw or paddy husk is identified each by the dependent cause. 
Similarly, a consciousness caused by the eye and the material 
form coming together is identified  as cakkhu viññā ṇa, visual 
consciousness. 
But due to ignorance, or foolishness, if one does not heed 
the fact that eye consciousness arises dependent on those two 
causes, and treats everything as ‘one’, he would see ‘contact’ as 
real, and give chase behind  the illusory image. The eye is here, 
the material form is there. He runs after the mirage. This explains 
a very deep aspect of consciousness. 
Now we have explored several aspects of the useful topic 
saḷāyatana. We told you at the outset that one has to kn ow the 
dependent causes of arising in order to get a perfect 
understanding of the saḷāyatana. So also one has to know their 
cessation, their satisfaction and perils. Then comes nissaraṇa or 
stepping out of the attraction towards saḷāyatana.

Sermon 14 

Next, I wish t o discuss with you a very important sutta 
called the Saḷāyatanika Sutta in the Majjhima Nikāya. 14 It can be 
considered as the most important discourse on the six sense 
spheres. Here you find the Buddha doing a comparative analysis. 
On one side is the ordin ary worldling who understands the six 
sense spheres at his mental level, and the satisfaction and perils 
that he experiences. On the other hand a person who has a 
realistic vision of the saḷāyatana, being convinced of the 
temporary nature of enchantment an d the inherent 
unpleasantness, obtains release from them. This is how the 
Buddha commences his comparison.  
“Cakkhuṁ bhikkhave ajānaṁ apassaṁ yathābhūtaṁ rūpe 
ajānaṁ apassaṁ yathābhūtaṁ cakku viññāṇaṁ ajānaṁ apassaṁ 
yathābhūtaṁ” and he goes on. Let’s study  the meanings. “ jānaṁ 
passaṁ” means knowledge and vision. Not having knowledge 
and vision of the true nature of the eye as it is and external 
objects as they are – ‘as it is’ must be understood with regards to 
impermanence – not seeing the impermanence, not seeing the eye 
consciousness as it is, which is the outcome of those two, and not 
seeing eye contact as it is, and not seeing the resultant pleasant, 
unpleasant and neither pleasant nor unpleasant feelings, as they 
really are, one develops attachment tow ards the eye – 
“cakkhusmiṁ sārajjati” – to the external objects, to the eye 
consciousness, to the eye contact and to the pleasant, unpleasant 
and neither pleasant nor unpleasant feelings resulting from eye 
contact. Now you can understand the entanglement o f the 
worldlings with the six spheres. Did you notice that the clinging 
runs into the mind as well? Unable to understand the mind wisely 
as it really is, one gets attached to the mind, the mental 
phenomena that the mind focuses on, the mind consciousness, 
mind contacts and feelings arising thereof. Then the resultant 
perils of this process are discussed “ tassa sārattassa saṁyuttassa 
sammūḷhassa assādānupassino viharato  āyati ṁ 
pañcupādānakkhandhā upacaya ṁ gacchanti.” That worldling,

The Law of Dependent Arising 

due to his ignorance, firmly clings to, and gets bound to the above 
mentioned sense spheres, sense objects and the resultant 
consciousness, so that caught in the deception of apparent 
pleasure, he gets into deep trouble. “ Āyatiṁ 
pañcupādānakkhandhā” he accumulates the fivefold ag gregates 
of grasping, again. As a result of gripping the temporary mass of 
phenomena that pass by, one develops the fivefold aggregates of 
grasping. Then its perils are explained. “ Tassa kāyikā pi darathā 
pavaḍḍhanti. Cetasikā pi darathā pava ḍḍhanti. Kāyik ā pi 
santāpā pava ḍḍhanti. Cetasikā pi santāpā pava ḍḍhanti. Kāyikā 
pi pari ḷāhā pava ḍḍhanti. Cetasikā pi pari ḷāhā pava ḍḍhanti. So 
kāyadukkhampi cetodukkhampi pa ṭisaṁvedeti.” These are the 
perils he has to experience. His physical distresses increase. His 
mental distresses increase. His physical pains increase. His 
mental pains increase. His physical burnings increase. His mental 
burnings increase. He experiences a mass of physical and mental 
grief. This explanation deals with the worldly aspect. Now look at 
the opposite aspect. 
“Cakkhuñca kho bhikkhave jāna ṁ passaṁ yathābhūtaṁ 
rūpe jānaṁ passaṁ yathābhūtaṁ cakkuviññāṇaṁ jānaṁ passaṁ 
yathābhūtaṁ, cakkusamphassa ṁ jānaṁ passaṁ yathābhūtaṁ.” 
Thus continues the account. If one were to see the eye as it really 
is, which means to see the impermanent nature of the eye, and the 
physical objects as they really are, and see the resultant eye 
consciousness as impermanent in its very nature, and also the eye 
contact, and feeling as they really are, such a person – such a 
monk – who disciplines himself in this dispensation, seeing the 
perils of the sensory activity, undergoes this wonderful change. 
Tassa pañcupādānakkhandā apacaya ṁ gacchanti. The 
five aggregates of grasping diminish in him. Compare this with 
the worldling. Ev ery experience is accumulated in his mind. He 
accumulates the relevant material objects as his own aggregate of 
form, and the feelings as his own heap of feelings. This is what 
leads him on in Saṁsāra. But the disciplined monk, in contrast,

Sermon 14 

sees impermanen ce then and there. Nothing remains as residue. 
Therefore, “ apacayaṁ gacchati” they are gradually exhausted. 
Here upacaya and apacaya stand for Saṁsāra and Nibbāna 
respectively. The Buddha attempts to illustrate how the mind 
inclined towards Nibbāna disciplines itself to wipe out the five 
aggregates of grasping. Then the Buddha goes on to describe the 
result thereof. “ Tassa kāyikā pi darathā pahīyanti. Cetasikā pi 
darathā pahīyanti. Kāyikā pi santāpā pahīyanti. Cetasikā pi 
santāpā pahīyanti. Kāyikā pi pari ḷāhā pahīyanti. Cetasikā pi 
pariḷāhā pahīyanti . So kāyasukhampi  cetosukhampi pa ṭisaṁvedeti.” “His physical distresses diminish. His mental distresses 
diminish. His physical pains diminish. His mental pains diminish. 
His physical burnings diminish. His mental burnings diminish. 
He experiences immense physical and mental happiness. Then 
the Buddha  delves deeper into this discipline. A monk who 
disciplines himself thus, finds himself progressing unbelievably 
fast on the Noble Eightfold Path. I wish to remark that this sutta 
will be of immense help to those who meditate on the saḷāyatana. 
Then the Bu ddha proclaims the final result of this training. “ Yā 
tathābhūtassa di ṭṭhi sāssa hoti sammādi ṭṭhi.” “If such a 
disciplined monk holds a view, that will definitely be the right 
view.” This refers, not to the ordinary  sammādiṭṭhi that we talk 
of, but is the  very path, right view at its deepest level. If such a 
monk holds an intention, it is the right intention. If he makes an 
effort, it is always a right effort. If he has awareness, it is a 
correct awareness. If he attains any concentration, it is bound to 
be the right concentration. Now did you notice that only five links 
in the Noble Eightfold Path are discussed here. 
Now the Buddha explains why three items were left out. 
“Pubbeva kho panassa kāyakamma ṁ vacīkammaṁ ājīvo 
suparisuddho hoti. ” A monk who undert akes this strenuous 
discipline, at the very outset dispels all gross impure tendencies 
which have no place in the path to Nibbanā. He is beyond lowly 
talk and action. He is pure in word, action and livelihood –

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Sammā vācā, Sammā kammanta, Sammā ājīva . At t he higher 
level of the path he concentrates on right view, right intention, 
right effort, right awareness and right concentration – Sammā 
diṭṭhi,  Sammā sa ṁkappa, Sammā vāyāma, Sammā sati, Sammā 
samādhi. Now the Buddha takes us further up the path. The monk 
who develops the Noble Eightfold Path in this manner attains 
purity of mind. “ Tassa eva ṁ imaṁ ariyṁ aṭṭhañgikaṁ maggaṁ 
bhāvayato cattāropi satipa ṭṭhāna bhāvanā pāripūri ṁ gacchanti. 
Cattāro sammappadhānā bhāvanā paripūriṁ gacchatnti. Cattāro 
iddhipādā bhā vanā pāripūri ṁ gacchanti. Pañca pi indriyāni 
bhāvanā pāripūri ṁ gacchanti. Pañca pi balāni bhāvanā 
pāripūriṁ gacchanti. Sattapi bhojjhañgā bhāvanā pāripūri ṁ 
gacchanti.” 
This is a very clear explanation of how one perfects the 
thirty seven Factors of Enlight enment through this disciplinary 
training. In the process of practicing the Noble Eightfold Path, the 
fourfold mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna develops spontaneously. So 
does the fourfold right effort, the four psychic powers, the four 
faculties, the five powe rs and the seven factors of enlightenment. 
This is a description of the transcendental stage or the 
Supramundane stage. 
The Buddha speaks further of the monk who has perfected 
himself thus far. “ Tassime dve dhammā yuganaddhā vattanti 
samatho ca vipassanā c a.” “In him, these two factors, namely 
calm and insight prevail like yoked oxen.” Two oxen yoked to a 
cart have to step together. Similarly, you have heard I am sure as 
samatha and vipassanā meditators, that one attains concentration 
through calm and the three signata – tilakkhana – through insight. 
There are three methods one could follow. After 
practicing samatha, one could proceed to practice vipassanā. 
“Samatha pubba ṁgamaṁ vipassanaṁ.” Or else practice 
vipassanā first and then samatha. “ Vipassanā pubba ṁgamaṁ 
samathaṁ.” There is yet another method. “ Samathaṁ ca

Sermon 14 

vipassanaṁ ca yuganaddhaṁ bhāveti.” That is ‘pulling together’ 
like two oxen yoked to a cart. Both samatha and vipassanā 
develop “yoked together”. 
Now the Buddha reveals the final result of this ex ertion. 
“So ye dhammā abhiññā pariññeyyā, te dhamme abhiññā 
parijānāti. Ye dhammā abhiññā pahātabbā, te dhamme abhiññā 
pajahati. Ye dhammā abhiññā bhāvetabbā, te dhamme abhiññā 
bhāveti. Ye dhammā abhiññā sacchikātabbā, te dhamme abhiññā 
sacchikaroti.” Whatever mental factors have to be comprehended 
through higher knowledge, he comprehends them through higher 
knowledge. Whatever mental factors have to be eliminated 
through higher knowledge, he eliminates them through higher 
knowledge. Whatever mental factors  have to be developed 
through higher knowledge, he develops them through higher 
knowledge. Whatever mental factors have to be realized through 
higher knowledge, he realizes them through higher knowledge. 
The Buddha then proceeds to explain these dhammas. 
What should be comprehended are the five aggregates of 
grasping. What should be eliminated are ignorance and craving. 
What should be developed are calm and insight – samatha and 
vipassanā. What should be realized and perfected are the wisdom 
of Arahanthood and emancipation through Arahanthood which 
are known by the terms  vijjā vimutti. This is a wonderful sutta 
that deals with different methods applicable in practicing the path 
to Nibbāna. 
It is clear that there are several methods to attain Nibbāna, 
depending on the object of meditation. Some may realize the 
impermanence of the five aggregates of grasping through the 
meditation of the three characteristics. Some may meditate on the 
primary elements. Some may meditate on impermanence in life 
through the mediu m of the six sense spheres. Finally, all this 
converge (add up) to reach the summit. Last of all, samatha and 
vipassanā, like two oxen yoked to a cart, ‘pull together’ in the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

final phase. Three factors in the Noble Eightfold Path having 
been already eliminated, the remaining five are eliminated during 
this final phase. It is the transcendental Noble Eightfold Path that 
is referred to here. Misconduct through word, body and 
livelihood become inapplicable here, as they have been already 
wiped out. When the meditator’s mind functions on a 
transcendental level, only the other five factors become active. 
The Buddha explains how one could reach the final goal of vijjā 
vimutti phala, through the analysis of the six sense spheres. When 
referring to impermanence, I am reminded of several more suttas 
that may confirm this position. 
Once the Buddha addresses the Monks and declare s15 
“Cakkhuṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī, rūpā aniccā 
vipariṇāmino aññathābhāvīno cakkhuviññāna ṁ aniccaṁ 
vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī. ” The eye is impermanent, subject to 
change and subject to ‘otherwiseness’. They are the three sides of 
impermanence. “It is impermanent” is an incomplete statement. 
Due to its impe rmanent character it is subject to change. Finally 
become ‘otherwise’ or different from what it was. This same 
description is applicable to material objects and also to visual 
consciousness. They are impermanent, subject to change and 
becomes ‘otherwise’. 
Now comes a question based on this discussion. “Monks, 
how can a permanent thing arise from an impermanent thing? If 
the eye is impermanent, if material objects are impermanent, how 
could eye consciousness become permanent? The eye contact 
resulting from e ye consciousness is also impermanent. The 
experience that arises dependent on eye contact is also 
impermanent. The purpose of this explicit description is to drive 
the point home. The entire statement “ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmī 
aññathābhāvī” is repeated at every point. Everything is calā ceva, 
vayā ca, aniccā, vipari ṇāmino aññathābhāvino . Here several 
terms are used to stress the character of impermanence, such as 
‘quivers’, ‘withers’, ‘impermanent’, ‘subject to change’, ‘has the

Sermon 14 

character of otherwiseness’. Somebody wishes to see some object 
well. But the moment he looks, both the object and the eye 
undergo a swift change, although we are unaware of this change. 
They quiver. That’s why they are called ‘movies’. Unable to 
understand the fast quivering nature, one e stablishes oneself on 
the perception of compact and tries to grasp material ‘objects’. “I 
saw this form with my own eye. It is the very same form.” It is 
not easy to understand the change it undergoes every moment. In 
this manner the Buddha makes explicit the nature of change 
everywhere. This is the second Dvayaṁ Sutta in the Saḷāyatana 
Vagga of the Saṁyutta Nikāya , which is of immense help to 
meditators on impermanence. It winds up as follows: “ calā ceva, 
vayā ca, aniccā, viparināmino ” “they quiver, wither , has the 
nature of impermanence and change.” It is invisible to the 
physical eye. It is visible only to the eye of wisdom. 
As the meditator on vipassanā reaches higher and higher, 
he begins to see through the world as ‘totally different’ to what 
others see. The Thera Theri Gatha  has recorded amazing objects 
of meditation, such as a flowing stream, a fire. He who has 
constantly cultivated the nature of impermanence will see 
impermanence in everything. The fallen leaf, the blossoming and 
fading flower is impermanent. That impermanence is very strong. 
At times the Buddha has declared “ Anicca saññā bhikkhave 
bhāvitā bahulīkatā sabba ṁ kāmarāgaṁ pariyādiyati sabba ṁ 
rūparāgaṁ pariyādiyati sabba ṁ bhavarāgaṁ pariyādiyati 
sabbaṁ avijjaṁ pariyādiyati samūhanti .” 16 A thorough training 
in the perception of impermanence results in total elimination of 
the attachment to sensuality. The passion for material objects, the 
yearning for becoming, ignorance and finally the subtle conceit of 
self are totally eradicated. The Buddh a has spoken so much in 
praise of the development of the perception of impermanence, 
that he has once remarked “It is incorrect to say there are two 
paths to Nibbāna because they all converge at the summit.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

One has to practice either the Four Foundations  of 
Mindfulness or the perception of impermanence. This point is 
confirmed in the Mahā Saḷāyatanika Sutta. However, there is no 
contradiction here because both serve the same purpose. At a 
superficial glance, we see one disciplining oneself in Four 
Foundations of Mindfulness following the accepted methodology. 
He follows this one and only path until he realizes Nibbāna. That 
is the accepted method. But we see that impermanence is also 
declared as the path. “There are two paths to gain control over 
defilements. One is the development of the Four Foundations of 
Mindfulness, the other is the development of the perception of 
impermanence.” The latter serves as a strong support in 
developing the spiritual qualities such as the fourfold 
satipaṭṭhānas, and the four  methods of right effort 
sammappadhāna. Everything that the Buddha has taught about 
impermanence is so amazingly relevant in the process of spiritual 
training. We have discussed here only a limited amount of that 
wealth of information. 
We must understand t hat the Buddha uses a variety of 
comparisons to emphasize the importance of saḷāyatana. Vedagu 
refers to the Arahant. Triveda is not the three Vedas of the 
Brahmins but the tevijjā Arahants are endowed with i.e. the 
knowledge of recollecting previous birth s, the knowledge of the 
divine eye, the knowledge of the elimination of influxes – pubbe 
nivāsānussati ñāna, dibba cakkhu and āsavakkhaya ñāna . The 
entirety of tevijjā comes under the purview of nissaraṇa or 
stepping out mentioned under six sense spheres . The earlier 
ascetics and Brahmins unfortunately missed this aspect of 
nissaraṇa. Neither did they understand the origin of saḷāyatana, 
the six sense spheres. It was the Buddha who proclaimed that a 
vedagu is found only in his path, and so is all spiritua l perfection. 
The Mahā Sa ḷāyatana Sutta  in particular, emphasizes the 
teachings of saḷāyatana, as we see. Although my discourse is 
brief, I have tried to direct all my explanations towards the 
practice of meditation. I hope it will be helpful to you.

Sermon 14 

The doctrine of impermanence proclaimed by the Buddha 
is of immeasurable importance. Everything is included within it. 
On the other hand, everything in the world takes place within 
these six sense spheres. We cannot realize it because we are 
running after a mirage. The day we realize this truth, all problems 
will dissolve. 
I think it is enough for today. You should read or listen to 
this topic of meditation more often, internalize it and put it into 
practice with determination. It will help you to tread the 
Buddha’s path to Nibbāna as far as possible. The Buddha  has 
clarified the direct path to Nibbāna or vijjā vimutti . Today we 
tried to expand your knowledge on the Saḷāyatana, in this series 
of discourses on Paticca Samuppāda . We hope to discuss the 
other topics if time permits, later. 
I wish you would reach the path of Dhamma without 
delay, with the help of this series of talks. May you acquire the 
strength, determination and power to fulfill the requirements in 
perfecting the path and attaining fruition as sotāpanna 
sakadāgāmī anāgāmi  and arahant. Whatever beings there be, 
from the lowest hell Avīci to the highest Brahma world Akaniṭṭha, 
may they all rejoice in this insightful sermon. May it be 
conducive to their attainment of Nibbāna!  May you attain 
Nibbāna in this very life!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. S. IV 83  Uddaka Sutta 
2. S. IV 15 Sabba Sutta  
3. S. IV 39 Samiddhi Sutta 
4. D. I 45f. Brahmajāla Sutta 
5. S. IV 67 Dvaya Sutta 
6. A. II 161-163 Mahā Koṭṭhita Sutta 
7. S. IV 98 Kāmaguna Sutta 
8. S. IV 162-165 Koṭṭhita Sutta 
9. S. IV 177-179 Kummopama Sutta 
10. S. II 12-14 Moḷiya Phagguna Sutta 
11. S. IV 50f.Sambahula Bhikkhu Sutta 
12. S. IV 67-69 Dutīya Dvaya Sutta 
13. M. I 259f. Mahā Ṭaṇhasankhaya Sutta 
14. M. III 287-290 Mahā Saḷāyatanika Sutta 
15. S. IV 67-69 Dutīya Dvaya Sutta  
16. S. III 155-157Aniccasaññā Sutta

Sermon 15 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 197) 
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Tesaṁ phassaparetānaṁ 
 bhavasotānusārinaṁ 
 kummaggapaṭipannānaṁ 
 ārā saṁyojanakkhayo 
 Ye ca phassaṁ pariññāya 
 aññāya upasame ratā 
 te ve phassābhisamayā 
 nicchātā parinibbutā 1  
   – Dvayatānupassanā S. Sn. 
  
To them that are fully given to contact 
And are swept by the current of becoming 
To them that tread the wrong path 
Destruction of fetters is far away. 
 
But they that fully understand contact 
And with full comprehension are attached to appeasement  
It is they that by the understanding of contact 
Are hungerless and fully appeased. 
 
Dear Listeners,  
 The Dhamma that the Teacher of the Three Worlds, the 
fully Enlightened Fortunate One placed before the world is one 
that goes against the current. That Dhamma w hich flows against 
the pervert and narrow current of becoming is the massive body 
of water called ‘ Dhammasota’ that takes one towards the 
cessation of becoming. The worldlings caught up in the current of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

becoming go on revolving in this Sa ṁsāric whirlpool. The Noble 
Disciple who has fallen into the Dhamma current reaches 
Nibbāna which is called the cessation of becoming. The turning 
point between these two is contact. 
 Therefore, we have chosen as the topic of this 15 th 
sermon, two verses on contact found i n the  Dvayatānupassanā 
Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta. Since we used as the topics of a number 
of earlier sermons, verses from this Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, you 
all might remember the style of preaching followed by the 
Buddha in that discourse. Introducing vario us items of Dhamma 
which incline to two sides and distinguishing their arising aspect 
and the cessation aspect is the style of preaching in this discourse. 
Now the two aspects of contact the Buddha first of all introduces 
to the congregation of monks with this statement in prose.  
 “If there are those who ask whether there could be another 
mode of contemplating the dualities, they should be told: ‘There 
is.’ How could there be? ‘Whatever suffering that arises, all that 
is due to contact.’ This is one mode o f contemplation. With the 
remainderless cessation of contact, there is no arising of 
suffering. This is the second mode of contemplation.” Having 
made this declaration, the Buddha goes on to state the benefits of 
practicing this contemplation of dualities.  “If a monk dwells 
diligently and ardently combatting defilements in accordance 
with this contemplation, one of two fruits could be expected of 
him; Either full comprehension here and now or if there is any 
residual clinging, non-returnership. 
 It is after  this declaration that the Buddha uttered those 
two verses. 
“Tesaṁ phassaparetānaṁ 
 bhavasotānusārinaṁ 
 kummaggapaṭipannānaṁ 
 ārā saṁyojanakkhayo

Sermon 15 

 Ye ca phassaṁ pariññāya 
 aññāya upasame ratā 
 te ve phassābhisamayā 
 nicchātā parinibbutā” 
 “For them who are fully enslaved to contact and moving 
along with the current of becoming, who are on the wrong path 
the cutting off of the bonds of becoming namely the destruction 
of fetters, is far away. But they that have comprehended contact 
and take delight in the appeasement through knowledge born of 
realization, verily it is they by their higher understanding of 
contact are hungerless and fully appeased.” 
 I hope to give a special sermon today based on these two 
verses because this happens to be a significant day marking the 
end of the rains -retreat of the Sangha on which they hold the 
Vinaya act called Pavāraṇā – namely the Full Moon day ending 
the rains-retreat. Due to other reasons too I thought of presenting 
this sermon at a more practical level – though other sermons also 
are meditation topics. So let me request you all from this point 
onwards to listen attentively to what is being said from word to 
word and sentence to sentence. Speaking about contact, First of 
all I must mention something I had already brough t out with 
reference to the very first discourse in the Dīgha Nikāya – namely 
Brahmajāla Sutta  – that is to say, the fact that the Buddha 
dismissed all the sixty two wrong views listed there with a very 
brief phrase. 
 Now, what is that significant phrase? ‘Tadapi phassa 
paccayā’2 – ‘That too is due to contact.’ Similarly towards the 
end of that discourse, the Buddha declares a statement like this 
with reference to the recluses and Brahmins who proclaim those 
views:

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 ‘sabbe te chahi phassāyatanehi phussa phu ssa 
paṭisaṁvedenti’ 
 ‘They all go on experiencing through the six sense -
spheres by contacting again and again.’ 
 Then the consequences of it are also mentioned. Because 
of that feeling they get craving, and due to craving, grasping, due 
to grasping, becomi ng, due to becoming, birth and due to birth, 
decay and death and all the rest of suffering. What does it mean? 
As stated in the first verse all recluses and Brahmins who took up 
those sixty -two views are enslaved by contact, caught up in the 
current of bec oming and fallen on the wrong track. Therefore 
they have not attained freedom from the fetters of becoming. 
Finally the Buddha proclaims what sort of Dhamma he preaches. 
About the monk who has attained arahanthood in this 
dispensation, it is said that he i s one who has reached full 
appeasement by five kinds of understanding about the six sense -
spheres. What are they? As we mentioned in a previous sermon, 
the understanding of the arising, going down, satisfaction, misery 
and stepping -out in regard to the six  sense-spheres – that is to 
say, samudaya, atthagama, assāda, ādīnava and nissaraṇa. This 
is the distinctive quality of this dispensation in regard to contact. 
From here onwards we shall take up a number of discourses to 
clarify further the phenomenon of c ontact. Now you had better 
take this as a pilgrimage – a pilgrimage to Nibbāna. With that 
idea uppermost in your minds please try to listen attentively to 
this sermon during this hour. 
 I need not mention this in particular for you know well 
enough about the twelve linked formula of Dependent Arising. In 
that formula beginning with ‘ avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā’ –  
‘dependent on ignorance, preparations’ – this is how contact 
comes to be mentioned: ‘….. saḷāyatana paccayā phasso, phassa 
paccayā vedanā’ – ‘dependent on the six sense -spheres, contact, 
dependent on contact, feeling.’ But the deepest philosophy of

Sermon 15 

contact is presented to us with the utmost clarity by the 
Madhupiṇḍika (‘Honey ball’) Sutta which is rich in its flavour of 
meaning like a ball of  honey. On previous occasions we have 
discussed in full this Madhupiṇḍika Sutt a 3 of the Majjhima 
Nikāya. If we are to bring up what is relevant to this context, the 
venerable Arahant Mahā Kaccāna who was placed foremost 
among those disciples who are capabl e of expounding at length 
what is preached in brief, is seen explaining a brief utterance of 
the Buddha at the request of the company of monks. This 
sentence occurs in that explanation: 
 “….cakkhuñcāvuso, pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhu -
viññāṇaṁ, tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso” 
 This statement presents a very profound philosophy. 
 ‘cakkhuñcāvuso, pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhu -
viññāṇaṁ’ 
 ‘Dependent on eye and forms arises eye-consciousness.’ 
 Then comes the phrase: 
 ‘tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso’ 
 ‘The concurrence of the three is contact.’ 
 If you reflect on this deeply, you will discover an 
extremely knotty point – a subtle one at that. Now remember, 
here the two words ‘ paṭicca’ and ‘ uppajjati’ came up. This is a 
clear indication that the Law of Dependent Arising is concerned 
with the arising of consciousness. Because of eye and forms 
arises eye-consciousness. But once it arises, worldlings, because 
of their delusion, because of their ignorance , count them as three. 
It is not really justifiable to count these as three. Why? It is 
because of the eye and forms that consciousness arose. We have 
explained what eye-consciousness is. The nature of consciousness

The Law of Dependent Arising 

is the very discriminating as two things . Until consciousness 
arises there is no idea of eye and form as two things. It is when 
consciousness arises that one gets the idea: ‘This is my eye and 
there is that form.’ 
 That is why we say that the gap – the interstice – between 
the two is consciousne ss. But due to non -understanding one 
counts eye, forms and consciousness as three. It is when one 
imagines them as three, that contact arises. From there onwards it 
is all delusion. That is why we call contact the turning point. Now 
that regarding contact we spoke of two things and a gap, let us 
now turn to a powerful discourse we had discussed on various 
occasions – namely the Majjhe Sutt a 4 among the ‘Sixes’ of 
Anguttara Nikāya.  First of all let me mention the introductory 
story for those who do not know a bout it. When the Buddha was 
dwelling at Isipatana in Benares, a group of Elder monks 
gathered in the assembly hall after the alms -round and initiated a 
Dhamma discussion – in modern parlance it may be called a 
symposium. What was the point at issue? A question to this effect 
came up in the Dhamma discussion. The Fortunate One has 
preached in the Metteyya Pañha of Pārāyaṇa the following verse:  
 Yo ubhante viditvāna 
 majjhe mantā na lippati 
 taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
 sodha sibbanimaccagā 
 Having taken up this  verse, they extracted four questions 
as the subject  for their  symposium. What are they? Let me first 
explain the meaning of the verse. ‘ yo ubhante viditvāna ’ – ‘He 
who, having understood both ends’, ‘ majjhe mantā na lippati ’ – 
‘does not get attached to the middle with wisdom’, ‘ taṁ brūmi 
mahāpurisoti’ the Buddha is saying: ‘Him I call a great man’ – 
Why? ‘ sodha sibbanimaccagā ’ – ‘Because he has bypassed the 
seamstress in this world.’

Sermon 15 

 So out of this cryptic verse four points are elicited as 
questions: ‘What is the one end mentioned in this verse? What is 
the second end? What is the middle? Who is the seamstress? To 
these four questions, six Elder monks put forward six 
interpretations. They seem to be wonderful meditation topics. Let 
me bring up only what is relevant to the context. Relating to the 
question of sense -spheres the interpretation given by the fifth 
Elder monk is this: ‘One end is the six internal sense -spheres, 
namely eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind. The second end is 
the six external sen se-spheres – forms, sounds, smells, tastes, 
touches, ideas. The middle is consciousness and the seamstress is 
craving. Talking about seamstress, nowadays there could be 
skilled seamstresses in the garment industry. But  this seamstress 
can beat them all be cause she has three special qualifications, 
namely: ‘ ponobhavikā’ – she puts the stitch for the next birth. 
‘nandirāgasahagatā’ – she has delight and attachment and 
‘tatratatrābhinandinī’ – she delights now here now there. It is 
that seamstress who puts the knot between the two ends ignoring 
the middle. Consciousness which is in the middle has arisen 
because of those two. But ignoring that fact the seamstress 
craving puts the stitch to those two ends. For instance it stitches 
up eye and forms. 
 The story of stitching up eye and forms, we have 
mentioned on various occasions. If we are to give a simile, one 
that is easily understood is the mirage. In short the Buddha has 
compared the entire aggregate of perception to a mirage. When 
we say ‘mirage’ we have in mind only the eye and forms. But the 
comparison of the entire aggregate of perception to a mirage is a 
very deep dictum. However in this context, for simplicity’s sake, 
let us take the question of eye and forms. Most of you know what 
a mirage is, but let us briefly remind ourselves about it. There is a  
Sanskrit word for the mirage – namely ‘ mṛgatṛsṇikā’ which 
means a sight that arouses craving and thirst in a deer. At times 
when there is a drought there is an appearance in the distance

The Law of Dependent Arising 

which resembles flo wing water. The deer imagines water in it. 
What is its stance? ‘I am here and water is there. I am here and 
water is there.’ Though it tells itself ‘I am here and water is there’ 
with every step it takes it is taking its eye with it. Still it goes on 
telling: ‘I am here, water is there.’ What it imagines to be water 
also recedes. 
 Now that is the nature of the mirage. It is an endless 
pursuit. The mirage is deceptive. What perpetuates that deception 
is the magic -like delusion in eye -consciousness. The deer keeps 
running unaware of the gap mentioned above. It is ignorant of the 
intervening space. Due to that delusion the deer runs and gets 
wearied. The Buddha has pointed out that not only the deer but 
the entire world of  living beings is deluded like it by t his mirage 
of perception. It is this seamstress ‘craving’ who is playing this 
subtle trick. It is said that this seamstress puts the knot. How can 
one get free from these knots. A clue to that release is found in 
this verse itself. ‘Yo ubhante viditvāna – majjhe mantā na lippat’, 
‘mantā’ means wisdom. You might say: ‘But we don’t have 
wisdom. It is something that dawns on arahants automatically.’ 
You must not say so. The seed of wisdom is there in every one of 
us. It is ‘yonisomanasikāra’– radical attention. 
 ‘Yonisomanasikāra’ is a very powerful word in this 
dispensation – particularly for insight meditators. But 
unfortunately we have to mention that in the commentaries we do 
not get a clear explanation of it. It is explained as ‘ upāya 
manasikāra’ (skillful  attention) and ‘ patha manasikāra ’ 
(attention according to the path). We call it ‘wise attention’ for 
convenience’s sake. But there is a great depth in it. ‘ Yoni’ means 
the place of origin – the matrix. Therefore ‘ yonisomanasikāra’ 
means ‘attention by way of the place of origin’. Already you can 
guess what the place of origin is. It is contact ( phassa) that we 
called the turning-point. That is why in the Brahmajāla Sutta we 
found the dictum: ‘ tadapi phassa paccayā ’ (‘That too is 
dependent on contact’). It s eems for some reason or other that

Sermon 15 

fact has not come to light so far. Contact is what seems to be the 
place of origin. So attending by way of the place of origin is 
yonisomanasikāra. 
 From here onwards we have to give various similes. There 
is a game calle d ‘table -tennis’. Well, let us call to mind this 
game. What we call the Ping -Pong ball and the two rackets are 
the paraphernalia required. There is a short net in the middle of 
the T.T table. What is the procedure in this game? The ball that 
the player on the other side spins with his racket, has to be 
returned to the other side by the player on this side before it falls 
to the ground. Now for easy comprehension of our simile let us 
call the player on the opposite side Māra. The player on this side 
is the meditator. Take it as a table tennis game between Māra and 
the meditator. There is no ‘racketeer’ like Māra. Just call to mind 
the nuances of the term ‘racket’ in the society. We have come all 
this way in Saṁsāra because we got caught in Māra’ s racket. 
Now we are going to beat Māra. Even to beat him, the meditator 
has to take up the racket. What does the incompetent or unskillful 
player do? When the player on the other side sends the ball to this 
side he lets it bump off and with difficulty returns it bendin g his 
body this way and that way. He cannot go on like that. He will be 
the loser before long. On the other hand the competent one keeps 
standing straight and returns the ball to the other side as soon as it 
touches his side of the table. He does not allow  it to bump off. 
You had better take this ‘bumping off’ itself as a simile for 
‘papañca’ – conceptual proliferation. In the context of the 
Dhamma, this ‘bumping off’ is comparable to papañca. Not to 
give way to ‘ papañca’ is attending then and there without  
allowing thoughts to bump off. What is the ‘then and there’? The 
point of contact – ‘phassa’. So attending then and there to the 
point of contact is like returning the ball to the other side as soon 
as it touches this side. You have to do it with extreme rapidity. It 
is one who does it very rapidly that in the end beats Māra. Māra 
will have to throw away his racket.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Let us take up another simile. It is not a game but a fight. 
We are now going back to the age of sword -fights. Not only in 
Sri Lanka but in countries like England they used the sword both 
for offence and defense. They had a sword hung on the belt. 
When two such persons fall out, one challenges the other to come 
for a fight and draws the sword from the scabbard. Sometimes the 
fight would go on as a duelling. With no shield to protect oneself, 
a parry and thrust would go on with the sword. Just think about it. 
How rapidly should one wield the sword in order to be the 
winner. One has to be prepared to ward off every blow of the 
opponent. We gave b oth these similes to show how rapidly one 
has to go on attending. Whether it is the racket or the sword, one 
has to accelerate attention to the utmost. Since we gave the simile 
of the table -tennis game as a practical illustration, let us assume 
that Māra  is sending a ‘form -ball’. As soon as the ‘form -ball’ 
comes, without allowing it to ‘bump off’ into ‘ papañca’, one 
should turn it to the opposite side. How does one do it? What is 
the racket used on this Buddha side? ‘ anicca, anicca ’ – 
‘impermanent, impermanent.’  Māra may send the ball again. But 
with this ‘anicca’ racket we turn it to the other side. We gave this 
simile to acquaint you with ‘ aniccānupassanā’ – ‘contemplation 
of impermanence.’ 
  On an earlier occasion too we mentioned in passing a 
very powerful sermon on the contemplation of impermanence. In 
the Saḷāyatana Vagga of the Saṁyutta Nikāya there are two 
discourses with the same title ‘ Dvayaṁ’. Last time we discussed 
one of them. Now w hat is relevant to the present context is the 
second ‘ Dvayaṁ’ Sutta. 5 This is how the Buddha begins that 
discourse: “ Dvayaṁ bhikkhave pa ṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti.” 
‘Monks, depending on a dyad consciousness arises.’ “ Kathañca 
bhikkhave dvayaṁ paṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti.” ‘How, monks, 
does consciousness arise depending on a dyad?’ “ Cakkhuñca  
paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññā ṇaṁ.” ‘Depending on eye 
and forms arises eye consciousness.’ Then comes a series of 
significant words. “ Cakkhuṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvī,

Sermon 15 

rūpā aniccā vipari ṇāmino aññathābhāvino .” ‘Eye is 
impermanent, changing and turning otherwise. Forms are 
impermanent, changing and turning otherwise.’ Then it is said: 
“Itthetaṁ dvayaṁ calañceva vayañca anicca ṁ vipariṇāmī 
aññathābhāvī.” ‘Thus thi s dyad is unstable, liable to pass away, 
impermanent changing and turning otherwise.’ That is not all. 
“Cakkhuviññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī .” ‘Eye 
consciousness is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise.’ 
“Yopi hetu yopi paccayo cakkhuviññā ṇassa uppādāya …….” 
‘Whatever condition there is for the arising of eye -consciousness, 
that too is impermanent.’ Then the Buddha poses a question to 
the monks: “Monks, how can something that arises due to a 
condition that is impermanent, be permanent?” If the  conditions 
are impermanent, how can eye -consciousness arisen depending 
on them be permanent? There are three terms used to denote the 
collocation of these three factors: “ tiṇṇaṁ dhammānaṁ saṅgati 
sannipāto samavāyo ” – The concurrence, assemblage, 
togetherness – that is what is called ‘contact’. Then comes the 
statement: “ Cakkhusamphassopi anicco vipari ṇāmī 
aññathābhāvī.” ‘Eye contact too is impermanent, changing, 
becoming otherwise.’ Then again the question is posed: How can 
eye contact arisen due to imper manent conditions be permanent? 
Now comes a significant declaration: “ Phuṭṭho bhikkhave, vedeti, 
phuṭṭho sañjānāti, phuṭṭho ceteti.” ‘contacted, monks, one feels, 
contacted one perceives, contacted one intends.’ Keep in mind, 
then: The origin and matrix of feeling, perception and intention is 
contact itself. It is not without reason that we stated that 
‘yonisomanasikāra’ or radical attention is attending mentally to 
the point of touch. In conclusion it is said that all these things are 
unstable, passing awa y, impermanent and changing otherwise: 
“itthetepi dhammā calā ceva vayā ca aniccā vipari ṇāmino 
aññathābhāvino.” 
 This is the wonderful presentation of the contemplation of 
impermanence by the Buddha. With that background you can

The Law of Dependent Arising 

now understand that whether  it is the racket or the sword, what 
matters is the speed of directing attention. It is at the moment one 
has accelerated the speed of attention to the utmost, that one can 
understand the secret of that mirage. We have now said enough 
about the eye. There are six. So then, let us turn our attention to 
the ear. I hope to explain that too with similes. Let me mention 
first of all that I have to hark back to the Majjhe Sutta , when 
speaking about every sense sphere. According to the exposition in 
the Majjhe Sutta, this is what is stated about the ear. Ear is one 
end, sound is the second end and ear consciousness is in the 
middle. The seamstress as usual is craving. What does this 
seamstress do? She puts the stitch on ear and sound ignoring ear -
consciousness. In this case too accelerating attention is what is 
helpful. I would like to give a simile to illustrate the acceleration 
of attention. It may be a little unconventional. 
 As you know, there is an insect like a beetle, about two 
inches in size living on the tr ees which we call ‘ Rähäyyā’(Eng. 
‘cicada’) That creature starts a music around 4 o’clock in the 
afternoon. When one ‘ rähäyyā’ gives the start, others join in the 
chorus. It is an extremely rough music irritating the ear. If you 
bear with me I shall imitate it: 
 ‘R-R-R…………R-R-R-R-R………..R-R’ 
 Sometimes I wonder whether it is called ‘ Rähäyyā’ 
because it teaches us how to roll our ‘R’s. Of course I do not 
know the etymology of the word. Rähäyyā’s music is a big 
disturbance to our meditation for calm and serenit y (i.e. 
‘Samatha’) because it digs into the ear. But it reminds us that 
there is something called the ‘ear -drum’. The most wonderful 
musical instrument in the world is the ear -drum. Rähäyyā 
reminds us of the fact that we have an ear -drum. Though it is our 
‘enemy’ in ‘samatha’, we can make it our ‘friend’ in ‘ vipassanā’ 
(Insight-meditation) if we use radical attention with mindfulness 
(sati) and full awareness (‘ sampajañña’). Between two ‘R’s

Sermon 15 

(R….R) there is Nibbāna, if one focusses one’s attention there. 
Only if you get caught in the ‘knot’ of the seamstress craving that 
it becomes a rough and irritating music. At last you will realize 
that it is only a concatenation of ‘R’s. According to the 
terminology of insight meditation, we may say, one can leave 
behind the ‘perception of the compact’ ( ghanasaññā) and arouse 
the perception of the heap ( rāsisaññā) if one directs one’s 
attention then and there with mindfulness and full awareness. So 
after all, rähäyyā is an insect that gives us a meditation -topic for 
Nibbāna, though apparently it is a disturbance to calm.  
 I must confess, I forgot to mention one thing when 
speaking about the eye. All the similes I gave about the eye are 
gross when compared with the simile given by the Buddha in the 
Indriyabhāvanā Sutta . 6 It is the last discourse in the Majjhima 
Nikāya. It is a wonderful discourse which the Buddha addressed 
to Venerable Ānanda. We may say, that the quintessence of that 
discourse is the supreme and incomparable development of sense 
faculties ( anuttarā indri yabhāvanā). It is illustrated with a 
number of similes. The simile that the Buddha had given there 
with reference to the eye beats all our similes regarding the 
acceleration of attention. The simile is: as quickly as a man with 
vision opens his eyes and cl oses them and closes the eyes and 
opens them, one should exercise radical attention with regard to 
forms coming before the eyes. So for the eyes, the Buddha has 
aptly given a simile based on the eye. 
 When it comes to the ear, he gives a simile about the e ar 
itself. Just as a strong man snaps his fingers with perfect ease so 
quickly, should one attend to a sound. By the way, the snapping 
of the fingers is often taken as an indication of a moment (khaṇa). 
The Buddha says that on hearing a sound a monk might be 
pleased or displeased or have a mingling of both but that he 
should immediately get rid of them and bring his mind to rest in 
equanimity.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Then we come to the nose. There too, if we go back to the 
Majjhe Sutta, nose is one end, smell is the second end a nd nose 
consciousness is in the middle. The seamstress craving ignores 
the middle and puts the stitch. When we smell something, we 
actually take in the air bearing the odour. If it is a pleasant smell 
we take it in with attachment. Air is the bearer of smell. 
 There is a story in the Sagāthaka Vagga of the Saṁyutta 
Nikāya 7 regarding attachment to fragrant smells. In the Kosala 
country a forest dwelling monk was living in a hut in the jungle. 
One day on returning from his alms -round he went down into a 
pond and eagerly smelt a lotus flower. A forest deity saw it and 
accused him as a thief of fragrance. The monk in defense said: 
“How can you call me a thief of fragrance? I didn’t pluck the 
flower or take it away.” But the deity said: “You are here 
purifying your mind. So, even a slight fault appears as a serious 
one.” The monk confessed his guilt and thanked the deity for 
pointing it out. So, it seems even intentionally smelling a flower 
is a defilement. The delusion of the mirage is perpetuated in 
doing so. One imagines that the fragrance is in the flower. 8 
 In regard to the tongue ‘ Majjhe Sutta’ says: tongue is one 
end, taste is the other end and tongue -consciousness is in the 
middle.’ When it comes to tasty things it may be ice -cream or a 
piece of instant chi cken. What happens as soon as one sees the 
ice-cream or the piece of chicken? Saliva flows into the tongue. 
Saliva is the bearer of taste just as air is the bearer of smell. 
Saliva gets ready to receive the taste. So, one greedily gulps 
down the tasty thing. The craving for taste is so powerful that the 
Buddha has recommended the meditations on elements and 
loathsomeness to combat it. He declares that one who is greedy 
will never awaken his heart (to Nibbāna). ‘Rasataṇhāya gadhito 
hadayaṁ nāvabujjhati.” 9 
 Sometimes he gives a simile that makes one shudder when 
reflecting on it. In the Nālaka Sutta  of Sutta Nipāta when

Sermon 15 

describing the path of practice befitting a muni (sage), he 
mentions it in brief: ‘ Khuradhārūpamo bhava.’10 – ‘Be one who 
has the simile of t he razor-edge in mind.’ The simile about the 
razor-edge given by the Buddha is as follows: A razor -blade is 
smeared with honey. To one who is greedy the razor -blade is 
given to lick. Can he do it without cutting his tongue? That is a 
simile which arouses f right in the greedy. Taste is such a subtle 
craving. Why does the Buddha give us such a frightful simile? 
Because he has conquered the craving for taste. Even the other 
arahants cite the example of the Buddha. “ Rasapaṭisaṁvedī kho 
pana so bhava ṁ Gotamo āhā raṁ āhāreti no ca rasarāga -
paṭisaṁvedī.” 11 The Brahmin youth Uttara once observed: 
“Experiencing taste that Venerable Gotama partakes of food but 
he is not one who experiences an attachment to taste.” The taste -
buds of the Buddha are as acute as ours. They  do not go inactive 
with the attainment of Buddhahood. But he has no attachment to 
taste. Nowadays people cannot understand this wonderful fact. 
This means that there is Nibbāna even at the tip of the tongue. A 
meditator can realize this to some extent whi le taking food with 
mindfulness and full awareness. So after all, the taste is neither in 
the tongue nor in the ‘instant -chicken’. It is only at the ‘ instant’ 
the tongue and the instant -chicken come together that the flavour 
becomes active. Now that we hav e spoken of saliva, just see how 
aptly the Buddha has given a simile for it. When speaking about 
the eye, he gave a simile that befits the eye and in speaking about 
the ear, one that befits the ear. Now see how apt the simile about 
the tongue is. Just as a strong man with the greatest ease gathers a 
bit of saliva at the tip of the tongue and spews it out, so quickly 
should a monk, as soon as the attachment to taste has arisen, free 
his mind from likes and dislikes and bring it to rest in equanimity.   
 Let us now take up the question of body and tangibles. In 
this connection too the  Majjhe Sutta says that the body is the one 
end, the tangible is the second end and body -consciousness the 
middle. There too it is precisely due to body and the tangible that

The Law of Dependent Arising 

body-consciousness arises. But the seamstress craving stitches up 
the two. You had better remember all these similes. That is why I 
cautioned you to listen attentively. It is here that what we actually 
call ‘contact’(phassa) comes. That is why the Buddha calle d it a 
‘nutriment’ ( āhāra). He pointed out that there are four kinds of 
nutriments (cattāro āhārā 12) which sustain beings. The first is the 
gross or subtle food taken in morsels ( kabaliṅkāra āhāra ). The 
second is contact (phassa). The third is intentional thinking going 
on in the mind ( manosañcetanā). The fourth is consciousness 
(viññāṇaṁ). It leads to a very deep dhamma disquisition. But 
there too the simile the Buddha has given for contact is one that 
makes one shudder. It is found in the ‘ Puttamaṁsa Sutt a’. 
Without relating the whole story we shall give only the simile. 
There the Buddha uses the term ‘ niccammā gāvī’ – literally ‘the 
cow that has been skinned.’ But we have to understand by it not a 
cow that is fully skinned to death – only that in some par ts of its 
body skin has come off. The Buddha is here speaking about such 
a cow. He says that if that cow stands near a wall, creatures in the 
wall would eat the flesh. If it stands near a tree, creatures in the 
tree would eat into the wound. If it goes dow n into water, 
creatures living in the water would eat into its body. If it stands in 
an open space, birds would peck at its wounds. Wherever that 
cow stands, creatures there would eat into it. Just ponder over the 
depth of this simile. How do we experience the pleasure of bodily 
contact? What is next to contact is feeling. You had better reflect 
on this statement: There is a difference between the feeling 
experienced with the skin and the feeling experienced without the 
skin. Suppose we have an open wound. Let alone other soft 
things, a velvet cloth is extremely soft to the touch. When a 
velvet cloth touches the wound, do we get a pleasurable feeling? 
What has happened now? 
 Let us add a post -script to this simile. The Buddha has 
compared the entire body to a wound . 13 If the whole body is a 
‘wound’, what could be the skin? The skin is the ‘bandage’ on it. 
It is to decorate this bandage that worldlings, especially females,

Sermon 15 

are spending so much. To ‘paint’ the bandage and make it 
fashionable, females in particular take a lot of pains. When a tiny 
scratch occurs the pleasure of touch is gone. I need not give you 
instances. Just reflect on the difference between the feeling with 
the skin and without the skin. So the simile of ‘ niccammā gāvī’ 
(skinned cow) given by the Buddha is extremely profound. 
 Let us now revert to the simile given by the Buddha with 
reference to the feeling of touch in the Indriyabhāvanā Sutta. It 
concerns the reaction to the feeling of touch. He even gives a 
formula to show how quickly a monk  should dispel a liking or a 
dislike or a mixture of both on experiencing a touch sensation. He 
gives an insightful formula to be used in bringing the mind to rest 
in equanimity. A monk should reflect: ‘Here is a liking, a 
disliking or both arisen in me. B ut that is something prepared, 
gross and dependently arisen. This is peaceful, this is excellent, 
namely equanimity (…. tañca kho  saṅkhataṁ oḷārikaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ. Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ  upekkhā’). 
In fact, that principle is applied to ever y sense faculty. With 
reference to the body this is the simile given in the 
Indriyabhāvanā Sutta  to illustrate the rapidity of bringing one’s 
mind to ‘ upekkhā’ or equanimity: ‘As quickly as a strong man 
would stretch his bent arm or bend his outstretched a rm.’ This 
simile often occurs in the Buddhist scriptures with reference to 
the speed with which one who has  psychic powers ‘disappears’ 
from one place and appears at another place. So in speaking about 
the body, the Buddha has taken a simile from the body itself. 
 Now we come to the mind. It is with the idea of saving 
time for dealing with the mind that I dealt with the other senses in 
brief. Mind is the knottiest point in the stitch of the seamstress 
craving. It is the last ‘trump’ of Māra. That is where all beings in 
the world including the scientist and the philosopher has got 
stuck. There too, to begin with, let us take up the ‘two ends’ of 
the Majjhe Sutta. Mind is one end. The other end is mind -objects 
(dhammā). One who puts the knot between them is the seamstress

The Law of Dependent Arising 

craving. We have to explain a very deep point in this connection. 
Let us hark back to the term ‘ manasikāra’. In the Pāli language 
the etymology of the word is: ‘ manasi’ is in the locative case – 
that means ‘in the mind’ and ‘kāra’ is ‘doing’. So ‘manasikāra’ is 
suggestive of some ‘doing’ in the mind. That ‘doing’ in the mind 
inadvertently we direct towards some object. That is a very deep 
point. Now that we have mentioned the word ‘ manasikāra’ let us 
bring in another discourse we came across e arlier too. We have 
already discussed it. When I mention its title those of you who 
had listened to it earlier would easily understand – namely 
Kimmūlaka Sutta. 14 That also is a very wonderful discourse. 
 The Buddha asks the monks: “How, monks, would you 
reply if wandering ascetics of other sects raise a set of questions 
like this?” the monks confess: “We do not know how to reply. 
Would the Fortunate One himself tell us the answers.” What is 
noteworthy is that the Buddha himself presents the set of 
questions. That indicates how important and how deep the 
questions are. Now the Buddha repeats the set of questions and 
says: “If they question you, you had better give these answers.” 
We have discussed that discourse earlier. So in this context we 
shall take up o nly the first three questions that are relevant. 
“Kimmūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā ?” “What, friends, is the root 
of all things?” “ kiṁ sambhavā sabbe dhammā ?” “What is the 
coming up of all things?” “ kiṁ samudayā sabbe dhammā ?” 
“What is the arising of all things ?” The answer to the first 
question is: “ Chandamūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā. ” “Interest, 
friends, is the root of all things.” We defined ‘ chanda’ as the 
lightest shade of craving. In fact it is so light that it is hardly 
recognizable. According to the traditi onal way of explanation 
“craving is bad but the desire for the skillful ( Kusalacchanda) is 
alright.” But even that has to be given up. That is why it is said in 
the Dhamma “ Chandaṁ nissāya chanda ṁ pajahatha” 
“Depending on desire give up desire.” It is a wo nderful Middle 
Path. In the final reckoning even that has to be abandoned. The 
desire for the skillful is good. One cannot do without it. The

Sermon 15 

desire for calm and insight must be there. But there comes a time 
to give it up as well. 
 That shows the fact that  ‘chanda’ which we rendered by 
‘interest’ is the root of all things. Just think why a problem comes 
to our mind as if from nowhere. It is ‘interest’ however subtle it 
may be. But it comes up. What finds or discovers it is attention – 
‘manasikāra sambhavā ’. It arises from ‘contact’ – ‘phassa 
samudayā’. I do not know much about the computer but as far as 
I can see, all the above three are found in the computer. We spoke 
of ‘ chanda’ (interest), ‘ manasikāra’ (attention) and ‘ phassa’ 
(contact). Out of these, ‘ chanda’ is the ‘mouse’. As you know, 
the mouse works unseen – stealthily. One cannot even see it 
working. When the mouse is active what happens? The ‘cursor’ 
starts running. That is attention. So ‘interest’ is the ‘root’ – the 
‘mouse’, which works stealthily . What does it do stealthily? It 
sets the ‘cursor’ working. What does the cursor aim at? The 
‘menu’ – that is phassa – ‘contact’. It is from there onwards that 
one ‘enjoys’ what is ‘dished up’ by the computer. We gave this 
analysis to make the explanation as practical as possible. 
 So then it seems ‘interest’ is the root of all things. Until 
the Buddha pointed it out, the world was unaware of it. Every 
time we conclude a deep disquisition by citing two simple verses 
which everyone knows. Let us recall them – at least the relevant 
portion. ‘ Manopubbaṅgamā dhammā – manoseṭṭhā mano -
mayā’. 15 All this time the commentarial tradition had interpreted 
it differently. As we pointed out in explaining the line 
‘manopubbaṅgamā dhammā ’, out of the two terms ‘ mano’ 
(mind) and ‘dhammā’ (mind-objects) on either side, mind comes 
first as the ‘forerunner’ ( manopubbaṅgamā). ‘Manoseṭṭhā’ – the 
mind-objects have mind as their chief. Not only that, ‘manomayā’ 
– the mind -objects are ‘mind -made’. That is why there is that 
word with its peculiar etymology: ‘ manasikāra’ (lit. doing -
within-the mind) i.e. attention. We were not aware that an object 
of the mind is of mind’s own making. So then it seems that all

The Law of Dependent Arising 

this gimmick is carried on with something made by the mind 
itself. Just see ho w subtle the knotty stitch of the seamstress 
craving is. It is by accelerating the speed of attention as in the 
table-tennis game,  that one can catch up with it. The secret of 
attention ( manasikāra) is discovered by accelerating ‘radical -
attention’ ( yoniso-manasikāra). That is to say by attending 
promptly – then and there. This is something almost 
‘unimaginable’.  
 There comes a time when the place of origin of a thought 
comes to light. There is in fact a couple of lines of a verse in a 
certain discourse w hich even the commentaries do not explain 
correctly: ‘ Disvā āyatanuppāda ṁ – sammā citta ṁ vimuccati.’ 16 
‘Having seen the arising of sense -spheres – the mind is well 
released.’ What is meant by saying that if at any time one sees the 
arising of the sense -spheres, the mind is emancipated? The 
arising of the sense -spheres occurs at a speed hardly discernible. 
With extreme rapidity, the ‘give -and-take’ process goes on 
between the mind and the mind -object. Everyone thinks that the 
mind-object stands before the mi nd, for one can argue: ‘How can 
we think without an object?’ But from the etymology of the term 
‘manasi-kāra’, one can understand that the mind -object itself is 
mind-made. That is why we say ‘ manomayā’. At whatever 
occasion one comes to understand it, the magic-show of 
consciousness gets exposed. It is this magician – this juggler – 
who creates this confusion. What we find in this magic -show is 
the mind and its object which is of its own making. In the final 
reckoning it amounts to the same problem of the d eer and the 
mirage. Only when one accelerates radical attention to the 
utmost, one comes to understand it as it is. 
 We need not give a simile of our own. Any simile we can 
give falls far below the mark when compared to the simile given 
by the Buddha with reference to the mind. “Suppose, monks, a 
man lets fall two or three drops of water into an iron -cauldron 
heated all day long. The dropping of those water -drops is slow

Sermon 15 

but their drying up and evaporation is instantaneous.” Just try to 
visualize it. You let two or three drops of water to fall from above 
into an intensely heated iron -cauldron. If you watch the drops as 
they fall, you fail to see them drying up. 
 In this simile we seem to get a hint to what is happening 
between mind and mind -object. But even that if a meditator 
realizes by accelerating radical attention, he has seen the arising 
of sense-spheres – how the two come together and consciousness 
arises. To see the arising of consciousness is to see the Law of 
Dependent Arising: “ Cakkhuñca  paṭicca r ūpe ca uppajjati 
cakkhuviññāṇaṁ.” Note the significance of the two words: 
‘paṭicca uppajjati ’ – Depending on eye and forms arises eye 
consciousness. The Buddha has preached that consciousness is a 
magic show. That is why it is said: ‘ majjhe mantā na lippat i’. 
Gets not attached at the middle with wisdom. ‘ Yo ubhante 
viditvāna’ – ‘He who having understood both ends.’ Why does 
one who understands both ends has no attachment to the middle? 
Because he has wisdom. He has discovered the magic of 
consciousness. We have so often said that if one sees the interior 
of a magic show the magic is no more for him. It happens at the 
above mentioned occasion. It is then that radical attention or 
‘yoniso manasikāra’ which we called the ‘seed’ of wisdom bears 
its fruit as wisdom itself. In that wisdom, consciousness has no 
place. That is why it is said ‘ paññā bhāvetabhā viññā ṇaṁ 
pariññeyyaṁ’17 – ‘wisdom has to be developed, consciousness 
has to be comprehended.’ In order to comprehend consciousness 
wisdom has to be develope d. At the peak of the development of 
wisdom, the secret of consciousness is exposed. It is exposed at 
the above mentioned moment. The arising of sense -spheres is 
seen then and there. Along with the seeing of the arising of sensespheres, their cessation becomes obvious, since whatever that has 
arisen has to cease. That is the realization of cessation ( nirodha). 
Then, there is that peaceful and excellent Nibbāna as expressed in

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the memorable formula, beginning with ‘ Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ 
paṇītaṁ’ (This is peaceful, this is excellent.) etc. 
 The question now comes up about the object of the mind – 
dhamma. We said that a meditator cannot do without it. There is a 
very important discourse which is relevant to the discussion of 
that point – namely, Alagaddūpama Sutta.18 In that discourse the 
Buddha has given the simile of the raft. He declares: 
“Kullūpamaṁ vo bhikkhave dhammaṁ desissāsi.” “Monks, I will 
preach to you a Dhamma which is comparable to a raft.” A man 
going on a long journey comes across a great expanse of water. 
There is no ferry boat or bridge. Since there is no other 
alternative he collects some branches from here and there, binds 
them together with creepers and improvises a raft. With its help 
and making an effort with his hands and feet, he gets across to the 
farther shore. Once he gets to the other shore, he no longer needs 
the raft. So he sets it adrift in the water. Drawing the  moral from 
this parable the Buddha says: “ Kullūpamo mayā  bhikkhave 
dhammo desito nitthara ṇatthāya, no gaha ṇatthāya.” “I have  
preached the Dhamma with the simile of the raft just for crossing 
over, not for grasping.” In the same connection he says: If one 
has understood this simile, even those things that have to do with 
Dhamma have to be given up. What to say of things on the s ide 
of Adhamma – that is those contrary to the Dhamma.  
 If I may allude to another simile for you to understand this 
moral in brief, I have already discussed the simile of the seven 
relay-chariots in the Rathavinīta Sutta.19 It is a simile resembling 
the modern relay-race. King Pasenadi of Kosala has some urgent 
business in Sāketa and seven relay-chariots are arranged for him. 
Because horses get tired the king dismounts from the first relay - 
chariot and mounts the second relay -chariot. Likewise from the 
second to the third and from the third to the fourth and so on and 
finally arrives at Sāketa by the seventh chariot. It is after getting 
down from the seventh chariot that he settles his business. The 
simile given is an illustration of the sequence of the se ven

Sermon 15 

purifications. The purification of virtue is purposeful as far as 
purification of the mind, purification of the mind is purposeful as 
far as purification of view and in this way seven purifications are 
mentioned. The seventh is purification by knowledg e and vision 
but even that has to be given up because perfect Nibbāna is 
without clinging (anupādā parinibbāna). This is very wonderful. 
In no other religious system you find anything like this. Giving 
up itself is Nibbāna. 
 It is to explain this that we u sed two terms in our sermons 
and books, namely ‘pragmatic’ and ‘relative’. Because it is 
pragmatic we make use of it, because it is relative we give it up. 
Now I am going to give you a new simile of a type you had never 
heard before. As you know, there are  relay-races. In this race I 
am going to describe, there are two teams – Māra team and the 
Buddha team. We are not concerned with the participants of the 
Māra team. In the Buddha -team there are four runners. In a relay 
race they make use of a baton to be c arried and passed on. The 
baton has to reach the winning -post for a team to win. Runner  
No 1. starts running. He runs in self -sacrificing spirit. He runs 
with all his efforts, panting all the way. On reaching the second 
runner he successfully hands over t he baton to him but himself 
falls dead. His partner does not look back to see whether his 
friend is dead but runs in the same spirit putting forth his best 
efforts. He runs and runs panting and passes the baton to the third 
and falls dead. The third in the  same spirit and with the same 
vigour runs and passes the baton to the fourth but falls dead. The 
fourth likewise runs in the same spirit with all his might to reach 
the winning-post. There he hands over the baton to the judge and 
himself falls dead. Who g ets the prize? Who won the race? Is the 
‘baton’ the winner? There is no one to receive the      
prize. Take it that Nibbāna too is something like that. Everyone 
seems to have the problem of ‘self’ and ‘not -self’ (‘ attā’ and 
‘anattā’). Who attains Nibbāna? The Buddha has said in 
repudiation: “These Brahmins are leveling at me a false charge of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

preaching annihilation. ” 20 We are also accused of it because of 
our sermons highlighting the Buddha -word. But this is how the 
Buddha answers the charge of preaching annihilation: “Formerly, 
as well as now I point out only suffering and the cessation of 
suffering”. “ Dukkhameva uppajjamāna ṁ uppajjati dukkha ṁ 
nirujjhamānaṁ nirujjhati.” 21 “What arises is only suffering and 
what ceases is only suffering.” There is no ques tion of persons at 
all. If so there is nothing to lament. Those who lament it are 
doing so because of ignorance. 
 Well then, if you all have come with me in this 
pilgrimage, the destination is the mind. But of course one can 
reach it through any of the six  senses. That is why we said that 
there is Nibbāna even at the tip of the tongue, provided the 
meditator properly directs radical attention. Some ancient 
episodes can be true up to a point though there are exaggerations 
in the commentaries. It is said that in the past in such sacred cities 
like Anuradhapura and Mihintale there is no seat in the 
monasteries seated on which some monk had not attained 
arahanthood while partaking of porridge at dawn by reflecting 
wisely on food. By practicing it regularly as so on as one 
discovers the secret at the tip of the tongue, one directly comes to 
the mind. Finally one arrives at the mind. Whatever is amassed 
through other senses at last boils down to mind and mind -objects. 
That is where insight reaches its peak. If one d iscovers that secret 
the magic -show of consciousness is exposed then and there. 
Wisdom is perfected and the journey ends. The Buddha team has 
won, and the Māra team has lost. 
 Now that, dear listeners, you have listened attentively to 
what we have said, try to bring victory to the Buddha team. Don’t 
think that you go somewhere on attaining Arahanthood. Don’t 
expect a ‘Simple Simon’ (‘ Siyadoris’) Nibbāna. Try to boost up 
the Buddha team taking the cue from those dead runners. So that 
is the illustration for the Four Supramundane Paths and Four 
Fruits. Try to recognize the four runners. I wish to wind up now.

Sermon 15 

Out of all sermons given so far this is probably the most practical. 
Please make the best use of this sermon. May the merits of 
listening to this sermon conduce to your attainment of Nibbāna 
here and now! Whatever beings there be, from the lowest hell to 
the highest Brahma world wishing to rejoice in this sermon, may 
they, with the help of this sermon with its meditation topics, 
attain the highest aim – the Deathless Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 143  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. D. I 42,43  Brahmajāla Sutta 
3. M. I 108 Madhupiṇḍika Sutta 
4. A. III 399 Majjhe Sutta 
5. S. IV 68 Dutiya Dvayaṁ Sutta 
6. M. III 298 Indriyabhāvanā Sutta 
7. S. I 204 Padumapuppa Sutta 
8. The simile given in the Indriyabhāvanā Sutta: 
  “Just as Ānanda, drops of water roll over from the slightly 
tilted lotus petal, they do not stick to it, so quickly and easily a 
liking, a disliking or both liking and disliking arisen ceases 
and equanimity is established in one, this Ānanda, is called the 
supreme development of sense -faculties in this Noble One’s 
discipline regarding smells sensed by the nose.”  
(Note the association of smell with the lotus.)    
9. Thag. V 733 Pārāsariya Theragāthā 
10. Sn. p.138  Nālaka Sutta 
11. M. II 138 Brahmāyu Sutta; S. IV 164 Koṭṭhika Sutta 
12. S. II 11 Āhāra Sutta; S. II 97 Puttamaṁsa Sutta 
13. S. IV 83 Uddaka Sutta 
14. A. IV 338 Kimmūlaka Sutta 
15. Dhp. Yamaka Vagga – vv. 1,2 
16. A. III 378 Soṇa Sutta 
17. M. I 293 Mahā Vedalla Sutta 
18. M. I 135 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
19. M. I 145 Rathavinīta Sutta 
20. M. I 140 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
21. S. II 16 Kaccānagotta Sutta

Sermon 16 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 198)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Sukhaṁ vā yadi vā dukkhaṁ – adukkhamasukhaṁ sahā 
ajjhattañ ca bahiddhā ca – yaṁ kiñci atthi veditaṁ  
etaṁ dukkhanti ñatvāna – mosadhammaṁ palokinaṁ  
phussa phussa vaya ṁ passaṁ – evaṁ tattha virajjati 
vedanānaṁ khayā bhikkhu – nicchāto parinibbuto 1 
  – Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, Sutta Nipāta.  
Dear Listeners,  
 Attainment of Nibbānic peace by overcoming sa ṁsāric 
suffering is generally considered as the aim of the Buddhist 
spiritual path. The problem of misery and happiness invariably 
reminds us of vedanā, feeling. The above two verses with a deep 
philosophical in terpretation of feeling, which are chosen as the 
topic for this 16 th discourse on Paṭicca Samuppāda, the Law of 
Dependent Arising, provides an ideal introduction to our 
discussion on the significance of feeling as revealed in the twelve 
links of the Paṭicca Samuppāda. 
 These two verses in the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta  of the 
Sutta Nipāta, were uttered by the Buddha in order to emphasize 
the significance of the duality of arising and ceasing. In several of 
our previous discourses on Paṭicca Samuppāda , this sutta 
provided the key to our explanation. In the present context too the 
relevance of the above two verses is established by the Buddha’s 
remark: “Monks, if someone inquires whether there could be 
another mode of contemplating dualities, you must reply in the  
affirmative. How is it possible? Whatever suffering arises, all that 
is dependent on vedanā – feeling. That is one mode of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

contemplation. With total cessation and detachment from feeling, 
suffering ceases. That is the other mode of contemplation. 
Monks, i f a monk applies himself to the ( dvayatānupassanā) 
twofold method of contemplation without delay, with undeterred 
effort at cleansing of defilements ( kiḷesa) he may expect to attain 
either Arahanthhood, or the stage of Non -returner, Anāgāmi in 
case his cli nging is not totally extinct.” The Buddha uttered the 
above two verses following this explanation. 
 Now let us find out their meanings. 
 Sukhaṁ vā yadi vā dukkhaṁ – adukkhamasukhaṁ sahā 
 ajjhattañ ca bahiddhā ca – yaṁ kiñci atthi veditaṁ 
 Whatever feelings  one experiences, either pleasant, 
unpleasant or neither pleasant nor unpleasant, internally or 
externally, 
 etaṁ dukkhanti ñatvāna – mosadhammaṁ palokinaṁ 
 Realizing their deceptive and breakable nature,  
phussa phussa vayaṁ passaṁ – evaṁ tattha virajjati  
Seeing their waning at every sense contact, there arises 
disenchantment, 
vedanānaṁ khayā bhikkhu – nicchāto parinibbuto 
With the elimination of feeling, the monk overcomes the 
hunger for craving and attains extinction. 
 That is the meaning of the two verses. It is clear that all 
feelings, according to the Buddha, pleasant, unpleasant and 
neither pleasant nor unpleasant, lead to suffering due to their 
deceptive breakable nature and their total cessation amo unts to 
extinction (Parinibbāna).

Sermon 16 

 Now let us try to understand ‘feeling’ ( vedanā) as found 
in the Paṭicca Samuppāda, the Law of Dependent Arising. You 
are familiar with the twelve links of the Paṭicca Samuppāda such 
as avijjā and saṅkhāra. Among them vedanā is described as 
‘Phassa paccayā vedanā , vedanā paccayā ta ṇhā’. I have once 
mentioned that for the clarification of any particular link, the two 
links before and after it have to be put in place. To give a simile, 
in order to illustrate one link in a cha in, the two links on either 
side must be visible at least in part. In this case phassa and taṇhā 
are the links on either side of vedanā, which need special mention 
here. In the previous discourse we discussed phassa, which was 
given a six -fold analysis by the Buddha, 2 such as cakkhu 
samphassa, sota samphassa etc. Similarly, vedanā is six-fold as 
cakkhu samphassajā vedanā , sota samphassajā vedanā , 
ghānasamphassajā vedanā , jivhā samphassajā vedanā , kāya 
samphassajā vedanā and mano samphassajā vedanā . ‘jā’ means 
arising. Therefore cakkhu samphassajā vedanā  means feelings 
arising from (born of) eye contact. The others are the ear contact, 
nose contact, tongue contact, body contact and mind contact. The 
deepest implications on vedanā are brought out in the 
Cūlavedalla Sutta  of the Majjhima Nikāya .3 By way of 
introduction to this discourse, I wish to quote a part of it. 
Visākha, an anāgāmi lay disciple, seeks explanation to a series of 
complicating questions from the nun Dhammadinnā, an Arahant 
Therī. She tackle d them in an expert manner. We would like to 
quote the last few questions and answers which were based on 
vedanā. 
 “Venerable Lady, how do you classify vedanā?” 
 “Friend Visākha, vedanā is threefold, pleasant, unpleasant 
and neither pleasant nor unpleasant . Sukhā vedanā , dukkhā 
vedanā and adukkhamasukhā vedanā.” 
 “Can you please explain what they mean?” (Visākha 
pretended not to know what they meant.)

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Whatever pleasant feeling is experienced physically or 
mentally, it is sukhā vedanā . An unpleasant physical or mental 
experience is dukkhā vedanā . Whatever physical and mental 
feeling is neither pleasant nor unpleasant is called 
adukkhamasukhā vedanā.” 
 “Venerable lady, what is pleasant about a pleasant 
feeling? and what is unpleasant? W hat is pleasant about an 
unpleasant feeling and what is unpleasant? What is pleasant about 
a neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling? and what is 
unpleasant?” 
 “Friend Visākha, a pleasant feeling is pleasant only as 
long as it lasts. Its change is unpleasa nt. Ṭhitisukhā viparināma 
dukkhā. An unpleasant feeling is unpleasant only as long as it 
lasts. Its change is pleasant. Ṭhitidukkhā viparināma sukhā . A 
neither pleasant nor unpleasant feeling is pleasant if surveyed  
with wisdom. It is unpleasant if surveyed without wisdom.” 
 “What is the latency ( anusaya) underlying a pleasant 
feeling? What is the latency underlying an unpleasant feeling? 
What is the latency underlying a neither pleasant nor unpleasant 
feeling?” 
 Before we quote Arahant Therī Dhammadinnā’s reply to 
this question, let me explain the term anusaya in case it is 
unfamiliar to some. In discussing kilesa, we come across three 
stages, the dormant stage called anusaya, the awakening 
(activating) stage called pariyuṭṭhāna, and the active stage that 
violates a precept called vītikamma. Our present discussion is on 
the anusaya stage. The Therī’s reply is as follows: 
 “Friend Visākha, the latency that lies hidden underneath a 
pleasant feeling is lust ( rāgānusaya). The latency that lies hidden 
underneath an unpleasant feeling is anger ( paṭighānusaya). The

Sermon 16 

latency that lies hidden underneath a neither pleasant nor 
unpleasant feeling is ignorance (avijjānusaya).” 
 “Venerable Lady, is the latency of lust found underneath 
every pleasant feeling? Is the latency  of anger found underneath 
every unpleasant feeling? And is the latency of ignorance found 
underneath every feeling that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant?” 
 “No friend Visākha. Lust is not found underneath every 
pleasant feeling. Anger is not found under neath every unpleasant 
feeling. Ignorance is not found underneath every feeling that is 
neither pleasant nor unpleasant.”  
 This position is further explained when the Therī answers 
Visakha’s questions that follow. 
 “Venerable Lady, what must be eradicated  in the case of 
pleasant feelings? What must be eradicated in the case of 
unpleasant feelings? What must be eradicated in the case of 
feelings neither pleasant nor unpleasant?” 
 “Friend Visākha, in the case of pleasant feelings, the 
latency of lust must be  eradicated. In the case of unpleasant 
feelings, the latency of anger must be eradicated. In the case of 
feelings neither pleasant nor unpleasant, the latency of ignorance 
must be eradicated.” 
 “Venerable Lady, must the latency of lust be eradicated in 
every instance of pleasant feelings? Must the latency of anger be 
eradicated in every instance of unpleasant feelings? Must the 
latency of ignorance be eradicated in every instance of feelings 
neither pleasant nor unpleasant?” 
 “No friend Visākha. Anusayas need not be eradicated in 
the case of every pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling or every 
feeling that is neither pleasant or unpleasant.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 With this brief reply the Therī presents an unusual 
description introducing three very special situations. 
 First and foremost a monk who deviates from lustful 
thoughts and unwholesome thoughts and immerses in seclusion 
with reflection and investigation ( vitakka vicāra) attains the first 
absorption endowed with joy and ease (pīti sukha). The latency of 
lust is absent  here although joy and ease are present. That is a 
very special mental state. 
 Secondly the Buddha declares something special about 
anger ‘ paṭigha’: A meditative monk entertains a longing, a 
yearning to speedily attain the noble emancipation through 
Arahatphala Samādhi , which is signeless ( animitta) undirected 
(appaṇihita) and void ( suññata), which the noble arahants attain 
and continue to abide in. The longing to attain that spiritual state 
is identified in the Dhamma as nekkammasita domanassa , 
dejection w ithin renounced life and not gehasita domanassa , 
dejection within lay life. 4 Dhammadinnā Therī declares that 
underneath this dejection no anger is found. That is a very special 
situation. Only a yearning prevails that the spiritual state has not 
yet been acquired, but no anger prevails. 
 The third factor is then explained. A certain monk who 
keeps aloof from pleasant and unpleasant feelings attains the 
fourth absorption which has only feelings that are neither pleasant 
nor unpleasant. No latency of ignoranc e is found underneath it. 
That is a special situation. 
 Followed by this explanation, the lay disciple Visākha 
comes up with an out of the ordinary question. 
 Venerable Lady, what is the counterpart of pleasant 
feeling?

Sermon 16 

 This term needs explanation. Think of a coconut or 
something similar that has two halves. Paṭibhāga means the 
counterpart. Now let’s get back to the questions and answers. 
 Venerable Lady, what is the counterpart of pleasant 
feeling? 
 Friend Visākha, the counterpart of pleasant feeling is 
unpleasant feeling. 
 Then, what is the counterpart of unpleasant feeling? 
 The counterpart of unpleasant feeling is pleasant feeling. 
 This answer establishes a relationship between the two. 
 Then, what is the counterpart of feeling neither pleasant 
nor unpleasant. 
 The counterpart, Friend Visākha, is ignorance (avijjā). 
 This answer is also unusual. The questioning continues. 
 What is the counterpart of avijjā, ignorance? 
 The counterpart is vijjā, knowledge. 
 What is the counterpart of vijjā, knowledge? 
 The counterpart is vimutti, emancipation. 
 What is the counterpart of vimutti? 
 The counterpart of vimutti is Nibbāna, extinction. 
 What is the counterpart of Nibbāna? 
 Friend Visākha, unable to restrain yourself from 
questioning, you are overstepping the boundaries. Higher life of 
Brahmacariya ends with Nibbāna, extinction. That is the end. 
Your question is erroneous.  
 But I am sure you can see, when you go deep into th is 
subject, that the worldlings exist between pleasant and unpleasant 
experiences. Emancipation on the other hand arises in mid 
position called neither pleasant nor unpleasant.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Now we know the counterpart of pleasant feeling is 
unpleasant feeling, and the  counterpart of unpleasant feeling is 
pleasant feeling. But the feeling neither pleasant nor unpleasant 
goes deeper. When ignorance that lies hidden is dispelled 
knowledge dawns. When knowledge is dispelled, emancipation 
dawns, and Nibbāna emerges. Everyth ing ends there. There is 
another valuable sutta relevant to this subject in the Vedanā 
Saṁyutta named Salla Sutta .5 Here the Buddha directly calls a 
person ignorant of the Dhamma as an illiterate common man. 
Afflicted with unpleasant feelings he desires fo r sensual pleasure. 
What is the reason for this? Being illiterate and worldly, he can 
visualize no other escape from misery than through sense 
pleasure. He is totally ignorant of feelings that are neither 
pleasant nor unpleasant. In an attempt to clarify t his point on an 
earlier occasion, we remember bringing out the simile of a see -
saw. A ride on the see -saw is similar to the ride on the head of a 
coconut frond which was a game of long ago. We see the 
ordinary worldlings ride the see -saw between joy and mi sery. 
They are not aware of the neither pleasant nor unpleasant position 
in the center. Only the noble disciple who dedicates himself to the 
serious practice of contemplation on feeling according to the 
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, is capable of identifying the nei ther pleasant 
nor unpleasant feeling. The worldlings on the run between the 
two extremes know nothing about the mid-position.  
 This point is well illustrated in the commentary with the 
simile of deer footprints. On a stretch of flat land there was a 
rocky plateau. A deer used to walk across it leaving footprints on 
the bare land but no trace on the rock. The feeling neither 
pleasant nor unpleasant is similar to the rocky plateau. 
Emancipation lies there, although the worldlings are not aware. 
Emancipation is found concealed. Talking of the two extremes 
and the middle, I would like to switch on to Majjhe Sutta 6 again 
for clarification, as we have done earlier. First let me give a 
summary of the sutta for the benefit of the new-comers.

Sermon 16 

 When the Buddha was residing at Isipatana in Benaris, a 
group of theras (senior monks) while relaxing after the mid -day 
meal, initiated a dhamma discussion. They selected a riddle -like 
verse with subtle meaning from the Metteyya Pañha 7 in the Sutta 
Nipāta, and sitting in conference as it were formulated four 
questions for interpretation. 
  Yo ubhante viditvāna 
 majjhe mantā na lippati 
 taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
 sodha sibbanimaccagā 
 Knowing the two ends, he who with wisdom 
 refrains from attachment to the middle,  
 I call him a great man (mahā purisa)  
 who transcends the seamstress in this world. 
 The four questions formulated were What is the first end? 
What is the second end? What is the middle? Who is the 
seamstress? Six senior monks contributed their deep  
interpretations which were even suitable as objects of meditation. 
When presented to the Buddha he approved all six as correct. 
Here, we will discuss the third interpretation, as it is the most 
relevant to us. 
 “One end is pleasant feeling. The other is u npleasant 
feeling. In the middle is the feeling neither pleasant nor 
unpleasant. The seamstress is craving.” 
 This makes it clear that the ordinary worldling runs 
between pleasure and pain driven by craving. Craving ignores the 
middle position and keeps tying knots with the two extreme ends. 
On the sly, she conceals ‘neither pleasant nor unpleasant’ feelings 
and keeps tying up the two ends. It is similar to the ride on the 
see-saw totally ignorant of the emancipation in the middle.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 Now let’s go into anothe r relevant sutta, the 
Phassamūlaka Sutta  in the Vedanā Sa ṁyutta.8 The Buddha 
begins as follows “Monks, there are three feelings”. To quote the 
Pāli statement “ Tisso imā bhikkhave vedanā , phassajā 
phassamūlakā, phassanidānā, phassapaccayā”.  
 ‘Monks, Feelings are of three types whether arisen from 
contact, rooted in contact, founded on contact or conditioned by 
contact. What are they? Pleasant, unpleasant and neither pleasant 
nor unpleasant’. The Buddha further clarifies how they arise. 
‘Monks, a conta ct conducive to a pleasant feeling, generates a 
pleasant feeling”. That contact is referred to as ‘ tajjaṁ’ a word 
which has to be broken up as tat+ja. Tajja means ‘born of that’ 
‘arisen from that’. When a contact which gives rise to a pleasant 
feeling ceases, the resultant pleasant feeling ceases. The Buddha 
stresses this fact with reference to unpleasant feelings as well. 
‘dukkhavedaniyaṁ bhikkhave phassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dukkhā 
vedanā’. Dependent on contact which generates an unpleasant 
feeling there ar ises an unpleasant feeling. With the cessation of 
that contact, the unpleasant feeling ceases. The same applies to 
feelings neither pleasant nor unpleasant. With a contact 
conducive to the generation of a feeling neither pleasant nor 
unpleasant, such a feeling is generated. With the cessation of such 
contact, the resultant feeling ceases. 
 The Buddha gives an ideal simile in order to explain 
contemplation on feeling, vedanānupassanā. ‘Monks, just as heat 
is generated by rubbing two pieces of wood together, that heat 
disappears then and there, when the two sticks are taken apart’. 
Here the word tajja is used. “ Yā tajjā usmā sā nirujjhati ”. The 
heat that arises by rubbing ceases then and there. Heat is 
generated by rubbing. By separating the two sticks, it coo ls. The 
message conveyed here is very deep. The Buddha has brought it 
up as a very important theory regarding vedanānupassanā. Here, 
in the Phassamūlaka Sutta, the Buddha declares it in poetic Pāli 
words, which can be easily commited to memory, as follows.

Sermon 16 

“Tajjaṁ tajjaṁ phassaṁ paṭicca tajjā tajjā vedanā uppajjanti. 
Tajjassa tajjassa phassassa nirodhā tajjā tajjā vedanā 
nirujjhanti”. Let us see its meaning. We can translate tajja as 
‘specific’. Then the statement would be roughly converted into 
English as ‘Depending on each different contact, each specific 
feeling is generated. With the cessation of each different contact, 
each specific feeling ceases’. That is the general idea. You have 
to understand the implication of tajja, which has a very specific 
meaning.  
 Generated by different contacts, feelings arise. With their 
disappearance, feelings vanish. Contemplation on feeling rests on 
this reality. The ordinary worldlings are unable to see 
impermanence. They ignore the middle. They always lean 
towards the ‘arising’ aspect. With reference to this, let us discuss 
the first interpretation in the Majjhe Sutta . Out of the six 
interpretations the first one on contact will help us here. It was 
the first to be approved by the Buddha as well. He said he too 
meant th is interpretation, when uttering the verse although the 
other interpretations are also correct. What then is the first 
interpretation? Contact ( phassa) is one end. Arising of contact 
(phassa samudaya) is the other end. It is not easy to grasp this. 
The mid dle is the cessation of contact ( phassa nirodha ). Now 
think what the seamstress does. She always sews the two opposite 
ends of the cloth, avoiding the middle. So are the worldlings who 
always live between contact and the arising of contact. Each time 
one contact fades away, they manoeuvre another to take its place. 
They never see the cessation in the middle. What does the 
seamstress craving (taṇhā) do? As in the simile of the two sticks, 
the Buddha says, if feeling arises dependent on contact, feeling 
should cease when contact ceases. But the worldlings are inclined 
towards origination. When one disappears, the stage is set for 
others to appear immediately. The implication here is deep, since 
it is suggestive of the perception of impermanace ( anicca saññā). 
The term tajjaṁ can be grasped through yoniso manasikāra or 
seeing as it is with true insight. You must keep this in mind.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Depending on different contacts, different feelings arise. With the 
cessation of these different contacts, those feelings cease. 
 I t hink much has been said about contemplation on 
feeling, ( vedanānupassanā). Let us remember as beckground 
knowledge the similes the Buddha gave for each of the five 
aggregates of grasping. Many of you are aware of them. Physical 
form is a cluster of foam. F eeling is a bubble. Perception is an 
illusion. Preparations are a banana stump. Consciousness is a 
deception.9 They all suggest impermanence, lack of solidity, lack 
of essence. Take the above simile given for feeling, for further 
contemplation. ‘Monks, rai n coming down on water in large 
drops in the summer, causes bubbles to rise and break up fast. 
They arise and break up. A wise man will look at it as it is, and 
see its essencelessness. It ceases then and there. It ceases then and 
there’. That is the simil e the Buddha gave to demonstrate the 
emptiness of feeling. Please retain it at the back of your mind. 
 Now let us go into a very special discourse among the 
suttas, with reference to contemplation on feeling, 
(vedanānupassanā), called Nandakovāda Sutta, in the Majjhima 
Nikāya.10 It’s a unique one. This is the background in brief. The 
Buddha was once residing at Jetavanārāma. According to a rule 
of discipline, senior monks were expected to give a fortnightly 
advisory talk to the nuns. On this particular day, Therī Prajāpatī 
Gotamī too dropped in, to remind the monks of the talk. The 
monks informed the Buddha that it was Nandaka Thera’s turn to 
advise the nuns. But, he showed reluctance until the Buddha 
himself made a request. He approached the nunnery 
Rājakārāmaya and addressed the anxiously waiting nuns. He said 
at the outset that the discussion would take the form of a question 
and answer session. Whenever necessary they should clarify their 
doubts by questioning him. The discussion began with the usual 
subject of tilakkhana, the three characteristics, beginning with the 
internal sense organs.

Sermon 16 

 ‘Sisters, is the eye permanent or impermanent?’ 
 ‘Impermanent, Venerable Sir’. 
 ‘That which is impermanent, is it pleasant or unpleasant?’ 
 ‘Unpleasant, Venerable Sir’. 
 ‘That which is impermanent, unpleasant and subject to 
change, is it worthwhile calling it I and mine?’ 
 ‘Definitely not, Venerable Sir’. 
 The other internal sense organs the ear, the nose, the 
tongue, the body and the mind were also discussed throug h a 
similar series of questions. The nuns concluded their answering 
by saying ‘Venerable Sir, we had already realized through noble 
wisdom the impermanence of all six internal sense spheres’. 
 The next series of questions was about the external sense 
objects. 
 ‘Sisters, is the physical form permanent or impermanent?’ 
 ‘Impermanent, Venerable Sir’. 
 In a similar manner the nuns were questioned about 
sound, smell, taste, contact and cognizable objects. Again they 
concluded their answering by saying that they had already 
realized the impermanence of the six external sense objects 
through their noble wisdom. 
 The third series of questions was on the six viññāṇas, the 
six types of consciousness. 
 ‘Sisters, is eye consciousness permanent or not?’ 
 ‘It’s impermanent, Venerable Sir’. 
  The series of questions was as above, to emphasis the 
quality of impermanence. At this point too, the nuns declared that 
they had already realized it.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

  Now this sutta offers us three wonderful similes. That I 
think makes this sutta invaluable. This is the first one: 
 ‘Sisters, there is a kindled oil lamp. The oil in it is 
impermanent. The wick is impermanent. The flame is 
impermanent. So is the light. But if someone were to say that the 
oil, the wick and the flame are impermanent, but the light is 
permanent, would you agree?’ 
 ‘Definitely not, Venerable Sir, because if the oil, the wick 
and the flame are impermanent, the light produced by them is 
bound to be impermanent’. 
 Here the nuns spontaneously came out with the Buddha’s 
theory “ tajjaṁ tajjaṁ phassaṁ”. They answered in unison as 
follows. 
 “Tajjaṁ tajjaṁ bhante paccaya ṁ paṭicca tajjā tajjā 
vedanā uppajjanti. Tajjassa tajjassa paccayassa nirodhā tajjā 
tajjā vedanā nirujjhanti ” ‘Venerable Sir, the reason is that 
different feelings arise dependent on different contacts. With the 
cessation of these contacts, the feelings cease’. 
 Paccaya or conditions here refers to phassa or contact, 
although the sutta doesn’t say so. We are compelled to believe 
that the nuns were not listening passively. For example, if they 
had continued to sit throughout in one posture, they would have 
experienced physical pain. They may have contemplated on 
vedanā in conformity with  the discourse. That is why perhaps 
they answered in unison “Tajjaṁ tajjaṁ”, “With the cessation of 
different contacts, the relevant feelings cease.” Here the 
fundamental theory emerges, which is then applied to the simile 
as follows. 
 If someone says the internal sense spheres such as the eye, 
the ear and the nose are impermanent but the feelings that arise 
thereof such as happiness and pain are permanent, is that

Sermon 16 

statement correct? It was in relation to this question that the 
similes were brought in. the simile of the oil lamp refers to the 
impermanence of internal sense spheres, the eye, the ear, the 
nose, the tongue, the body and the mind. Now the Thera presents 
his second simile. 
 ‘Sisters, think of a huge tree. The roots are impermanent. 
The trunk is i mpermanent. The foliage is impermanent. The 
shadow is impermanent. If someone were to say that the root, the 
trunk and the foliage are impermanent, but the shadow is 
permanent, would you agree?’ 
 ‘No Venerable Sir. If roots, the trunk and the foliage are 
impermanent, the shadow has to be impermanent as well.’ 
 ‘Sisters, in the same way if the six external sense objects, 
physical form, sound, smell, taste, physical contact and 
cognizable objects are impermanent, the resultant pleasant 
feelings, unpleasant fe elings and feelings neither pleasant nor 
unpleasant are bound to be impermanent’ 
 To prove this argument the Buddha’s theory is cited 
“Tajjaṁ tajjaṁ bhante paccaya ṁ paṭicca tajjā tajjā vedanā 
uppajjanti. Tajjassa tajjassa paccayassa nirodhā tajjā tajjā 
vedanā nirujjhanti ”. With this logical argument most probably 
realization dawned upon the nuns regarding the cause – effect 
relationship although not mentioned in the sutta. The third simile 
is more peculiar. 
 ‘Sisters, a butcher or his assistant, slaughters a cow, and 
skins it with a very sharp butcher’s knife. It is delicately done 
without damaging either the flesh or the skin. Only the nerves 
that joined the skin to the flesh were severed. He then expertly 
covers the body with the skin and says ‘There you are. The cow is 
there just as she was. No difference whatever’. Do you think that 
statement is correct?’

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 ‘Certainly not, Venerable Sir. The nerves are severed 
between the skin and the flesh, with a butcher’s knife’. 
  ‘Yes sisters. It is the simile I cited . Now I shall give you 
the interpretation. The flesh within the skin stands for the six 
internal sense faculties. The skin is compared to the external 
sense objects. The nerves that join the two, represent passion for 
lust, nandirāga. 
 Dear listeners,  nandirāga is a synonym for  taṇhā 
(craving). Nandi is to take delight in. Rāga is attachment. 
nandirāga is compared to the nerves that join the flesh and the 
skin of the cow together. Once the nerves are severed, the cow 
though apparently the same, is not reall y the same. The skin 
merely lies spread over the flesh.  
 Now I want you to recall some facts I stressed in the 
previous discourse. With reference to the Buddha’s sensitivity to 
taste it is said “ Rasa paṭisaṁvedi bhagavā hoti, no ca rasa rāga 
paṭisaṁvedi”. He is sensitive to taste but not attached to taste. Let 
us interpret the simile of the cow on these lines. The nerves were 
severed by means of  Nibbāna. The nerves are compared to 
passion for lust, nandirāga. Nandirāga is a synonym for craving. 
These nerves need not be cut off. It’s the passion for lust that has 
to be eliminated. Finally, what is the butcher’s knife? It is a 
synonym for noble wisdom. Noble wisdom is used, for the 
delicate job of severing the cow’s flesh from the skin. Only the 
nerves are se vered leaving the false appearance that the body is 
intact. But there is a difference, the difference between worldly 
and transcendental. You must try to understand it. Try to apply it 
to the simile of a drop of water on a lotus petal. 
 Nandaka Thera, befo re concluding the discourse, briefly 
touched on the seven Factors of Enlightenment bojjhangas, that 
is,  mindfulness, investigation of Dhamma, effort, rapture, repose, 
concentration and equanimity.

Sermon 16 

 ‘Sisters, if one disciplines oneself in each of these seven 
Factors of Enlightenment with Nibbāna as the goal, one is certain 
of Arahanthood. What does ‘with Nibbāna as the goal’ mean? 
The specific terms used are ‘ viveka nissita ṁ’, founded on 
seclusion, ‘ virāga nissita ṁ’, founded on detachment, ‘ nirodha 
nissitaṁ’, founded on cessation, ‘ vossagga parināmiṁ’, maturing 
in total relinquishment. They all stand for Nibbāna.’ 
 ‘Sisters, now the time is up. You can leave.’  
 The nuns rose respectfully and proceeded  to meet the 
Buddha. They stood by after venerating him. He then dismissed 
them saying briefly ‘Sisters, you may go’. Then the Buddha 
addressed the monks. ‘Monks, the Cātuddasa is the 14th day. The 
pañcadasa is the 15 th day. Looking at the moon on the 14 th day 
many will not notice that the moon is not fully visible, though 
really it is not. Similarly, here the Buddha makes the simile clear 
– the five hundred nuns were gladdened by Nandaka’s discourse 
but their expectations were not fulfilled. Then he advise d the 
Venerable Nandaka to repeat the same discourse, the following 
day. If technology had been as advanced as it is today the task 
would have been simple. Venerable Nandaka was asked to repeat 
word to word the entire discourse, the following day.  
 This second day’s account is recorded briefly in the text. 
Venerable Nandaka, after the mid -day meal, entered the nunnery 
and repeated the discourse word for word, in the form of 
questions and answers, and finally said ‘Sisters, that’s all for 
today’. The nuns, as on the previous day met the Buddha, and 
were given permission to leave. Once they left, the Buddha 
addressed the monks and cited his simile again. ‘Monks, looking 
at the moon on the 15 th day, many people have no doubt whether 
the moon appears full or not. It’s full without doubt.  
 Similarly the nuns are not only gladdened but their 
expectations are fulfilled. Their ultimate objective has been

The Law of Dependent Arising 

realized. The final statement in this account is amazing. Of these 
five hundred nuns, the nun who acquired the l owest spiritual 
attainment is Sotāpanna, that of stream winner. At the end of the 
first hearing of the discourse, there were no spiritual attainments 
but on the following day, the lowest attainment was Sotāpanna. It 
indicates that contemplation of feeling or vedanānupassanā as 
explained in the statement “tajjaṁ tajjaṁ” is the force underlying 
it. 
 I wish to now introduce to you a dangerously critical sutta 
in the Māra Saṁyutta. Take care. Even certain educated people 
have misinterpreted this and insulted th e Dhamma. Some have 
even committed suicide through misunderstanding. Although it 
has caused a lot of confusion, this Godhika Sutta 11 touches the 
Dhamma at its depth. This is how it goes. When the Buddha was 
residing in Rajagaha, the monk Godhika lived in a  cell on the 
slope of the Isigili rock. Striving hard in meditation he attained a 
worldly state of concentration or samādhi called ‘sāmayika ceto 
vimutti’. Due to some mysterious reason as his mind touched on 
the samādhi, it slipped away. He made the highest effort again 
and again but for the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth time the 
samādhi slipped away. In deep disappointment he decided to 
commit suicide by severing his neck.  
 This is how the text records it. The  Māra, reading this 
thought of Venerable Godhika, approached the Buddha with a 
show of deep reverence and said ‘Great Hero, a disciple of yours 
who is a Sekha (Sotāpanna) is planning to commit suicide. Please 
prevent him’. This request is very unusual of M āra. It reveals his 
shrewdness. Strange enough, at this very moment Venerable 
Godhika cut off his neck with a sharp weapon. Seeing this, the 
Buddha gives a very unusual reply.  
 “Evaṁ hi dhīrā kubbanti – nāvakaṁkhanti jīvitaṁ, 
 samūlaṁ taṇhaṁ abbuyha – Godhiko parinibbuto”

Sermon 16 

 Instead of criticizing the monk he praised him. “ Evaṁ hi 
dhīrā kubbanti”, ‘That is how the wise men act’. “ nāvakaṁkhanti 
jīvitaṁ”, ‘They have no expectations in life’. “ samūlaṁ taṇhaṁ 
abbuyha”, ‘extracting craving at its very root’ “ Godhiko 
parinibbuto”, ‘Godhika has attained parinibbāna’. This story 
invites criticism. Let us see what followed. The Buddha informed 
the monks of this unusual incident and together with them 
climbed Kālasilā rock in Isigili to see the monk. At a distance 
they saw that the monk’s neck was completely severed from the 
body. They also observed a smoky cloud floating in all ten 
directions. The Buddha explained the mystery behind it, “Monks, 
can you see that smoky cloud floating about? That’s Māra trying 
to dete ct where Venerable Godhika’s consciousness is 
established”. Finally what the Buddha disclosed was surprising 
“Appatiṭṭhitena viññānena Godhiko parinibbuto”, ‘The Venerable 
Godhika attained parinibbāna, his consciousness unestablished’.  
 Let us explain the  above statement. Those of you who 
have read our discourses on Nibbāna know that this reference is 
to the mind that wanders in continuous existence Bhava. The 
ordinary worldling is one who is forever grasping, forever pulling 
at. In Pañca upādānakkhanda, upādāna means grasping, grasping 
the five heaps of aggregates. A man grasping for life on his death 
bed is engaged in a tug -of-war with Māra or death. Death tries to 
pull him out of this life. The man, holding on to dear life pulls in 
the opposite direction . Now that’s exactly what the shrewd Māra 
wishes for. He suddenly lets go saying ‘Have it’. The unfortunate 
man falls back into continuous existence. Existence leads to birth. 
Birth has in store a package of birthday gifts such as decay, 
disease and death.  That is the result of not letting the rope go at 
the moment of death. Holding on means victory to Māra. What is 
the benefit of letting go as Venerable Godhika did? This point is 
too subtle even for erudite westerners to understand. Too subtle. 
At the mome nt of death, Venerable Godhika lets go not only 
craving but also feeling which craving accompanies. Cutting off 
one’s neck is unbelievable. Due to some hidden spiritual strength

The Law of Dependent Arising 

in him he was unable to retain the samādhi which he attained six 
times over. Perhaps he wished to practice insight meditation with 
the help of the samādhi, failing which he was determined to 
practice it simultaneously with the samādhi. Unbelievably bold, 
wasn’t he? 
 Ultimately he seems to have succeeded. These are 
extremely disputab le points. We have heard that certain monks 
misinterpreting this incident, committed suicide. Some are 
foolhardy. Those who think ‘I have no more prospects in life’ 
‘My health has deteriorated’ or ‘I wish to be physically stronger’ 
and wish for a future li fe, easily get caught to Māra. It’s essential 
to let go of everything. Some have attained Nibbāna even while 
being impaled, by letting go . You have heard perhaps of such 
stories in the commentaries, though somewhat superfluous. A 
monk in the grip of a tige r, gradually attained each stage of 
spiritual development with each attack and finally attained 
Nibbāna when his heart was being attacked. 
 To get back to our serious discussion, vedanānupassanā 
or contemplation on feeling is a very effective object of 
meditation. We sometimes call it a strenuous path to Nibbāna. 
Everyone is reluctant to practice it. But if you practice it 
correctly, victory is certain. Let’s take another simile. In horse 
racing, the final stage is so uncertain that an instant camera 
decides the winner. The most unexpected horse may win. What 
Venerable Godhika did was similar to that. But anyone who 
believes, cutting off one’s neck is a shortcut to Nibbāna, he is 
certainly on the w rong track. Some have tried it out, 
unfortunately. On the other hand some may be critical of this 
story ignorant of the fact that vedanānupassanā underlies it.  
 This subject needs serious thinking. Imagine the tug -ofwar with Māra at the moment of death. What do the ordinary 
worldlings do? They think of sensuality in the presence of 
unpleasant feeling. They wish for Deva loka  or the comforts at

Sermon 16 

home. Māra  lets go his firm grip saying ‘Have it’. What 
Venerable Godhika did was quite the opposite. He let go w hen 
Māra was pulling with his might. We can imagine Māra ’s plight 
when he crash -landed on his back. That’s the lesson we learn 
here. 
 It would be beneficial, I think, to discuss the experiences 
of a vipassanā meditator, at this point. One of the main obsta cles 
a meditator faces, is sitting in cross -legged position for long. 
Some cannot sit for more than thirty minutes at each sitting. Soon 
they reach the climax. That is the right moment to recall the four -
fold effort practiced by the Buddha.12 
Kāmaṁ tacoca nahārū ca a ṭṭhi ca avasissatu sarīre 
upasussatu ma ṁsa lohita ṁ, ya ṁ taṁ purisa thāmena, 
purisaviriyena, purisaparakkamena pattabbaṁ  
na taṁ apāpuṇitvā viriyassa santhānaṁ bhavissati  
 Let the skin nerves and the bones remain. Let the flesh 
and blood dry up. I shall not lay down my effort until I attain that 
stage which has to be attained through unshaken manly energy, 
manly vigor, manly strength. With unshaken determination as 
demonstrated above, if a meditator takes his mind off the 
meditation object, to apply firmly on the pain saying ‘Let it break 
to pieces. I don’t care’, that effort will strengthen the 
Enlightenment Factors ( bojjaṇga). You might sweat as a result. 
But haven’t we had more bitter experiences in life? 
 Putting up with unbearable pain unmove d, some 
meditators, even laymen, though without our advice, have tried 
out this method and have had strange experiences. The pain burns 
the meditator beyond the bearable point and suddenly turns cool 
and feels like concrete. Then one could sit for hours. A wareness 
develops under the circumstances which at the same time, 
introspection on feeling develops, the meditator comes to realize 
that feeling is not one solid unit but a cluster similar to a cluster

The Law of Dependent Arising 

of rain drops. He also realizes that he revolted again st pain taking 
it to be one unit whereas he now sees each streak of pain 
revealing the true nature of name -and-form. Dear listeners, each 
streak of pain reveals the true nature of name -and-form. Finally, 
to use two terms I often repeat, the perception of t he compact,  
ghaṇa saññā fades away allowing the perception of cluster or rāsi 
saññā to emerge. There lies introspection. The worldling lives 
within the perception of the compact. He sees things as a 
complete whole. Through meditation one realizes the plur ality of 
everything, true to the Buddha’s simile of a cluster of bubbles, 
arising and breaking. It takes one, deep into vipassanā , insight 
meditation and in fact, if applied correctly, one could firmly 
establish oneself in samādhi, awareness and even atta in 
arahanthood while in that seat by means of vedanānupassanā, 
contemplation on feeling. That’s why ancient books contain such 
stories as that of the monk in the tiger’s grip. It’s important to 
remember this topic is of practical importance to meditators. It’s 
well worth taking Venerable Godhika as an example, not in the 
negative but in the positive aspect. It is not an invitation to 
commit suicide but an invitation to eliminate craving. Only an 
invitation to eliminate craving. In this discourse something 
practically useful to meditators cropped up. When we discussed 
feeling, contact and taṇhā automatically came into the scene. 
 From today’s discourse if you got any inspiration, any 
courage to continue with your meditation practice, we will feel 
satisfied. I f you give importance to vedanānupassanā in your 
daily meditation instead of casting it aside as only appropriate for 
the educated, you can go far. You can sit and practice awareness 
longer and also attain a samādhi. Through insight meditation you 
could at tain transcendental paths and fruits and even attain 
Arahanthood in this very life. 
 If you wish to cross over the samsara, before the lamp of 
this dispensation goes out, I do wish you would make use of the 
objects of meditation we explained in this discou rse. The lamp of

Sermon 16 

the dispensation is about to go out. If you want release from 
repeated births and deaths, it’s worth practicing them even at the 
risk of your life as Venerable Godhika did. We wish ‘May you 
soon attain release from continued existence’. Wh atever beings 
there be, from the lowest hell ‘Avīci’ to the highest Brahma world 
‘Akaniṭṭha’ may they rejoice in this discourse. May it conduce to 
their attainment of Nibbāna. May they attain the Deathless 
Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 738 – 739 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. S. II 2 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
3. M. I 299 Cūla Vedalla Sutta 
4. M. III 215 Saḷāyatana Vibhaṅga Sutta 
5. S. IV 140 Salla Sutta 
6. A. III 399 Majjhe Sutta 
7. Sn. 1042 Tissametteyyamāṇavapucchā 
8. S. IV 215 Phassamūlaka Sutta 
9. S. III 142 Pheṇapiṇdūpama Sutta 
10. M. III 270 Nandakovāda Sutta 
11. S. I 122 Godhika Sutta  
12. A. II 5 Upaññāta Sutta

Sermon 17 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 199)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Taṇhā dutiyo puriso – dīghamaddhāna saṁsaraṁ 
itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ – saṁsāraṁ nātivattati 
etamādīnavaṁ ñatvā – taṇhā-dukkhassa sambhavaṁ 
vītataṇho anādāno – sato bhikkhu paribbaje 1 
  – Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, Sutta Nipāta 
 
Dear Listeners, 
 ‘Worldlings undertake the unending journey of births and 
deaths in a mad pursuit that holds no gratification’ – revealed the 
Buddha. They do not realize the misery in the samsaric journ ey 
due to the foolish expectation of encountering contentment. 
Craving is the tempting force in hiding, which creates a false 
shadow of contentment. We hope to discuss the significance of 
craving, (taṇhā), as relevant to the subject of Paṭicca Samuppāda, 
the Law of Dependent Arising, taking the above two verses as the 
topic of the seventeenth discourse on Paṭicca Samuppāda , 
because they well demonstrate the worldling’s samsāric journey 
with taṇhā as the partner. The two verses are found in the 
Dvayatānupassanā Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta. We have explained 
to you the style of presentation in the sutta, through several 
discourses on Paṭicca Samuppāda. It presents the different topics 
of the Dhamma one by one in a way conducive to contemplation 
as a  duality. This is how the Buddha introduces the duality of 
craving. 
 “Monks, if someone inquires whether there could be 
another mode of contemplating dualities, you must reply in the 
affirmative. How is it possible? However much misery arises, all

The Law of Dependent Arising 

that is conditioned by craving. This is one mode of 
contemplation. With the complete detachment and cessation of 
craving, suffering ceases to arise. This is the second mode of 
contemplation. Monks, a monk who trains himself well in this 
duality of contemplation applying strenuous effort to burn out the 
defilements, can hope to realize one of these two spiritual 
attainments, either Arahanthood in this very life or in case any 
residue of grasping is left over, the stage of Non -returner 
(Anāgāmi). At the end of this a ccount the Buddha recited the two 
verses selected as our topic. 
Taṇha dutiyo puriso – dīghamaddhāna saṁsaraṁ 
The man wandering long, with craving as his partner 
itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ – saṁsāraṁ nātivattati 
Does not transcend this saṁsāra which is an alternation 
between ‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’. 
Next he declares: 
etamādīnavaṁ ñatvā – taṇhā dukkhassa sambhavaṁ 
Seeing the evils of craving which generates misery 
vītataṇho anādāno – sato bhikkhu paribbaje 
Let the monk conduct himself min dfully with craving 
dispelled and grasping abandoned. 
 When discussing the topic craving, taṇhā, we must recall 
how Paṭicca Samuppāda deals with it. You all know the ‘Law of 
Dependent Arising’ with twelve links. “ Vedanā paccayā taṇhā, 
taṇhā paccayā upādanaṁ” from feeling as condition arises 
craving, from craving as condition arises grasping. You have to 
remember right along, the two links on either side of craving. 
 Craving is sixfold in the Buddha’s analysis in the Paṭicca 
Samuppāda Vibhaṇga Sutta of the Vibhaṇga Sa ṁyutta 2 in the 
Saṁyutta Nikāya . They are based on the six sense objects as

Sermon 17 

craving for physical form, sound, smell, taste, physical contact 
and mental objects. 
 The most popular and the most heard of interpretation is 
found in the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta . 3 Those listeners 
who chant or listen to parittas know well, that the Buddha in the 
interpretation of the Four Noble Truths, analyses the origin of 
suffering in relation to craving. We have often emphasized that 
statement for your benefit. “Yāyaṁ taṇhā ponobhavikā nandirāga 
sahagatā tatratatrābhinandinī seyyathida ṁ kāma ta ṇhā, bhava 
taṇhā, vibhava ta ṇhā.” This craving is ponobhavikā. It has the 
inherent nature of causing repeated birth. Nandirāga sahagatā – 
Delights in and attach es to lust. Tatratatrābhinandinī – takes 
delight here and there. Those are the three characteristics of 
taṇhā. Then come the three types of craving kāma taṇhā, bhava 
taṇhā and vibhava taṇhā. Kāma taṇhā is craving for the five 
sense pleasures. Bhava taṇhā is in short, the longing for the soul 
to continue forever as the eternalists advocate. Vibhava taṇhā on 
the other hand is the craving to cease existence as nihilists teach. 
That is how craving is classified in the Dhammacakkappavattana 
Sutta. 
 Now I wish to  introduce to you something that calls for 
serious thinking. The Buddha in the Titthāyatana Sutt a 4 of the 
Tika Nipāta  in the Anguttara Nikāya  proclaims these words. 
“Katamaṁ ca bhikkhave dukkha samudaya ṁ ariyasaccaṁ?” 
“Monks, what is the Noble Truth of the Arising of Suffering?” 
Do you think it’s craving? You are mistaken. The Buddha says 
it’s the Paṭicca Samuppāda  consisting of twelve links. Avijjā 
paccayā saṅkhārā, saṅkhāra paccayā viññāṇaṁ, viññāṇa 
paccayā nāmarupaṁ etc. This is sure to pose a problem to many. 
Are the Buddha’s statements contradictory? In one place he says 
suffering is conditioned by craving. In another place it’s Paṭicca 
Samuppāda with its twelve links. How do we clarify this? Why 
didn’t the Buddha speak of craving in connection with suffering? 
It is simple logic that if there is a mother, a father has to be

The Law of Dependent Arising 

present somewhere. You all know that. Similarly the father is 
revealed through the Paṭicca Samuppāda Dhamma. 
 I shall now explain it to you. I n the earlier discourses on 
Paṭicca Samuppāda  I have repeatedly stressed the fact that the 
important point here is not avijjā but the inter -relation between 
viññāṇa and nāmarūpa. It is this inter -relatedness of conditions 
that was referred to as the vortex . It’s the central spot in the 
Paṭicca Samuppāda . Then what is avijjā or craving? I think it 
will be more lucid if I put it this way. 
 In the blindness called ignorance, with the darkness of 
preparations, a process of groping takes place. During this 
groping, two things get caught within one’s grip, consciousness, 
and name -and-form, viññāṇa and nāmarūpa. They have an 
interdependent relationship. But the worldlings being unable to 
see this connection, always treat them as two. As a result there 
arise greed ( lobha), anger ( dosa), delusion ( moha), attachment, 
clashes and deception and many more problems. We have given 
many a simile to illustrate this situation, so it suffices to touch on 
them in brief. The simplest simile of the dog on the bridge 
appears in “Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled”. A dog walking across a 
bridge sees its own shadow in the water and believing it to be 
another dog will react by wagging its tail or growling or staring 
inquisitively. That illustrates greed, anger and delusion ( lobha, 
dosa, moha ). We have modernized it using an ancient Greek 
mythical story. It has appealed to many. Narcissus the Greek 
youth who had never seen his handsome face in a mirror, saw its 
reflection in a pond as he bent towards it. Assuming it to be a 
goddess in the water , he spent several days in a futile effort to 
hold her in his arms and ultimately sacrificed his own life. He 
was not aware that it was his own reflection. 
 We have brought out many more similes to show the 
misconception of duality. We hope you remember in  the first 
discourse, the game of draught between Ajith and Sumith which

Sermon 17 

terminated in utter confusion. In the same way, in the game of 
cricket that you know so well, the moment two teams are formed, 
the original inter-relatedness is forgotten. Then there is the simile 
of the cinema. The worldlings are not capable of understanding 
this interdependent origin of things, due to its subtle nature. Ven 
Sāriputta has expertly demonstrated it using the simile of two 
bundles of reeds. Two bundles of reeds maintain their upright 
position supported by each other. When one is pulled out of 
position, the other is bound to fall. Interdependent origination is 
exactly like that. They are not one, and neither are they two. We 
have to refer to a simile from folk lore as the last resort in 
explaining this intrinsic relationship. If consciousness is 
questioned “Who are you?” it would answer “Please ask nameand-form”. If nāmarūpa is questioned “who are you?” it would 
reply “please ask viññāṇa”. They are so closely inter -related. The 
worldlings cannot grasp this subtlety and hence the division into 
two teams. It should be now clear that viññāṇa and nāmarūpa are 
closely inter-dependent. 
 Now see whether you can agree with me here. It’s name -
and-form that is divided into six sense spheres. They are activated 
by craving ( taṇhā), to function as craving for physical form, 
craving for sound, craving for smell and so on. Eye consciousness 
arises through eye and physical form coming together. Forgetting 
this truth the eye runs in pursuit of form, the ear in pursuit of 
sound. This ap parent duality creates the deception of the five 
aggregates of grasping instigated by lobha (greed), dosa (anger) 
and moha (delusion). This analysis may not correspond to what 
appears in certain books. Commentators attempt to find the root 
cause of ignorance, which I think is a futile attempt. Ignorance is 
the father. In other words, the duality of consciousness and name -
and-form springs up through preparations in the background of 
ignorance. The worldlings pick it up as a duality. Craving begins 
to functio n from this point. The Buddha proves this in several 
places such as the Samiddhi Sutta 5 when he says “ acchecchi 
taṇhaṁ idha nāmarūpe.” Cut off craving towards this name -and-

The Law of Dependent Arising 

form. It is this name -and-form that divides itself into six sense 
spheres. We think  this explanation is sufficient because there is 
no contradiction here. In certain places where the Buddha talks of 
the Law of Dependent Arising  the Noble Truth of the Arising of 
Suffering is directly identified as the Law of Dependent Arising. 
 What we ha ve been discussing is the background of 
craving. To put it in brief what Paṭicca Samuppāda  depicts is 
nothing more than the background of craving which is ignorance. 
It changes into a vortex and conceals the inter -relationship from 
the worldlings. The worl dlings always live imprisoned between 
two ends, two extremes, which create attachments, friction and 
illusion. The final result is suffering, or the weaving of the five 
aggregates of grasping.  
In the discourse on the Four Noble Truths, the Buddha 
specifically referred to craving as the Noble Truth of the Arising 
of Suffering. Even when talking of the cessation of suffering, he 
did not refer to ignorance. 
“Tassā yeva ta ṅhāya asesa virāga nirodho cāgo pa ṭinissaggo mutti anālayo”  
The total detachment and destruction of craving is called 
the cessation of suffering. At this point one may ask “Where is 
ignorance?” In the earlier mentioned Titthāyatana Sutta, the 
cessation of suffering is explained through the reverse order of 
the Paṭicca Samuppāda. 
“Avijjāyatveva asesa virāga norodhā sa ṁkhāranirodho.” 
With the cessation of ignorance each of the other links cease to 
be. In fact the most detailed analysis of the Noble Truth of the 
Arising of Suffering is found in the Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta of 
the Dīgha Nikāy a. 6 Here the Buddha exposes the place where 
taṇhā arises and where it remains hiding, in the following words 
“sā kho pana esā ta ṇhā kattha uppajjamānā uppajjati, kattha 
nivisamānā nivisati.” This is presented in the form of a question.

Sermon 17 

 Before I proceed further, I want to point out to you that 
taṇhā is a feminine gender noun, in Pāli. It’s useful to know this, 
because the term ‘mother’ is used in this context. Some suttas say 
“taṇhā janeti p urisaṁ.” 7 Craving gives birth to man. Craving is 
the mother. “ Sā kho pana esā ta ṇhā…” if translated in 
conformity with the gender rules in ancient Pāli grammar – 
though an accurate English translation is not possible – it would 
appear as follows. “That thi s lass craving, in taking birth, where 
will she take birth?” 
 Another important point, dear listeners, is the correct 
rendering of ‘nivisamānā’ into English. The idea of “lying under, 
hiding or creeping under” is implied here. So let’s take it as 
‘lying in  hiding’. Then the Buddha’s question would be “That 
this lass craving (taṇhā), in taking birth where will she take birth? 
In lying in hiding where will she lie hiding?” Now comes the 
Buddha’s reply’ “ Yaṁ loke piyarūpa ṁ sātarūpaṁ etthesā ta ṇhā 
uppajjamānā u ppajjati. Ettha nivisamānā nivisati ”. Please 
remember that ‘ piyarūpa’ here means ‘delightful in nature’. 
‘Sātarūpa’ means ‘agreeable in nature’. Since this reference is to 
the place where birth takes place, whatever is delightful in 
appearance and agreeabl e in appearance, that is where craving 
takes birth and lies in hiding. 
 Next the Buddha proceeds to analyze this position. “Kiñca 
loke piyarūpaṁ sātarūpaṁ?” What is delightful and agreeable in 
this world? The answer consists of a long list which begins wit h 
“cakkhuṁ loke piyarūpaṁ sātarūpaṁ etthesā taṇhā uppajjamānā 
uppajjati ettha nivisamānā nivisati. ” “The eye is delightful and 
agreeable in this world. Therein is craving born. Therein craving 
lies concealed.” In this manner the Buddha talks of the six 
internal sense spheres, the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the 
body and the mind. Then he proceeds to list the six external sense 
objects, physical form, sound, smell, taste, touch and mental 
objects. I hope you can understand them, though I have listed

The Law of Dependent Arising 

them in brief. They are all delightful and agreeable to the 
worldling so that craving takes birth in them and lies in hiding. 
 That is not all. The six -fold consciousness that arises due 
to contact between each pair such as the eye -consciousness, 
cakkhu viññāṇa the ear consciousness sota viññāṇa and so on are 
delightful and agreeable to the worldling. There too craving arises 
and lies in hiding. Then the Buddha points out that the six sense 
contacts eye contact, ear contact, nose contact, tongue contact, 
body contact and mind contact ( cakkhu, sota, ghāna, jivhā, kāya 
and mano samphassa ) are also delightful and agreeable so that 
craving can arise and wait in hiding. So also the six feelings 
generated through six sense contacts ( samphassajā vedanā ) are 
also de lightful and agreeable. Next comes saññā or perceptions 
such as the perception of form, the perception of sound, the 
perception of smell and so on. This is followed by the six 
intentions saṁcetanā. Worldings like to think of the intention of 
physical forms , sounds, smells, tastes etc. as delightful and 
agreeable There too craving arises and waits in hiding. 
 Next comes an amazing statement from the Buddha. 
“Rūpataṇhā loke piyarūpa ṁ sātarūpaṁ etthesā ta ṇhā uppajja -
mānā uppajjati .” Worldlings are delighted by  craving for 
physical form ( rūpataṇhā). They are comforted by it. They are 
delighted by craving for physical form, craving for sound, 
craving for smells, craving for taste, craving for physical contact 
and craving for mental objects. This reveals the unbel ievable 
truth that there is craving within craving, taṇhā within taṇhā. 
Taṇhā is born within itself and lies in hiding. Can you believe it? 
The next list is under vitakka or reflection. Reflection on physical 
form, rūpavitakka is enticing. So is investigation of form, 
rūpavicāra. The ten-fold analysis of craving with reference to its 
arising and lying in hiding is found in the Mahā Satipa ṭṭhāna 
Sutta.

Sermon 17 

 Then the Buddha explains how the cessation of craving is 
brought about. I shall put it briefly to you. I am confident you can 
follow the entire procedure. “ Sā kho panesā ta ṇhā kattha 
pahīyamānā pahīyati, katta nirujjhamānā nirujjhati.” Where does 
that taṇhā cease? Where does taṇhā get eliminated? Where 
craving arises, there it cea ses. “ Yaṁ loke piyarūpa ṁ sātarūpaṁ 
etthesā ta ṇhā pahīyamānā pahīyati. Ettha nirujjhamānā 
nirujjhati.” A lengthy and descriptive analysis is given in this 
manner on the cessation of craving in the Mahā Satipa ṭṭhāna 
Sutta. 
 Let us now move on to the Majjhe Sutta in the Ekaka 
Nipāta of the Anguttara Nikāya.8 In our discussion on craving or 
taṇhā, this sutta is of great relevance to us. We have discussed it 
several times because we are compelled to draw on its content 
when talking of craving. You will remember it when I tell you its 
background. Once when the Buddha was residing at Isipatana 
Deer Park in Benares, a group of Senior Monks, after the mid-day 
meal sat in conference in their conference hall. Their main topic 
was a verse from Metteyya Pañha, a discourse of the Buddha. 
 Yo ubhante viditvāna 
 majjhe mantā na lippati 
 taṁ bhrūmi mahā puriso’ti 
 sodha sibbanimaccagā. 
 Knowing the two ends, he who with wisdom refrains from 
attachment to the middle, I call him a great man who transcends 
the seamstress in this world. 
 Based on this verse four questions were formulated. What 
is the first end? What is the second end? What is the middle? 
Who is the seamstress? Six senior monks addressed the assembly 
and gave six different interpretations.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 The first interpreter pr esented his view as follows. The 
first end is contact ( phassa). The second end is the arising of 
contact. The middle is the cessation of contact. The seamstress is 
craving. Here he explains how craving functions. “ Taṇhā hi naṁ 
sibbati tassa tasse’va bhavas sa abhinibbattiyā .” “Craving 
stitches him on to repeated births.” That is why craving is called 
the seamstress. 
 To state the other interpretations in brief, the second monk 
said “The first end is the past, the second end the future and the 
middle is the p resent. The seamstress is craving.” We too can 
agree with this argument, watching how our thoughts work, 
running between the past and the future. We are not even aware 
of the existence of a present. That’s because craving keeps tying 
up the ends. The third  interpretation suggests pleasant feelings as 
one end, painful feelings as the second end, the feelings that are 
neither pleasant nor painful as the middle and the seamstress of 
course taṇhā, craving. Here too we are so engrossed in the two 
ends, we are hardly aware of feelings that are neither pleasant nor 
painful. In the fourth, name (nāma) is one end. Form (rūpa) is the 
other. In the middle is consciousness ( viññāṇa). Here again the 
seamstress is craving who keeps stitching together the two ends, 
name-and-form. What is the fifth interpretation? The internal 
sense spheres eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind constitute 
one end. The six external objects, physical form, sound, smell, 
taste, physical contact and cognizable objects form the other end. 
In the middle is consciousness. Craving, playing her role as the 
seamstress ties up the two ends, ignoring the middle. The sixth 
and final interpretation gives the view of self ( sakkāya) or the 
five aggregates of grasping as one end. The other end is the 
arising of the view of self ( sakkāya samudaya ) or the arising of 
the five aggregates. The middle is the cessation of the view of 
self. Craving is the seamstress in this sixth interpretation as well, 
who keeps tying up the knots every moment, taking care tha t the 
cessation of sakkāya di ṭṭhi and its arising, is impossible. These

Sermon 17 

interpretations give ample proof of the vicious activity of taṇhā, 
craving. 
 We have occasionally used the sewing machine as a 
modern simile to explain the behavior of taṇhā. Each time  the 
needle goes in, the thread of the shuttle ties a knot. Tying knots is 
a specific characteristic of craving. Tatratatrābhinandinī 
nandirāgasahagatā are words that well demonstrate the function 
of the needle, piercing into the machine, tying a knot and coming 
up and repeating the process. Majjhe Sutta well describes the 
ruthless behavior of craving. 
 I would like to discuss this topic from yet another angle, 
using another expression in the same verse, since I am very 
particular that you understand it cle arly. “ Taṇhā dutiyo puriso 
dīghamaddhāna sa ṁsaraṁ itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṁ saṁsāraṁ 
nātivattati.” The true nature of this saṁsāra is summarized as 
something found between ‘thisness’ and ‘otherwiseness’. Let me 
explain it. Think of a being taking birth here f rom somewhere, let 
us say from the animal world. This baby seeing things, hearing 
sounds around him, he develops the notion ‘here’ followed by the 
idea of ‘thisness’ or itthabhāva. From the moment thisness is 
established, it keeps changing into ‘otherwisen ess’, or 
aññathābhāva.  
 It is an amazing thing. The nature of ‘ bhava’ (becoming) 
– what is called bhava – is something that happens due to 
grasping. Whenever a being grasps – clings to – something, 
impermanence begins to function from that moment. Explain ing 
this subtle point is no easy task. Try to comprehend it yourself. 
We have explained before that only subsequent to arising of a 
‘thing’ that it becomes ‘otherwise’. When something becomes a 
‘thing’, from that point onwards it starts to change. I shall give a 
simile though not a perfect one. Think of buying a toy from a toy 
shop for a little baby. Paying for it adds more value to it. What 
they have brought home has its own nature or ‘thisness’ –

The Law of Dependent Arising 

itthabhāva. The moment the little one breaks it, it changes  into 
‘otherwiseness’ – aññathābhāva. From then onwards it begins to 
change. The notion of a ‘thing’ with its particular characteristics 
is called ‘maññanā’. It means to assume something to be a ‘thing’ 
with its own identity. From then onwards it begins to change. 
 The Buddha, immediately after his enlightenment has 
proclaimed as follows: 9  
“Aññathābhāvī bhavasatto loko  
bhavapareto bhavamevābhinandati” 
 The worldling attached to bhava – continuous becoming – 
which has the nature of otherwiseness, and overcome by bhava, 
delights in it. It is the seamstress craving who instigates the 
worldling. For example, imagine you lost something. Craving 
would say “Don’t worry. There is another one beyond. Have it.” 
It expresses what is implied by tatratatrābhinandinī, ta ṇhā 
ponobhavikā. Ponobhavikā is not merely suggestive of the 
moment of death. It takes place every moment. Punabbhava 
apparently means the next birth. But every moment something 
becomes a ‘thing’ or a ‘this’. It keeps changing. Due to this 
change, it is discarded and another ‘thing’ is grasped. Another 
‘thing’ is grasped. This grasping is done through craving, which 
lies in hiding. This process is referred to as tatratatrābhinandinī, 
the fact that the beings wander in saṁsāra between ‘thisness’ and 
‘otherwiseness’. This happens not only from life to life and birth 
to birth but also within a lifetime. This change is extrem ely 
subtle. I have given you these details to enable you to understand 
itthabhāva and aññathābhāva.  
 There are several meaningful verses in the Taṇhā Vagga 
of the Dhammapada, that expand on this subject but 
unfortunately the meanings of some verses are lost to us. Anyway 
let us discuss one verse for our purpose.

Sermon 17 

 Tasiṇāya purakkhatā pajā 
 parisappanti sasova bādhito 
 saṁyojana saṁgasattā 
 dukkhamupenti punappunaṁ cirāya10 
 Here is its meaning. Tasiṇā is a synonym for taṇhā – 
craving. “Tasiṇāya purakkhatā p ajā” The human race placed in 
the forefront by craving “ parisappanti sasova bādhito ” like a 
rabbit entrapped in a snare. What happens to the humans? The 
commentary says parisappanti means frightened. Frightened like 
a rabbit in a snare. This interpretation  overlooks a very valuable 
implication referred to here. Why was the rabbit taken as simile? 
It can leap far. Think of a rabbit with its hind foot caught in a 
noose. Ignorant of the confronted plight it leaps far. Then 
realizing the perilous situation, it leaps in all directions but is 
hopelessly caught. Similar is the noose of craving. 
Saṁyojanasaṁgasattā – stuck in the bond of sticky craving. 
“Dukkhaṁ upenti punappunaṁ cirāya” – humans are gripped by 
suffering repeatedly for long. In short, unless one attains the stage 
of Non -returner, even though born in Brahma world, one is 
destined to return here, due to the trap of craving. 
 This verse in the Dhammapada which you are quite 
familiar with, emphasises how strong the fetter of craving is. 
 Yathāpi mūle anupaddave daḷhe 
 chinnopi rukkho punareva rūhati 
 evampi taṇhānusaye anūhate 
 uppajjati dukkhamidaṁ punappunaṁ11 
 “Yathāpi mūle anupaddave da ḷhe” – When the root is 
uninjured and firm, chinnopi rukkho punareva rūhati  – even 
though the tree is cut down, gr ows again and again. “ Evampi 
taṇhānusaye anūhate ” – similarly as long as the latency of 
craving is not eliminated, “ uppajjati dukkhamidaṁ punappunaṁ” 
– this suffering arises again and again. This verse reveals the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

strength of craving. It’s not different fr om the plight of the rabbit. 
I am not trying to include everything in this discourse. I am only 
trying to bring out the hidden meanings of these valuable verses, 
which have not been given their due. 
 Now let us look at another aspect of taṇhā as given in 
another sutta. we have explained how conditioned by craving, 
grasping (upādāna) arises. In some places craving itself plays the 
role of grasping. I would like to cite an example from 
Kutuhalasālā Sutta of the Saṁyutta Niyāka , which has been 
subjected to muc h criticism.12 To put it in brief, the Paribbājaka 
Vacchagotta visited the Buddha and made a critical comment. He 
said the six teachers such as Pūranakassapa, Makkhalī Gosāla and 
Ajithakesakambalī, when their ordinary followers die, reveal their 
destinations and also when their spiritually developed disciples 
pass away, reveal their destinations as well. But the Recluse 
Buddha reveals where ordinary followers are born, but is silent 
about the next birth of his disciples with the highest spiritual 
attainment. The Buddha only utters the phrase “ Acchecchi 
taṇhaṁ vāvattayī sa ṁyojanaṁ, sammā mānābhisamayā anta –
makāsi dukkhassa.” 
 Even the Buddhists of today do not know what 
Vacchagotta knew about the Buddha. This statement is about the 
emancipated person. “ Acchecchi ta ṇhaṁ” – cut off craving. 
“Vāvattayī saṁyojanaṁ” – reversed the hooks of bonds. “ Sammā 
mānābhisamayā antamakāsi dukkhassa ” – comprehending pride 
correctly, expelled suffering. That is what the Buddha says about 
the emancipated person after death. Vacc hagotta puzzled by this 
explanation, confesses his doubt, his confusion. The Buddha says 
he well understands Vacchagotta’s confusion and explains his 
position as follows. 
 “Saupādānassa khvāham vaccha uppatti ṁ paññapemi no 
anupādānassa.” I disclose the bir th of him who grasps, not of 
him who is detached. The Buddha then gives a simile. “Vaccha,

Sermon 17 

just as a fire, “ saupādāno jalati .” Here the fire is a saupādāno 
fire, which needs an explanation. Upādāna is used in Pāli to 
mean fuel. A fire burns only when it grasps some sort of fuel, 
such as wood. The Buddha here explains that a fire burns 
“saupādāno” only by grasping a fuel, “ no anupādānassa ” not 
without a fuel. That is the simile of the fire. This simile prompts 
Vacchagotta to pose another question. “Friend Gotama, if a flame 
(acci) is carried far by the wind, what would you say is the fuel – 
upādāna?” You can imagine a forest fire, where the wind could 
carry a flame to a tree far away. That is the simile here. The 
Buddha replies that the wind is the fuel. We refer to this as 
“caught by the wind.” The flame was definitely ‘caught by the 
wind’ and carried afar. This reply instigates Vacchagotta to ask 
an unusual question. “Friend Gotama, if a being lays down this 
body and enters a certain other body, what then would you point 
out as the fuel?” This sutta words it as “ aññataraṁ kāyaṁ 
anuppatto hoti .” ‘ Aññataraṁ’ here means ‘a certain’. “A being 
reaching (entering) a certain other body, lays down this body” 
means he gives u p this body and reaches another. The Buddha 
specifically states that craving is the fuel in that situation. This 
shows how forceful the functioning of craving is. But 
unfortunately, Dear listeners, due to misinterpretation of this 
simile and this paragraph , the modern readers understand this as 
‘antarābhava’ – a period of existence between death and next 
birth. 
 We have often explained in our books that the theory of 
interim birth is unacceptable. How did this misconception come 
about? One reason is the mis interpretation of the simile. Here 
Vacchagotta questions, not regarding the gap between two 
existences, but regarding the passage from one existence to the 
next. There is also a very intricate language problem visible here. 
In the process of the Buddha word passing from one generation to 
the next generation, confusion regarding phrases and words 
occurred. Sometimes the version in one written copy differed 
from another. Those who profess the theory of antarābhava read

The Law of Dependent Arising 

‘anuppatto’ which means ‘reached’ as ‘ anuppanno’ which means 
‘not born’. Anuppatto means the opposite of anuppanno. These 
theorizers explain their position thus. 
 A being lays down the body. Did he enter the next birth? 
No, not yet. ‘ anuppanno’ ‘not born’. What is the grasping during 
this gap? T hat is their interpretation. But I have emphatically 
pointed out the special word ‘ aññataraṁ’ that occurs here. It 
means ‘a certain’. We use this adjective always with something 
existing, not with something non -existant. If we select something 
really exist ing and use the word aññaṁ before it, it is correct. 
This is a very subtle point. But why go so far? It’s clear that 
Vaccha questions how one birth leads to another. These 
theorizers, imagining that there is a time gap between the two, 
have in the recent p ast continuously argued that an interim birth 
exists. They have not understood the suttas correctly. 
 One thing is clear however. The Buddha confirms that 
craving itself is the grasping at the moment of death. It can be 
proved with several examples. A syno nym for craving is 
‘bhavanetti’. Netti is a projection, a point that juts out. Bhavanetti 
– ‘bent’ is another term used. During a rainy season like this, 
somebody levels a strip of high ground leaving a projection at the 
top. With a shower of rain that pro jection would collapse. 
Similarly, the projection in continuous becoming is craving. Why 
so? Because there is a shortcoming, a possibility to collapse. ‘ ūno 
loko atitto taṇhādāso’.13  
In this world there is always a flaw, a shortcoming to be 
seen. ‘ atitto’ no contentment. Taṇhādāso – a slave to craving. 
ūno loko atitto ta ṇhādāso is a statement in the Raṭṭhapāla Sutta. 
The worldlings always find shortcomings. Even a millionaire 
would complain he is short of something or the other. ‘ Atitto’ 
means never gratified. Taṇhādāso means a slave to craving. In 
this sense craving is called bhavanetti because craving alone is 
sufficient to create continuous existence. Due to the presence of

Sermon 17 

that projection ‘ netti’, one is bound to fall into existence 
somewhere. That itself explains why the Buddha referred to 
craving as grasping. This statement contains not one or two but 
several important facts. 
Next let us talk about the cessation of craving. The term 
used to describe Nibbāna on certain occasions is ‘ taṇhakkhaya’ 
“taṇhakkhayo virāgo nirodho Nibbāna ṁ.” The very ceasing of 
taṇhā is treated as Nibbāna. It’s the very ceasing of taṇhā, 
craving. Many educated people are confused by this. They argue 
if craving means ‘wishing for’ something, wishing for Nibbāna is 
also craving. 
There is a Sutta 14 that offers a solution to this problem. 
When Venerable Ananda was residing at Ghositārāma in 
Kosambi, a certain Bhikkhunī sent a man to say that she was 
seriously ill and wished to meet him. Venerable Ananda accepted 
the invitation. As he was approaching the nunnery, she lay down 
on her bed fully covered, with a hidden intention. Venerable 
Ananda, seeing through this lowly behavior, delivered an 
effective discourse to suit the occasion. Thanks to the nun’s 
unseemly plan, we are rewarded with a valuable discourse. 
Let us first listen to four statements which conveys the 
essence of the discourse. 
Āhārasambhūto ayaṁ bhagini kāyo 
āhāraṁ nissāya āhāro pahātabbo. 
taṇhāsambhūto ayaṁ bhagini kāyo 
taṇhaṁ nissāya taṇhā pahātabbā. 
mānasambhūto ayaṁ bhagini kāyo 
mānaṁ nissāya māno pahātabbo. 
methūnasambhūto ayaṁ bhagini kāyo 
 methūneca setughāto vutto bhagavatā.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Then follows an analysis of each statement by Venerable 
Ananda. First let us understand their meanings. “ Āhāra sambhūto 
ayaṁ bhagini kāyo ” Sister, this body has arisen based on food, 
“Āhāraṁ nissāya āhāro pahātabbo .” Food has to be eliminated 
through food. Taṇhā sambhūto aya ṁ bhagini kāyo .” This body 
has arisen based on craving. “ Taṇhaṁ nissāya ta ṇhaṁ 
pahātabbo.” Craving has to be eliminated through craving. This 
sounds rather contradictory. Then he says “ Māna sambhūto ayaṁ 
bhagini kāyo .” Sister, this body arises based on conceit. But 
conceit has to be eliminated through conceit. The final statement 
seems rather queer. “ Methuna sambhūto bhagini aya ṁ kāyo.” 
Sister, this body arises through sexual intercourse. Here the 
phrase ‘ methunaṁ nissāya’ does not occur. It says ‘ methuneva 
setughāto’. That bridge has to be pulled down. All relations have 
to be severed. That is the approach suggested with reference to 
sex. 
Now Venerable Ananda goes into detail taking one 
statement at a time. “ Āhārasambhūto ayaṁ bhagini kāyo .” That 
can be understood easily. Food is essential. One cannot go into 
total starvation like the Niga ṇṭhas. A monk parta kes of food 
contemplating as follows; “ Neva davāya, na madāya, na 
maṇdanāya” etc. It is known as ‘ ñāṇa sa ṁvara’,15 restraint 
through wisdom. One partakes of food, contemplating on food. It 
turns out to be meditation. We have time and again reminded you 
that eating is not a game, not a source of entertainment. It’s 
merely for maintenance of the body so that higher life could be 
fulfilled. Such a monk, says Venerable Ananda, will eliminate 
food eventually. 
Next is ‘ taṇhā sambhūto’ which is rather difficult to  
grasp. Venerable Ananda explains it as follows. A certain monk 
comes to know that a certain bhikkhu attained Arahanthood, 
through destruction of influxes. This monk thinks “When will I 
be able to become an Arahant like that monk?” A wish, a 
yearning arises in him. We admit that it is craving. But inspired

Sermon 17 

by that wish, that yearning, he strives hard and becomes an 
Arahant. 
Mānasambhūto is also somewhat similar. A certain monk 
comes to hear that a particular bhikkhu known to him had 
become an Arahant. The m onk’s thoughts are given in a peculiar 
phrase. “ Kimañga pana aham ?” Why can’t I? It shows conceit. 
Perhaps this Arahant monk was uneducated or belonged to a low 
caste. “If he can, why can’t I achieve it?” is an expression of 
conceit. But this conceit might pave the way to Arahanthood. 
The fourth statement was handled very briefly without 
explanation. Venerable Ananda only said “ Methuneca setu ghāto 
vutto bhagavatā .” What he said about methuna is not similar to 
what he said about the earlier three. He advoca ted the breaking 
off of all connections. Thoroughly embarrassed, the nun, jumped 
off the bed, fell at the feet of Venerable Ananda and apologized 
for her disgraceful suggestion due to her foolishness and 
unwholesome thoughts. Through her foolishness and ev il 
thoughts, we were rewarded with a useful sutta. Although we 
look at it positively, certain Buddhist sects have taken undue 
advantage of it by misinterpreting the statement. The Tantrayāna 
sect took it as “ Methunaṁ nissāya methunaṁ pajahati”. Methuna 
is abandoned through methuna. These are indecent trends not 
worth discussing. 
I am reminded of another incident centered round 
Venerable Ananda, again at Ghositārāma in Kosambi, which 
sheds light on the same topic. 16 One day a Brahmin named 
Uṇṇābha enquires o f the Venerable Ananda “For what purpose 
do you practice celibacy (higher life) under the Ascetic Gotama?” 
Being a non -Buddhist, he questioned out of curiosity. Venerable 
Ananda’s reply was “ chanda pahānattha ṁ” We practice the 
disciplines of higher life in  order to dispel desire ( chanda). The 
second question was, “Is there a path of discipline laid down to 
dispel desire?” The reply was purposely given with the intention

The Law of Dependent Arising 

of arousing more critical inquiry. “Yes. The path is the four bases 
of success – iddhipādas, desire, resolution, will and investigation.” 
Most probably you have heard of them. Chanda is described as 
“chanda samādhi padhāna sa ṅkhāra samannāgataṁ iddhipādaṁ 
bhāveti.” Basing his effort on the contemplation of desire, a monk 
develops iddhipāda. I t implies that desire can be eliminated by 
developing iddhipāda. It is a contradictory statement inviting 
criticism. Naturally, the Brahmin retorted, “ chandeneva chandaṁ 
pajahissatīti netaṁ ṭhānaṁ vijjati.” ‘Desire is dispelled by desire 
itself’ is an impo ssibility. Venerable Ananda gives a simple 
simile to clarify the situation. “Brahmin, do you admit that you 
had a desire to visit the monastery, but it vanished on arrival 
here?” “Yes friend.” Do you admit you had some resolution to 
visit the monastery but it vanished on arrival here?” “Yes friend.” 
Do you admit you had the will to visit the monastery but it 
vanished on arrival?” “Yes friend.” “Do you admit you had a 
sense of investigation when arriving at the monastery but it 
vanished on arrival?” “Yes friend.” 
Similarly, Brahmin, a monk following the path of 
discipline with the support of the four iddhipādas, attains total 
destruction of desire, which is his goal. When the aspiration of a 
worldling is accomplished, more aspirations crop up. Goals in the 
life of a worldling are all created by craving. They help to 
multiply craving. But here, what is the goal? Nibbāna which is a 
synonym for the elimination of craving ( taṇhakkhayo). The effort 
directed towards the destruction of craving, ends at achieving the 
goal. We have on earlier occasions given you various similes to 
clarify this point. Then the critics cann ot say that the desire to 
attain Nibbāna is also desire. We have to face facts. Here we see 
the Middle Path in action. We have explained it in diverse ways 
such as the simile of crossing a current. The fundamental 
characteristics of the Middle Path are pragmatism and relativity. 
Even what is harmful is not totally discarded but utilized 
to achieve the goal. To give an example, the Niga ṇṭhas gave up

Sermon 17 

food altogether and even untied the knot of their robe. They 
walked about naked. The Buddha, with the experience he went 
through, always avoided the extremes. He introduced 
contemplation, through which the Middle Path was made a 
reality. Contemplation became an essential feature in it. Saṁsāra 
or continuous existence is such that, crossing the current of 
saṁsāra calls for extreme caution. That is exactly why the 
Buddha resorted to the middle path. “ Taṇhaṁ nissāya ta ṇhā 
pahātabbā” is perfectly applicable in this context. Taṇhā craving 
is abandoned by means of craving. The difference lies there. With 
regard to worldly goals, when one is achieved, when one is 
realized, another crops up. But Nibbāna terminates everything. 
What is Nibbāna? It is not something lik e Siyadoris’s Nibbāna –
Nibbāna of Simple Simon . ‘Taṇhakkhayo’ means the destruction 
of craving. In the discourse on the Four Noble Truths, the arising 
of suffering is illustrated by ‘ taṇhā ponobhavikā’. Cessation of 
suffering was illustrated by “ tassāyeva taṇhāya asesa virāga 
nirodho cāgo pa ṭinissaggo mutti anālayo .” It speaks of nothing 
but the destruction of craving.  
At the same time, remember the question asked by 
Vacchagotta Paribbājaka. In talking of the birth of the 
emancipated person, the Buddha use d the most appropriate term 
‘Acchecchi taṇhāṁ.’ He cut off craving. ‘Vāvattayī saṁyojanaṁ.’ 
Reversed the hooks of fetters ( saṁyojanas). These fetters are 
fixed one to the other like the railway compartments connected to 
one another by hooks. Reverse the ho oks and they are 
disconnected. Try to understand the fetters as similar. Hooks or 
bonds of rebirth are turned backwards. Another phrase that adds 
depth to this idea is ‘ sammā mānābhisamayā’. It gives the reason 
for endless births. The final target is the d estruction of māna, 
conceit. It is the final attack on Māra’s asmimāna or conceit of 
self. In other words the pride of self as “I am” is the subtle 
attachment to continuous becoming. Those who have read the 
Dhamma will know, that after the attainment of Anāgāmi (Nonreturner) one is born in the Brahma world, because the conceit of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

self still remains. Concealed within the fivefold fetters such as 
passion for worlds of form, passion for formless worlds, conceit, 
agitation and ignorance, there is self -pride in a very subtle form. 
That too has to be eliminated. I have been trying to emphasize the 
significance of craving, which is treated as the mother. 
There seems to be some confusion regarding the 
connection between the Paṭicca Samuppāda and craving. That’s 
why some people, like the Hindus our Pāli commentators, keep 
guessing what the root cause of ignorance is. It is an unnecessary 
attempt. Let us understand it this way. The groping that takes 
place in the darkness of ignorance is called kāya saṁkhara, vacī 
saṁkhara and mano sa ṁkhara, that is the preparation of the 
body, speech and the mind. In this process of preparation, there 
arises viññāṇa and nāmarūpa, (consciousness and name -andform). These are the two forces we referred to as the vortex. The 
worldlings unable to understand their inter -dependent nature take 
a firm stand, mistakenly seeing something to grasp in the form of 
subject-object. This is what activates in upādāna or grasping. To 
facilitate better understanding of this position, let me recall the 
simile of the mirage which I have often referred to. Imagine a 
row of posts fixed far apart on a flat land. The deer imagining 
there is water, runs upto the first post, then upto the second and 
the third, and so on. This is the deception which we call taṇhā 
ponobhavikā or craving that leads to continuous existence. 
Craving is the force that pushes beings forward. All this should 
make you realize the depth of the Buddha’s Dhamma. It is an 
amazingly rewarding dhamma, if you have the correct vision of 
the goal. Many people understand Nibbāna to be another birth. 
When explaining the Paṭicca Samuppāda , we have emphasized 
that the speciality about the Dhamma is that one has to terminate 
the entire mass of suffering as the final goal. The attachment to 
continuous bir th and the very notion of becoming has to be 
eliminated, or else it will persist even after the attainment of a 
Non-returner (Anāgāmi). Such is the subtlety of the dhamma.

Sermon 17 

Now Dear Listeners, I hope you will support your 
meditation with what I have explain ed, particularly in seeing the 
negative aspect of craving as the Buddha has taught us. If you are 
aware of the conditions under which craving arises and ceases, 
you can definitely reach the spiritual attainment described as 
“taṇhakkhayo virāgo, nirodho Nib bānaṁ.” I want you to put this 
discourse into practical use in improving your meditation and 
religious practices, so that you could attain the different stages of 
the path and the peace of Nibbāna in this very life. Whatever 
beings there be from the lowest  hell Avīci to the highest Brahma 
world Akaniṭṭha, may they rejoice in this discourse and may they 
attain the peace of Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 740 – 741  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. S. II 2 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
3. S. V 421 Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta 
4. A. I 176 Titthāyatana Sutta  
5. S. I 8 Samiddhi Sutta 
6. D. II 290 Mahā Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta 
7. S. I 37f. Paṭhama, dutiya, tatiya Janeti Sutta 
8. A.III 399 Majjhe Sutta 
9. Ud. 32 Lokavolokana Sutta 
10. Dhp. V 342 Taṇhā Vagga 
11. Dhp. V 338 Taṇhā Vagga 
12. S. IV 398 Kutuhala Sālā Sutta 
13. M. II 54 Raṭṭhapāla Sutta 
14. A. II 144 Bhikkhunī Sutta 
15. Vism. Sīla Niddesa 6 (S.H.B.) Sinh. Script.  
16. S. V 271 Brāhmana Sutta

Sermon 18 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 200)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Upādāna paccayā bhavo – bhūto dukkhaṁ nigacchati 
jātassa maraṇaṁ hoti – eso dukkhassa sambhavo 
tasmā upādānakkhayā – sammadaññāya paṇḍito 
jātikkhayaṁ abhiññāya – nāgacchanti punabbhavaṁ1 
– Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, Sutta Nipāta 
Dear Listeners,  
 Religious teachers from ancient times have introduced 
various theories and views in an attempt to reveal the secret of 
continued existence. Some even attempted to hand over the 
responsibility of existence to gods and Brahma. The Buddha, 
disproving all these theories and views disclosed that grasping 
(upādāna) is the root cause of existence as clearly explained in 
the Law of Dependent Arising, ( Paṭicca S amuppāda Dhamma). 
We have chosen as the topic of this 18 th discourse on Paṭicca 
Samuppāda, two verses that shed light on our subject. These two 
verses are also from the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta , of the Sutta 
Nipāta which has already provided us with suitable  topics for 
several discourses on Paṭicca Samuppāda . I have explained its 
style of presentation on earlier occasions. It is a sutta where the 
Buddha makes a very impressive analysis of the duality of arising 
and ceasing, surveying it from different angles.  This is how the 
Buddha introduces the two aspects – arising and ceasing – with 
regard to grasping – upādāna, which is a link in the Paṭicca 
Samuppāda.  
 “Monks, if someone enquires whether there could be 
another mode of contemplating dualities, you must r eply in the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

affirmative. How is it possible? Whatever pain arises, all that has 
grasping as condition. This is one mode of contemplation. With 
the total detachment and cessation of grasping, pain ceases to be. 
This is the second mode of contemplation. A mo nk who practices 
the dual technique of contemplation striving hard to burn out the 
defilements (kilesa) with vigilance, can expect one of these two 
rewards, either Arahanthood in this very life or the attainment of 
Non-returnership in case a trace of grasp ing remains as residue.” 
The above two verses were uttered to clarify that point. 
Upādāna paccayā bhavo  – Continued existence called 
bhava, depends on grasping called upādāna 
bhūto dukkha ṁ nigacchati – The born, experiences 
suffering  
jātassa maraṇaṁ hoti – Death comes to the born 
eso dukkhassa sambhavo – This is the origin of suffering 
tasmā upādānakkhayā – Therefore through the destruction 
of grasping 
sammadaññāya paṇḍito – The well informed wise men  
jātikkhayaṁ abhiññāya – realizing the extinction of birth  
nāgacchanti punabbhavaṁ – will not seek birth again. 
 That is the meaning of the two verses. Let us try to first 
understand the term upādāna. Many of you know the position of 
‘upādāna’ in the Law of Dependent Arising. “ Taṇhā paccayā 
upādānaṁ, upādāna paccayā bhavo ”. We have mentioned on 
earlier occasions that when making an analytical study of any one 
of the links of the Paṭicca Samuppāda , the two links on either 
side have to be taken into account. Then conditioned by craving 
is grasping, conditioned b y grasping is continuous birth. In the 
analysis of the Paṭicca Samuppāda , the Buddha explains the 
significance of grasping through the question -answer method. 2 
‘Katamañca bhikkhave upādāna ṁ?’, What is grasping? 
‘Kāmupādānaṁ’, grasping of sense pleasure, ‘ diṭṭhupādānaṁ’,

Sermon 18 

grasping of views, ‘ sīlabbatupādānaṁ’, grasping rules of 
morality and views, ‘attavādupādānaṁ’, grasping of the notion of 
self. 
 This term upādāna also deserves some thought. The 
prefix ‘ upa’ gives the general idea of closeness, ‘coming nea r’, 
sometimes explained as ‘ upeti upādiyati’, ‘reach close and grip’. 
In fact the implication here is to continue to grip firmly. Gripping 
not with the hands but with the mind. Now, when discussing 
upādāna, you are automatically reminded of the often menti oned 
topic pañca upādānakkhandha, the five heaps of grasping – rūpa, 
vedanā, saññā, saṅkhārā and viññāṇa (physical form, feeling, 
perception, preparations and consciousness). These are the five 
heaps we reach and grip. ‘ Etaṁ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā ’ 
‘This is mine, This am I, This is myself’.  
 The Mahā Puṇṇama Sutta 3 of the Majjhima Nikāya refers 
to a certain moonlit night when the Buddha allowed the monks to 
ask him questions. A monk on this occasion asked two questions 
about upādāna and upādānakkhandha. What is the root cause of 
the five aggregates of grasping? kiṁ mūlakā? The Buddha replied 
“Ime kho bhikkhu pañcupādānakkhandā chandamūlakā”. Chanda 
or desire is the root of the five aggregates of grasping. The term 
chanda embodies the idea of taṇhā. Chanda is wish. Now comes 
his second question, which seems complicating at a glance. 
“Venerable Sir, is upādāna the same as pañca upādānakkhandhā 
or are they different?” The reply is “Monk, grasping and the five 
aggregates of g rasping are not identical. Nor are they altogether 
different from each other. If there is any desire towards the five 
aggregates of grasping, that is called grasping.” Dear listeners, 
you must remember that the lustful desire towards the aggregates 
is the quality of grasping within it. 
 Now let us find out what bhava means in ‘ Upādāna 
paccayā bhavo ’. The general meaning is existence. But on 
hearing the word, many think of different worlds such as the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

world of sensuality, the world of form and the formless w orld. 
The connection between becoming ( bhava) and the mind is not 
clear to many. That perhaps is the reason why Venerable Ānanda 
once asked the Buddha, 4 “Bhavo bhavo ti bhante vuccati. 
Kittāvatā nukho bhante bhavo hoti ?” “Venerable Sir ‘Existence 
existence’ they say. To what extent can it be called existence?” 
Then the Buddha replied as follows “ Ānanda, in the absence of a 
kamma (action) that could carry its results into a sensual sphere 
or a sensual world ( kāma dhātu), is sensual existence possible?” 
Here kāma dhātu  refers to a world of sensuality. Venerable 
Ānanda replies “No Venerable Sir”. Then the Buddha explains 
his position using some unusual terms “ kammaṁ khettaṁ, 
viññāṇaṁ bījaṁ, taṇhā sineho ”. Kamma is the field, 
consciousness is the seed, craving is the moisture.  
 The consciousness of beings who are overwhelmed by 
ignorance and tied down by craving, tends to seek birth in a 
sensual world. Now it’s clear that birth in a sensual world takes 
place in a field called kamma with viññāṇa as the seed when  the 
moisture of craving is available. Venerable Ānanda’s second 
question was somewhat similar to the first, though based on a 
world of form. The Buddha explains ‘Ānanda, in the absence of a 
kamma that could carry its results to a world of form ( rūpa 
dhātu), is existence of form possible?’ ‘No Venerable Sir’. Here 
the explanation is similar to that of the earlier question. For 
beings overwhelmed by ignorance, and tied down by craving who 
seek birth in a world of form, kamma provides a field with 
viññāṇa as the seed and craving as the moisture. Apply this same 
explanation regarding birth in a formless world ( arūpa dhātu ). 
Existence in a formless world is possible only if a kamma 
conducive to such a birth is present. In short, in the analysis of 
the Law of Dependent Arising, the Buddha refers to existence as 
threefold, existence in the world of sensuality, ( kāma bhava ) in 
the world of form ( rūpa bhava) and in the formless world ( arūpa 
bhava).

Sermon 18 

 Now we have discussed “ Bhava”. What do you think is 
bhūta in “ Bhūto dukkhaṁ nigacchati?” A bhūto is one who has 
come into existence. “ Upādāna paccayā bhavo – bhūto dukkhaṁ 
nigacchati”, One who falls into continuous existence, one who 
enters continuous existence – he is referred to as bhūta – he 
experiences pain, suffer ing. How? Herein you must remember 
that contained within bhava, both birth and decay -death are 
found. These two inherent features birth and decay -death ( jāti, 
jarā-maraṇa) are thereby proved. “ bhūto dukkha ṁ nigacchati” 
implies that a person who comes into existence, has birth and 
decay-death, which are an inseparable pair yoked together. Every 
religious teacher has attempted to remove decay and death from 
birth, to create an external birth. The Buddha has confirmed the 
impossibility of such a position in the Salla Sutta.5 
 “Nahi so upakkamo atthi  yena jātā na mīyare , jarampi 
patvā maraṇaṁ evaṁ dhammāhi pāṇino” 
 There is no devise whatsoever by which a born person can 
avoid death. Death is certain even after decay. This makes it clear 
that upādāna (grasping) has existence within it. Grasping is 
suggestive of existence. If grasping is suggestive of existence, the 
idea of birth, decay and death are also obvious. That is why the 
above verse winds up with ‘Eso dukkhassa sambhavo’. That itself 
is the ar ising of suffering. That is the positive aspect. The other 
verse suggests ‘ Tasmā’ Therefore with the total destruction of 
grasping, ‘ sammadaññāya pa ṇḍitā’ the wise with right 
understanding ‘ jātikkhayaṁ abhiññāya’. This is an unusual 
phrase, which we will e xplain now. ‘ jātikkhayaṁ abhiññāya’ 
means seeing the destruction of birth, the non -existence of birth, 
with wisdom par excellence, nāgacchanti punabbhavaṁ – do not 
seek rebirth again. 
 Due to this series of discourses on the Law of Dependent 
Arsing, we were compelled to talk of a direct order procedure and 
a reverse order procedure. Now you are familiar with it by

The Law of Dependent Arising 

reading and listening to it often. This is how the direct order 
begins. Avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā, sa ṅkhāra paccayā viññā ṇaṁ, 
viññāṇa paccayā nāma rūpaṁ. It ends with “ Jātipaccayā 
jarāmaraṇaṁ soka parideva dukkha domanassa upāyāsā 
sambhavanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandassa 
samudayo hoti ”. Although the entire process has not been 
mentioned here, we can see that conditioned by birth, there aris e 
decay, death, grief, lamentation, suffering and dejection. In this 
manner the entire mass of suffering arises. That is the Law of 
Dependent Arising, in direct order, which reveals that dependent 
on birth, there arises the entire mass of suffering, decay,  death, 
grief, lamentation, suffering, dejection and despair. 
 How do we look at this in the reverse order? 
‘Avijjāyatveva asesa virāga nirodhā ’. With the total destruction, 
detachment and cessation of ignorance, ‘ saṅkhāra nirodho ’ 
preparations cease. ‘saṅkhāra nirodhā viññāṇa nirodho’, with the 
cessation of preparations consciousness ceases. ‘ viññāṇa nirodhā 
nāmarūpa nirodho’ , with the cessation of consciousness, name -
and-form cease. It goes on till the last link. ‘ Jāti nirodhā, 
jarāmaraṇa soka parideva du kkha domanassa upāyāsā 
nirujjhanti. Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandassa nirodho 
hoti.’ This is the reverse order. “With the cessation of birth, it is 
obvious that decay, death, grief, lamentation, suffering and 
dejection also cease. In this manner, the e ntire mass of suffering 
comes to an end.” But Dear Listeners, we have come across an 
unusual discourse, delivered by the Buddha himself, which 
suggests the possibility of attaining Nibbāna, through the direct 
order alone. It is the Upanisa Sutta of the Abhisamaya Saṁyutta 
in the Saṁyutta Nikāya.6 Most educated westerners, who dislike 
the negative quality in the discourses on causality, seem to prefer 
this Upanisa Sutta, which follows the direct order adding up link 
by link and finally ending up in Nibbāna. The simile used here is 
the same as what is found in any other discourse on Dependent 
Arising. This is how it goes “Just as, Monks, a shower of rain

Sermon 18 

with piercing rain drops pours down on a summit of a hill and the 
water takes a downward course along the s lopes filling rugged 
crevices, and small ditches, and when they overflow, the small 
holes and when they overflow, the large holes and when they 
overflow, the rivulets and large rivers and finally fills the great 
ocean, in the same way monks,……” Supported b y this 
illustrative simile, the Buddha proceeds to explain the links of the 
Law of Dependent Arising. Please try to remember the links even 
though not familiar with the meanings. 
 “Evameva kho bhikkhave, avijjūpanisā sa ṅkhārā. saṅkhārūpanisaṁ viññāṇaṁ, viññāṇūpanisaṁ nāmarūpaṁ, nāmarūpūpanisaṁ saḷāyatanaṁ, sa ḷāyatanūpaniso phasso , phassūpanisā 
vedanā, vedanūpanisā taṇhā, taṇhūpanisaṁ upādānaṁ, upādānūpaniso bhavo, bhavūpanisā jāti, jātūpanisaṁ dukkhaṁ…….” 
 Now follows, from there onwards, a process that even you 
may prefer. 
 “Dukkhūpanisā saddhā , saddhūpanisaṁ pāmujjaṁ, pāmujjūpanisā pīti , pītūpanisā passaddhi , passaddhūpanisaṁ 
sukhaṁ, sukhūpaniso samādhi , samādhūpanisaṁ yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṁ, yathābhūtañāṇadassanūpanisā nibbidā , nibbidūpaniso virag o, virāgūpanisā vimutti , vimuttupanisaṁ khaye 
ñāṇaṁ.” 
  This account is very unusual, because it follows only the 
direct order. The reverse order is inapplicable here. The turning 
point between the two processes is Dukkha, suffering. At this 
juncture, I wi sh to critically comment on the Sinhala translation 
of the Tipitaka, where the Pāli word upanisā has been 
convieniently replaced by paccaya, thereby denying Sinhala 
readers the full significance of this special word upanisā. 
 The Upanisā Sutta, when transl ated, would appear as 
follows. Even without a knowledge of Pāli, one could notice its

The Law of Dependent Arising 

special quality. The earlier sutta was worded as followed, 
“Dependent on ignorance arises preparations, Dependent on 
preparations arise consciousness.” But this sutta, tr anslated 
grammatically would appear as follows. 
 In association with ignorance (arise) preparations 
 In association with preparations consciousness 
 In association with consciousness name-and-form 
 In association with name-and-form six aggregates 
  In association with six aggregates contact 
 In association with contact feelings 
 In association with feelings craving 
 In association with craving grasping 
 In association with  grasping existence 
 In association with existence birth 
 In association with birth suffering 
 The second part follows the same pattern. 
 In association with suffering (arises) confidence (saddhā) 
 In association with confidence (arises) delight (pamoda) 
 In association with delight (arises) joy (pīti) 
 In association with joy (arises) serenity (passaddhi) 
 In association with serenity (arises) ease (sukha) 
 In association with ease (arises) concentration (samādhi) 
 In association with concentration (arises) knowledge of 
things as they are (yathābhūta ñāṇadassana) 
 In association with knowledge of things as they are 
(arises) disenchantment (nibbidā) 
 In association with disenchantment (arises) detachment 
(virāgo) 
 In association with detachment (arises) emancipation 
(vimutti) 
 In association with emancipation (arises) wisdom of 
extinction (khaye ñāṇa)

Sermon 18 

 I hope my listeners have got at least a general idea of the 
grammatical problem here. The translation appears different 
because what is conveyed here is peculiar. Let me try to give you 
a general idea. You know that the term paccayā in this twelve 
links of the Law of Dependent Arising is repeated without any 
change. Avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā, sa ṅkhāra paccayā viññā ṇaṁ 
etc. But the term upanisa is declined with the subject it qualifies 
keeping to case, gender and number. Those of you who know 
grammar, will agree that an adjective will take the case, gender 
and number of the noun it qualifies. “ Avijjūpanisā sa ṅkhārā” 
therefore, will have to be tr anslated as ‘Preparations exist in 
association with ignorance’. Avijjā is a feminine gender noun in 
Pāli. “ Saṅkhārūpanisaṁ viññāṇaṁ” has to be translated as 
‘consciousness exist in association with preparations’.  Saṅkhārā 
is in the plural in Pāli. 
 ‘Vedanūpanisā taṇhā’ has been translated in the feminine 
gender in grammatical Sinhala, although an identical version is 
not possible in English. I wish to draw your attention to an 
unknown aspect of the term ‘ upanisa’, though it is used often. 
You have heard of ‘Upanissaya sampatti’ . Upanisa means ‘in 
close association with’. Why the Buddha used the term upanisa 
instead of paccayā is a problem. 
 In order to clarify that point, I wish to quote as a brief 
commentary, the Nibbedhikapariyāya Sutt a 7 in the sixth Nipāta 
of the Anguttara Nikāya . This sutta holds within it several 
valuable facts about the Dhamma. The Buddha addresses the 
monks in one place as follows “ Katamo ca bhikkhave dukkhassa 
vipāko?”, ‘What is the consequence of suffering?’. A person 
oppressed by su ffering, overwhelmed by suffering will grieve as 
a consequence, will become feeble, lament and beat his chest and 
finally ‘sammohaṁ āpajjati’ will fall into total delusion. There is 
another aspect. Instead of crying and lamenting overwhelmed by 
grief some may react in a different way.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Bahiddhā pariye ṭṭi āpajjati, ko ekapada ṁ dvipadaṁ 
jānāti imassa dukkhassa nirodhāyāti. ” He directs the searchlight 
outwards. ‘Who knows a line or two to help me cease this 
suffering?’ Here the Buddha summarises this situatio n into an 
amazing theory “ sammoha vepakkaṁ vāhaṁ bhikkhave dukkhaṁ 
vadāmi pariyeṭṭhi vepakkaṁ vā” “ Monks, I declare two reactions 
to suffering, either total delusion ( sammoha) or search 
(pariyeṭṭhi).” You may have now tuned in to the drama of 
Paṭācārā or Kisā Gotamī. Both reactions are involved here. 
Imagine the plight of Paṭācārā who lost her husband, her two sons 
and her parents, and was driven into a state of lunacy. She was 
humiliated and beaten on the roads. An unknown noble friend 
directed her to the  world’s greatest and noblest friend. The 
outcome was that she became an Arahant Therī. 
 Kisā Gotamī’s drama was not different either. A mad 
woman who walked the roads, seeking for medicine for her dead 
child on her shoulder. She was ridiculed though not b eaten up. 
An unknown noble friend directed her to the Buddha. The mad 
walk finally ended up in Arahantship. It’s clear now that 
‘delusion and search’ are both present here. Then why is the word 
‘vā’ (vepakkaṁ vāhaṁ…) used here. It gives an alternative. 
Paccaya has a specific idea. “ Jāti paccayā bhikkhave 
jarāmaraṇaṁ”, “ Uppādā vā tathāgatāna ṁ, anuppādā vā 
tathāgatānaṁ ṭhitā va sā dhātu. ” Those are examples. ‘Decay 
and death have birth as the only condition. Whether Buddhas are 
born or not, this law persists unchanged. But the Buddha declared 
that suffering has two consequences or results. Either one would 
fall into delusion or one would fall into a search outside.  
 Dear listeners, we have often fallen into the first of these 
two tracks, the reason being t he absence of a noble friend. The 
search for a person who knows ‘one or two lines’ to direct us will 
be futile, until and unless a Buddha appears. That has to be well 
understood. The stories of Pa ṭācārā and Kisā Gotamī prove that 
the ordinary worldling’s r eaction to suffering is delusion. Lying

Sermon 18 

hidden underneath it one may discover an upanissaya sampatti a 
kammic force which is visible to a Buddha though hidden from 
us.  
 In this context ‘ upanisā’ conveys the idea of ‘relying on’ 
or ‘in association with’. T wo possible results are seen in 
association with the experience of suffering. One is delusion. The 
other is search. The positive results of the search have already 
been mentioned. It is an upward path of purification where 
suffering ( dukkha) leads to confi dence ( saddhā). Confidence 
leads to delight (pāmojja). Delight leads to joy ( pīti). Joy leads to 
serenity (passaddhi). Serenity leads to ease ( sukha). Ease leads to 
concentration ( samādhi). Concentration leads to knowledge of 
things as they are ( yathābhūtañāṇa dassana ). It leads to 
disenchantment ( nibbidā). Disenchantment leads to detachment 
(virāgo). Detachment leads to emancipation ( vimutti). 
Emancipation gives rise to the wisdom of extinction (khaye ñāṇa) 
or the wisdom to understand everything. Most educ ated 
westerners prefer this explanation which leads you on a positive 
track. 
 A certain erudite person of modern time s8 named this 
discourse as the circular Law of Dependent Arising. It is called 
circular because it follows the direct order to the end inst ead of 
using the direct order and the reverse order. Even though many 
are familiar with the Upanisa Sutta, the subtle difference between 
‘paccaya’ and ‘upanisā’ is hardly recognized, as a result of which 
even translations have treated both words as identic al. You must 
understand that ‘ upanisā’ has an alternative implication. That is 
why this sutta says. ‘In association with ignorance…’ instead of 
‘Dependent on ignorance…’, which suggests a definite result 
based on conditionality.     
 Assuming that the Upanisa Sutta  clarifies the difference 
clearly, let us understand the final result of this path. What was 
the final attainment of those Arahant Bhikkhunis? The cessation

The Law of Dependent Arising 

of birth ( Jātikkhaya). If grasping gives rise to existence, and 
existence gives rise t o birth and decay -death, we have to 
eliminate birth. There is no other alternative but the elimination 
of birth. That is called ‘ Jātikkhaya’. A great many humans who 
promote and love existence, dislike extinction ( Nibbāna) for that 
reason. It becomes the Nibbāna of ‘Siyadoris’ (Simple Simon). 
You cannot bargain for birth totally free of decay -death. 
Elimination of birth is the only solution to the misery that 
follows. 
 How could birth be eliminated? By eliminating grasping. 
It is the stage which is totally free of craving, desire and lust. You 
can understand the significance of this sutta, from whichever 
aspect you scrutinize it. Then let us look at it from another angle. 
We just now said that one comes to know through highest 
wisdom, the total eradication o f birth ( jātikkhaya). How is that 
possible? How can one know that birth has been totally wiped 
out? The Buddha has been able to, for some reason, declare that 
there will be no more rebirth for him. “ Natthidāni punabbhavo”. 
Similarly Arahants are referred to as ‘eliminated birth’ ‘khīnā jāti 
vusitaṁ brahmacariyaṁ’. The problem is, how are we to know 
whether birth has been eliminated? The solution to this problem 
will also clarify the suttas that deal with the profundity of 
Nibbāna. The Ajāta Sutt a 9 in the Itivuttaka provides an ideal 
solution to our problem. First make yourselves familiar with it in 
Pāli: “Atthi bhikkhave ajāta ṁ abhūtaṁ akataṁ asaṁkhataṁ – no 
ce ta ṁ bhikkhave abhavissa ajāta ṁ abhūtaṁ akataṁ 
asaṁkhataṁ nayidha jātassa bhūtassa katassa sa ṁkhatassa 
nissaraṇaṁ paññāyetha.” 
 This declaration invites for deep contemplation. The 
Buddha emphasizes the existence of something, which the 
worldlings never ever thought of. You will understand it as we 
translate the statement.

Sermon 18 

 “Atthi bhikkhave ajāta ṁ abhūtaṁ akataṁ asaṁkhataṁ”, 
‘Monks, there exists a state unborn, unsprung, undone, 
unprepared.’ “ no ce ta ṁ bhikkhave abhavissa ajāta ṁ abhūtaṁ 
akataṁ asaṁkhataṁ”, ‘if such an unborn, unsprung, undone, 
unprepared state was non -existent, “ nayidha jātassa bhūtassa 
katassa sa ṁkhatassa nissara ṇaṁ paññāyetha”, ‘it would be 
impossible to declare the security of a state unborn, unsprung, 
undone, unprepared, attainable in this birth itself. Then the 
Buddha declares the same statement in the positive order. “Yasmā 
ca kho b hikkhave atthi ajāta ṁ abhūtaṁ akataṁ asaṁkhataṁ, 
tasmā jātassa bhūtassa katassa sa ṁkhatassa nissara ṇaṁ 
paññāyatī ti. ” ‘Monks, since there exists an unborn, unsprung, 
undone, unprepared state, there is a release from the born, sprung, 
made, prepared state.’ Now we must understand why the Buddha 
repeated it, emphasizing the negative and the positive points of 
view. The or dinary worldling is unable to imagine the existence 
of such a state. That is why we highlighted it in our series of 
discourses on Nibbāna. The worldling is unable to comprehend it 
due to his craving for existence. What is expressed here is the 
cessation of  birth through the cessation of continuous existence 
which the Arahants experience with the attainment of Phala 
Samāpatti. As they transcend the world, they experience that 
continuous existence is dependent on the six aggregates, and their 
cessation leads to the cessation of continuous existence. The final 
mental state of the Buddha and the Arahants is the fruition of this 
realization.  
 Based on this realization, Nibbāna is called ‘ tāṇaṁ, 
lenaṁ, dīpaṁ, saraṇaṁ, parāyaṇaṁ’ 10 a protection, a cave, an 
island, a refuge, a support. Whenever the Buddha and the 
Arahants are in a relaxed state of mind they dwell on the 
elimination of existence ( bhavanirodha) described as ‘ Bhava 
nirodho Nibbāna ṁ’. If existence is a fire its elimination is the 
extinction of the fire. The mind firmly established in this state, far 
removed from the excitement of the world, cannot be disturbed

The Law of Dependent Arising 

even by thunder. What is the nature of the mind at that time? The 
truth has been realized. The end of birth has been attained. The 
continuous existence having been eliminated, birth too is ended. 
Decay and death are thereby terminated. This truth has been 
realized. That is the quality of the mind free from continuous 
existence. 
 The following verses in the Itivuttaka effectively 
condenses the ideas expressed above.   
Jātaṁ bhūtaṁ samuppannaṁ – kataṁ saṇkhatamaddhuvaṁ 
jarāmaraṇasaṇghātaṁ – roganiḍḍaṁ pabhaṇguraṁ 
āhāranettippabhavaṁ – nālaṁ tadabhinandituṁ 
Tassa nissaraṇaṁ santaṁ – atakkāvacaraṁ dhuvaṁ 
ajātaṁ asamuppannaṁ – asokaṁ virajaṁ padaṁ 
nirodho dukkhadhammānaṁ – saṅkhārūpasamo sukho 
 Here is its meaning. It gives a realistic description of the 
world. 
Jātṁ bhūtaṁ samuppannaṁ – born, sprung up, 
dependently arisen. kataṁ saṇkhatamaddhuvaṁ – made, 
prepared, short lived. jarāmaraṇasaṇghātaṁ – bonded by decay 
and death. roganiḍḍaṁ pabhaṇguraṁ – a nest for sickness,  
perishable. And what is the nest made up of? 
āhāranettippabhavaṁ – born of craving for food. nālaṁ 
tadabhinandituṁ – not fit to take delight in. Tassa nissara ṇaṁ 
santaṁ atakkāvacaraṁ dhuvaṁ – departure from this called 
Nibbāna is peaceful, beyond reasoning and enduring. ajātaṁ 
asamuppannaṁ asokaṁ virajaṁ padaṁ – unborn not 
dependently arisen, free from grief and attachment. nirodho 
dukkhadhammānaṁ – ceasing of all factors of sorrow. 
saṅkhārūpasamo sukho – stilling of all preparations is bliss.

Sermon 18 

 What is remarkable is that any verbal account about 
Nibbāna begins with the term saṅkhārasamatho, stilling of 
preparations. For instance ‘ Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ 
sabba sa ṅkhārāsamatho s abbūpadhi pa ṭinissaggo ta ṇhakkhayo 
virago nirodho Nibbāna ṁ.’ That is clear proof that with the 
cessation of preparations, all that is associated with it inclusive of 
existence ceases, because existence is dependent on preparations. 
I would like to make a c omment here. Unfortunately, many have 
misinterpreted the term asaṁkhata. Instead of understanding it as 
a state free of preparations, it is treated as a ‘thing’. The 
‘unprepared’ has become a world. Even Nibbāna has been 
converted into a world. A transform ation has taken place within 
the Dhamma. That is why we have tried to explain to you, the 
implication of asaṁkhata, the unprepared. That realization is 
called ‘anidassana viññāṇa’, a state of consciousness which does 
not display name -and-form ( nāmarūpa), w hich represents the 
entire world. This mental state too had been misinterpreted as a 
world. We have attempted to clarify in our discourses on 
Nibbāna, particularly in some of our recent discourses, that 
anidassana viññāṇa is not a world but a realization a ttainable 
through the cessation of continuous existence ( bhava). As further 
clarification I would like to point out something unforgettable. 
On the front cover of the book Paṭicca Samuppāda just out from 
the press, you see two bundles of bambo, one leaning  against the 
other, so dependently that if one is pulled out the other falls. This 
demonstrates the mutual dependency ( aññamaññapaccayatā) 
between consciousness and name -and-form, as explained by 
Venerable Sāriputta. With reference to this we have brought out 
as an analytical explanation, a very deep and valuable sutta called 
Mahā Nidāna Sutta. 
 The Buddha’s declaration of mutual dependency 
(aññamaññapaccayatā) between consciousness and name -andform based on dependent arising, is condensed in the Mahā 
Nidāna Sutta as follows.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Ettāvatā kho Ānanda jāyetha vā jīyetha vā mīyetha  vā 
cavetha vā upapajjetha vā. Ettāvatā adhivacanapatho, ettāvatā 
niruttipatho, ettāvatā paññattipatho, ettāvatā paññāvacara ṁ, 
ettāvatā va ṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati itthatta ṁ paññāpanāya yadida ṁ 
nāmarūpaṁ saha viññāṇena.” 11 
 This is its translation, ‘Ānanda, to this extent does a 
person’s birth or decay or death or departure or rebirth takes 
place’. Next he deals with another aspect. ‘To this extent is a path 
of attribute ( adhivacana) a path of etymology (nirutti) a path of 
manifestation (paññati) displayed’. Concealed within these three 
words is the secret of language and logic. Only to this extent is it 
possible to express a path of attributes, a path of etymology and a 
path of manifestation. F urthermore the Buddha says ‘ ettāvatā 
paññāvacaraṁ’ ‘To this extent does wisdom reach’. This means 
that wisdom can reach in between name -and-form and 
consciousness but not beyond. 
Next comes an explanation as to why the simile of the 
vortex was used. Ettāvatā vaṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati itthattaṁ paññāpanāya 
yadidaṁ nāmarūpaṁ saha viññā ṇena’. ‘Ānanda, to this extent 
does the vortex whirl, for the continuity of existence, that is as 
long as name -and-form together with consciousness.’ We too 
have referred to the simile of vaṭṭa, the vortex to clarify this 
point. It is not our own creation but a simile hidden among the 
suttas. The vortex whirls only as long as name -and-form goes 
with consciousness. One can take birth, go through decay -death, 
pass away and seek birth again on ly as long as name -and-form 
twirls with consciousness. Only to that extent can language and 
logic hold sway over beings. Only to that extent can wisdom 
penetrate. It cannot go beyond. Only to that extent does the entire 
vortex (or whirlpool) of existence (saṁsāra) whirl. 
 The two words referred to above are the most significant, 
that is name -and-form and consciousness. ‘ nāmarūpaṁ saha 
viññāṇena’. We have attempted to emphasize the significance of

Sermon 18 

this duality by using similes such as Narcissus and that of t he dog 
on the bridge. Inability to understand this mutual dependency 
aññamaññpaccayatā is at the very root of delusion. In popular 
games such as cricket or draughts you see a clear division into 
two sides without understanding the mutual dependency of one 
on the other. This inability to understand it, leads to a process of 
preparations ( saṅkhāra) between name -and-form and  
consciousness that results in the six sense spheres. Here too the 
presence of duality is significant such as the eye and physical 
form, ear and sound. We have discussed this on earlier occasions. 
This process goes through contact, feeling, craving and ends up in 
suffering. 
 This is the secret hidden behind the statement ‘Ānanda, to 
that extent does the undercurrent spin, for the continuity of 
existence, that is as long as name -and-form spins with 
consciousness’. Whenever one realizes this relationship and break 
them apart, suffering ends. I am sure you remember how the 
Bodhisatta Vipassi contemplated on the Law of Dependent 
Arising in the re verse order “ Kiṁ paccayā jarāmara ṇaṁ?” 
‘Dependent on what is decay -death?’ ‘Birth’, ‘ Jāti’. In this 
manner he proceeded until he saw that name -and-form, nāmarūpa is dependent on consciousness, viññāṇa and consciousness  
is dependent on name -and-form. He co uldn’t proceed further 
because the secret key to the solution lay there. Due to the 
ignorance of the mutual dependency between these two, the view 
of self ( sakkāyadiṭṭhi) or the view of ‘I’ arises. Ignorance paves 
the way for a division into two camps, two teams. An ideal 
example is the game of chess between two good friends Ajith and 
Sumith, who challenged each other over a game. What takes 
place in this world is similar . Narcissus assumed his own shadow 
to be a goddess. That explains the notion of self, sakkāya diṭṭi. 
Now you can understand this delusion arises between these two, 
name-and-form and consciousness. It is absolutely essential to 
realize with wisdom that name -and-form is substanceless. It is a

The Law of Dependent Arising 

mere shadow. That is why we did an etymological study of these 
terms. ‘Form’ in ‘name -and-form’ is a ‘nominal form’, it is a 
form only in name. ‘Name’ in ‘name-and-form’ is a formal name. 
It is an apparent name. Here, na me does not refer to the accepted 
names used in this world, but the five qualities of name called 
feeling ( vedanā), perception ( saññā), intention ( cetanā), contact 
(phassa) and attention ( manasikāra). It is a formal name given to 
name. Let us understand it  as only a fomal name. Form ( rūpa) 
here refers to the created notion of form in association with the 
four great primaries ( mahābhūta). That’s why we call form 
‘nominal form’. This game takes place within the illusion of 
consciousness due to the inability t o identify the two. Two camps 
have been formed in saṁsāra as ‘self and others’, as ‘myself and 
the world’. The root cause lies hidden there. The Mahā Nidāna 
Sutta has been named so because it reveals these underlying facts 
regarding the primaries. 
 Now let us discuss how to attain its realization. Instructive 
verses are found here and there for this purpose. The Muni Sutta 
of the Sutta Nipāt a 12 is one such example although it has not 
drawn much attention. 
 Saṅkhāya vatthūni pamāya bījaṁ  
 sinehamassa nānuppavecche 
 sa ve muni jātikhayantadassī 
 takkaṁ pahāya na upeti saṁkhaṁ 
 This verse is extremely deep in meaning. It discusses the 
qualities of a muni, an Arahant. This jewel of a verse uttered by 
the Buddha, extremely deep in meaning, describes a sage ( muni) 
an Arahant. Saṅkhāya vatthūni , here vatthūni means land or a 
field. Try to recall what helped the viññāṇa to establish itself. 
‘Kammaṁ khettaṁ, viññā ṇaṁ bījaṁ, ta ṇhā sineho ’ ‘ if beings 
blinded by ignorance, tied by craving seek birth in a world of 
sensuality or a world of form or a formless world, kamma serves 
as the field, consciousness as the seed and craving as moisture.

Sermon 18 

This idea is condensed in ‘ saṅkhāya vatthūni pamāya bīja ṁ’, 
correctly identifies the field and the seed of consciousness. 
‘sinehamassa nānuppavecche ’. He refrains from watering it. He 
identified the field correctly and he identified the seed correctly. 
So he waters it no more. Then what is the result?  
 ‘sa ve muni jātikhayantadassī’. He indeed is the sage who 
has seen the cessation of birth. 
 ‘takkaṁ pahāya na upeti sa ṁkhaṁ’. The term takka 
reminds us of atakkāvacara. ‘ takkaṁ pahāya’ given up 
reasoning. ‘na upeti saṁkhaṁ’ seeks no recognition. 
 Here a special comment is necessary to clarify this phrase. 
The worldlings do not recognize Arahants. What is the reason? 
Worldlings recognize people with assets ( upadhi sampatti ) such 
as the possession of land, houses, designations or vehicles. The 
Buddha and the Arahants have given up the five assets called the 
aggregates of grasping (which the y had been carrying all the way 
through saṁsara) and as a result they are not reckoned (or taken 
seriously) by the worldlings. 
 ‘takkaṁ pahāya’ too suggests a deep meaning. The 
‘avyākata vatthu’ or the ‘undeclared topics’ seem to baffle many. 
We have earli er discussed four points out of the ten undeclared 
topics. They deal with the position of a Tathāgata after death. 
Not only the religious philosophers of that time but even the 
educated class today are baffled by the Buddha’s silence 
regarding such popular  topics. Educated westerners say that it 
revealed the Buddha’s ignorance. But the true position was, Dear 
listeners, that the Buddha and the Arahants were beyond all 
limitations of logic. Language and logic restricted by dilemma 
and quadrilemma are incapab le of penetrating the after -death 
position of the Buddha and Arahants. The four questions are 
mitigated by the misconception of a ‘personality or a soul’ after 
death. 
 This is how the Buddha rejects them. ‘It cannot be said 
that a Tathāgata is’ after death , or is not. Nor can it be said that

The Law of Dependent Arising 

he is both, ‘is’ and ‘is not’ or he is ‘neither is’ nor ‘is not’. Please 
try to understand this subtle point. It is not possible to say ‘yes’ or 
‘no’ to these four positions. Neither can you confirm the four 
positions wholesale or reject them altogether. As such ‘ saṁkhaṁ 
na upeti’, ‘comes not within reckoning’ is the best description of 
this post-parinibbāna position. 
 References made regarding the deep qualities of the 
Buddha in certain suttas are amazing. They are not empty sayings 
imposed on him. Here is an impressive one, “Rūpasaṅkhā vimutto 
kho tathāgato gambhīro appameyyo duppariyogāho seyyatāpi 
mahāsamuddo.” 13 The Tathāgata is beyond reckoning by form. 
He is free from the qualities of form, having given them up. He 
carries a form which he has not grasped. For this reason, the 
world finds it too deep a concept to realize. Gambhīro, deep. 
Appameyyo, immeasurable. Duppariyogāho, difficult to 
penetrate. Seyyathāpi mahāsamuddo, like unto the great ocean. 
The reason for comparing it to the ocean is that it is beyond 
understanding, beyond grasping through logic. We know that 
logic functions within the limitations of consciousness an d nameand-form. A break -through reveals the sphere unattainable 
through logic. Atakkāvacaraṁ dhuvaṁ means beyond reasoning 
and stable. Logic is unstable but the worldlings dwell within the 
framework of logic. Since the Buddha has surpassed the worldly 
characteristics of form he is called ‘ rūpa sa ṅkhā vimutto ’. 
Although it sounds amazing I can’t help remarking here that the 
Arahants are the least recognized – ignored in the world due to 
the absence of expected qualifications. The world is reluctant to 
find out what Nibbāna is. Because of their craving for continuous 
existence they lean on logical reasoning. This problem is most 
serious among the educated westerners. The statement ‘ rūpa 
saṅkhā vimutto kho Tathāgato’ explains the reason. He is beyond 
reckoning by form. ‘saṁkhaṁ nopeti vedagu’ the knowing of the 
veda (wisdom) does not yield to reckonings. Now you can 
understand the depth of the simile in the verse. ‘ saṅkhāya 
vatthūni’, An Arahant understands the true nature of the field, 
‘pamāya bīja ṁ’ he unders tands the deceptive nature of the seed 
of consciousness. ‘ sinehamassa nānuppavecche’ and he prevents

Sermon 18 

the rain of craving supplying moisture, ‘ sa ve muni 
jātikhayantadassī’ he is the sage who sees the cessation of birth. 
This idea is found in several places in the Sutta Nipāta. 
 Here is another statement about the sage in the Sutta 
Nipāta.14 “Yo jātamucchijja na ropaye – jāyantamassa 
nānuppavecche.” ‘ jātaṁ ucchijja’ – uprooting what is born. ‘ na 
ropayeyya’ – refrains from planting. ‘ jāyantamassa nānuppa -
vecche’ – abstains from supplying water to what is growing. 
Arahants live but do not nourish life. They do not accumulate any 
kamma. This explains the “state of release”, described in several 
suttas. To put it in brief the Arahant with correct understanding 
prevents the seed of consciousness growing in the field of 
kamma, nourished by the moisture of craving, thereby putting an 
end to existence. 
 Let us condense this idea further. “ Upādāna paccayā 
bhavo – anupādā parinibbāna ṁ”, ‘existence is dependent on 
grasping. Detachment brings extinction’. Many get caught up 
here because Parinibbāna reminds them of the Mahā 
Parinibbāna Sutta . Parinibbāna does not refer to the ‘death’ of 
the Buddha or an Arahant. It refers to the moment the Buddha or 
an Arahant attains fruition of Arahanthood experiencing the 
cessation of existence, and the cessation of birth. Those who have 
a confused notion regarding thi s, have distorted even very clear 
suttas. Let me give you an instance of a clear sutta. This is an 
occasion the Buddha talks of himself. 
 Tiṇṇo so bhagavā taraṇāya dhammaṁ deseti 
 santo so bhagavā samathāya dhammaṁ deseti 
 danto so bhagavā damathāya dhammaṁ deseti 
 parinibbuto so bhagavā parinibbānāya dhammaṁ desetī 15    
 If we attempt translating verbally it will cause confusion. 
Let us proceed carefully.  
 ‘Tiṇṇo so bhagavā tara ṇāya dhamma ṁ deseti’, Having 
crossed over, the Fortunate One teaches the Dhamm a for others 
to cross over (the ocean of saṁsāra)

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 ‘santo so bhagavā samathāya dhamma ṁ deseti’, Having 
attained peace the Fortunate One teaches the Dhamma for others 
to attain peace. 
 ‘danto so bhagavā damathāya dhamma ṁ deseti’, Having 
restrained himself t he Fortunate One teaches the Dhamma to 
restrain others. 
 The last sentence goes as  
 ‘parinibbuto so bhagavā parinibbānāya dhamma ṁ 
desetī’, If parinibbuto means passing away, how could he teach 
the Dhamma? ‘parinibbuto bhagavā’ means ‘free from the world’ 
‘free from everything worldly’. Then the line reads ‘Having 
released himself from the world, the Fortunate One teaches the 
Dhamma for the release of others’. Please remember that 
parinibbuto means the total isolation of the Bud dha or the 
Arahants from the world by entering the mental state of Arahat 
phala samāpatti . In that state they do not even hear the 
thundering. If one is unable to realize in this very life that one’s 
existence has been totally eliminated, doubt will remain . Doubt is 
ignorance. That means ignorance has not been totally eliminated. 
The most precious word in the Buddha’s teaching crops up here. 
‘Diṭṭheva dhamme’, In this very birth. Many people try to evade 
this word. In this very birth, one can attain the ces sation of 
existence following the Buddha’s teaching. No other religious 
teacher has been able to show the path to cease existence, in this 
very birth. 
 The Buddha has shown the way to cessation of birth, 
cessation of decay -death, cessation of suffering. Wh ich explains 
the ‘ jātikhayantadassī’, ‘ khīnā jāti ’, ‘ natthi dāni punabbhavo ’. 
They testify to the fact that the Buddha had no more births. He 
had reached the highest stage, Phalasamāpatti. So had the 
Arahants. The ordinary worldlings are unable to understa nd this 
discontinuity of the relationship between consciousness and 
name-and-form. They can only see the continuity of the physical 
form and the natural functioning of the five senses. The Buddha 
and the Arahants live their lives, they partake of food but the 
release they attained ( vimutti) continues, though not visible. It is 
the release vimutti, that becomes their refuge at the last moment.

Sermon 18 

 Today we were compelled to speak in a forceful tone. The 
reason is, many have distorted the Dhamma, due to lack of  
penetrative understanding. Dhamma has been converted into a 
path that promotes continuity of existence. The educated class 
here as well as abroad are responsible for it. We have done our 
best in clarifying misconceptions. I am sorry I have to state facts. 
 Dear Listeners, this is enough for today. I wish to remind 
you to adopt yourselves to the Buddha word, “ Sammoha 
vepakkāhaṁ bhikkhave dukkhaṁ vadāmi pariyeṭṭhi vepakkaṁ vā” 
I declare that the outcome of misery is twofold, either delusion or 
search. The se arch can be fulfilled only during a period the 
Buddha’s message survives. Suffering causes delusion endlessly 
in saṁsāra. Kisā Gotamī, Paṭācārā and many others overwhelmed 
by misery found the doors of Nibbāna open to them because the 
supreme friend (kalyāna mitta) the Buddha, showed the way. His 
path began with ‘ dukkhupanisā saddhā saddhūpanisa ṁ 
pāmojjaṁ’ Misery gives rise to confidence, confidence leads to 
delight and proceeded on the positive track. 
 I want you to realize the value of this present moment and 
put it into practical use. This discourse may have appealed to 
some but irritative to some. Anyway I hope you will understand 
the Dhamma, realize the importance of Diṭṭhevadhamme (in this 
life itself) clarify any doubts and make the determination to tr ead 
the path of positivity even though you may be immersed in 
misery. We wish you would realize the four paths and fruits of 
purity through the perfection of your meditation, inspired by the 
precepts followed, meditation practiced and the discourses you 
have listened to, before the lamp of the Dhamma is extinguished. 
Whatever beings there be from the lowest hell Avīci to the highest 
Brahma world Akaniṭṭa, may they rejoice in this discourse and 
may they attain the peace of Nibbāna.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. III 12 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. S. II 2 Vibhaṅga Sutta 
3. M. III 15 Mahāpuṇṇama Sutta 
4. A. I 223 Paṭhama Bhava Sutta  
5. S. IV 208 Sallattena Sutta 
6. S. II 29 Upanisa Sutta 
7. A. III 410 Nibbedhika Sutta 
8. B. M. Barua 
9. Itv. I Ajāta Sutta 
10. S. IV 372 Tāṇa Sutta, Lena Sutta, Dīpa Sutta, Saraṇa Sutta,  
S. IV 373 Pārāyana Sutta  
11. D. II 55 Mahānidāna Sutta 
12. Sn. I 12 Muni Sutta 
13. M. I 483 Aggivacchagotta Sutta 
14. Sn. I 12 Muni Sutta 
15. M. I 227 Cūla Saccaka Sutta

Sermon 19 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 201)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Yaṁ kiñci dukkhaṁ sambhoti 
sabbaṁ āhāra paccayā 
ahārānaṁ nirodhena 
natthi dukkhassa sambhavo 
Etamādīnavaṁ ñatvā 
dukkhaṁ āhāra paccayā 
sabbāhāraṁ pariññāya 
sabbāhāramanissito 
Ārogyaṁ sammadaññāya 
āsavānaṁ parikkhayā 
saṅkhāya sevī dhammaṭṭho 
saṁkhaṁ nopeti vedagu 1 
 – Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, Sutta Nipāta 
Dear Listeners,  
 Life of beings is dependent on food. But concealed within 
food is found craving which increases the misery of existence. As 
a result, the Buddha was compelled to present to the world an 
extraordinary vision based on nutriment. Full expression is given 
to t his vision in three of the verses in the Dvayatanupassanā 
Sutta in the Sutta Nipāta which I have selected as the topic of this 
19th discourse on the Law of Dependent Arising.  
 In several of our earlier discourses we have drawn your 
attention to the style of presentation in this sutta. To state briefly, 
it is a style of presenting facts for the contemplation of the nature 
of arising and ceasing. In this context the Buddha presents, for

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the first time, the method of dual contemplation on nutriment 
with regar d to arising and ceasing aspects. He introduces it as 
follows: “Monks, if someone inquires whether there could be 
another mode of contemplating dualities, you must reply in the 
affirmative. How is it possible? Whatever suffering arises, all that 
has nutriment as condition. This is one mode of contemplation. 
With the total detachment and cessation of grasping towards 
nutriments, suffering ceases to be. This is the second mode of 
contemplation. A monk who practices this dual technique of 
contemplation, striving hard to burn out the defilements ( kilesa) 
with vigilance, can expect one of these two rewards, either 
Arahanthood in this very life or the attainment of a non -returner 
in case a trace of grasping remains.” The above three verses were 
uttered to clarify this point further. 
Yaṁ kiñci dukkhaṁ sambhoti – sabbaṁ āhāra paccayā 
Whatever suffering arises, all that is dependent on 
nutriment. 
ahārānaṁ nirodhena – natthi dukkhassa sambhavo 
With the cessation of nutriment, there is no arising of 
suffering. 
Etamādīnavaṁ ñatvā – dukkhaṁ āhāra paccayā 
Knowing the consequences of suffering dependent on 
nutriment 
sabbāhāraṁ pariññāya – sabbāhāramanissito 
With complete understanding of nutriment, with 
detachment towards nutriment 
Ārogyaṁ sammadaññāya – āsavānaṁ parikkhayā 
With the perfect understanding of health, through the 
elimination of influxes 
saṅkhāya sevī dhammaṭṭho – saṁkhaṁ nopeti vedagu 
The Arahant who has the threefold higher knowledge and 
is firmly established in the Dhamma, does not come into 
reckoning.

Sermon 19 

 The vision on nutriment presented in these three verses is 
extremely deep. The Āhāra Sutta of the Āhāra Vagga  in the 
Āhāra Saṁyutta2 found in the Saṁyutta Nikāya presents a totally 
different attitude towards nutriment than that of the ordinary 
world. This is how the Buddha explains it to the monks: 
“Cattārome bhikkhave āhārā bhūtāna ṁ vā sattāna ṁ ṭhitiyā 
sambhavesīnaṁ vā anuggahāya. Katame cattāro? Kabali ṁkāro 
āhāro o ḷāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā 
tatiyā, viññā ṇaṁ catutthaṁ.” “Monks, ther e are four types of 
nutriments available for the maintenance of beings born, and for 
the welfare of those seeking birth. What are they? Material food 
either gross or soft, that can be made into lumps. Contact is the 
second. Mental intentions is the third. Consciousness is the 
fourth.” The root cause for all four, according to the Buddha is 
craving. “ Ime ca bhikkhave cattāro āhārā ta ṇhā nidānā ta ṇhā 
samudayā ta ṇhā jātikā ta ṇhā pabhavā. ” “These four types of 
nutriments have craving as the root cause, craving as the reason 
for arising, craving as the place of origin and craving as the place 
of birth.” 
 We come across another amazing account on this subject 
in the simile of ‘the flesh of a son’ in the Nidāna Sa ṁyutta.3 
Although we have made general references to  it earlier, I hope to 
analyse it now in direct reference to the Law of Dependent 
Arising. In this discourse on the “flesh of a son” capable of 
arousing intense emotions, the Buddha presents some valuable 
facts, as good as objects of meditation, in condensed form. 
 Let me first quote the Buddha word as it is. “Monks, 
imagine a couple who enters a desert track with their only loving 
son, equipped with a small quantity of simple requirements. 
Halfway through, finding their food exhausted the couple 
confidentially surveying their plight decided to kill the son. They 
killed their only son, made an edible preparation of the flesh and 
the fleshy bones and managed to traverse the rest of the journey. 
Had they not killed the son, all three would have perished. But a s

The Law of Dependent Arising 

they ate the meat, being overpowered by intense grief they beat 
their chests lamenting “Where is our only son.” 
 At the end of the narrative the Buddha asked the monks a 
question. “Monks, what do you think? Did those parents consume 
their only son’s fles h as a sport or enjoyment? For strength or 
appearance or adornment?” “Certainly not” replied the monks. 
“Monks, did not the parents consume the flesh of the child, 
merely to cross over the desert?” (make note of the term merely). 
“Yes Venerable Sir” responded the monks.  
 The fable ends there. Now the Buddha sets about to drive 
home the hard facts related to food. “Monks, gross food has to be 
treated as illustrated in the simile. It has its rewards. A deep 
understanding of gross material food, partaken of i n lumps, is 
equal to an understanding of lust in relation to the five -fold 
sensuality. The noble disciple who grasps this fact of reality will 
attain the fruit of a Non -returner. He will not return to this 
world.” That is the Buddha’s teaching. 
 At this po int, we are compelled, though reluctantly, to 
expose the immature childish story replaced by the commentato r 4 
which underestimates the significance of the Buddha’s message. 
What did the man and wife traversing the desert do when they ran 
out of food? They sat down under a particular tree with few 
leaves and had a confidential discussion. The husband said, “We 
have no more food. It is not possible to provide for you by 
farming or trade. The only possible solution is for you to kill me, 
and reach your destination, with the child.” Then the wife replied, 
“I am unable to earn a living in this desert by an occupation s uch 
as weaving thread. So I suggest that you kill me, and cross the 
desert with the child.” To this the husband responded, “The child 
will not survive if the mother is dead. The only obvious 
alternative is to kill the child and feed on the flesh until we c ross 
the desert. If we survive we have the possibility of getting another 
son. Agreeing to this plan, the mother sent the son to the father.

Sermon 19 

Recalling the trouble he went through, in order to bring him up, 
the father refused to kill him, and sent him back to the mother. 
 Thinking of the innumerable prayers offered to the gods 
and the pain she bore for ten months, the mother couldn’t kill the 
son. The boy walking between the mother and the father 
continuously – but mind you under that tree with few leaves – fell 
down dead. Then the parents after much lamenting and grieving, 
fed on the flesh. 
 Do you notice how the sensitivity found in the Buddha’s 
story has been revised in the second? I would like to add my 
comments here. Those who read the Dhamma and the Vinaya 
today in Sinhala hear of this childish story only. Can you see how 
the Buddha’s teachings are undermined? Perhaps the 
commentators feared that the earlier story would encourage 
parents to kill their children. But the Buddha’s intention was to 
show how dangerous the desire for food taken as a whole can be. 
The idea here is very deep indeed. In case you, my listeners, too 
have your doubts, let me annex another simile here. 
 You may have perhaps read the Buddha’s simile on 
Dhātumanasikāra (attention on the primaries) about a butcher.5 A 
certain butcher or his apprentice slaughteres a cow, slices it and 
sells it at a crossroad. Nobody thinks of the flesh in terms of a 
cow. Similarly, says the Buddha, a meditator should survey his 
own body by dissecting into the four elements earth, water, fire 
and wind. Thereby the Buddha doesn’t encourage slaughter of 
animals. It is only a simile. A butcher is a merciless person who 
slaughters, cuts into parts and sells cattle with cruelty. The 
Buddha’s advice was to dissect  the body one loves into the four 
elements as an object of contemplation. That is the message 
behind the simile. 
 Another doubt crops up regarding the simile of the son’s 
flesh. Since vegetarianism and meat -eating are common subjects

The Law of Dependent Arising 

for discussion today, one might misundestand this as an approval 
of meat -eating. The sole purpose of the simile here is to expose 
the danger concerning food in general. When discussing this topic 
once, I said if a grain of rice on our plate could speak, it would 
pour out the pa inful experience of misery in its life. With the 
introduction of agrochemicals that terminate thousands of insects, 
the grain of rice will not only complain but shed bitter tears, if it 
was possible. On the whole, food is a source of unhappiness. The 
purpose of the above simile was to bring about disillusionment 
regarding gross or delicate food, partaken of in lumps whether 
with or without meat. It must not be misinterpreted. I will touch 
on this again later. 
 Let us move on to contact as nutriment ( phassāhāra). 
“How, Monks, must contact as nutriment be understood? Imagine 
a cow with infected skin? ( niccammā gāvī)” The reference is not 
to a totally skinned cow in the slaughter house but to a cow with 
exposed wounds due to skin infection. If this cow stands b y a 
wall, insects there would attack the wounds. If she rests under a 
tree, the insects on the tree would attack her. If she gets into the 
water, insects in the water would harass her. In an open area, 
animal life associated with the sky would inflict pain  on her. 
Wherever the cow is, she has no escape. “That is how ‘contact 
nutriment’ should be understood” says the Buddha. If correctly 
understood, it’s advantages are many. First it gives a profound 
understanding of the three aspects of feeling (vedanā) as pleasant, 
painful and neither pleasant nor painful. If a noble disciple 
reaches this level of understanding, nothing more remains for him 
to do. He becomes an Arahant. The Buddha reveals the strength 
of feeling (vedanā) as an object of meditation. 
 Considering the depth of the simile, I would like to offer a 
brief commentary here. We know that feeling is dependent on 
contact. Bodily contact rests entirely on the soft skin, as we all 
know. Let’s imagine we have a wound on the right arm. A slight 
rub on the l eft arm with a velvet cloth brings immense comfort

Sermon 19 

but the same impact on the right arm will cause the arm to be 
withdrawn with pain. Condensing and simplifying the statement 
of the Buddha, one could say he is comparing the pleasant feeling 
on the skin and  the painful feeling on the raw flesh. In the 
ultimate sense, the skin is a mere bandage round a wound. If the 
entire body is a wound, a disease, and an ulcer, the skin is the 
bandage, as taught in the contemplation of impurities ( asubha 
bhāvanā) as gaṇḍabhūto, roga bhūto, vaṇa bhūto. This subject of 
meditation leads one to disillusionment regarding contact and the 
attainment of Nibbāna. That is the nutriment of contact. 
 The next is mental intentions as food ( mano sa ṁcetanā 
āhāra). How Monks should the foo d of mental intentions be 
identified?” Another simile is given here deep in meaning. There 
is a pit of burning embers as deep as the height of a man. It emits 
no smoke or flames. A man who longs to live but fears death, 
longs for enjoyment but fears pain, approaches this pit. Two 
strong men grip him by his arms and drag him towards the pit. 
Although he is physically drawn towards the coal pit, his 
intention (cetanā), his aspiration (patthanā), his resolve (paṇidhi) 
is bent away from it. He wriggles about bu t is dragged on. That is 
the simile. Next the Buddha applies it to the subject. “Monks, that 
is how mental intentions should be understood. The noble 
disciple who has the full understanding of the nutriment of mental 
intentions, will attain full realization of the craving for sensuality, 
the craving for existence and the craving of annihilation ( kāma 
taṇhā, bhava ta ṇhā, vibhava ta ṇhā). To him who reaches this 
level of purity, Arahanthood is certain.  
 Here too a short commentary seems necessary. What is 
the painful nature of mental intentions? Here is an example. We 
have to find the money tomorrow to settle a heavy loan. Can we 
fall asleep relaxed tonight? We might toss and turn in bed and our 
thoughts might torment us. Mental intentions ( mano saṁcetanā) 
will drag us away forcibly. Here is another example. The deer 
runs after the mirage due to craving. Due to craving for water. It

The Law of Dependent Arising 

runs due to the deception there is water. It keeps running. 
Although too exhausted to keep running, it drags itself forward, 
prompted by craving. Watching the behaviour of mental 
intentions, one can understand the nature of craving. I think that 
is enough about mano saṁcetanā. 
 The last one, nutriment of consciousness is the most 
subtle of the four. “Monks, how would you understand t he 
nutriment of consciousness? ( viññāṇa āhāra). This is the simile 
given. “The ministers or the executioners catch hold of a criminal 
and present him before the king for the final verdict. In the 
morning, the king orders that a hundred stabs be inflicted o n him 
with a sharp knife (known as aḍayaṭi). At noon the king is 
informed that the criminal was still alive. A repetition of the 
punishment is ordered. Again in the evening another round of 
hundred stabs was inflicted on him. Now the Buddha questions 
the m onks, “Monks, what do you think? Does this man who is 
inflicted with three hundred stabs a day with a sharp knife, 
experience pain? “Why not Venerable Sir? Even a single stab 
would definitely bring pain and distress on him.” The simile ends 
there. The Budd ha says “That is how, Monks, the nutriment of 
consciousness should be understood. A thorough understanding 
of the nutriment of consciousness will lead to the understanding 
of name -and-form. The noble disciple who reaches this level of 
understanding has not hing more to do. That is the nutriment of 
consciousness, the most difficult to comprehend. No one likes to 
treat consciousness as misery. In place of the aḍayaṭi story a 
simple but modern illustration will make this clear. 
 TV addicts face continuous attac ks from morning till 
night not with the aḍayaṭi of ancient times but – If I may coin a 
new word to suit modern times – with the ‘ad’-yati blows leveled 
against them by the business executioner of the commercial 
world.

Sermon 19 

 Here is another illustration. When yo u enter a street at 
night, electric bulbs in some business places keep winking so as 
to draw our attention, and to tempt us through subtle devices. The 
worldlings cannot realise the misery within this, due to the 
presence of consciousness. We have come thr ough Saṁsāra 
suffering severe aḍayaṭi blows but totally ignorant of name -andform, the mischief -maker behind it. The meditators have to 
understand the rest through meditation. He who realizes fully the 
functioning of the nutriment of consciousness, attains  
Arahanthood. 
 Let me emphasize another aspect on the subject of 
nutriments. Life depends on nutriments. We cannot do without it. 
What follows is deep. You know the Buddha spent six years of 
physical torture. The Niga ṇṭhas advocated self -mortification as 
the only way to happiness. Self -mortification was the most 
favoured path both among the ascetics and Brahmins. So 
naturally, the Buddha too went to its extreme until he collapsed 
by fasting. Through trial and error he realized the only solution to 
suffering was the middle path. 
 We have discussed earlier a sutta that discusses the 
middle path, which we wish to touch on briefly. Once a certain 
Bhikkhunī, instigated by hidden evil intentions, invited Venerable 
Ananda on the pretext of listening to a discourse. 6 Venerable 
Ananda, reading her mind, delivered a discourse based on four 
sub-topics. The first topic is very much relevant to us. 
This is how it is presented. “ Āhāra sambhūto bhagini 
ayaṁ kāyo. Āhāraṁ nissāya āhāro pahātabbo.” “Sister, this body 
is made up of nutriment. With the help of nutriment, should 
nutriment be eliminated.” It is a puzzling statement but the 
middle path lies therein. Venerable Ananda gives a brief 
explanation as to how nutriment can be instrumental in 
eliminating nutriment. You listeners are familiar with these facts. 
Monks are advised not to avoid food totally but to contemplate

The Law of Dependent Arising 

while partaking of food. With a clear perspective of the purpose 
of eating, it has to be converted into a subject of meditatio n 
through the restraint of wisdom ( ñāṇa samvara). A monk when 
partaking of food, contemplates as follows with wisdom. “I 
partake of this food not for enjoyment or strength or adornment 
or beautification (paṭisaṇkhā yoniso, neva davāya, na madāya, na 
maṇḍanāya, na vibhūsanāya ) – merely ( yāvadeva) – for the 
maintenance of this body ( imassa kāyassa ṭhitiyā) – for survival 
(yāpanāya) – to refrain from destruction to life ( vihiṁsūparatiya) 
– for the fulfillment of higher life ( brahmacariyānuggahāya). I 
shall thus dispel the pain of hunger and prevent the arising of any 
future pain by overeating (iti purāṇaṁ ca vedanaṁ paṭikankhāmi, 
navañca vedanaṁ na uppādessāmi). In this journey of life, I shall 
deviate from wrong, being frugal in food and other requirements 
(yātrā ca me bhavissati). 
To this noble quest in life, meditative monks add a subject 
of meditation. Its purpose is indicated as follows; “This food is 
merely a speck of the elements ( dhātu mattako ). It is a 
preparation consisting of earth, water, heat and wi nd. Taken in 
terms of elements it is clean but after entering this putrid body 
(imaṁ pūtikāyaṁ patvā) it becomes extremely repulsive ( ativiya 
jigucchanīyo jāyati ). This statement includes both subjects of 
meditation, contemplation on the elements and the r epulsiveness 
of food. That is how food is converted into a subject of 
meditation.  
Finally contemplation on the elements leads to emptiness 
(suññatā). This mere speck of the elements is essenceless ( dhātu 
mattako suñño). 
This almsfood is subject to conditi onality. The individual 
partaking of it is not a being or a living entity, but an essenceless 
speck of the elements. This almsfood which is not loathsome 
becomes extremely repulsive after entering this body.

Sermon 19 

Yathāpaccayaṁ pavattamānaṁ dhātumattamevetaṁ 
yadidaṁ piṇḍapāto. Tadupabhuñjakoca puggalo dhātumattako 
nissatto nijjīvo suñño. Sabbo panāya ṁ piṇḍapāto ajigucchanīyo. 
imaṁ pūtikāyaṁ patvā ativiya jigucchanīyo jāyati.  
This almsfood as a requisite is nothing but a speck from 
the elements. He who partakes of it is not a being or a living thing 
but a mere empty speck of elements. This almsfood though clean 
would become extremely repulsive, once inside the foul body. 
This clarifies how one realizes the void (essencelessness) 
through contemplation on the elemen ts. Contemplation on 
repulsiveness leads one to disillusion, letting go. Freedom from 
food, elimination of food is suggestive of the dispelling of 
craving. There lies the Middle Path. The Sabbāsava Sutta further 
clarifies this point. As we proceed in life we encounter certain 
things we can neither manage with nor without. The Buddha 
realized that food is one such requirement. The middle path has to 
be followed regarding food. Instead of rejecting it altogether, one 
partakes of food perfectly aware of its li mitations, ( mattaññū) 
with Nibbāna as the goal. Many other similes can be cited that 
are extremely effective in causing disillusionment towards food. 
Khuraṁva madhunālittaṁ7 and khuradhārūpamo bhava 8 are two 
wonderful similes mentioned earlier. A man fond of honey is 
offered a generous dose of it spread on a razor blade. He cannot 
enjoy it without risking his tongue. This simile helps to eliminate 
the greed for taste. Partaking of food is similar to applying 
medication on a wound ( vaṇasssa ropanatthāya) and lubricating 
the axle of the cart ( akkhassabbhañjanaṁ yathā) 9 are two similes 
that clarify the place of food on the path to Nibbāna. Food is not 
a source of pleasure but an essential commodity to carry the five 
aggregates across the desert of Saṁsāra safely, not different from 
oiling the axle of a wheel. The simile of the son’s flesh is also 
applicable here, although it stirs the emotions as well. The 
Buddha explains the repulsive nature of food inside the body and 
the importance of adopting the middle path with regard to food.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

It is further explained in such suttas as the Ogha Taraṇa 
Sutta.10 If a person, on getting into a river with a strong current, 
to cross over, stops there without moving, he will sink. If he 
wriggles about, he’ll get washed away.  Wriggling is compared to 
self mortification, or rejecting all food. Stopping is compared to 
self indulgence, or endless consumption of food. Avoiding both 
these extremes, one should eat only what is required for survival. 
‘Mattaññū hohi bhojane .’ Know you r limit when eating. 
Venerable Sarīputta’s advice to meditative monks is to refrain 
from eating the last four or five mouthfuls of food so as to drink 
enough water. “ cattāro pañca ālope abhutvā udaka ṁ pive.” 11 
This gives ease and lightness for meditation. By means of various 
similes, the middle path regarding food has been always 
emphasized. The topic of food is so important that, the first of the 
ten questions asked at the higher ordination of novice Arahant 
Sopaka was based on food. You may have heard of it, perhaps. 
“sabbe sattā āhāra ṭṭhitikā.” 12 Although this is subject to ridicule 
today, a deep understanding of this will lead to dejection, 
detachment and cessation which leads to Nibbāna. 
In the Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta 13 we meet Venerable Sāriputta 
analyzing ‘right view’ in its diverse aspects, one after the other in 
response to the inquiry “Do you know yet another analysis?” 
According to one mode of analysis, based on the pattern of the 
four truths, if a monk has a comprehensive understanding of 
nutriment, the arising of nutriment, the cessation of nutriment and 
lastly the path leading to the cessation of nutriment, that alone 
can arouse correct view in him, and practice the four truths 
regarding nutriment meaningfully. Nutriment is of four kinds, 
gross materia l food consumed in lumps, contact nutriment, 
nutriment of mental intentions and nutriment of consciousness. 
Understanding them at depth is to understand the misery 
associated with nutriment. The nature of craving underlying it 
represents the second Noble T ruth. Cessation here stands for 
Nibbāna. The path is the middle path called ‘ paṭisaṅkhā yoniso’

Sermon 19 

or the restraint through wisdom, or in other words, partaking of 
food wisely reiterating its purpose as an object of meditation. 
The last verse touched on a ver y profound aspect of the 
topic “ Ārogyaṁ sammadaññāya – āsavānaṁ parikkhayā 
saṅkhāya sevī dhamma ṭṭho – saṁkhaṁ nopeti vedagu ”. Lets go 
through its meaning again. Ārogyaṁ sammadaññāya – We 
partake food in order to maintain health. But the implication in 
this line is deeper than that. It refers not merely to physical health 
but enduring health which is Nibbāna. “ ārogyaṁ 
sammadaññāya” understanding good health well, “ āsavānaṁ 
parikkhayā” through the destruction of influxes, “ saṅkhāya sevī 
dhammaṭṭho” well estab lished in the dhamma, “ saṁkhaṁ nopeti 
vedagu” – vedagu refers to an Arahant endowed with three -fold 
knowledge, and not a Brahmin learned in the three Vedas. 
“saṁkhaṁ nopeti” is not reckoned. An Arahant is ‘Not reckoned’ 
is a complicating concept which deserves some thought. Then let 
us discuss it at this point. 
There is another sutta called the Atthirāga Sutta 14 that 
mentions the four types of nutriments with a subtle simile. To 
begin with, the Buddha explains the four types of nutriments. 
Then three very significant words are introduced. If a disciple has 
passion ( rāga) towards nutriment, pleasure ( nandi) towards 
nutriment and craving ( taṇhā) towards nutriment, its 
consequences are pointed out. If someone has passion, pleasure 
and craving towards, let u s say, gross food which is made into 
lumps for eating, the consciousness gets established and 
strengthens itself. Many are interested in the secret of rebirth, an 
intricate subject. If passion, pleasure and craving are present 
towards nutriment, the consci ousness towards nutriment gets 
established and strengthens. From then onwards the process of 
Paṭicca Samuppada  is activated. Wherever consciousness gets 
established and grows, name -and-form activates itself there. 
Wherever name -and-form is established prep arations are 
activated. Wherever preparations are established, there ‘ āyatiṁ

The Law of Dependent Arising 

punabbhavābhinibbatti’ another existence takes place. Existence 
gives rise to birth, decay, death. This is a very subtle point to 
grasp. This process is described in relation to g ross food (āhāra), 
contact (phassa), mental intentions ( mano saṁcetanā) as well as 
consciousness ( viññāṇa). Attachment, pleasure or craving 
towards either of these four types of nutriments, leads to 
existence ( bhava) with the consciousness well established  there. 
It is followed by name -and-form ( nāma-rupa), preparations 
(saṅkhāra) and then birth takes place. 
The subtleness in this account is centered round the simile 
used by the Buddha “Monks, if a dyer or a painter were to paint 
on a smooth board or a wall  or a cloth, using a rusty red, yellow 
or light red paint – now read the rest carefully – in the same way 
is created a figure of a male or a female, with details complete. 
(Now connect what was said). If at this point attachment, pleasure 
and craving are p resent towards nutriment, another birth is 
possible. Similar to a film reflected on a screen, the figure of the 
male or the female that seeks rebirth is registered on the foetus in 
the mother’s womb which we call the muddy patch. The Buddha 
discusses this at depth as if he was painting a picture. At this 
stage the three defilements passion, pleasure and craving ( rāga, 
nandi, taṇhā) add a certain hue to the consciousness. That is what 
we call name -and-form. In brief it is a form in conformity with 
the name reflected on the consciousness. This is made explicit by 
the simile of the painter. This process takes place as long as the 
three-fold nutriments of consciousness ie passion, pleasure and 
craving last. A person excessively fond of food, may perhaps be 
born as a worm or a pig. It happens due to attachment to food. 
This illustrates the interrelatedness between consciousness and 
name-and-form. 
The simile of the painter symbolizes defilements. The 
Buddha then deals with the opposite tendency with a deeper 
significance, which is a mystery to many. “If one has no passion 
or pleasure or craving towards the four types of nutriments, …”

Sermon 19 

Here the Buddha brings out an amazing simile. “Monks, there is a 
pavilion with windows on the north, south and east. When the sun 
rises, Monks, where will the sun’s rays fall? 
“On the western wall, Venerable Sir.” 
“If there was no wall on the west?” 
“In that case, on the earth, Venerable Sir.” 
“If there was no earth?” 
“On the water, if there was no earth.” 
“Well, if there was no water?” 
“In that case, Venerable Sir, the sun’s rays will not be 
established anywhere.” 
The word used here is ‘ appatiṭṭhita’ – ‘not established’. 
Can you see how deep its significance is. “Venerable Sir, if the 
sun’s rays do not fall on the wall or the earth or on the water, then 
it is not established” – ‘appatiṭṭhita’. We have earlier introduced 
the term ‘ anidassana viññā ṇa’ – non-manifestative 
consciousness. In the absence of passion, pleasure or craving, 
consciousness is unable to establish itself. In explainin g the 
meaning of anidassana, the simile of the painter suggests a 
mental state where there is nothing to be seen, to be revealed. We 
have explained this position based on a simile in the Kakacūpama 
Sutta.15 Here too, the question answer method is used. “A man 
appears with some colour paints and a brush and declares that he 
would paint a picture in the sky” says the Buddha. “Monks, do 
you think it is possible?” 
“No Venerable Sir. It is not possible because ‘ ayaṁ hi 
bhante ākāso arūpī anidassano ’, this sky is  formless, and is not 
capable of showing or revealing anything. This is a subtle point 
many cannot understand. We have discussed the significance of 
‘anidassana viññāṇa’ in the discourses on Nibbāna. 
Viññāṇaṁ anidassanaṁ – anantaṁ sabbato pabhaṁ 
ettha āpo ca paṭhavi – tejo vājo na gādhati

The Law of Dependent Arising 

ettha dīghañca rassañca – aṇuṁ thūlaṁ subhāsubhaṁ 
ettha nāmañca rūpañca – asesaṁ uparujjhati 
viññāṇassa nirodhena – ettetaṁ uparujjhati 16 
 
 This verse remained an unresolved mystery for ever so 
long. Some interpreted it as  a peculiar world. We have pointed 
out that the consciousness is there – viññāṇaṁ anidassanaṁ – but 
the released consciousness ( vimutta viññā ṇa) does not reflect 
name-and-form. Next, it discusses the characteristics of name -
and-form. ‘Anantaṁ’ – as in the simile where there was no place 
for the sun’s rays to fall. It is similar to that. Anantaṁ sabbato 
pabhaṁ – ettha āpo ca pa ṭhavi – tejo vājo na gādhati . In this 
viññāṇa the four elements earth, water, fire and wind can have no 
footing. Why? Contemplation o n the four elements have brought 
about disillusionment. If this idea is attached to the story of 
rebirth discussed earlier, it would appear as follows. If the 
consciousness (viññāṇa) does not clasp the four elements firmly, 
gives up attachment towards them , then “ ettha āpo ca pa ṭhavi – 
tejo vājo na gādhati. ” – the four elements have no place in the 
consciousness. 
 On the other hand, if earth, water, fire and wind are 
present, the notion of long and short is present. Now think of its 
applicability to the pai nter. ‘ ettha dīgha ṁ ca rassa ṁ ca’. 
Otherwise the concepts of ‘long -short’ would be inapplicable. 
Subhāsubhaṁ – beautiful or repulsive would also be inapplicable. 
As mentioned in the story, the figure of a man or woman is drawn 
with all the details. As long  as rāga, nandi and taṇhā (passion, 
pleasure and craving) are present, the human figure acquires its 
relevant colours automatically. The paint here is lust. But in the 
consciousness that is released, called anidassana viññāṇa, nameand-form does not reflec t itself. The verse viññāṇaṁ 
anidassanaṁ is extremely deep in meaning as you can see. 
Finally it says “ ettha nāmañca rūpañca asesa ṁ uparujjhati”. 
Name-and-form is totally cut off here. “ Viññāṇassa nirodhena” – 
with the cessation of consciousness. The impli cation behind this

Sermon 19 

phrase is not understood by many. This is not a reference to the 
prepared and specially prepared consciousness. By consciousness 
we mean the consciousness that is accompanied by name -andform. The worldlings do not know of the other cons ciousness 
which is identified as the ‘ceased consciousness’ – ‘niruddha 
viññāṇa’. How does it cease? It has no foundation or object. That 
is what is described as “appatiṭṭhaṁ anārammanaṁ” in talking of 
an Arahant’s mind. you may have heard that the void state is 
referred to as “ animitta” – signless, ‘ appatiṭṭhita’ – not 
established, ‘ suññata’ empty and void,  devoid of self. It is this 
void state that is emphasized. In support of this position, here are 
two verses from the Dhammapada.17 
Yesaṁ sannicayo natthi – ye pariññāta bhojanā 
suññato animitto ca – vimokkho yesa gocaro 
ākāseva sakuntānaṁ – gati tesaṁ durannayā 
 This verse too is deep in meaning. ‘ Yesaṁ sannicayo 
natthi’ – they have no accumulated load, ‘ ye pariññāta bhojanā ’ 
– understood the intricacies of nutriment, ‘ suññato animitto ca 
vimokkho yesa gocaro ’ – whose pasture ground is void, signless, 
has the nature of release. Nutriment is not their prey. Realizing 
the void inherent in nutriment, the Arahants conduct themselves 
with ease in th eir signless essenceless pastures. The path they 
traverse is not visible. “ Ākāseva sakuntāna ṁ gati tesa ṁ 
durannayā” – Like the path taken by the birds in the sky, the 
course taken by the Arahant’s mind is untraceable, due to its 
signless, unestablished nat ure. Deities and Brahmins venerating 
the Arahants say they are unable to trace the object of the mind of 
the Arahants who have attained the Arahant phala samāpatti. The 
main thing emphasized here is the void ( suññato) and signless 
(animitto). 
 The verse that follows emphasizes the above facts. 
Yassāsavā parikkhīṇā – āhāre ca anissito

The Law of Dependent Arising 

suññato animitto ca – vimokkho yassa gocaro 
ākāseva sakuntānaṁ – padaṁ tassa durannayaṁ 
 The qualities of the Arahant who has destroyed all 
influxes stated here are similar to those in the above verse. Those 
who have well comprehended the four types of nutriments will 
know that the path taken by the Arahant is untraceable because it 
is signless ( animitta) and is undirected ( appaṇihita). Now you 
understand why the Arahants are ca lled “ saṅkhāya sevī 
dhammaṭṭho sa ṁkhaṁ nopeti vedagu. ” Those Arahants do not 
come into reckoning means, the worldlings do not recognize 
them. Once, the Brahmin youth Uttara, the pupil of Brahmin 
Brahmāyu curious to know how the Buddha partakes of food and 
in order to examine his conduct, followed him for seven months 
like a shadow. The outcome of it, an amazing account of the 
Buddha’s daily routine is given in the Brahmāyu Sutta .18 The 
Buddha partakes of food contemplating on the eight factors 
beginning wit h “ neva davāya, na madāya ”. The most amazing 
revelation is that the Buddha is “ rasa paṭisaṁvedī bhagavā no ca 
rasa rāga paṭisaṁvedī .” He is aware of taste. His taste buds are 
active but there is no lust for taste. The reason is that his 
consciousness is void (suñña) and signless (animitta). 
 Dear Listeners, you must clearly understand that 
according to these two amazing verses, understanding the 
significance of nutriment at its depth does not imply giving up 
nutriment altogether. It is the elimination of c raving and lust for 
nutriment that is required. Unless one reaches this stage, the 
ordinary mind gets established somewhere by the force of 
craving, whether we expect it or not. A film is produced either in 
a mother’s womb or elsewhere. Everyone gets stuck  there. 
“Āyatiṁ punabbhavo.” Another existence takes place here if 
consciousness and name -and-form go together. If the 
consciousness is removed, no name -and-form arises there. Even 
while the person is living, if the consciousness has released itself 
from t he name -and-form, he does not seek a goal at death. The

Sermon 19 

simile of the pavilion illustrated the mind that is signless. The 
sun’s rays had no place to establish itself, whether on the wall or 
on the earth or on the water. Can you understand how deep the 
vision regarding nutriment is in the Dhamma? A correct 
understanding of nutriment, its arising, its cessation and the path 
to the cessation of nutriment corresponding to the Four Noble 
Truths, the final result would most certainly be Arahanthood. 
There is noth ing more for him to accomplish. Dear listeners, 
considering the above facts, please treat this discourse as a 
subject for meditation. You must not put it away as too deep. It is 
true that the Dhamma is very deep. But if you train your mind on 
the lines of radical attention ( yoniso manasikāra) the attainment 
of paths and fruits (magga phala) is not far away. 
 Today you have established yourselves on a higher sīla 
and disciplined your mind in meditation. 
 Not only the monks, but all those involved in meditation, 
contemplate on the nutriments. If this contemplation is correctly 
perfected, it certainly leads to paths and fruits in the Dhamma. I 
wish this discourse would be instrumental in the attainment of 
spiritual heights of Sotāpanna (Stream Entrant), Sakadāgāmi 
(Once-returner), Anāgāmi (Non-returner) and Arahat (Emancipation) and cross over this dreadful Saṁsāra. Whatever beings 
there be, from the lowest hell Avīci to the highest Brahma world 
Akaniṭṭha, may they rejoice in this discourse, and may they attain 
the peace of Nibbāna!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 747 – 749 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. S. II 11 Āhāra Sutta 
3. S. II 97 Puttamaṁsa Sutta 
4. S.A II 79 Sāratthappakāsinī (S.H.B) 
5. M. I 55 Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta 
6. A. II 144 Bhikkhunī Sutta 
7. Thag. V 733 Pārāsariya Thera Gāthā 
8. Sn. 138 Nālaka Sutta 
9. S. IV 175 Rathūpama Sutta 
10. S. I 1 Ogha Sutta 
11. Thag. V 983 Sāriputta Thera Gāthā 
12. Khuddhaka Nikāya, Khuddhakapāṭha, IV Kumāra Pañha 
13. M. I 46 Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta 
14. S. II 101 Atthirāga Sutta 
15. M. I 122 Kakacūpama Sutta 
16. D. I 211 Kevaḍḍha Sutta 
17. Dhp. VII 92 Arahanta Vagga 
18. M. II 133 Brahmāyu Sutta

Sermon 20 
 (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 202)
 ‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Ye me pubbe viyākaṁsu 
huraṁ gotama sāsanā 
iccāsi iti bhavissati 
sabbaṁ taṁ itihītihaṁ  
sabbaṁ taṁ takkavaḍḍhanaṁ 
nāhaṁ tattha abhiramiṁ  
Tvañca me Dhammaṁ akkhāhi 
taṇhānigghātanaṁ muni  
yaṁ viditvā sato caraṁ 
tare loke visattikaṁ  
Idha diṭṭhasutamuta viññātesu 
piyarūpesu Hemaka 
chanda rāgavinodanaṁ 
Nibbānapadamaccutaṁ  
Etad aññāya ye satā 
diṭṭhadhammābhinibbutā 
upasantāva te sadā 
tiṇṇā loke visattikaṁ1  
  – Hemaka Sutta, Sutta Nipāta. 
Those who explained to me before 
Outside the dispensation of Gotama  
All of them said: ‘So it was and so it will be’ 
But all that is so-and-so talk 
All that is productive of logic 
I did not delight therein

The Law of Dependent Arising 

But now to me, O! Sage 
May you proclaim a Dhamma  
That is destructive of craving 
By knowing which and mindfully faring along 
One might get beyond the world’s viscosity 
The dispelling here in this world 
Of desire and lust for pleasant things 
Seen, heard, sensed and cognized  
Is Nibbāna that slips not away 
Knowing this they that are mindful 
And are fully appeased here and now 
Are always calm and composed 
They have crossed the world’s viscosity. 
 
Dear Listeners,  
 The uniqueness of the Law of Dependent Arising 
discovered by the Fully Enlightened One is the presenting of a 
solution to the Sa ṁsāric problem in the present itself. Until then, 
religious teachers in the world went on searching for a solution 
by entwining past and future with logic. In this well -preached 
(svākkhāta) Dha mma what becomes obvious by the other 
qualities like ‘ sanditthika’ (can be seen here and now) ‘ akālika’ 
(timeless) ‘ ehipassika’ (inviting one to come and see) 
‘opanayika’ (leading one onwards) and by the term often used 
‘diṭṭheva dhamme ’ (in this very life ) is that solution in the 
present. Today we chose as the topic for the twentieth sermon on 
Dependent Arising, the Hemaka Sutta of the Pārāyana Vagga in 
Sutta Nipāta in order to turn your attention to this unique quality. 
Paraphrased, this is the meaning of those verses. 
1.  ‘ye me pubbe viyākaṁsu – huraṁ gotama sāsanā’ 
Those, who, outside the dispensation of Gotama 
explained to me before –

Sermon 20 

‘iccāsi iti bhavissati’ 
Said so ‘it was’, ‘so it will be’ 
‘sabbaṁ taṁ itihītihaṁ’ 
All that is ‘so-it-was’, ‘so it was’ talk 
‘sabbaṁ taṁ takkavaḍḍhanaṁ’ 
All that is productive of logic.  
‘nāhaṁ tattha abhiramiṁ’ 
I did not delight in it. 
  
2. ‘Tvañca me Dhammaṁ akkhāhi 
taṇhānigghātanaṁ muni’ 
But may you preach to me the Dhamma that destroys 
craving, O! Sage. 
‘yaṁ viditvā sato caraṁ 
tare loke visattikaṁ’ 
Having understood which and faring mindfully, one can 
cross over from world’s viscosity. 
 
3. ‘Idha diṭṭhasutamuta viññātesu 
piyarūpesu Hemaka’ 
In regard to pleasant things seen, heard, sensed and 
cognized here in this world, O Hemaka. 
‘chanda rāgavinodanaṁ 
Nibbānapadamaccutaṁ’ 
The dispelling of desire and lust is the state of Nibbāna 
that does not slip away. 
 
4. ‘Etad aññāya ye satā 
diṭṭhadhammābhinibbutā’ 
Knowing this, those that are mindful and fully appeased 
here and now. 
‘upasantāva te sadā 
tiṇṇā loke visattikaṁ’ 
Are always calm and composed and they have crossed 
over the viscosity in this world.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 In a previous sermon we happened to mention that 
according to the exposition in the Visuddhimagga that is now 
accepted, out of the twelve links the two links ignorance and 
preparations ( avijjā sa ṅkhārā) are reckoned as belonging to the 
past, the last two links, birth, decay -and-death as belonging to the 
future, and the eight links in the middle, consc iousness, name -
and-form, six sense -spheres, contact, feeling, craving, grasping 
and becoming (viññāṇa, nāma-rūpa, saḷāyatana, phassa, vedanā, 
taṇhā, upādāna, bhava) as belonging to the present. If we accept 
that exposition – that interpretation – what the Brahmin youth 
Hemaka had stated as a charge against other religious systems, 
the explaining as ‘so it was’ and ‘so it will be’, that is to say the 
‘so-and-so’ charge could be levelled at our Dhamma as well. But, 
dear listeners, this is not a ‘so -and-so’ Dh amma. This is 
something unique. In support of his interpretation, Venerable 
Buddhaghosa, the author of Visuddhimagga, gives a twenty -fold 
analysis of Paṭicca Samuppāda made-up of groups of five:2 
 Atīte hetavo pañca 
idāni phalapañcakaṁ 
Idāni hetavo pañca 
āyatiṁ phalapañcakaṁ  
Five causes were in the past 
Now there is a fivefold fruit 
Now there are five causes 
Which will have in future a fivefold fruit. 
 In the past there were five causes. In the present there are 
the five fruits. There are five causes in the present of which there 
will be five fruits in the future. What are these five causes? 
Ignorance, preparations, craving, grasping and becoming. What 
are said to be the five fruits in the present? Consciousness, name -
and-form, six sense -spheres, contact and feeling. Then again the 
five present causes are said to be ignorance, preparations, 
craving, grasping and becoming and the five fruits are

Sermon 20 

consciousness, name -and-form, six sense -spheres, contact and 
feeling. By this analysis the wonderful inter -connection between 
the twelve links which is called ‘ idappaccayatā’ (specific 
conditionality) is breached. We have already explained to you all 
that the basic principle of the Law of Dependent Arising obtains 
between any two consecutive links of the formula. That is to say: 
 This being – this comes to be 
 With the arising of this – this arises 
 This not being – this does not come to be  
 With the cessation of this – this ceases. 
 The law holds good between any pair of links. It cannot 
be broken. It cannot take in additional things. Any two links are 
wonderfully interconnected. It is reinforced by the significant 
phrase ‘yā tatra tathatā avitathatā anaññathatā ida ppaccayatā’ – 
‘That suchness, that invariability, that not -otherwiseness therein 
is the specific conditionality.’ The Buddha has thus confirmed 
that connection. We have to point out that by the analysis in the 
Visuddhimagga that basic principle is violated. 
 Not only that. Venerable Buddhaghosa speaks of three 
rounds or ‘ vaṭṭas’ – namely, ‘ kilesa-vaṭṭa’ (the round of 
defilements), the ‘ kamma-vaṭṭa’ (the round of action) and 
‘vipāka-vaṭṭa’ (the round of result). But, dear listeners, we have 
pointed out to yo u in our explanation of the Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
that the ‘ vaṭṭa’ interpretation that is actually relevant to the Law 
of Dependent Arising is that between consciousness and name -
and-form. We have cited on several occasions a very deep section 
of the Buddha’s sermon that confirms it. On this occasion too let 
me quote it for the benefit of those who are new-comers. 
 “… Ettāvatā kho Ānanda jāyetha vā jīyetha vā mīyetha vā 
cavetha vā uppajjetha vā, ettāvatā adhivacanapatho ettāvatā 
niruttipatho, ettāvatā paññattip atho ettāvatā paññāvacara ṁ

The Law of Dependent Arising 

ettāvatā va ṭṭaṁ vaṭṭati itthatta ṁ paññāpanāya, yadida ṁ 
nāmarūpaṁ saha viññāṇena.” 3 
 “In so far only, Ānanda, can one be born or grow old or 
die or pass away or reappear, in so far only is there any pathway 
for verbal expression, in so far only is there any path way for 
terminology, in so far only is there any pathway for designation, 
in so far only is there any sphere of wisdom, in so far only is 
there a whirling round of pointing out a ‘this -ness’ – that is to 
say, as far as name-and-form together with consciousness” 
 In this exposition we have birth, decay and death and all 
the rest of it. Nothing is lacking. Venerable Sāriputta, the 
foremost in wisdom, presents this more clearly through a very 
simple simile in the Naḷakaḷāpa Sutta 4 in answer to a series of 
questions raised by Venerable Mahā Ko ṭṭhita. It is a wonderful 
simile. “Just as, friend, two sheaves of reeds are made to stand 
one supporting the other at the top, so consciousness stands with 
name-and-form as condition. And then  with name -and-form as 
condition there are the six sense-spheres, contact, feeling, craving 
etc. Out of these two sheaves of reeds, if one is drawn, the other 
falls down. If the other is drawn, this will fall down. In the same 
way the cessation aspect is e xplained as follows: With the 
cessation of consciousness, the cessation of name -and-form 
occurs and along with the cessation of name -and-form, six sensespheres, contact, feeling, craving, grasping and the rest of it falls. 
Just try to visualize this: Out of the two sheaves of reeds, suppose 
the one on the left is the consciousness sheaf of reeds. The one on 
the right side is the name -and-form sheaf of reeds. A number of 
other sheaves of reeds are leaning on the name -and-form sheaf of 
reeds. All those would  fall if the name -and-form sheaf of reeds 
falls. Now you can understand why this is called ‘ sandiṭṭhika’ 
(visible here and now) ‘ akālika’ (timeless) and ‘ ehipassika’ 
(inviting one to come and see). There is no need to bring in three 
periods of time into th e interpretation of the Paṭicca Samuppāda 
formula.

Sermon 20 

 Now that we have said all this about the exposition in  
Visuddhimagga, let us go on to another point. Out of the above 
mentioned mutual interdependence, even as a corollary of it, 
something called a duali ty (dvayatā) comes up. We have made 
use of the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta in selecting topics for a 
number of our sermons. As you may recall, there is a duality of 
arising and ceasing ( samudaya-nirodha). There is another duality 
of internal – external (ajjhatta-bahiddhā). It is these two dualities 
that you come across throughout the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta. We have 
spoken about the two phrases ‘ iti ajjhattaṁ vā kāye, bahiddhā vā 
kāye’ (whether in the internal body or in the external body) and 
‘samudayadhammānupassī vā vayadhammānupassī vā ’ (either 
seeing the arising nature or the passing away nature). 5 This is the 
duality. But our Theravāda tradition has not recognized this term. 
It has not come up in the traditional exegesis. However we 
pointed out its importance. There are two discourses in the 
Saḷāyatana Sa ṁyutta of the Saṁyutta Nikāya by the same titled 
‘dvayaṁ’ (dyad). In one Dvayaṁ Sutta6 we find the Buddha 
addressing the monks and saying: “monks, I shall preach to you 
about a dyad. What is the dyad? Eye and forms, ear and sounds, 
nose and smells, tongue and tastes, body and tangibles, mind and 
mind-objects. This is the dyad.” 
 Then the Buddha declares a very striking challenge: “If 
someone says I will reject this dyad and make known some other 
dyad, it will only be a vain boast. When questioned he would not 
be able to make good his boast. And furthermore, he would come 
to vexation.” Just  see, all that is about the duality. In the other 
‘Dvayaṁ’ Sutta this is how it comes up: “ Dvayaṁ bhikkhave 
paṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti.” “Consciousness, monks, arises 
depending on a dyad.” “ Kathañca bhikkhave dvaya ṁ paticca 
viññāṇaṁ sambhoti.” “How monks, d oes consciousness arise 
‘depending on a dyad?” “ Cakkhuñca pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati 
cakkhuviññāṇaṁ.” “Depending on eye and forms arises eye -
consciousness.” Then the Buddha makes another declaration. 
“Cakkhuṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī, Rūpā aniccā

The Law of Dependent Arising 

vipariṇāmino aññathābhāvino .” “Eye is impermanent changing 
and becoming otherwise. Forms are impermanent, changing and 
becoming otherwise.” Then he goes on: “ Itthetaṁ dvayaṁ 
calañceva vayañca anicca ṁ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvi .” “Thus 
this dyad is unstable, pass ing away, impermanent, changing and 
becoming otherwise.” Just understand in brief that the question of 
the two is resolved through the teachings on impermanence. 
There is another significant discourse that corroborates, the 
‘internal-external’ part of the implications of dvayaṁ or dyad. 
There is in the Saṁyutta Nikāya a discourse titled ‘ Bālapaṇdita 
Sutta’ – not to be confused with the ‘ Bālapaṇdita Sutta ’ of the 
Majjhima Nikāya . Let us bring up a section of that discourse: 
“Avijjānīvaraṇassa bhikkhave bālassa ta ṇhāya sampayuttassa 
evāyaṁ kāyo samudāgato. Iti ayañceva kāyo bahiddhā ca 
nāmarūpaṁ. Ittheta ṁ dvayaṁ. Dvaya ṁ paṭicca phasso 
saḷevāyatanāni yehi phu ṭṭho bālo sukhadukkha ṁ paṭisaṁvediyati 
etesaṁ vā aññatarena .” 7 “Monks, to the fool hindered by 
ignorance and fettered to craving, this body  has come up. Thus 
(there is) this body and name -and-form as external (to it). Thus 
there is this dyad. Depending on the dyad there is contact and the 
six sense-spheres, contacted by which or by any one of them, the 
fool experiences pleasure and pain.” That would suffice as far as 
the significance of the dyad is concerned. 
 Now let us pass on to the two words ‘hetu’ and ‘paccaya’. 
During the Buddha’s time those two words were used in every 
discourse as synonymous. Whe never the question comes up as 
‘Ko hetu ko paccayo’ – ‘what is the cause, what is the condition?’ 
– the answer is one. There are no two answers. There is a 
delightful discourse titled ‘ Mahā Pu ṇṇama’,8 which has as its 
setting a moonlit night out in the ope n air. The Buddha is seen 
answering questions raised by the monks. One monk strangely 
enough, rattled out five questions one after the other. 
 “Venerable Sir, what is the cause, what is the condition 
for the designation of an aggregate of form?

Sermon 20 

 What is the cause what is the condition for the designation 
of an aggregate of feeling? 
 What is the cause what is the condition for the designation 
of an aggregate of perception? 
 What is the cause what is the condition for the designation 
of an aggregate of preparations? 
 What is the cause what is the condition for the designation 
of an aggregate of consciousness?” 
 Now the Buddha is answering: 
 “The four great primaries is the cause, the four great 
primaries is the condition for the designation of an aggregate of 
form.  
 Contact is the cause, contact is the condition for the 
designation of an aggregate of feeling. 
 Contact is the cause, contact is the condition for the 
designation of an aggregate of perception. 
  Contact is the cause, contact is the condition for the 
designation of an aggregate of preparations. 
 Name-and-form is the cause, name -and-form is the 
condition for the designation of an aggregate of consciousness.” 
 What we need to glean from this quotati on is the fact we 
had pointed out – namely that the two words were used 
synonymously in the discourses. But, dear listeners, it is evident 
that in the literature handed down as treatises – that is to say, in 
the ‘ pakaraṇa’ literature – a semantic change, a n undesirable 
change of meanings has occurred. First of all, let me give an 
instance of it. In the section called ‘ Parikkhā Vibha ṅga’ in the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

Nettippakaraṅa,9 ‘hetu’ and ‘ paccaya’ are distinguished as two 
words. This is how it comes up: 
 “Dve dhammā janayanti hetu ca paccayo ca’  
 ‘Two factors ‘bring forth’ (‘janayanti’) something – cause 
and condition.’ 
 Out of them cause is said to be the special factor 
(asādhāraṇo hetu) and condition is said to be the common factor 
(sādhāraṇo paccayo). An illustration is also given. In the case of 
a germinating seed, the seed is called the cause and conditions are 
earth and moisture. Then is summing up Nettippakaraṅa says: 
 “Iti sabhāvo hetu  parabhāvo paccayo. Ajjhattiko hetu 
bāhiro paccayo. Janako hetu pariggāhako paccayo. Asādhāraṇo 
hetu sādhāraṇo paccayo.”   
 In defining the two words it says, hetu or cause is intrinsic 
nature ( sabhāvo) and paccaya or condition is extrinsic nature 
(parabhāvo). Here we find an unusual semantic twist. ‘ Sabhāva’ 
(Skt. svabhāva) is a word used in general for ‘nature’. Now it has 
become a technical term. So ‘sa-bhāvo’ is intrinsic nature. ‘Parabhāvo’ is extrinsic nature. Just see what a distortion it is. For the 
birth of a sapling or a seedling the seed is said to be the cause 
(hetu) a nd other things such as earth, water, fire and air are 
conditions (paccaya). But from the verses uttered by Selā Ther ī 10 
it seems that all the three factors – seed, earth and moisture are 
essential. Then ‘ ajjhattiko hetu ’ – cause is internal ‘ bāhiro 
paccayo’ condition is external. Then again, ‘ janako hetu’ – cause 
is what brings forth or gives birth – ‘pariggāhako paccayo ’ – 
condition is what helps or contributes to it. 
 Now we cannot help saying something about the 
Paṭṭhānappakarana 11 too. When we come to it, we find the 
number of ‘conditions’ (paccayā) increasing up to twenty four. In 
the attempt to show the connection between thoughts, twenty four

Sermon 20 

conditions are listed. The first among them is called ‘hetu’ but not 
in the sense we mentioned above. So it seems at last ‘ hetu’ 
(cause) became one of the ‘ paccayas’ (conditions). To add to the 
confusion now the scholars are at pains trying to establish the 
‘identity’ of the two conditions ‘ anantara’ and ‘ samanantara’ 
because the definition given to both happens  to be the same. So 
this is the situation. Anyway, we do not wish to labour the point. 
Let us now pass on to ‘ Paṭisambhidāmaggappakaraṇa.12 When 
we come to it we find a similar semantic change. This is how the 
two words ‘ hetu’ (cause) and ‘ hetusamuppanna’ (arisen from a 
cause) are explained in the Paṭisambhidāmagga: 
 “Avijjā hetu sa ṅkhārā hetusamuppannā, sa ṅkhārā hetu 
viññāṇaṁ hetusamuppannaṁ.” 
 According to this interpretation, out of the twelve links, 
the one that precedes a link is the cause from which t hat 
particular link is arisen. But we have pointed out with reference 
to the first two lines of the verse ‘ ye dhammā hetuppabhavā – 
tesaṁ hetuṁ Tathāgato āha ’ that what is called ‘ hetu’ is not 
ignorance or any other link but that basic principle of 
‘idappaccayatā’ (specific conditionality) – ‘This being – this 
arises’ etc. We have also shown that as for ‘ hetusamuppanna’ 
each of these twelve links is arisen from a cause. Ignorance and 
other links are illustrations of the principle. This fact is further 
borne out by the qualification sometimes mentioned about a 
Stream-winner (Sotāpanna) that he has clearly seen the cause as 
well as things arisen from the cause (‘ hetu ca sudi ṭṭho hoti hetu 
samuppanne ca dhamme’).  
 But an even clearer proof of this fact – as we  earlier 
pointed out – is the declaration made by the Buddha showing the 
distinction between the Law of Dependent Arising ( Paṭicca 
Samuppāda) and things dependently arisen ( paṭicca samuppannā 
dhammā). 13 It is a momentous declaration.

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 “Jātipaccayā bhikkhav e jarāmara ṇaṁ. Uppādā vā 
tathāgatānaṁ anuppādā vā tathāgatāna ṁ ṭhitā va sā dhātu 
dhammaṭṭhitatā dhammaniyāmatā idappaccayatā”. 
 “Dependent on birth is decay and death. Whether there be 
an arising of Tathāgatas or whether there be no arising of 
Tathāgatas, that elementary nature, that orderliness of the 
Dhamma, that norm of the Dhamma, the specific conditionality 
does stand as it is.” 
 What corroborates the inter -connection between birth and 
decay is the norm that holds good whether there be an arising of 
Tathāgatas or there be no arising of Tathāgatas. That elementary 
nature ‘stands as it is’ – ‘ṭhitā va sā dhātu’. That is the ‘suchness’ 
which cannot be changed – ‘tathatā’. That specific conditionality 
(idappaccayatā) is Paṭicca Samuppāda. ‘Things dependentl y 
arisen’ ( paṭiccasamuppannā dhammā ) are the twelve links 
beginning with ‘ignorance’. They all are ‘ hetusamuppannā’. 
Every one of them is impermanent ( aniccaṁ), prepared 
(saṅkhataṁ) and dependently arisen ( paṭiccasamuppannaṁ). All 
this shows that an undesirable semantic change has occurred with 
the passage of time in regard to the Law of Dependent Arising. 
 There are enough instances in the discourses to prove that 
the twelve linked formula of Paṭicca Samuppāda  has been 
presented as an answer to questions of extremists which are of the 
dilemma type. The world rests on a duality ( dvayanissita) – the 
question of two things. Either ‘it is’ or ‘it is not’. Either ‘it exists’ 
or ‘it does not exist’. Either ‘everything exists’ or ‘nothing 
exists’. Either it is ‘on e’s own doing’ or ‘another’s doing’. 14 The 
worldlings are immersed in such a duality ( dvayatā). When such 
Brahmins come and raise questions, particularly in the 
Kaccānagotta Sutta,15 the Buddha pointed out that such questions 
with two ends rest on a duality (‘dvayanissita’).

Sermon 20 

 “Sabbaṁ atthīti kho Kaccana aya ṁ eko anto. Sabba ṁ 
natthīti ayam dutiyo anto. Ete te Kaccāna ubho ante anupa –
gamma majjhena Tathāgato dhamma ṁ deseti: avijjāpaccay ā 
saṅkharā …(etc.)” 
 “(To say) ‘Everything exists’, Kaccāna, is one extreme. 
‘Nothing exists’ – this is the second exrteme. Without going to 
both extremes, Kaccāna, the Tathāgata preaches the Dhamma by 
the middle: Dependent on ignorance, preparations … (etc.)” 
 Without going to both extremes the Tathāgata brings up 
the twelve linked formula of Dependent Arising. In that 
exposition both the direct ( anuloma) and indirect ( paṭiloma) 
orders are given. I hope you all can follow. Firstly, the direct 
order beginni ng with ‘ avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā’ (Dependent on 
ignorance, preparations). Then the Buddha follows it up with the 
indirect order, ‘ avijjāyatveva asesa virāganirodhā ……(etc).’ 
(But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of 
ignorance……etc.). Between these two we find ‘ samudaya’ 
(arising) and ‘ nirodha’ (ceasing). One cannot say something 
absolutely exists or absolutely nothing exists. There is an 
‘arising’ and a ‘ceasing’. It is that norm that is called Dependent 
Arising or ‘ Paṭicca Samuppāda ’. Not onl y that. Sometimes a 
tetralemma beginning with ‘one’s own doing’ ( sayaṁ kataṁ) 
‘another’s doing’ ( paraṁ kataṁ) and so on as well as six 
dilemmas were presented to the Buddha but he answered them 
with the twelve linked formula. There are many who do not know  
why the Buddha puts forward these twelve links as his answer. 
Why does he do so? In it there is the solution in the present. It 
lays bare the structure of the problem. What is the structure? 
Within the background of ignorance, preparations arise. It is these 
preparations that keep up the vortex between consciousness and 
name-and-form. The outcome of that vortical interplay is 
bifurcation within the six sense -spheres as internal and external. 
Now comes up the story of the ‘dyad’ ( dvayaṁ) – eye and forms, 
ear and sounds etc. That is why we illustrated the mutual

The Law of Dependent Arising 

interdependence ( aññamañña paccayatā ) with reference to the 
simile of the two bundles of reeds. As a result of the bifurcation 
as ‘internal’ and ‘external’ in the case of the six sense -spheres, 
the entire story of feeling, craving, grasping, becoming and birth 
unfolds itself. 
 Though we explain this way, you might not understand. 
Now you had better recall the similes we have given while 
discussing the Law of Dependent Arising. Many of you would 
follow when it comes in the form of similes. We have given 
various kinds of similes like the cinema and the magic world. Let 
us take it this way. Suppose there are several worlds. There is the 
cinema-world. Now that we have spoken of the chess game 
between Ajith and Sumith, let us call it the gambler’s world. 
Then there is the magic world and the cricket world. There is 
another world which the dog on the plank represented earlier. 
Later we presented a more aesthetic simile in the form of the 
story of Narcissus. Ev eryone seems to like it. For those who 
haven’t heard it before let me give a summary of it. It is a Greek 
story we have read. A very handsome Greek youth who had never 
seen his own face, while wandering in a forest bent down into a 
pond to wash his face. Seeing the reflection of his own face there, 
he imagined it to be an angel’s. To embrace the angel he had a 
vain struggle with the ripples for several days and in the end 
sacrificed his life for love. That, of course, was self -love. Other 
affections are no better. We have to call it the world of romance. 
So we have now a lot of worlds. The cinema -world, the 
gambler’s world, the magic -world, the cricket -world and the 
romantic world.  
 Now let us see how in each of these worlds those twelve 
links of the Paṭicca Samuppāda formula play their part. Think of 
the cinema -world to begin with. When does the film -show 
actually start? When the entire cinema hall is steeped in darkness. 
At that moment the eyes get focused on the screen. Then the 
deluded interplay begins. In that strange world all the

Sermon 20 

‘preparations’ of the actors and actresses become meaningful in 
the darkness. When the interval comes, and lights are turned on, 
all the variety of colours on the screen fade away. But it is 
between the screen and the backgrou nd of darkness that a 
wonderful world is created with the help of the behaviour of 
actors and actresses. That is the delusion. Then why does one go 
to the cinema hall and buy a ticket? To get deluded. What is the 
reason? The entire world is a world of sens uality. Within this 
sensual world, there are many tiny tiny worlds which we already 
named. The cinema world is easily understood. 
 Then let us take up the magic -world. The magic -world 
exists until the magician’s subtle tricks are understood. As soon 
as one  discovers them at least by hiding in some corner of the 
stage, the magic-world is no more. Now what about the gambler’s 
world? We have clearly portrayed it with the help of the chess 
game between Ajith and Sumith. To put it in brief, that world 
exists on the chess -board. Those worthless pieces became 
‘chessmen’. When the Zen master compelled the two friends to 
play a deadly chess game – a gamble for life – with sword in 
hand threatening to behead the loser, both of them mutually made 
up their minds to sacr ifice their life for each other. But just at the 
critical moment of judging the winner and the loser, what did the 
Zen master do? He bent down and swept off the pieces from the 
chess board and that was the end of the game. Isn’t that enough 
for you to understand the gambler’s world? 
 Then as for the cricket -world, we need not describe it for 
you. You all know about it. But this is what has to be pointed out 
as important. When the two teams get down to the cricket -
ground, the paraphernalia of the game dazzle  with life. Players 
are dubbed with strange names. From then onwards it is all 
delusion. The cricket delusion is so powerful that in the end some 
even commit suicide. So that is the cricket -world. Between 
victory and defeat, all the twelve links are there – even birth and 
death, grief, lamentation, pain, unhappiness, despair and all the

The Law of Dependent Arising 

rest of it. Then the world of romance. About that you all know 
more than we do. There again either it is self -love or love for 
another. It is that love for each other that m ake them say: ‘Of 
course the world outside is suffering but when we are together 
our world is wonderful!’ The day that soap bubble vanishes into 
thin air there is suicide or murder. So that is the world of 
romance. Remember, in everyone of those worlds, it  is the twelve 
links that come into play. 
 What is of particular importance is that vortex – ‘vaṭṭa’. 
The real rallying point is the mutual inter -relation between 
consciousness and name -and-form. It is a very strange kind of 
delusion. That is why we said, if you ask consciousness ‘Who are 
you?’ it would reply ‘Ask name -and-form’. If you ask name -andform ‘Who are you?’ It would also reply: ‘Ask consciousness.’ 
The two are neither to be reckoned as two nor are they one and 
the same. There is a delusion invol ved. That is why we pointed 
out that what is called ‘ nāma-rūpa’ is a formal name and a 
nominal form. It is only a perception of form. But it is in name -
and-form that consciousness finds an object. It is here that a 
world is created. All that happens within  the darkness of 
ignorance. In that darkness of ignorance a preparation goes on. It 
is that preparation that in the Dhamma is called ‘ kāyasaṅkhāro’ 
(body preparation), ‘ vacīsaṅkhāro’ (speech preparation) and 
‘cittasaṅkhāro’ (thought preparation). So much s o, as we 
mentioned on an earlier occasion, in order to escape from the 
round of existence all those three preparations have to be stilled. 
Breathing in and breathing out are reckoned as the body 
preparation (‘ kāyasaṅkhāro’), thinking and pondering are the 
speech preparation (‘ vacīsaṅkhāro’) and perception and feeling 
are the thought preparation (‘cittasaṅkhāro’). These constitute the 
infra-structure of existence. That is why the yogins in the past 
stilled those preparations. Nibbāna is called ‘ sabba sa ṅkhāra 
samata’ – the stilling of all preparations. When all preparations 
are stilled, that is the end of the whole story. But these are not 
stilled automatically. It is when the light of wisdom dawns that

Sermon 20 

they are stilled. That is what we call ‘ anidassana viññāṇa’ – nonmanifestative consciousness. Consciousness ceases, name -andform ceases. In various ways we described it. Whether you call it 
‘saḷāyatana nirodha ’ (cessation of the six sense -spheres), 
‘viññāṇa nirodha ’ (cessation of consciousness) or ‘ nāma-rūpa 
nirodha’ (cessation of name -and-form) it is the same. It shows 
that the Buddha solved this problem in the present itself. This is a 
wonderful Dhamma- a marvellous Dhamma. 
 Though we say so, you might wonder why all these facts 
have not come to light all th is time. Neither the commentators, 
nor the Western scholars could understand such deep suttas like 
Mūlapariyāya, Madhupiṅḍika, Mahā Nidāna and Mahāpadāna. 
They were relegated to the limbo as abstruse discourses. What is 
the reason? There must be some reaso n. What is it? This is the 
reason, dear listeners. In the history of this dispensation an 
unfortunate thing had happened at some stage or other. Those 
extremely deep discourses were branded as ‘ vohāra desanā ’ 
(conventional sermons) and pushed into obscurit y. In their place, 
other things came to be upheld as deep. The Buddha must have 
foreseen this predicament for he had made a prophesy that in 
future such monks would get the upper hand.16 
 “Ye te Suttantā tathāgatabhāsitā gambhīrā  gambhīratthā 
lokuttarā suñ ñatāpaṭisaṁyuttā tesu bhaññamānesu na sussū –
sissanti na  sotaṁ odahissanti na aññācitta ṁ upaṭṭhapessanti na 
te uggahetabbaṁ pariyāpuṇitabbaṁ maññissanti.” 
 “Whatever discourses that are preached by the Tathāgata 
that are deep and profound in meaning, transc endental and 
dealing with voidness, when those discourses are being spoken 
about, they would not listen to them, they would not lend ear to 
them, they would not make up their minds to understand them. 
They would not think it worthwhile learning and masteri ng 
them.”

The Law of Dependent Arising 

 This is precisely what came to pass. At present ‘ vohāra 
desanā’ or the so called ‘conventional teachings’ are supposed to 
have been addressed to simple people like us. You know, there 
were instances when such discourses like Bāhiya Sutta 17 helped 
the listeners to attain Fruits of the Path or even Arahanthood. But 
unfortunately for some reason or other those sermons were 
branded as conventional teachings and relegated to the 
background. That is the reason for all this confusion. 
 At present what is called Paṭicca Samuppāda is a formula 
to be by -hearted and recited up and down. It has no other 
significance. But it is with this formula that the Buddha not only 
solved the entire Sa ṁsāric puzzle but presented through it a 
wonderful principle that  lays bare the structure of the Realms of 
Form and Formless Realms as well as that of the miniature 
worlds found within this sensuous realm – as we highlighted 
above. This fact has been ignored all this time. It is because of 
this ignorance that they went on taking liberties with the two 
words ‘hetu’ and ‘ paccaya’. We can’t change the Buddha word. 
If the Buddha has used the couple of words synonymously we 
have to accept it as it is. Playing with these two words had gone 
so far that concepts totally foreign to the spirit of the Dhamma 
came to be tagged on with the passage of time. That is why they 
went to the extent of bringing in like Brahmins, such concepts as 
‘one’s own doing’ and ‘another’s doing’ or interpreting ‘ hetu’ as 
intrinsic nature ( sabhāvo) and ‘ paccaya’ as extrinsic nature 
(parabhāvo). This confusion is not of recent origin. It has gone 
on for quite a long time. Our ideas may appear as revolutionary. 
But I cannot help pointing this out. The truth must come to light 
even in the face of criticism. 
 So then, dear listeners, in regard to the Law of Dependent 
Arising you should pay special attention to what we have said 
about ‘ Saṁsāra-vaṭṭa’ (the vortex of Saṁsāra) and 
‘aññamaññapaccayatā’ (the mutual inter -dependence) and the 
inter-connection between consciousness and name-and-form. The

Sermon 20 

term viññāṇa itself is suggestive of two things. ‘ Vijānāti’ means 
discriminating as two things. It is due to that very discrimination 
that name -and-form becomes the object of consciousness. That 
happens in the darkness of ignorance which makes one grasp at 
the shadow. Name -and-form is only a shadow or a reflection. 
That is where the story of the deer and the mirage comes in. It 
leads to an imprisonment between two things. “Eye is here, form 
is over there”. The deer is un aware of the fact that with each step 
it is taking it is taking its eye along with it. Therefore it has 
posited two ends or driven two pegs for itself. The whole world 
has got caught between these two pegs and created a dichotomy 
to rest on (‘ dvayanissita’). The Buddha gave a solution to this 
problem by giving up both extremes not by putting them together 
nor by compromising with them, but by avoiding both. The 
solution he gave is the twelve -linked formula of Dependent 
Arising. 
 By this solution the Buddha,  for one thing, solved the 
Saṁsāric puzzle. Why did the commentator bring in the question 
of past lives and future lives into the interpretation of this 
formula? They could not appreciate the fact that if you 
understand the present life in Saṁsāra correctly the past and the 
future are already understood. Just ponder over this, dear 
listeners. Must you go on removing the sheaves of a plantain 
trunk to ascertain whether the tree has a pith? If you take a sharp 
sword and cut the trunk in two in the middle, can  you not see 
from the cross -section that it is pithless? That is why a stream -
runner ( Sotāpanna) is said to have seen Nibbāna. We have 
explained earlier that he is said to have seen Nibbāna because for 
a split second he has seen in a flash, the cessation o f preparations 
in the light of wisdom. In one of our  Nibbāna sermons, we have 
compared it to the legendary Herculean feat of the soldier Nīla in 
parting the sea water with a giant iron bar. If the Sotāpanna has 
had that flash of insight, he has discovered the secret of Saṁsāra 
to that extent. Of course all fetters to existence are not broken by 
that initial insight. That realization is gradual but it is because of

The Law of Dependent Arising 

this insight into the truth that he is irreversibly inclined to 
Nibbāna. He has thereby won th e assurance of Nibbāna. He has 
had a glimpse of the true state of affairs which is none other than 
the Law of Dependent Arising. ‘This being – this comes to be’. 
 Nowadays when speaking about that attainment there are 
many who go on asserting: “We keep our  precepts unbroken. We 
are already ‘sotāpanna’.” That is not the criterion. One has to see 
the norm of the Dhamma couched in the phrase: ‘ Yaṁ kiñci 
samudayadhammaṁ – sabbaṁ taṁ nirodhadhammaṁ’ – 
‘whatever is of a nature to arise – all that is of a nature t o cease.’ 
Through that insight one has seen the norm of arising and 
ceasing. He has for a moment experienced the cessation of 
consciousness. Consciousness is what one grasps at last. By 
seeing its cessation he has understood the nature of arising and 
ceasing of the entire Five Aggregates. It is by that insight into the 
truth that he is inclined to Nibbāna. He is irreversible. By that 
much alone a stream-winner is great. Of course he has to proceed 
further. The Buddha has pointed out that it is when one dire cts 
radical attention ( yoniso-manasikāra) that there is, this 
breakthrough. 
 I have now said enough about Nibbāna. About this series 
of sermons I have to say something more. I have shown that there 
has been some historical evolution in the interpretation o f the 
Law of Dependent Arising. These sermons might give rise to all 
sorts of criticism. So I would like to mention that there is a 
history for this little series of sermons too. Though it is something 
personal, let me tell you about it. About 20 years ago , when I was 
at Mitirigala Nissarana Vanaya, my revered teacher, the Most 
Venerable Mātara Srī Ñā ṇārāma Mahāthera, once when I saw 
him in his ‘ kuṭi’ invited me to deliver a series of sermons on 
Nibbāna to the meditative Sangha there as they had some 
problems in understanding it. He even said that the sermons 
should be taped. But my first response, with a simile, was that if I 
came out with what I have to say, I would be the target of heavy

Sermon 20 

criticism. But the next day he encouraged me with a wonderful 
guarantee. “You had better mention in the sermon itself that I 
invited you to give these sermons.” It is because of that guarantee 
that you had the opportunity to listen to the series of sermons on 
Nibbāna and read the ‘ Nivane Niveema’ volumes (i.e., ‘ Nibbāna 
– The Mind Stilled’ series in 7 volumes). If not for that these 
things would have continued to remain concealed under the sands 
of time. I came to know that those who had a myopic eye for the 
Nibbāna series twenty years ago, are now showing a deep interest 
in it. 
 In the meantime, some suggested to me the feasibility of 
writing a book on Dependent Arising. But instead of writing a 
book, I thought it easier to deliver a series of sermons to you all 
because you have already listened to more than a hundred of my  
sermons. I had the confidence that you would not get up and go 
complaining that the sermons are too deep. That is why I started 
this series of sermons. But one thing, dear listeners, a preacher’s 
mode of presentation adapts itself to the level of understa nding of 
the audience. Twenty years ago, I addressed those Nibbāna 
sermons to the meditative Saṅgha of Mitirigala Nissarana 
Vanaya. Some of the similes I gave in those sermons are now 
well known in the country. But in these sermons addressed to a 
village a udience I gave similes direct from village -life – even 
rustic ones. I suppose it does not detract our respect for the 
Dhamma. Please try your best to understand this deep Dhamma 
through them. It is because of the depth of this Dhamma that the 
Buddha hesita ted to preach it at first – that Brahmā Sahampati 
had to bend his knees to propitiate and invite him to preach. 
 We have already mentioned on an earlier occasion that 
there are two things in this Dhamma that are considered 
exceptionally deep. As it is said  in suttas like Ariyapariyesana, 18 
“Duddasaṁ idaṁ ṭhānaṁ yadidaṁ idappaccayatā pa ṭicca–
samuppādo”. “This is something difficult to see, namely the 
specific conditionality – the Dependent Arising.” It is not easy for

The Law of Dependent Arising 

the worldlings immersed in defilements to see the Law of 
Dependent Arising. So also the cessation ( nirodha) which is 
Nibbāna. That too is difficult for the world to see. It comes with 
the cessation of preparations. Instead of that, the worldlings are 
steeped in the craving for existence or beco ming ( bhavataṇhā), 
all speculative views come ancillary to it. This dispensation is 
threefold as Precept, Practice and Penetration ( pariyatti, paṭipatti, 
paṭivedha). Out of these the first to suffer from neglect was 
Penetration. Then Practice too gradually  went down. In the end 
only Precept remained. So the intellectuals came to the forefront. 
From there onwards, it was the age of commentaries, treatises and 
compendia. It happened not only in our Theravāda tradition, but 
in other sects as well. It is said t hat eighteen sects sprang up even 
before the lapse of a hundred years from the Buddha’s passing 
away. Not only that. Each sect had its scriptural heritage – 
cartloads of books. It was rarely that one with discernment took 
the trouble to make sense out of them.  
 Therefore you must not rest satisfied merely with listening 
to these sermons but make an effort to understand them. Don’t be 
discouraged thinking: ‘We are worldlings without that wisdom to 
understand such things.’ The Buddha has pointed out the seed  of 
wisdom – that is, ‘radical attention’ ( yoniso manasikāra). We all 
have that in us to some extent or other. I have shown it by the 
‘simile of the five -fingers’. I shall repeat it for the benefit of the 
new comers. Up to now they explained the constituents of ‘nāma’ 
in nāma-rūpa differently giving first place to ‘ phassa’ or contact. 
I gave the simile of the five -fingers – feeling ( vedanā) the little 
finger, perception ( saññā) the ring finger, intention ( cetanā) the 
middle finger, contact ( phassa) the inde x-finger and attention 
(manasikāra) the thumb. Out of these taking ‘attention’ as the 
thumb we pointed out with the help of a simile of a case of 
murder or theft how a judge gives crown pardon to an alleged 
culprit when there are no witnesses and gets the whole mystery 
out through him. The Buddha had to do a similar thing because

Sermon 20 

this Saṁsāric problem is so difficult to solve since consciousness 
is a magician’s trick. 
 That is why the Buddha gave ‘attention’ out of the five 
constituents of name (nāma) free pardon and made him the crown 
witness. But he was made to give an oath of speaking the truth as 
if warning him. “You are the guy in the guise of ‘ ayonisomanasikāra’ (non-radical attention) who committed this Saṁsāric 
crime with the other four guys plottin g for the murder of all 
beings from beginningless times. At least now you had better be 
‘yoniso’ (radical).” That was the beginning. We have shown what 
happens when ‘ yoniso manasikāra ’ reaches the climax of its 
development. It is with the help of this radi cal attention that one 
understands feeling as feeling. You should think why in the 
Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta there are the apparently awkward phrases like 
‘Kāye kāyānupassī ’ (contemplating body in the body) and 
‘vedanāsu vedanānupassī ’ (contemplating feeling in f eeling). 
When one gives evidence under an oath one cannot help coming 
out with the truth – feeling as feeling, perception as perception, 
intention as intention. But one thing. In the end the culprit – the 
biggest culprit – is found guilty through his own confession. He is 
caught by his talk about the ‘thing’ – ‘manasikāra sambhavā 
sabbe dhammā’. 19 All ‘things’ are found out by ‘attention’. That 
is the deepest point. Mind finds out a thing by means of 
‘manasikāra’. As we already mentioned, out of the five me mbers 
on the ‘nāma’ side namely, feeling, perception, intention, contact 
and attention – attention is the ‘thumb’. It is the ‘thumb’ with the 
complicity of the other four fingers is carrying on this ‘gang -
murder’. He has the closest connection with contact  (the indexfinger). We have identified the five fingers. Of course this is not a 
part of the Buddha’s teaching. I gave this simile only for 
clarification of issues involved. 
 So then take it that we all have the ability to arouse 
‘yoniso-manasikāra’. Get it awakened. It is then that there is the 
dispelling of the four perversions ( vipallāsā). In place of the four

The Law of Dependent Arising 

perceptions so far pursued, namely the perception of permanence 
(niccasaññā), the perception of the pleasant ( sukhasaññā), the 
perception of beauty ( subhasaññā) and the perception of self 
(attasaññā), one begins to develop the perception of 
impermanence ( aniccasaññā), the perception of suffering 
(dukkhasaññā), the perception of repulsiveness ( asubhasaññā) 
and the perception of not -self ( anattasaññā) according to the 
method of contemplation taught by the Buddha. That is the great 
revolution in one’s way of attention. Then the world one sees is 
far different from the above mentioned worlds. This is a Dhamma 
that penetrates through the world. Gradu ally, the perception of 
the compact ( ghanasaññā), which made one posit two ends, gets 
liquidated through the contemplation of impermanence 
(aniccānupassanā). What happens with that liquidation? The 
perception of the heap ( rāsisaññā) emerges. One begins to see a 
thing as a heap. Thereby the contemplation of impermanence 
goes deeper. One sees the flux of arising and ceasing. It 
culminates in disenchantment or disgust ( nibbidā). In this 
Dhamma ‘nibbidā’ is the key to Nibbāna. There is such a norm of 
Dhamma in this teaching. Supramundane Paths and Fruits cannot 
be realized through by -hearting the Dhamma or by getting 
certificates. You have to get down into the practice proper. It is to 
those who had practiced deeply in this Dhamma in past births like 
Bāhiya, that the Buddha preached very brief sermons like ‘In the 
seen – just the seen.’ It may not apply to everybody. You have to 
start from the ‘nursery’ itself. That is why virtue, concentration 
and wisdom have to be developed. Backed by them gradually one 
comes t o realize those Supramundane attainments. It may be a 
miserable leper like Suppabuddha.20 If he came to the Buddha 
with the correct Sa ṁsāric maturity, he could realize immediately 
on hearing the Buddha’s sermon that norm of the Dhamma 
enshrined in the dict um: ‘ yaṁ kiñci samudayadhamma ṁ – 
sabbaṁ taṁ nirodhadhammaṁ’ – ‘whatever is of a nature to arise 
– all that is of a nature to cease.’ It is the insight based on the

Sermon 20 

Five Aggregates of Grasping which in effect is the insight into 
the Law of Dependent Arising. 
 The Buddha has proclaimed this regarding the Law of 
Dependent Arising.  
 “Uppādā vā tathāgatāna ṁ anuppādā vā tathāgatāna ṁ 
ṭhitā va sā dhātu dhamma ṭṭhitatā dhammaniyāmatā 
idappaccayatā.” 21 
 “Whether there be an arising of the Tathāgatas or whether 
there be no arising of Tathāgatas, that elementary nature, that 
orderliness of the Dhamma, that norm of the Dhamma, the 
specific conditionality does stand as it is.” 
 About this Law of Dependent Arising, the Buddha has 
used such words of affirmation like ‘ tathatā avitathatā , 
anaññathatā, idappaccayatā ’ – ‘That suchness therein, the 
invariability, the not -otherwiseness, the specific conditionality.’ 
When one sees this norm as a fact of realization – instead of 
saying ‘impermanent – impermanent’ – one begins to see the flux 
of arising and passing away. This is the path outlined in this 
Dhamma. Therefore this series of sermons is not meant for the 
scholar to pass exams and get degrees. Think of the purpose of 
these sermons – their practical aspect. 
 But what has been  happening all this time? A basket was 
simply handed down without examining what is in it. “Our 
teacher has said this. We must not go beyond it. Our 
commentators have explained like this. We must not think 
beyond their explanations.” A vast delusion has go ne on for a 
long, long period getting hold of the brains – lay – and monk – 
alike. Ignoring those extremely profound discourses, they ran 
after other things (I won’t say what they are). But the truth is 
here. Worldlings do not see it. We had to say in our Nibbāna 
sermons too, that a path of Dhamma overgrown for a number of 
centuries, had to be cleared up. On this occasion too it has to be

The Law of Dependent Arising 

reiterated. We showed the inter -relation between name -and-form 
and consciousness in both aspects of arising and ceasing.  The 
world is always on the ‘ samudaya’ side (arising side). ‘Though 
there is nightfall today, there is a dawn tomorrow.’ That is their 
way of thinking. They do not like even to think of ‘ nirodha’ 
(cessation). That is why we gave various similes. The seamst ress 
craving stitches up those two ends, but it is when one sees the 
middle that there is a release. Now that we have mentioned about 
those two ends, let us hark back to that wonderful verse preached 
by the Buddha: 
 ‘Yo ubhante viditvāna 
  majjhe mantā na lippati 
  taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
  sodha sibbanimaccagā’ 22    
   ‘He who, having understood both ends, does not get 
attached to the middle with wisdom, him I call a great man. He 
has gone beyond the seamstress here.’ 
 Six interpretations w ere given for this verse. But out of 
them, let me now mention a few. Pleasant feeling is one end. 
Painful feeling is the other end. The middle is neither painful nor 
pleasant feeling – which is the middle that no one is interested in. 
the six internal sens e-spheres is one end. The six external sense -
spheres is the second end. Consciousness is the middle. It is due 
to the magic trick of consciousness that those two ends are 
separated. Then again, ‘name’ is one end and ‘form’ is the other 
end. It is through ignorance of the fact that consciousness is in the 
middle that many scholars go on explaining ‘name’ and ‘form’ 
like materialistic scientists. The term ‘ rūpa’ is interpreted as in 
physics. But we have pointed out that what we have here is only a 
‘perception of form’ ( rūpasaññā). It is with the help of the 
constituents of the name group that form is recognized. That is 
the basics for any consciousness. ‘Rūpa’ cannot be understood by 
such materialistic analysis. You can’t change this Dhamma into

Sermon 20 

an atomistic study. One has to see what actually is here. How can 
one see it? Certainly not through instruments. One can do it only 
through radical-attention (yoniso manasikāra). It is for that virtue, 
concentration and wisdom are required. This is what we 
presented through our sermons. 
 Therefore you should not think that these are too abstruse 
for us. Some are even scared of the term ‘ Paṭicca Samuppāda’. 
They would say: ‘That is something even the author of 
Visuddhimagga could not understand. So how can we do it?’ That 
seems to be the general attitude. But the truth is here in the 
discourses which they underestimate as too simple conventional 
teachings ( vohāra desanā ). It is in such under -rated discourses 
like Mahā Nidāna and Mahāpadāna that the true explanation of 
Paṭicca Samuppāda is found. One has to intuit into the meaning 
without getting involved in words. Of course all these are worldly 
conventions. There are the path ways of synonyms and 
terminology. Every vortex revolves round with the synonyms and 
terminology pr oper to it. Think for instance about the cricket 
world. As you know, it has its own ways of synonyms and 
terminology. It is within that environment that the cricket craze 
goes on. That is what gives rise to an ‘ itthatta’ or a level of 
existence. Birth, dec ay and death go with it. Regarding that too 
there is a very wonderful discourse which we have already 
discussed. Let me now mention it in brief. 
 “Kāye vā bhikkhave sati,  kāyasañcetanāhetu uppajjati 
ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. Vācāya vā bhikkhave sati, 
vacīsañcetanāhetu uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ sukhadukkhaṁ. Mane vā 
bhikkhave sati, manosañcetanāhetu uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ 
sukhadukkhaṁ avijjāpaccayā va.”23 
 To put it simply – “When one has taken for granted that 
there is a body, due to intentions about the body there ar ise 
inward pleasure and pain. When one takes for granted that there 
is speech, due to verbal intentions there arise inward pleasure and

The Law of Dependent Arising 

pain. When one takes for granted that there is a mind, due to 
mental intentions there arise inward pleasure and pain. Fi nally it 
is said: ‘ avijjā paccayā va ’ – all conditioned by ignorance.” But 
then it goes on to say: ‘avijjāyatveva asesa virāganirodhā so kāyo 
na hoti ya ṁ paccayāssa ta ṁ uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ sukhadukkhaṁ 
sā vācā na hoti ya ṁ paccayāssa ta ṁ uppajjati ajjhatta ṁ 
sukhadukkhaṁ so mano na hoti ya ṁ paccayāssa ta ṁ uppajjati 
ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ.’ 
 ‘But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of 
ignorance, that body is not there owing to which there arise for 
him inward pleasure and pain. That speech is not there owing to 
which there arise for him inward pleasure and pain. That mind is 
not there owing to which there arise for him inward pleasure and 
pain.’ Then it is said in affirmation: “ Khettaṁ taṁ na hoti, 
vatthuṁ taṁ na hoti, āyatanaṁ taṁ na hoti, adhikaranaṁ taṁ na 
hoti yampaccayāssa taṁ uppajjati ajjhattaṁ sukhadukkhaṁ.” 
 “That field is not there, that site is not there, that base is 
not there, that reason is not there, owing to which there can arise 
for him that inward pleasure and pain.” That field, that site, that 
base, that reason which sustained all those are not there once 
ignorance ceases. That is what we tried to point out in various 
ways. 
 Well, everything comes to an end. When I started this 
series of sermons, I expressed my misgivings – as I did in the 
case of Nibbāna sermons – whether I would live long enough to 
complete the series. However, I survived the series. So I would 
like to wind up with a transference of merit. Whatever merit that 
accrued by my efforts to clean up a path of Dhamma ov ergrown 
for centuries, may it be rejoiced over by my departed parents who 
brought me up, teachers who gave me the vision of knowledge, 
and lay -supporters who helped keep his frail body alive. 
Whatever beings there be, from the lowest hell to the highest 
Brahma world, may they too rejoice over that merit! May it

Sermon 20 

conduce to their attainment of Deathless Nibbāna! In this series 
of sermons I made use of various sections of the discourses. So 
let this floral garland of sermons woven out of the well -preached 
Dhamma flowers culled from the garden of profound discourses 
be a humble offering at the foot of the Dhamma shrine which 
received honour and worship from the Buddha himself!

The Law of Dependent Arising 

1. Sn. 209 Hemaka Sutta 
2. Vism. 436 (S.H.B. Sinh. script) 
3. D. II 63 Mahā Nidāna Sutta 
4. S. II 114 Naḷakaḷāpa Sutta  
5. M. I 55 Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta 
6. S. IV 67 Dvaya Sutta 
7. S. II 23 Bālapaṇdita Sutta 
8. M. III 15 Mahā Puṇṇama Sutta 
9. Netti. 114 (B.J.T.S. 39 Sinh. script) 
10. S. I 134 Selā Sutta 
11. Paṭ. 1.1 (B.J.T.S. 50 Sinh. script) 
12. Paṭis. 1-96 (B.J.T.S. 35 Sinh. script) 
13. S. II 25 Paccaya Sutta 
14. S. II 19 Acela Kassapa Sutta 
15. S. II 16 Kaccānagotta Sutta  
16. S. II 266 Āṇi Sutta 
17. Ud. 6. Bāhiya Sutta 
18. M. I 167 Ariyapariyesana Sutta  
19. A. V 106 Kiṃmūlaka Sutta 
20. Ud. 48. Suppabuddhakuṭṭhi Sutta 
21. S. II 25 Paccaya Sutta 
22. A. III 399 Majjhe Sutta 
23. A. II 157 Sancetanā Sutta

By The Same Author 
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought   
2. Saṁyutta Nikāya – An Anthology  
3. Ideal Solitude  
4. The Magic of the Mind  
5. Towards Calm and Insight   
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume I  
7. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume II  
8. Seeing Through  
9. Towards A Better World  
10. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume I  
11. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume II  
12. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume III  
13. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume IV  
14. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume V  
15. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VI  
16. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VII 
17. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Library Edition  
18. Nibbāna and The Fire Simile  
19. A Majestic Tree of Merit  
20. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective  
21. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume I  
22. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume II 
23. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume III 
24. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume IV  
25. Walk to Nibbāna   
26. Deliverance of the Heart through Universal Love 
27. Questions and Answers on Dhamma 
28. The Miracle of Contact 
29. From The Wheel of Kamma To The Wheel of Dhamma 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla, Karandana 
Phone: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
සැ.යු.: මෙෙ කෘති මලේඛනය සරලතේවයට ෙුලේ තැන දුනේ 
අංක අනුපිළිමවලකේ සහිතව සකසේවී ඇති බවතේ, මලේඛනමයේ 
අගහරිමයේ එන කෘති මබොමහෝ දුරට ගැඹුරැ විය හැකි බවතේ, 
පොඨකයිනේ දැනුවතේ කිරීම් වශමයනේ සඳහනේ කරනු 
කැෙැතේමතමි. 
- සම්පොදක  
1. තිසරණ ෙහිෙ  
2. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 1 
3. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 2 
4. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 3 
5. දිවි කතමේ සැඳෑ අඳූර 
6. කය අනුව ගිය සිහිය 
7. හිත තැනීෙ 
8. පිනේ රැමකක ෙහිෙ 
9. අබිනිකේෙන 
10. පිළිමවතිනේ පිළිමවතට 
11. කමයේ කතොව 
12. ෙො-පිය උවැටන 
13. පරතිපතේති පජාොව 
14. පැවැතේෙ හො නැවැතේෙ 
15. කෙම කකරමයනේ රෙම කකරයට 
16. මෙතේ සිමතේ විෙුකේතිය 
17. ඇති හැටි දැකේෙ 
18. තමපෝ ගුණ ෙහිෙ 
19. සකේෙමනේ නිවන 
20. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 1 මවළුෙ 
21. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 2 මවළුෙ  
22. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 3 මවළුෙ  
23. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 4 මවළුෙ  
24. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 5 මවළුෙ  
25. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 6 මවළුෙ  
26. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 7 මවළුෙ  
27. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 8 මවළුෙ  
28. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 9 මවළුෙ

29. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 10 මවළුෙ 
30. පහනේ කණුව රෙම මදේශනො – 11 මවළුෙ  
31. විදසුනේ උපමදසේ 
32. භොවනො ෙොගගය 
33. උතේතරීතර හුදකලොව 
34. සසුනේ පිළිමවත 
35. කලන චිතරය 
36. දිය සුළිය 
37. බුදු සෙය පුදේගලයො හො සෙොාය 
38. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  පළෙු මවළුෙ   
39. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ – මදවන මවළුෙ  
40. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  මතවන මවළුෙ   
41. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  සිවුවන මවළුෙ   
42. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  පසේවන මවළුෙ   
43. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  සයවන මවළුෙ   
44. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  සතේවන මවළුෙ   
45. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  අටවන මවළුෙ   
46. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  නවවන මවළුෙ   
47. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  දසවන මවළුෙ   
48. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ –  එමකොමළොසේවන මවළුෙ    
49. නිවමනේ නිවීෙ – පුසේතකොල ෙුද්‍රණය (1-11 මවළුම්) 
50. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 1 මවළුෙ  
51. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 2 මවළුෙ  
52. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 3 මවළුෙ  
53. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 4 මවළුෙ 
54. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – පුසේතකොල ෙුද්‍රණය (1-4 මවළුම්) 
55. සේපශගමයේ ආශකයගය 
56. ෙනමසේ ෙොයොව 
57. පැරණි මබෞදර චිනේතොමේ සංකලේපය සහ යථොථමය 
 
නැවත ෙුද්‍රණය කරවීෙ පිළිබඳ විෙසීම් 
කටුකුරැනේමදේ ඤාණනන්‍ද සදහම් මසනසුන  
කිරිලේලවලවතේත, දම්ෙුලේල, කරඳන  
දුරකථනය

knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net