Title: towards calm and insight
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/towards_calm_and_insight.pdf
Word Count: 14375

Pothgulgala Dharmagrantha 
Dharmasravana Màdhya Bhàraya
 This is to inform our readers that all Dhamma 
books so far written and yet to be written by  
Venerable Bhikkhu Katukurunde ¥àõananda will 
hereafter be published by the P.D.D.M.B. (Kandy) 
and that the D.G.M.B. (Colombo) would not be 
publishing any of his books. 
 P.D.D.M.B. 
 Kandy 
 2013.07.07

TOWARDS CALM
AND
INSIGHT
(Some Practical Hints)
by Bhikkhu K. ¥àõananda
Published strictly for free distribution
All Rights Reserved
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited. 
The present set of sermons is available for free download at
www.seeingthroughthenet.net
ISBN : 978-955-1255-22-0
Published by:
Pothgulgala Dharmagrantha Dharmasravana 
Màdhya Bhàraya
Sri Lanka

II
Dhamma is Priceless !
Strictly for free distribution
Printed by
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd.
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila,Nugegoda.
Tel : 011 4 870 333
   First Impression  -  1993
   Second Impression  -  1998
   Third Impression  -  2008
   Fourth Impression  -  2012
   Fifth Impression  -  2014
Copies of this book may be obtained from :
1. Mr. Anura Rupasinghe  -  No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy.
2. Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi -   25, Main Street, Devalegama.
3. Mr. D. T. Weragala -  422, Welipara, Thalawatugoda.
4. Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe
 29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda.
5. Mr. Sanjeewa Nawaratne
 308/17 B, Kiriwaththuduwa Road, Magammana, Homagama.
6. Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe -   No. 26, Havelock Road, Galle.
7. Mr. S.A. Lionel
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara.
8. Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne - Elapatha, Rathnapura.
9. Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 "Saman",  Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla.
10. Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne
 Jayamanna Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya.
11. Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura.
12. Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe
 Studio 'Chàya', Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.
 Web Site: www.seeingthroughthenet.net

Towards Calm
And Insight
(Some Practical Hints)
by 
Bhikkhu K. ¥àõananda
A Manual of
Aphorisms and Reflections on
Dhamma
likely to be of help in
bolstering up Calm (Samatha)
and in triggering off
Insight (Vipassanà)
Fifth Edition

Dhamma is priceless!
Strictly for free distribution
Sabbadàna§ dhammadàõa§ jinàti
The Gift of Dhamma excels all other gifts
Ajara§ jãramànena
tappamànena nibbuti§
nimmissa§ parama§ santi§
yogakkhema§ anuttara§
Suppiya Thera, Thag. 1.32
With the decaying an Un-decaying
With the burning a Cool
A perfect Peace will I create
Supremely free from Yokes rule
iii
CONTENTS
  Page
 List of Abbreviations vi
 Preface to First Edition vii
 About  the  P.D.D.M.B. viii
I. How to Quell ANGER and Dwell on METTâ 1
 (Loving Kindness)
II. Aids and Incentives to Sati  Sampaja¤¤a 6
 (Mindfulness and Full-awareness)
III. Pause and Ponder  A miscellany 11
 (Cud for the ruminants)
 
 Appendix 55 
v

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
D.N. Dãgha Nikàya
M.N. Majjhima Nikàya
S.N. Sa§yutta Nikàya
K.S. Kindred Sayings
A.N. Anguttara Nikàya
G.S. Gradual Sayings
Dhp. Dhammapada
Ud. Udāna
Sn. Sutta Nipàta
Thag. Theragàthà
Thig. Therãgàthà
P.T.S. Pali Text Society
Wh. Wheel, Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy.
viiv

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
 The coupling of Samatha and Vipassanà in Buddhist meditation reveals  
the close relationship between CALM and CLARITY. It is only when the    
ripples of distraction subside that insight can reach the bottom of the pond of 
consciousness. A meditator well aware of both these aspects of meditation,   
might find something of practical use in these pages.
 The first two sections on mettà and sati-sampaja¤¤a are designed to   
bolster up the calm a meditator builds up by his samatha practice. The third and 
last section which invites him to pause and ponder, provides an opportunity       
for the triggering-off of insight. In most of the aphorisms culled from my        
diary notes, brevity of expression has been preserved for the sake of effect.   
Where they initially misfire, the reader is requested to exercise some patience. 
The reflections on Dhamma presented here in essays, similes and parables     
could be better understood in the light of my earlier works.
 I wish to thank Mr. U. Mapa, the Public Trustee of Sri Lanka, Mr. J. Alwis, 
Secretary to the Ministry of Coconut Industries and Mr.Samarapala Withanage, 
Senior Assistant Secretary, for their efforts to bring out this publication as a       
gift of Dhamma. Mr.Susiri De Silva, Managing Director, Vishva Lekha, who    
took a personal interest in seeing the book through the press, also deserves         
my thanks.
K. ¥àõananda.
Nissarana Vanaya,
Meetirigala,
Sri Lanka
24.3.1991
About the D.G.M.B.   . . . . .
Rare is the birth of a Buddha in this world. So rare too, is the 
opportunity to listen to his Dhamma. This conviction has inspired many a 
devoted Buddhist to cherish the Dhamma as something extremely 
precious.
The Buddha has declared that salutary friendship (Kalyàna-mittatà) is 
almost synonymous with his dispensation. The gift-of-Dhamma is the 
link that moulds the bond of this friendship. Dhamma deserves no pricetag precisely because it is price-less.
It is in this spirit that the D.G.M.B. launched its Dhamma-dàna 
movement in 1997. Many a parched traveller on the desert path has had a 
refreshing drink of the nectar of Dhamma free of charge ever since. Many 
an enthusiastic benevolent heart seized the opportunity to participate in a 
genuine act of Dhammadàna.
Should we always go for things that sport a price-tag? Is everything 
that comes free to us, necessarily worthless? What about the air and the 
sunshine?
It is in point of merit that the gift-of-Dhamma excels all other gifts. 
Dhamma is the nectar that quenches the insatiate samsàric thirst of 
beings. The gift of Dhamma is therefore of far greater merit than an 
ordinary gift of food or drink. For the magnanimous, Dhammadàna is for 
ever an unfailing source of altruistic joy.
All enquiries regarding participation in this Dhammadàna should be 
addressed to:-
Mr. G.T.Bandara
The Settlor, D.G.M.B.,
Royal Institute, 
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo – 05.
    Fax : 2592749, 2580564
vii viii
About the P.D.D.M.B. . . . . .
It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Katukurunde ¥àõananda           
of Pothgulgala Aranyaya, Kandegedara, Devalegama, that all his Dhamma 
Books and recorded sermons be offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of     
charge to the Dhamma-thirsty world'. The recently established Trust,      
officially named "Pothgulgala Dharmagrantha Dharmasravana Màdhya 
Bhàraya" centred in the sacred city of Kandy enshrining the Tooth Relic of 
the Buddha, has dedicated itself to the task of fulfilling that noble wish.
Accordingly, P.D.D.M.B. has taken upon itself the duties of publication      
and distribution of books written by the venerable author as well as the     
recording and distribution of his sermons on C.D.s, in addition to maintaining 
the website, 'seeingthroughthenet.net' - Those wishing to participate in this 
multifaceted Dhammadana may note the Account Number of our Trust given 
below. Our readers are cautioned that there is no other number in the same     
Bank  to  remit  their  contributions. 
All enquiries should be addressed to:-
Mr. Anura Rupasinghe
No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy.
Sri Lanka.
P.D.D.M.B. 
Acc. No. 100761000202 
Sampath Bank
Kandy.
Tel: 0777-801938
e-mail: pothgulgala@seeingthroughthenet.net
viii

1 2

How to 
Quell Anger
and
Dwell on Mettà (Loving Kindness)
1. (i)   Remember the Wise-old SAW.
Even were bandits savagely to sever you limb from 
limb with a two handled saw, he who entertained hate 
in his heart on that account would not be one who 
carried out my teaching.
-Kakacåpama. S., M. N. Sutta No. 21
 (ii) Uppajjate sace kodho
 àvajja kakacåpama§
- Brahmadatta Thera, Thag.
 If anger arises, reflect on the simile of the SAW.
2. Bear up! Like a dumb-bell (but with a difference).
Sace neresi attàna§
ka§so upahato yathà
esa pattosi nibbàna§
Sàrambho te na vijjati
- Daõóa Vagga, Dhp.
If you restrain yourself like a broken bronze, you have already 
reached appeasement (nibbàna) and there will be no cross talk for 
you.
(Note : A broken bronze vessel does not give out reverberations or 
echoes, when struck.)
 
3. A Protective Mantra:
Let them abuse me, beat me, kill me  Ill have 
Mettà  unconditional Mettà.
(Note: Repeat this formula non-stop in times of danger to your 
Mettà - Mettà = Loving kindness)
For a practical illustration, see Puõõovàda S., M.N.
4. A reliable triumvirate:
Khanti  mettà  anuddayatà
Forbearance  Loving kindness  Sympathy.
5. I see no error made which I could not have made Myself *
(i.e. given the same amount of delusion).
* An antiseptic for rash itchings and irritations that may come up 
while handling the suffering, erring, humanity.
Symptoms: nausea, c-a-r-ping (not coughing), holier than thou 
feeling, stiffness, righteous indignation.
Contra-indications: Discontinue treatment if self-pity sets in. 
Directions for use: Just rub it in.
6.  Large - heartedness  the way to Deliverance of the heart 
through Mettà (Mettà cetovimutti)
(i)  Accommodation  No problem
  (Accept them with all their weaknesses).
(ii)  Reception  Cordial
  (Receive them with the warmth of friendship)
(iii) Atmosphere  Free
  (Let them ventilate their grievances)
 
7. Switch on to Mettà for a floodlit scene of a gloomy world:
Subhaparamàha§ bhikkhave mettàcetovimutti§ vadàmi
Monks, I say that deliverance of the heart through loving-kindness, 
has beauty as the highest aim.
- S.N V 119

3 4
8.  Touch the feeble and the stable with Mettà
 mettàya phasse tasathàvaràni.  Sàriputta S. Sn.
9. Veto all hateful impulses on the basis of the 5 ways of  
 quelling malice (àghàta  pañivinaya).
I. Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards him 
loving-kindness (mettà) should be developed.
ii. Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards him 
compassion (karuõà) should be developed.
iii. Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards him 
equanimity (upekkhà) should be developed.
iv. Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards him unmindfulness and inattention (asati amanasikàro) should be 
exercised.
v. Monks, to whatsoever person malice is arisen, towards him the 
attitude of taking into account the fact that he is the owner of his 
own deeds (kammassakatà) should be adopted - That venerable 
one is the owner of his own deeds, heir to his own deeds, deeds 
are the matrix for him, deeds are his kin, deeds are his refuge, he 
will become the heir of whatever deeds he does.
10. The bad-tempered are good whetstones for Forbearance.
Ubhinnamattha§ carati
attano ca parassa ca
para§ sa§kupita§ ¤atvà
yo sato upasammati
-Sakka Sa§yutta S.N: 122
 
 He works for the weal of both
 his own and of the other
 who on seeing the other enraged
 mindfully calms himself down.
11. Get rid of your worn-out skin!
One occasion for Anger is injured self-pride. Supposing you make a 
blunder and your friends are poking fun at you. The best thing to do 
now, is to have a hearty laugh at yourself  to join with them in poking 
fun at yourself. Your friends will soon realize that now there is no one 
to poke fun at  no real object for any malicious delight  for they are 
now pelting stones at the discarded worn-out skin of a serpent.
 Yo ve uppatita§ vineti kodha§
visaña§ sappavisa§ va osadhehi
so bhikkhu jahàti orapàra§
urago jiõõamiva tacam puràõa§
Uraga S.Sn.
 He who can curb his wrath
 as soon as it arises
 like timely antidote will check
 snakes venom that so quickly spreads
 such monk gives up the 
 here and beyond
 just as a serpent sheds
 its worn-out skin.
(Tr. Ven. Nyanaponika)
(The Worn-out skin  Wh. 241/242)
12. Plead for your client the Accused, 
before the prejudiced judge - Anger N Hate
Take the cue from Venerable Sariputtas discourse on the five ways of 
quelling malice with regard to five types of persons. (A.N. II 186, G.S. 
III 137 ff.  A study of the discourse is advocated for greater clarity).
The 5 types of clients:
i. One whose ways are impure in deed but pure in word.
         ii.  One whose ways are impure in word but pure in deed

iii. One whose ways are impure both in deed and word, yet from 
time to time obtains mental clarity, mental calm.
iv. One whose ways are impure both in deed and word, and 
obtains no such clarity or calm.
v. One whose ways are pure both in deed and word, and who 
obtains mental clarity, mental calm.
Plead for mitigation, mercy or innocence as the case may be.
13. Mettà enables you to discover uncut-diamonds where  
 earlier you found mere chunks of charcoal.
14. How best to treat a patient who is angry and hateful 
 towards you:
i. Bathe him with Mettà-water  to cool him down.
ii. Apply fragrant Mettà-soap  to remove his dirt of hate.
iii. Use the Mettà-towel on him  that he may not catch the 
chill of remorse.
iv. Soothe him with Mettà-balm  to cure his irritations and 
old wounds.
15. Build the bund of Khanti  forbearance  well above the level 
 of the marshy wasteland of ill-will and turn the river of  
Mettà to overflow it in cascades.
16. A word of Mettà leaves pleasing overtones for others and  
serene undertones for oneself.
5 6

Aids and Incentives to
Sati Sampaja¤¤a
(Mindfulness and Full-awareness)
(A recipe for a pudding  the proof of which is in the eating).
1. Sati = Appamàda (A simple equation)
(i.e. mindfulness = heeófulness)
2. Sati is Economy (Nothing goes waste).
3. In Sati  there is SO MUCH in so little.
4. Attend to points of contact (touch).
5. Listen  to the SOUND if any, caused by your actions.
6. ONE thing  at  a  time  and  THAT done - well. 
(a good motto  for sati sampaja¤¤a)
7. Look Sharp : (a warning)
i. Bowl brimful of oil on your head
ii. Man with uplifted sword behind you
iii. Spill  not  a drop!
(See Canonical simile  S.N.V: 169, K.S.V: 150)
8. Walk on the precipice of the Present:
Let not passing trains of thought make you dizzy.
9. Watching a movie, unmoved
 ……… and what, monks, is that development of concentration, 
which when cultivated and made much of, conduces to mindfulness and 
full-awareness. Herein, monks, the feelings of a monk are known to him 
as they arise, they are known to him as they persist, they are known to 
him as they finally pass away. His perceptions are known  to  him as they

7 8
arise, they are known to him as they persist, they are known to him as they 
finally pass away. His thoughts are known to him as they arise, they are 
known to him as they persist, they are known to him as they finally pass 
away……….
A.N.IV: 32 (also, S.N.V: 180)
10. Determination :
24 hour long unbroken chain-of-sati
(If any link breaks perchance, weld it 
promptly)
11. Take regular 3 hourly or 4 hourly checks of your successes and 
failures and RE-DETERMINE SATISAMPAJA¥¥A. 
…… Good is it, monks, to reflect on ones failures from time to 
time ….. to reflect on ones successes from time to time ……
A.N.IV: 160
 (N.B. Failures are the pillars of success)
12. Have a special speed limit within the precincts of your kuñi (hut).
Caution: Go-Slow
No hurry or flurry
Slowly  carefully - mindfully
(Note: Haste makes waste)
13. CONQUER IMPULSIVE ACTIONS:
Pay special attention to the following steps in Satipaññhàna Sutta:
(i) in going towards and in coming back  I
he is fully aware (abhikkante 
pañikkante sampajànakàrã hoti)
(ii) in looking at and in looking away from 
 he is fully aware (àlokite vilokite 
sampajànakàrã hoti)
(iii) in bending and in stretching  he is 
fully aware  (sammi¤jite pasàrite 
sampajànakàrã hoti)
14. Keep an eye on the stranger in your kuñi (i.e. YOURSELF)  TO 
AVOID ACCIDENTS.
15. Make a mental note as to how your vehicle (body) is disposed 
while it is on the path ways of movements 
(i.e iriyàpatha = posture)
……In whatever way his body is disposed, so he 
understands it 
 yathà  yathà  và panassa kāyo paõihito hoti tathà tathà 
na§ pajànàti …… Satip.  S.M.N.
16. STOP at the posture  junctions (iriyàpatha sandhi)
Watch out for the green lights:
i. Attend to the intention before taking the turn.
ii. Do not telescope postures (e.g. from sitting to standing and 
walking).

9 10
17. Walk to a slower rhythm and keep up with mental noting:
i. In caïkamana (pacing up and down):
6 stages to be progressively distinguished, together with their 
respective preceding intentions, except in the case of stage 5.
Thus:
 1. lift (heel) 2. bend (knee) 3. send (foot)
 4. drop (heel) 5. put (sole) 6. press (foot)
To begin with I: lift  put
Then II: lift  send  put
and so on.
ii. At other times:
 lift  put or lift  send  put, plus the TOUCH
18. Dub yourself a patient and be patient.
19. Whenever you are sweeping, sweep the moments away softly and 
carefully, leaving no rubbish behind!
20. Enlist the WORD, to marshal sati sampaja¤¤a.
Its advantages:
ACTION is too gross and
THOUGHT is too subtle, but,
WORD stands mid-way between them.
One can be doing many things at the same time with a semblance 
of awareness.
One seems to be able to think about many things at the same time, 
being unaware of the diffuseness of thought.
But, one cannot speak two words at the same time without 
being unintelligible: TRY!
WORD can command awareness by 
narrowing down dissipation in action and 
diffuseness in thought.
So, crowd out stray thoughts by repetition of 
the same word and narrow down attention to 
the task at hand, however insignificant it be, 
like the trunk of an elephant reaching out for a 
NEEDLE!
21. Under the microscope of attention, every moment appears 
UNIQUE and that is, one moment is as good as any other.
22. Nip it in the bud!
Whenever you notice some turmoil in your mind, know it to be an 
ally of Màra and dispel it 
Yadàvilatta§ manaso vija¤¤à.
Kaõhassa pakkhoti vinodayeyya
-Sàriputta S., Sn.
23. Full-awareness (sampaja¤¤a) insulates against SHOCKS.

3
Pause and Ponder  A miscellany
(Cud for the ruminants)
1. A shrivelled leaf can tell you the history of the universe.
2. It is good, now and then, to attend ones own funeral. 1
(see Vijaya S.Sn.)
3. Learn to dismantle and reassemble yourself.
Parts: i. hand-bones  ii. foot-bones  iii. shin-bone  iv. thigh-bone  
v. hip-bone  vi. back-bone  vii. skull 
(see Satipaññhàna S.M.N.)
4. Every man is a tombstone and every face a MASK.
5. Accept yourself, and reject your self.
6. The Prison of the Senses:
What we see so often blocks our vision  if we fail to see through.
7. Conceit:
A misappropriation of public property (i.e. earth, water, fire, air), 
and a mental exploitation of ones fellow beings.
8. If upàdànas are clutches, upadhis are crutches
(upàdàna = grasping; upadhi = asset)
9. When you help a person, think that you are simply repaying a debt 
incurred in the past.
10. The change of attitude underlying the reflection on the use of the Four 
Requisites:
Having been the proud owner of this body, you are now its 
reluctant caretaker.
11 12
11. How wonderful silence is:
and yet:
sounds make you aware of silence.
silence makes you aware of sounds.
12. The relationship between sankhàra and vi¤¤āõa:
a make up for a makebelieve EMPTY SHOW:
(Saïkhàra = preparation, vi¤¤àõa = consciousness)
13. Nàma-råpa:
Råpa in nàmaråpa is nominal form. (= pañhavi, àpo, tejo, 
vàyo i.e. earth, water, fire, air).
Nàma in nàmaråpa is formal name (= vedanà, sa¤¤à, cetanà, 
phasso, manasikàro i.e. feeling, perception, intention, contact, 
attention)
For form is such that it calls forth a name, and name is such 
that it conjures up a form.
14. If you are proud of your brains, just think of your brain matter.
(See Vijaya S.Sn:)
15. The world needs us most when we need ourselves no more.
16. We are worthy of all when we have given up all.
17. When you get the credit for something, remember how much you 
owe to your parents and teachers.
18. A Package  deal ?
What is there to see in a seen?
What is there to hear in a heard?
What is there to sense in a sensed?
What is there to cognize in a cognized?
For: diññha (seen), suta (heard), muta (sensed), vi¤¤ata (cognized), 
are simply contexts for self  reference.
 (See Bàhiya S.Ud.)

19. Face every moment as a challenge to your equanimity.
20. Cattàro ariyavohàrà  The four modes of speech of noble ones:
1. Diññe diññhavàdità  in a seen, just a seen
2. Sute sutavàdità  in a heard, just a heard
3. Mute mutavàdità  in a sensed, just a sensed
4. Vi¤¤àte vi¤¤àtavàdità  in a cognized, just a cognized
-A.N.II. 246
It is, as though in the midst of a film show one throws up the cloak of 
delusion or ignorance and awakens to reality: After all, this is only 
a seen
21. Su¤¤atà  Voidness:
Awakening to voidness is like becoming 
aware, in the midst of a film show, that only 
one scene flashes on the screen at a time, and 
that it is consciousness which connects them 
up into a story  a story which, for each 
individual is a fraction of his own life-story 
(with individual biases, prejudices, tastes, 
predilections, prior experiences etc. thrown 
in, in good measure).
Furthermore, even that one scene which 
appears on the screen at a time is something 
projected from behind and the screen by itself 
is BLANK! VOID!
22. Supinakåpamà kàmà  Dream-like are sense pleasures
The element of delusion, the darkness of ignorance, is a necessary 
ingredient in all sense-pleasures as in the case of theatrical 
performances. Hence, even one acquainted with camera  tricks, 
library  shots etc. is carried away by his impulses in spite of 
himself when he enjoys the film show. So powerful is the force of 
àsavas (influxes).
True awakening, therefore, is the awakening to the nature of 
consciousness.
pa¤¤à bhàvetabbà
vi¤¤àõam pari¤¤eyya§
-Mahà Vedalla S.M.N.
Wisdom should be developed
Consciousness should be comprehended.
23. Saïkhàrà  The backstage preparations for the 
pa¤cupàdànakkhandhà  the Five Grasping groups.
In a drama, sankhàras are the back-stage preparations (make up 
etc.) for the scenes on the stage (which are therefore made-up).
So it is the case with the drama of life  the conceit of existence, 
(asmimàna). All sankhàras which assert self are bhava sankhàras.
All intentions, all aspirations, all determinations and all 
preparations (cf, yà ca cetanà, yà ca patthanà yo ca paõidhi ye ca 
saïkhàrà) that go to make up ones life story, take on a specific 
individual orientation. The succession of sankhàras 
(sankhàrasantati) is comparable to the series of consecutive 
frames which make up a motion picture.
24. Saïkhàrà  The search for an English equivalent.
The rendering widely accepted today, is formations - a term 
which lacks life, and unlike its original, has little significance to the 
maninthestreet. He might even react to the dictum: All 
formations are impermanent, with a cynical: So what?
Though innocuous, the term is too bland and passive.
13 14

15 16
Venerable ¥àõavãras rendering determinations though it does 
mean something to the former, is yet too cut-and-dried a term 
which is not suggestive enough of the finer nuances of the original. 
It is too thin-lipped, to recognize the conditioning aspect of the 
term saïkhàrà. His rendering of saïkhata by the term 
determined, reveals this flaw, as it is rather suggestive of a 
determinism. (Determinate would be less objectionable.)
Preparations seems to be the nearest equivalent. While covering 
most of the nuances of the original Pali term, it has the added 
advantage of paving the way to nibbidàviràga  (disenchantment 
and dispassion or detachment).
Life is a series of endless preparations  whether it is for the pauper 
or for the millionaire. All preparations are impermanent is a fact 
which could be recognized even by the man in the street as a stark 
reality.
For the house-wife burdened with her household chores, the dictum 
as it stands is full of significance as also for her husband struggling 
to keep up with the Joneses, and they will exclaim Oh! what is not a 
preparation in this life?
25. Saïkhàrà  Saïkhata  Asankhata
There is some kinship between Saïkhàrà and 
preparations; as far as their social-background is concerned.
Unlike the term Pañicca Samuppàda, Saïkhàrà was a word 
already in usage (like dukkha, kamma, etc), when the Buddha 
came on the scene, though he gave it a new dimension.
Some of the popular meanings of the term were:
(1) Culinary preparations
i. e.g. sakuntama§sehi susankhatehi., - âmagandha S., Sn.
(With well-prepared birds meat).
ii. sankhatiyo  Lañukikopama S.M.N. (delicacies as special 
preparations for the table.)
(2) Back-stage preparations or personal make-up
(3) A state of stress, tension, or activity; the momentum.
i. Yo ahosi pabbhajjàbhisa§kharo so pañippassambhi
Soõa Vagga Ud.V.
(whatever eagerness there was for going-forth, that subsided)
ii.   ……… gamikàbhisa§khàro ………. patippassambhi
A.N.IV: 180
 (that eagerness or tension for making the journey, subsided)
iii.  ……… cakka§  yàvatikà abhisankhàrassa gati 
tàvatika§  gantvà ciïgulàyitvà bhåmiya§ papati;
A.N.I.112
(the wheel ………. rolled as far as the momentum applied on it 
allowed it to go and then twirled around and fell flat on the 
ground.)
(4) Repairing, reconditioning
pañi  sankharoti
In the formula of Paticca Samuppàda, sankhàrà play the 
make-up role as preparations for the vortical interplay between 
vi¤¤àõa (consciousness) and nàma-råpa (name and form). Avijjà 
(ignorance) provides the darkness of background. The endproduct of this interplay is pa¤cupàdànakkhandhà  the Five 
Groups of Grasping which therefore, are the Prepared 
(saïkhata), and each of which is a prepared. 
Ki¤ca bhikkhave sankhàre vadetha, Sankhata§
abhisankharontãti bhikkhave tasmà sankhàràti
vuccanti. Ki¤ca sankhata§ abhisankharonti.
Råpa§ råpattàya sankhata§ abhisankharonti
Vedana§ vedanattàya sankhata§ abhisankharonti
Sa¤¤a§ sa¤¤attàya sankhatam abhisamkharonti
Sankhàre sankhàrattàya sankhata§ abhisankharonti
Vi¤¤àõa§ vi¤¤àõattàya sankhata§ abhisankharonti

Sankhata§ abhisankharontãti kho bhikkhave tasmà
Sankhàràti vuccanti …….. 
S.N. III 87
And what, monks, would you say are preparations? They 
prepare the prepared. That, monks, is why they are called 
preparations. And what is the prepared that they prepare?
They prepare as a prepared, form into the state of form.
They prepare as a prepared, feeling into the state of feeling.
They prepare as a prepared, perception into the state of 
perception.
They prepare as a prepared, preparations into the state of 
preparations.
They prepare as a prepared consciousness into the state of 
consciousness.
They prepare the prepared. So, that is why, monks, they are 
called preparations.
It may be noted that sankhàrà as one of the Five Groups of 
Grasping are defined as råpasa¤cetanà saddasa¤cetanà etc. (i.e 
deliberations on forms, sounds, etc.) These deliberations on 
sense-objects as prepared preparations seem so essential 
(that is, seem pithy and substantial), that they are compared to the 
trunk of a plantain tree (S.N.III.142). The connection between 
sa¤cetanà and sankhàrà is something like gathering and 
constructing.
Consciousness as a prepared (sankhata) consciousness is 
compared to a conjurors trick or màyà (ibid). Consciousness 
when freed from these illusory preparations, is referred to as 
visankhàragata§ citta§ (Dhp.v:154) or Vi¤¤àõa§ 
anabhisankhacca vimutta§ (S.N.III 5)
This is the Asankhata  The Non-prepared state or the Unprepared.
17 18
26. Kàyasankhàro, Vacãsankhàro, Cittasankhàro
The dialogue between Dhammadinnà Therã and Visàkha 
Upàsaka.
Kati panayye sankhàràti
Tayo me àvuso Visàkha sankhàrà, kàyasankhàro
vacãsankhàro cittasankhàroti,
Katamo panayye kàyasankhàro, katamo vacãsankhàro
katamo cittasankhàroti.
Assàsapassàsà kho àvuso Visàkha kàyasankhàro.
vitakkavicàrà vacãsankhàro, sa¤¤a ca vedanà ca cittasankhàroti
Kasmà panayye assàsapassàsà kàyasankhàro, kasmà 
vittakkavicàrà vacãsankhàro kasmà sa¤¤à ca vedanà ca
cittasankhàroti.
Assàsapassàsà kho àvuso Visàkha, kàyikà, ete dhammà 
kàyapañibaddhà. Tasmà assàsapassàsà kàyasankhàro. Pubbe kho 
àvuso Visàkha, vitakketvà vicàretvà pacchà vàca§ bhindati. Tasmà 
vitakkavicàrà vacãsankhàro. Sa¤¤à ca vedanà ca cetasikà. Ete 
dhammà cittapañibaddhà. Tasmà sa¤¤à ca vedanà ca 
cittasankhàroti.
CålaVedalla S.M.N.
But, lady, how many preparations are there? 
There are these three preparations, friend Visàkha, bodypreparation, speech-preparation, mind-preparation.
But which, lady, is body-preparation, which is speech-preparation, 
which is mind-preparation?
The in-breaths and out-breaths, friend Visàkha, are body 
preparation, thinking and pondering are speech preparation, 
perception and feeling are mind-preparation.
But why are in-breaths and out-breaths a body preparation, lady, 
why are thinking and pondering a speech-preparation, why are 
perception and feeling a mind-preparation?

19 20
Perception and feeling are, likewise, an incipient stage in mental 
activity (or thought activity). With sa¤¤à (perception) and 
vedanà (feeling) the thinking apparatus is already buzzing. 
Sa¤¤à strikes the cognitive note and vedanà the affective note, 
which prepare (or pave the way for) cetanà (intention) the 
conative. The fact that sa¤¤à and vedanà are cetasika and 
cittapatibaddha of course needs emphasis (and perhaps reemphasis too, for Venerable ¥àõavãra misses this point as well).
Visàkhas questioning on these subliminal levels of bodily, verbal 
and mental preparation is a preamble to his next question regarding 
the cessation of perception and feeling. Hence the above discussion 
is a spotlight on the infrastructure of Preparations  Sankhàrà.
27. Kàyasankhàrà  Vacãsankhàrà  Manosankhàrà
Bodily, verbal and mental preparations that are ethically 
significant, and come under the purview of kamma are referred to 
as Kàyasankhàrà.,Vacãsankhàrà and Manosankhàrà - mano 
signifying ideational activity. These preparations which, unlike 
those discussed above (26) are grosser, more articulate, and more 
deliberate, are pu¤¤àbhisankhàrà, apu¤¤àbhisankhàrà and 
àne¤jàbhisankhàrà (i.e. meritorious, demeritorious and 
imperturbable specific preparations).
As a rule, the prefix abhi is added either to the noun 
(abhisankhàrà) or to the verb (abhisankharoti) to signify these 
special categories of preparations. If, for instance, in breathing and 
out breathing are the warming-up of the machine, with 
pu¤¤àbhisankhàrà and apu¤¤àbhisankhàrà an ethical 
preparation is made for progress and regress in the sa§saric 
context. These preparations go a long way and are the inheritance, 
as it were, of beings (……. kammadàyàdà sattà  Kukkuravatiya 
S.M.N.I 389). Ane¤jàbhisankhàrà which pertain to jhànic 
realms, are more or less like the rotation of a top which keeps it 
upright and (apparently) imperturbable.
Kamma has been defined in terms of  cetanà or intention.
Friend Visàkha, in-breaths and out-breaths are bodily, these things 
are bound up with the body, that is why in-breaths and out-breaths 
are a body-preparation. First, friend Visàkha, having thought and 
pondered, afterwards one breaks into speech; that is why 
thinking and pondering are a speech preparation. Perception and 
feeling are mental; these things are bound up with the mind. That is 
why perception and feeling are mind-preparation.
Here the term preparation seems more at-home than 
formation, determination or process as a rendering for 
sankhàro. (Note the singular)
To begin with, the in-breaths and out-breaths are a body-preparation 
not because they form or determine the body, but because they 
prepare the body for more gross forms of activity which assert self. 
This is the most elementary warming-up  the springing up into 
life  of this machine  the body. One knows how much the 
rhythm of breathing is connected with all forms of strenuous 
physical exercise. This basic Heaving and Sighing which an 
asthma-patient will tell you is so painful a process, puts you on a 
see-saw of preparation. Visàkhas question, But why are in-breaths 
and out-breaths body preparation? is not out of place, as very often 
respiration is taken as a matter-of-course. This backstage 
preparation for more gross forms of activity is generally 
underestimated or taken for granted. Hence the emphasis that they 
are bodily, and are bound up with the body.
Thinking and pondering is the basic preparation for what comes out 
as speech. Here too, Visàkhas counter-question is apposite. 
Vitakka-vicàrà is sub-vocal speech - so to say, i.e. a back-stage 
preparation for the social-function of breaking-out into speech. 
The specific explanation of Dhammadinnà Therã that first having 
thought and pondered afterwards one breaks into speech, clearly 
indicates that it is a pre-paration. This point has been overlooked 
by Venerable ¥àõavãra Thera who rhetorically poses the question 
Is thinking and pondering verbal action? For him, the emphasis on 
the words pubbe (first) and pacchà (afterwards) signifies a 
relationship of determination (See - Notes on Dhamma p.5. 
Private edition, Sept: 1963)

Cetanàham bhikkhave kamma§ vadàmi. Cetayitvà kamma§ 
karoti kàyena vàcàya manasà  A.N.III 415.
Intention, monks, I say, is action. Intending one does action by 
body, by speech, by mind.
The term sankhàrà, however, has its own points of emphasis. If, 
by cetanà one is gathering or piling up the kamma heritage, by 
sankhàrà one is making preparations to reap the specific good or 
bad results of his actions. A clear illustration of these points of 
emphasis in the context of Kamma and its results, is provided by the 
following reference:
  
Micchàdiññhikassa purisapuggalassa micchàsankappasa, 
micchàvàcassa micchàkammantassa micchà àjãvassa 
micchàvàyàmassa micchàsatissa micchàsamàdhissa 
micchà¤àõassa micchàvimuttissa ya¤ceva kàyakamma§ 
yathàdiññhi samatta§ samàdinna§, ya¤ca vacãkamma§ 
yathàdiññhi samatta§ samàdinna§ ya¤ca manokamma§ 
yathadiññhi samatta§ samàdinnam yà ca cetanà yà ca 
patthanà yo ca paõidhi ye ca sankhàrà sabbe te dhammà 
aniññhàya akantàya amanàpàya ahitaya dukkhàya 
sa§vattanti. Ta§ kissa hetu. Diññhihi bhikkhave pàpikà
A.N.V.212
Monks, for a man, a person, who has wrong view, wrong thinking, 
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, 
wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration, wrong knowledge, 
wrong release, whatsoever bodily action is undertaken and 
carried out in accordance with that view, whatsoever verbal 
action is undertaken and carried out in accordance with that view, 
whatsoever mental action is undertaken and carried out in 
accordance with that view, whatsoever intention, whatsoever 
aspiration, whatsoever determination and whatsoever 
preparations there may be  all those states conduce to what is 
unpleasant, not delightful, not agreeable not beneficial  to what is 
painful. What is the cause of that? Monks, the view is bad.
The sequence of mental states mentioned here, is also 
noteworthy. While cetanà (intention) imparts the ethical 
significance to the whole trend, patthanà (aspiration) and 
paõidhi (determination) decide its direction and aim, and 
sa§khàrà (preparation)  as it were - gives it the stream-line.
In respect of these ethically significant sankhàras which are in 
some way or other prefixed with abhi, the term formations is 
not strong enough as a rendering, due to its shade of passivity. 
Even the words cetanà and sa¤cetanà are sometimes coupled 
with words meaning fabrication, construction or preparation, 
(ceteti pakappeti abhisankhata§ abhisa¤cetayita§). As 
such the dynamic significance of the word sankhàra must never 
be ignored.
28. Saïkhàrà and Dhammà
sabbe saïkhàrà aniccàti
yadà pa¤¤àya passati
atha nibbindatã dukkhe
esa maggo visuddhiyà
sabbe saïkhàrà dukkhàti
yadà pa¤¤àya passati
atha nibbindatã dukkhe
esa maggo visuddhiyà
sabbe dhammà anattàti
yadà pa¤¤àya passati
atha nibbindatã dukkhe
esa maggo visuddhiyà
Dhp. Vv 277-279
All preparations are impermanent. When one sees this with 
wisdom, then one becomes disgusted with suffering. This is the 
path to Purity.
All preparations are suffering. When one sees this with 
wisdom, then one becomes disgusted with suffering. This is the 
path to Purity.
21 22

All things are not-self. When one sees this with wisdom, then one 
becomes disgusted with suffering. This is the path to Purity.
These three verses touching upon the Tilakkhana (the three 
characteristics of existence), have posed a question to many. Why  
it is often asked, is it that sankhàrà is used only with reference to 
anicca and dukkha and the word dhamma is introduced with 
reference to anattà? What is the logic behind this? 
True enough, to many, it is simply a question of logic, but the value 
of these three verses lies in the fact that they state a psychological 
necessity, in the interests of nibbidà (disgust or 
disenchantment)
Even to the average man or woman conscious of the grosser aspects 
of sankhàrà (preparations) it may appear that life is an endless 
series of preparations. But the pity of it is that to them these 
preparations seem so essence-tial, and pithy like the plantain 
trunk which simulates something substantial. So all the routine 
make-ups concoctions and preparations are recognized as part 
and parcel of life. Variety is the spice of life, they say. For them, the 
rat-race promises so much pep, that sans preparations, life seems 
dull. On the debris of one shattered Castle-of Hope they will 
readily build another. And for every castle built on this earth, a 
thousand or more are built in-the-AIR.
But there comes a time, at least to some of them  to take stock of the 
situation they are in. Either it is a case of yonisomanasikàra 
(radical reflection) aroused in the clarity of saddhà on hearing the 
Dhamma, or it is some rude shock in life, like loss of the beloved as 
in the cases of Patàcàrà and Kisà Gotamã. Bereavement gives such a 
powerful object lesson in impermanence and suffering that one is 
either driven to near insanity or to the search for deliverance 
(sammohavepakkàha§ bhikkhave dukkha§ vadàmi 
pariyeññhivepakka§ và A.N.III 416).  Monks, suffering, I say, has 
either delusion or search as its result ……). If one is fortunate 
enough to come across the Dhamma at this juncture, one stands a 
better chance to make a good start.
23 24
The important point, however, is to see that all preparations are 
impermanent, and it calls for clarity and wisdom to see this. It is 
said that preparations are the most subtle form of suffering, even 
as hunger is the subtlest of diseases.
Jighacchàparamà rogà
sankhàraparamà dukhà
eta§ ¤atvà yathàbhåtam
nibbàna§ parama§ sukha§
Dhp. V. 203
Hunger is the farthest of disease. Preparations are the farthest in 
the case of sufferings. Knowing this as it really is, Nibbàna is the 
highest bliss.
Just as much as hunger is taken for granted as part and parcel of 
life and is even prided on with the euphemism appetite, so are 
sankhàras or preparations particularly those subliminal levels 
discussed above (26). If ever the question is raised why the word 
dhamma is not introduced into the first or the second verse quoted 
above, one has only to point out that the range of suffering extends 
only up to sankhàra as Dhp. V 203 specifically states. (Note that 
the word parama as expressing the upper limit can mean either 
highest or worst according to the context.) It is, as though, 
Dukkha as distress has coincided with the element of stress in 
sankhàra.
Then what is the provocation for looking upon all dhammas as 
anattà? it may be asked. Now, it is said that even pre  Buddhistic 
sages and as a matter of fact, âlàra Kàlàma and Uddaka Ràmaputta 
had reached the higher Jhanic levels of àki¤ca¤¤àyatana (sphere 
of Nothingness) and nevasà¤¤à nàsa¤¤àyatana (sphere of 
Neither Perception nor Non-perception). The Buddha, soon after 
his Enlightenment even thought of them as the fittest persons to be 
taught the Dhamma first, (see Ariyapariyesana S.M.N.) because 
they had  already  become  acquainted  with  the  sublime  levels of

down sankhàra, thereby ending all suffering, as the expressions 
sankhàråpasama and dukkhåpasama suggest. (Note that the 
word upasama is suggestive of something more dynamic than a 
determinant), The giving  up, the letting  go thus becomes a 
matter of necessity. Hence, instead of resorting to a legerdemain, 
the Buddha plainly asks us to face the problem of anattà fairly and 
squarely and to assiduously develop anattasa¤¤à (perception of 
not self) from the very outset in as comprehensive a manner as 
possible. Sammàdiññhi has always to be in the vanguard 
(sammàdiññhi pubbaïgamà hoti  Mahàcattàrisaka S.M.N.) and 
not inveigled from behind. One of the most effective formulas 
recommended by the Buddha for constant reflection on the anattà 
characteristic, not only dispenses with the need for a lever but on 
the contrary goes so far as to exhaust the latencies to the conceit of 
I and mine. It occurs in a number of suttas in the Canon. The 
Mahà Puõõama Sutta, for instance, introduces it as follows:
Katha§ pana bhante jànato katha§ passato imasmi¤ca 
savi¤¤àõake kàye bahiddhà ca sabbanimittesu aha§kàra  
mama§kàra mànànusayà na hontãti.
Ya§ ki¤ci, bhikkhu, råpa§ atãtànàgatapaccuppanna§ ajjhatta§ 
và bahiddhà và o¯àrika§ và sukhuma§ và hãnam và paõãtam và 
ya§ dūre santike và, sabba§ råpa§ neta§ mama nesohamasmi na 
meso attàti, evameta§ yathàbhåta§ sammappa¤¤àya passati. 
yà kàci vedanà ………. 
yà kàci sa¤¤à ………. 
ye keci saïkhàrà ……….
ya§ ki¤ci viïïàõaü ………. na meso attàti.
Eva§ kho bhikkhu jànato eva§ passato imasmi¤ca savi¤¤àïake 
kàye bahiddhà ca sabbanimittesu aha§kàra mama§kàra 
mànànusayà na hontãti.
M.N.III 18f
25 26
 sankhàrà. Blinded with self-bias, those sages, however, were 
unable to distinguish sankhàràs as such and hence they clung to 
those mental phenomena as states of some permanent soul. These, 
therefore, become the wherewithal for fresh preparations. 
Unless one lets go of these dhammas, there is no escape from 
sankhàras  from preparations, stress and distress. Like a cancer, 
sankhàras have so blighted this existence that they thrive on the 
minutest trace of a thing viewed as self. Ignorance and craving 
regarding things presented to consciousness have to be done away 
with, in order that the seemingly unending process of preparations 
(sankhàrasantati) and with it Dukkha  may cease. To see all 
dhammas as not self, is therefore a necessity. Without that insight, 
whether one likes it or not, sankhàras will go on, true to the simile of 
the man forcibly and unwillingly dragged towards a pit of embers, 
given as an illustration of the nature of manosa¤cetanà (see S.N.II 
11). So powerfully insatiable is craving that the Samsàric individual 
is for ever inclined (nati) like the Leaning Tower-of Pisa.
In Venerable ¥ànaviras explanation of the relevance of these three 
verses to the problem of sankhàras, a reversal of the order is 
evident. The important word sankhàras is defined as something 
upon  which- something else- depends  a determinant or a 
determination (Notes on Dhamma p.10) and the word dhamma 
as all things dependent upon other things.
With this definition, the seeing of the impermanent and suffering 
nature of sankhàras becomes a manoeuvre of levering out the notion 
of self  an indirect method to see dhammas as impermanent. As 
he puts it - he must first see that this thing is dependent upon or is 
determined by, some other thing, and he must then see that this other 
thing, this determination or sankhàra is impermanent. When he sees 
that the other thing, the sankhàra, on which this thing depends, is 
impermanent, he sees that this thing too, must be impermanent, and 
he no longer regards it as self (ibid).
The Path to Purity is not that circuitous. The giving up of 
dhammas  by  seeing  them as  not self is a  question  of  calming

looked upon with the conceit am (asmimàna) as so many I-dos 
and my-doings (aha§kàra mama§kàra - lit. I-ing and mineing), the insight into not self, as it deepens, reveals that 
preparations are simply conditioned by or are dependent upon 
Ignorance (avijjà). Hence it is that with right understanding of the 
nature of this conceit, one puts an end to suffering (sammà 
mànàbhisamayà antamakàsi dukkhassa ……..)
suddha§ dhammasamuppàda§
suddha§ sankhàra santati§
passantassa yathàbhåta§
na bhaya§ hoti gàmaõã.
  Adhimutta Thera-Thag
To one who sees as-it-is, the arising of pure phenomena, and the 
succession of pure preparations, there is no fear, O headman.
29. Heave!  and  sigh!
Supposing we sit after doing some strenuous work. We want calm 
and repose. We are tired of activity  of endless preparations. But it 
seems we cannot help breathing. As if to have done with even this 
laborious activity of our lungs, we take one d-e-e-p breath  like 
packing up into a bundle so many possible tiny breaths. That is, we 
heave to grab a moment of calm and repose even from this tedious 
work of breathing. But do we really get what we want? No. We 
have to let go of the hard-won stock of air now choking our lungs. 
Hoping to get the longed-for repose at the other end of the see-saw, 
we release the breath and empty out our lungs. But do we find calm 
and repose here  in this sigh of relief? No. We have to breathe 
again, and again. How convulsively we grasped (or gasped) for 
breath! But how we have to give it up perforce!
And sowe go on and on
in and out.
27 28
But lord, in what manner should one know and see so that there 
come to be in him no underlying tendencies to conceive this body 
with its consciousness and all its external signs in terms of I and 
mine?
Any kind of form, monk, whatever, whether past, future or present, 
in oneself or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or 
near, he sees all of it with right wisdom as it is, thus: This is not 
mine, this am I not, this is not my self
Any kind of feeling whatever …………………
Any kind of perception whatever …………………
Any kind of preparations whatever …………………
Any kind of consciousness whatever …………………
 ………………… this is not my self.
It is when a man knows and sees thus, monk, that there come to be 
no underlying tendencies in him to conceive this body with its 
consciousness and all external signs in terms of I and mine.
One who effectively wields this formula in combating the notion of 
self, is compared at A.N.II 202 to a skilled archer (i) who shoots afar 
(dåre pàtã) (ii) by the flash of lightning (akkhaõavedhã) and (iii) 
rends asunder even a huge body (mahato kàyassa padàletà). That 
is to say (i) he attains Right Concentration (sammàsamàdhi), (ii) 
becomes one of the Right View (sammàdiññhi) and (iii) attains to 
Right Freedom (sammàvimutti), with which the huge mass of 
ignorance is rent asunder.
This kind of reflection which sweeps the entire range of dhammas 
including possible future ones, and puts the imprint, This is not 
mine, This am I not, This is not my self in such a way as to 
prevent breeding fresh preparations (sankhàras) reveals the 
immense importance of the line sabbe dhammà anattàti. It is as if 
the raw material for preparations is condemned well in advance 
to stem the gushing currents of craving. The insight into not self 
dispels the darkness of ignorance which sustains the make-up 
activities  of  sankhàras.  Whereas   earlier preparations  were

One-end Second-end Middle Seamstress  
1.  Contact Arising of 
contact 
Cessation of 
contact 
Craving 
 
 
2.  Past Future Present Craving 
 
3.  Pleasant 
     feeling 
Unpleasant 
feeling 
Neither 
unpleasant nor 
pleasant 
feeling 
 
Craving 
4.   Name  Form Consciousness Craving 
 
5.  Six internal 
     sense bases 
Six external 
sense bases 
 
Consciousness Craving 
6.  Personality Arising of 
Personality 
Cessation of 
Personality 
Craving 
 
29 30
  Isipatana. Quoting the verse in question, those Elder monks raised 
the point:
What, friends, is one end what is the second end, what is the 
middle and who is the seamstress?
As many as six interpretations were offered by individual monks, 
each of which, they claimed, is sufficient admonition for one to 
make and end of suffering here and now. Then at the suggestion of 
another monk, they all approached the Buddha and presented him 
with the report of this symposium to get his ratification.
The Buddha ratified them all as well-said each in its own way, but 
explained what exactly he meant when he uttered that verse to 
Metteyya. His explanation happened to coincide with the first 
interpretation that came up at the symposium. Conveniently 
tabulated, the six different interpretations are as follows:
   We HEAVE and SIGH
aniccà vata sankhàrà
uppàdavayadhammino
uppajjitvà nirujjhanti
tesa§ våpasamo sukho
Transient indeed are preparations
To rise, to fall, their nature is
They arise only to pass away
Bliss it is to calm them down.
Vayadhammà sankhàrà
Appamàdena sampàdetha
Preparations are subject to decay.
Accomplish your TASK without delay,
-Mahà Parinibbàna S.,D.N.
30. The Shuttle  free Mind
There seems to be a seam, but there is no seam
Yo ubhante viditvàna
majjhe mantà na lippati
ta§ bråmi mahàpurisoti
Sodha sibbanimaccagà
-Tissametteya S.Sn.
He who having known both ends, with wisdom does 
not get attached to the middle, him I call a Great Man. 
He has gone beyond the seamstress in this world.
This verse which was uttered by the Buddha in reply to a question 
that occurred to the Brahmin ascetic Tissametteya, gets an 
interesting Canonical commentary at Anguttara Nikaya. III. 399. It 
was the topic of discussion in an assembly of monks at Deer Park in

31 32
A sewing-machine illustrates the seamstress at work. As the needle 
pierces through one fold making the contact on the second fold, the 
shuttle hastens to make a stitch (in time), lest there be a cessation 
of contact in between. And so the needle comes up with the same 
thread to go down again and again - stitch after stitch. The shuttle 
works unseen, connecting up the stitches as long as its own load of 
cotton lasts.
Supposing some fine day the shuttle runs out of its load of cotton 
and is not replenished in time. What will happen as the machine 
goes into action? The needle will pierce through one fold, giving a 
semblance of contact to the second fold, but as it comes up, there 
is a cessation in the middle-which may pass unnoticed for a while by 
one unacquainted with the mechanism. The needle seems to work 
alright for him  as before  and apparently, there are the stitches too 
to connect up. But those who KNOW, know what has happened. 
There seems to be a seam, but there is no seam.
Now, as for the seamstress  craving, she has the following 
qualifications, according to the Buddha.
yàyà§ taõhà ponobhavikà nandiràgasahagatà
 tatratatràbhinandinã ………… (Saccavibhanga S.M.N. etc)
And that craving which is the perpetrator of re-becoming which is 
allied to delight and lust, and which rejoices now-here now-there.
In this particular context too, craving is defined in all the six 
interpretations with the words …. tanhà hi na§ sibbati tassa 
tesseva bhavassa abhinibbattiyà … (……. for it is craving that 
stitches him so that he is born into this and that state of existence 
…) In the formula of Pañicca samuppàda, craving is the condition 
for 'grasping' (upàdàna) which in its turn conditions becoming or 
existence (bhava).
So the seamstress is fully qualified for her job. Whether it is a case 
of contact or any of the other dualities mentioned in the five 
subsequent explanations, the seamstress sees to it that a 
recurrence is maintained (ponobhavikà) by linking up the two and 
introducing delight and lust (nandiràgasahagatà). Notoriously 
licentious (tatratatràbhinandinã) she reaches out (upàdàna) and 
even outreaches  to bring about ever new states of existence.
The middle represents the domain of the s-l-u-r where 
Ignorance lurks to give a spur  hence, avijjà paccayà 
sankhàrà. Whether it is a cessation of a specific contact or any of 
the other members in the middle (i.e. present, neither-unpleasantnor-pleasant feeling, consciousness, cessation-of-personality), the 
usual tendency is to ignore - to slur-over. When this habit of 
slurring-over is carried on for aeons and aeons, a latency or an 
underlying tendency (anusaya) is built up, which is difficult to 
root out. But, luckily it is in this very domain that the secret of 
emancipation lies. Perhaps the best illustration of this principle is 
found in the Cåla Vedalla Sutta. (M.N.) in the form of a dialogue 
between Dhammadinnà Therã and Visàkha Upàsaka. It concerns 
the inter-relation between the three grades of feeling -pleasant 
unpleasant, neither unpleasant nor pleasant.
I
Sukhà panayye vedanà ki§ sukhà ki§ dukkhà dukkhà
vedanà ki§ dukkhà ki§ sukhà adukkhamasukhà vedanà
ki§ sukhà ki§ dukkhàti
Sukhà kho àvuso Visàkha vedanà ñhitisukhà 
vipariõamadukkhà dukkhàvedanà ñhitidukkhà 
vipariõàmasukhà adukkhamasukhà vedanà 
¤àõasukhà a¤¤àõadukkhàti.
But, lady, in what respect is pleasant feeling pleasant and in what 
respect is it unpleasant? In what respect is unpleasant feeling 
unpleasant, and in what respect is it pleasant? In what respect is 
neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling pleasant and in what 
respect is it unpleasant?
Friend Visàkha, pleasant feeling is pleasant in respect of presence 
and unpleasant in respect of change. Unpleasant feeling is

33 34
unpleasant in respect of presence and pleasant in respect of change. 
Neither unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling is pleasant in respect of 
knowledge and unpleasant in respect of ignorance.
         II
Sukhàya panayye vedanàya kimanusayo anuseti, 
dukkhà ya vedanà ya kimanusa yo anuseti 
adukkhamasukhàya vedanàya kimanusayo anusetãti.
Sukhàya kho àvuso Visàkha vedanàya ràgànusayo 
anuseti, dukkhàya vedanàya pañighànusayo anuseti 
adukkhamasukhàya vedanàya avijjànusayo anusetãti.
But, lady, underlying tendency to what underlies in the case of 
pleasant feelings? Underlying tendency to what underlies in the 
case of the unpleasant feeling? Underlying tendency to what 
underlies in the case of the neither-unpleasant nor pleasant feeling?
Friend, Visakha, the underlying tendency to lust underlies in the 
case of pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency to resistance 
underlies in the case of the unpleasant feeling. The underlying 
tendency to ignorance underlies in the case of neither unpleasant 
nor pleasant feeling
III
Sukhàya panayye vedanàya ki§ pañibhàgoti
Sukhàya kho àvuso Visàkha vedanàya dukkhà vedanà pañibhàgoti
 Dukkhàya panayye vedanàya ki§ pañibhàgoti
 Dukkhàya kho àvuso Visàkha vedanàya sukhà vedanà pañibhàgoti
 Adukkhamasukhàya panayye vedanàya ki§ pañibhàgoti
Adukkhamasukhàya kho àvuso Visàkha vedanàya avijjà 
pañibhàgoti
 Avijjàya panayye ki§ pañibhàgoti
 Avijjàya kho àvuso Visàkha, vijjà pañibhàgoti
 Vijjàya panayye ki§ pañibhàgoti
Vijjàya kho àvuso Visàkha vimutti pañibhàgoti
Vimuttiyà panayye ki§ patibhàgoti
Vimuttiyà kho àvuso Visàkha nibbàna§ pañibhàgoti
Nibbànassa panayye ki§ pañibhàgoti
Accasaràvuso Visàkha pa¤ha§ nàsakkhi pa¤hàna§ pariyanta§ 
gahetu§. Nibbànogadham hi àvuso Visàkha brahmacariya§ 
nibbànaparàyaõa§ nibbàna pariyosàna§.
What is the counterpart of pleasant feeling, lady?
Friend Visàkha, unpleasant feeling is the counterpart of pleasant 
feeling.
What is the counterpart of unpleasant feeling, lady?
Friend Visàkha, pleasant feeling is the counterpart of unpleasant 
feeling.
What is the counterpart of neither unpleasant nor pleasant feeling, 
lady?
Friend Visàkha, ignorance is the counterpart of neither 
unpleasant nor pleasant feeling
What is the counterpart of ignorance, lady?
Friend Visàkha, knowledge is the counterpart of ignorance
What is the counterpart of knowledge, lady?
Friend Visàkha, deliverance is the counterpart of knowledge
What is the counterpart of deliverance, lady?
Friend Visàkha, Nibbàna is the counterpart of deliverance

35 36
What is the counterpart of Nibbàna, lady?
Friend Visàkha, you have pushed this line of questioning too far. 
You were not able to grasp the limit of questions. For, friend 
Visàkha, the Holy Life merges in Nibbàna, leads to Nibbàna, 
reaches its consummation in Nibbàna.
As this dialogue reveals, the neutrality, indifference and ignorance 
associated with the Middle in the context of feeling are transformed 
into knowledge, detachment and deliverance. The second line of the 
verse, majjhe mantà na lippati (with wisdom, does not get 
attached to the middle) is to the same effect. The Middle Path runs 
right through this domain of the S-L-U-R, transcending its 
limitations.
This anguished world swayed by contact (aya§ loko santàpajàto 
phassapareto– Ud. Nanda Vagga) slurs over each specific 
cessation of contact, which is conditionally arisen. For the 
worldling, the see-saw alternation is between pain and pleasure 
(see S.N.IV.208), and this makes him too busy to probe into the 
cessation of contact as such. The fact that it is just at this point that 
insight unfolds itself is best illustrated by the Nandakovàda Sutta 2
(M.N.) .
A similar slurring over is found in the case of the second 
interpretation where Past is One-end, Future the Second-end 
and Present is in the Middle. The Present is something elusive 
for the worldling hankering after the Past and yearning for the 
Future (see Bhaddekaratta S. M.N.). But here too it is the task of 
insight to discern the impermanence of the present phenomena 
without resort to a self-bias.
In the fourth and the fifth interpretations, consciousness occurs in 
the middle, as its conditionally arisen nature is often overlooked. Its 
role is taken for granted by the worldling engrossed in name-and 
form (nàmarupa) and in the six internal and external sense-bases 
(i.e the six senses and their respective objects). The magical illusion 
(màyà) of consciousness is to be comprehended.
In the sixth interpretation, the cessation of personality 
(sakkàyanirodha) stands in the middle. The worldling who finds 
himself leashed to a self like a dog to a post, does not realize that 
the ambit of his personality (sakkàyo) is confined to just the five 
Grasping-Groups. Nor does he realize that the cause of arising of 
his personality (sakkàyasamudayo) is desire (chanda). Hence 
the cessation of personality is for him tantamount to annihilation.
That is perhaps why the Brahmins steeped in Eternalism 
(sassatadiññhi) mistook the Buddha for a Nihilist pure and simple, 
and disparaged him. (See Alagaddåpama S. M.N.). A cessation of 
personality (sakkàyanirodho) which is not tantamount to 
annihilation will appear as a possibility only when one gets an 
insight into impermanence, suffering, and not-self.
If, then, by any one of the six methods outlined above, one 
dismisses the Seamstress  abandons craving  how will his 
mind function? As some seem to think nowadays, will he be 
reduced to a VEGETABLE? If all this time his mind had been 
Prepared (sankhata) what will be the Un-prepared mind like?
The Released mind (vimutta§ citta§) or Influx-free mind 
(anàsava§ citta§) is sometimes referred to as the mind gone to the 
state of non-preparation (visankhàragata§ citta§  Dhp v: 154). In 
at least one context it is called consciousness-not-having- beenprepared, set free. (Vi¤¤àõà§ anabhisaïkhacca vimutta§ S.N. 
III: 153). Consciousness which is non-manifestative (Vi¤¤àõà§ 
anidassana§  D.N.I 213 M. N.I 329) is yet another way of referring 
to it.
This is the SHUTTLE-FREE MIND. The machine appears to 
work as before. There are the apparent preparations. But there is 
no end-product as a prepared (sankhata). The Perfect One is 
released from the reckoning of preparations. Though his six 
senses come in contact with objects, there is no SHUTTLE to 
complete the stitch. In other words: There seems to be a seam but 
there is no seam ……….

37 38
i. Na kappayanti na purekkharonti
accantasuddhãtã nate vadanti
àdànagantha§ gathita§ visajja
àsa§ na kubbanti kuhi¤ci loke
Suddhaññhaka S. Sn.,
They fabricate not, they proffer not, nor do they hold on to a 
highest purity, as a view. Letting go of the knotty tangle of 
grasping, they form no desire anywhere in this world.
ii. Na me hoti ahosinti
bhavissanti na hoti me
sankhàrà vibhavissanti 
tattha kà paridevanà
Adhimutta Thera-Thag.
It does not occur to me I was
Nor does it occur to me I will be
Preparations will perish,
What is there to lament?
iii. Suddha§ dhammasamuppàda§
suddha§ sankhàrasantatim
passantassa yathàbhåta§
na bhaya§ hoti gà§aõi
-ibid.
To one who sees as-it-is, the arising of pure phenomena and the 
succession of pure preparations, there is no fear, O! headman.
31. Attend to your Ins and Outs  until the In-lines fade away into 
Out-lines.
i. Tiõakaññhasama§ loka§
yadà pa¤¤àya passati
mamatta§ so asa§vinda§
natthi meti na socati
Adhimutta Thera-Thag.
When one sees with wisdom, the world as comparable to grass and 
twigs, experiencing no mine-ness, one does not lament: O! I have 
nothing!
ii. Kadà nu kaññhe ca tiõe latà ca
khandhe ime ha§ amite ca dhamme
ajjhattikàneva ca bàhirànica
sama§ tuleyya§ tadida§ kadà me
Tàlapuña Thera-Thag.
When shall I weigh, as equal, twigs, grass and creepers  these 
aggregates and countless things internal as well as external Ý O! 
When will that be of me?
(For the mode-of-approach, see Mahà Hatthipadopama Sutta 
and Mahà Ràhulovàda Sutta of the Majjhima Nikàya)
32. I. Dancing on a frying-pan.
As one of the four vipallàsas (perversions) anicce niccasa¤¤à 
(perception of permanence in the impermanent) is to be 
systematically counteracted with aniccasa¤¤à (perception of 
impermanence). The perversion prevails at three levels  sa¤¤à 
(sense-perception), citta (thought) and diññhi (view).
Ignorance or ignoring of the disintegrating nature of the sankhata, 
leads to chronic delusion (moha) with its twin feelers attachment 
(ràga) and aversion (patigha). Thus curiosity, love and hate 
obsess the groping worldlings.
The Sankhata-facade has to be penetrated through with the 
Ariyan penetrative wisdom which sees the rise and fall (…… 
udayatthagàminiyà pa¤¤àya ariyàya nibbedhikàya). 
Bhavanirodho sacchikàtabbo Cessation of becoming is 
something to be realized. What prevents its realization is tanhà 
ponobhavikà  craving which makes for re-becoming. With delight

39 40
and lust it connects up and obscures the fact of cessation by 
delighting now-here now-there, like dancing on a frying pan. 
Hence it is the nibbidà viràga (disenchantment and dispassion) 
regarding the present that automatically lays bare the cessation of 
saïkhàras which make up the facade.
Råpa§ kho ânanda, anicca§ sankhata§ 
p a ñ i c c a s a m u p p a n n a §  k h a y a d h a m m a §  
vayadhamma§ viràgadhamma§ nirodhadhamma§. 
Tassa nirodhà nirodhoti vuccati ……….. Vedanà 
…….…… sa¤¤à ………… sankhàrà……… 
vin¤àõam kho ânanda, anicca§ ……
S.N.III. 24
Form, ânanda, is impermanent, prepared, dependently arisen, of a 
nature to waste away, pass-away, fade away and cease. By such 
ceasing, is there said to be cessation. Feeling…… Perception …... 
Preparations….. Consciousness, ânanda, is impermanent ……...
II. Take a peep into your private museum where the relics of 
yesterdays treasured possessions and status symbols lie.
33. Phantasmagoria
Yesterday = last nights dream
Tomorrow = tonights dream
Today = a day-dream
 
34. Old-age  a caricature of Youth
 
35. Bale out! No S.O.S.
I si¤ca bhikkhu ima§ nàva§
 sittà te lahumessati
 hitvà ràga¤ca dosa¤ca
 tato nibbàna mehisi
-Dhp. v. 369
Bale out this ship, O! monk. Emptied it will sail lightly for you. 
Giving up lust and hate, you will then arrive at Nibbàna.
II. From EI Dorado  (A parable)
A steamer is returning from EI Dorado with a heavy cargo of gold 
nuggets in its hold. Adorning its cabin is a vast array of exquisite 
wood carvings worth a fortune.
Still in mid-ocean, it runs out of coal, Not a breath of wind to unfurl 
the sails. When every available piece of wood had become 
firewood, the wood carvings too follow suit to go up in smoke.
The ship is now moving and the sailors heave a sigh of relief. But 
then comes a Titanic disaster. Just when land hove in sight, the ship 
runs on rocks.
Water seeps in fast. No way to seal the damaged keel. Only the fate 
of the sailors looks sealed.
S.O.S Save-our-souls they signal in vain. Save our (Golden) 
Souls!
Bale out. Dump the gold into the sea! Some one suggests. What? 
Dump all this precious gold into the sea? the others retort. We 
would rather die.
Water gushes in. Now-or-never. As a last resort they agree to let 
go of the gold. And so the precious gold safely reached the bottom 
of the sea, and the sailors, eventually, the safety of dry land……… 
Where were the sailors born?
 Where will they die?
Where was that gold born?
 Where will it die?
Where were the carvings born?
 Where will they die?
Where were the cravings born
 There they all die.

41 42
36. If everything happens the way we want, then this is not Sa§sàra
37. When things look too rosy there is a danger of a red coming in.
38. Make an appointment with disappointment - then you will never meet 
with it.
39. When Past and Future crowd out the passage of the present, 
thoughts cannot move in single file.
40. Sankhàras are life-situations measured out in thought.
41. See the four elements in the melting-pot.
42. Your biography is being filmed for you - even before it is written.
43. When one fully understands that one is acting, one is no longer 
acting.
44. When one becomes fully aware that one is reacting, one is no longer 
reacting.
45.  Life looks such a formidable sum we are set to work out for 
ourselves, with all its numerous additions and subtractions, 
divisions and multiplications, until we come to the last step:  
multiply by NOUGHT
Su¤¤ato loka§ avekkhassu
mogharàja sadà sato
attànudiññhim åhacca
eva§ maccutaro siyà
eva§ loka§ avekkhanta§
maccuràjà na passati
-Sn. V. 1119
Look upon the world as void, Mogharàja,
And mindful ever, uproot
The lingering view of self
Thus will you cross the realm of Death,
For, the king of Death sees him not
Who thus looks upon the World (as void)
46. I. The Elusive Gem
(A moral from Ummagga Jataka)
King Vedeha was informed that there is a gem in the pond by the 
city-gate. He consulted one of his advisers, Senaka, as to the means 
of getting it. As suggested by the latter the pond was emptied of its 
water and when they failed to find the gem, Senaka got the men to 
take even the mud out. Still, the gem could not be found. But once 
the pond got filled again, the elusive gem was visible there.
Then the king sought the help of his youngest adviser Bodhisatta 
Mahosadha, who agreed to solve the problem. He came to the pond 
and had a look, and understood that the gem is not in the pond but 
on the palm tree by the bank. He got one of the men to immerse a 
bowl into the water and showed that the gem is visible there too. 
Where then, is the gem? asked the King. It is in the crows nest 
on the palm tree said Mahosadha, Send someone up and get it 
down. And so it was got down and given to the king. It was only the 
reflection that they had sighted in the pond. They had failed to 
reflect wisely on the REFLECTION!
Anattani attamàni§
passa loka§ sedevaka§
niviññha§ nàmaråpasmi§
ida§ saccanti ma¤¤ati
-Sn. V 756 Dvyatànupassanà S.
Just see a world! with all its gods
Fancying a self, where naught, exists
Entrenched in name and form it holds
The conceit that this is the truth.
So it is the case with the self-image, nàma-råpa, reflected on 
consciousness. Many were the philosophers who traced it 
(metaphysically) to the bottom of the pond of consciousness. But 
they could not fathom it, for their perspective was wrong 
(ayoniso manasikàra). They, too had failed to reflect wisely on 
the reflection.

43 44
Those who craved for the gem ignored the nest as external 
because the precious gem shined so internal though both were 
external, as a matter of fact. Only the Bodhisatta adjusted his 
perspective so as to see the gem and the nest as-they-are i.e mere 
reflections of the external.
Likewise, only the Buddha, of all religious teachers adjusted his 
perspective in such way as not to get entangled in the reflection  
Nàma råpa. As he put it: tadapi phassapaccayà   that too is due 
to contact (Brahmajàla S. D.N.). With his keen insight which was 
not blocked by any precious object (anàrammaõa§) he 
discovered that the pond of consciousness has the same crystal 
clear, lucid limpid nature it always had  for  the keen sighted.
II.  Some reflections on seeing the REFLECTION
i. Pa¤¤à bhàvetabbà
vi¤¤àõa§ pari¤¤eyya§
-Mahà Vedalla S. M.N.
Wisdom should be developed, consciousness should be 
comprehended.
ii. Vi¤¤àõa§ anidassana§
ananta§ sabbatopabha§
ettha àpo ca pañhavã
tejo vàyo na gàdhati
ettha dãgha¤ca rassa¤ca
aõu§ thåla§ subhàsubha§
ettha nàma¤ca råpa¤ca
asesa§ uparujjhati
vi¤¤àõassa nirodhena
ettheta§ uparujjhati
-Kevaóóha S. D.N.I. 213
Consciousness which is non-manifestative
Endless, lustrous on all sides
Here it is that earth and water
Fire and air no footing find
Here again are long and short,
Fine and coarse, pleasant, unpleasant
And name and form, all these are here
Cut off without exceptions
When consciousness does come to cease
All these are held in check herein.
iii. Yà ceva kho pana ajjhattikà pañhavidhàtu, yà ca bàhirà 
pañhavidhàtu, pañhavidhàturevesà ….
-Mahà Hatthipdopama S. M.N.
And whatever earth element that is in oneself and whatever earthelement that is external to oneself  it is just earth element itself.
iv. Passa§ naro dakkhiti nàmaråpa§
disvàna và ¤assati tàni meva
kàma§ bahu§ passatu appaka§ và
na tena suddhi§ kusalà vadanti
Mahà Viyåha S S.N.  908.
A seeing-man will see name and form, and having seen, he will 
know those alone. Verily, let him see much or less. Yet experts do 
not speak of purity thereby.
v. Kadà nu kaññhe ca……………
-(See above p 38.)
vi. Kodha§ jahe vippajaheyya màna§
sa¤¤ojana§ sabbamatikkameyya
ta§ nàmaråpasmi§ asajjamàna§
aki¤cana§ nànupatanti dukkhà.
-Dhp v. 211

45 46
Let one put wrath away, conceit abandon
And get well beyond all fetters as well.
That one by name and form untrammelled
And possessionless - no pains befall
vii. Pabhassaramida§ bhikkhave citta§ ta¤ca kho
àgantukehi upakkilesehi upakkiliññha§………
-A. N. I. 10
This mind, monks, is luminous, only, that it is defiled by 
extraneous defilements ……
47. Sa¤¤à tries to put the two-and-two together, but Sankhàrà see to it 
that the total is not four but five.
48. phassa is the apex of the sankhata-triangle.
49. Saïkhata: The element of artificiality in the word suggests 
simulation, pretension, and verisimilitude as illustrated by the five 
Canonical similes, mass of foam (form), water bubble (feeling), 
mirage (perception), plantain tree (preparations) and magical-illusion 
(consciousness).
50. Sankhàrà: The vibrant forces that impel, propel and compel the 
samsàric individual, may be put down to the tension created by an 
imagined relationship between an internal and an external sense base. 
It is like a rope strung up between two pegs. Hence saëàyatananirodha 
( c e s s a t i o n  o f  t h e  s i x  s e n s e - b a s e s )  b r i n g s  a b o u t  
sabbasamkhàrasamatha (stilling of all preparations). When the eye 
ceases, forms fade away (…….. cakkhu¤ca nirujjhati råpà ca 
virajjanti). 3 
(S.N. IV 98)
Knock off the eye, from the scene (or the seen) and forms will 
shrink into insignificance at the other end for lack of perspective.
51. Nàma-råpa: The delusion created by nàma-råpa as self image is 
like my imagining that the fellow appearing in the mirror. (i.e. my 
own reflection) is looking at me even when I turn my back on him.
To understand Pañicca Samuppàda is to become aware that the 
fellow looks at me, only when I care to look at the fellow.
………. ki§ pañicca? Phassa§ pañicca.
 Dependent on what? Dependent on contact.
All speculative attempts to catch-the-fellow-napping are 
misguided. Hence the Buddha bundled out all the 62 views in 
Brahmajàla Sutta (D.N.) with tadapi phassapaccayà  That too 
is due to contact
The advice to Bàhiya (Ud.) strikes at the root of this fundamental 
delusion.  …. in the seen, just the seen, ……. (…… diññhe 
diññhamaññam bhavissati ……)
Ii. Passa§ naro dakkhiti nàmaråpa§ ……
(See above p.44)
ii. Avijjànãvaraõassa bhikkhave bàlassa taõhàsampayuttassa 
evam aya§ kàyo samudàgato. Iti aya¤ceva kàyo bahiddhà ca 
nàmaråpa§ ittheta§ dvaya§. Dvaya§ pañãcca phasso 
salevàyatanàni yehi phuññho bàlo sukhadukkha§ 
pañisa§vediyati etesa§ và a¤¤atarena.
-S.N.II 23f
For the f o  o l monks, cloaked by ignorance and tied to craving, this 
body is wrought in this way. Thus there is this body, and name and 
form outside - thus this pair. Because of the pair, there is contact and 
just six spheres of sense. Touched by these or by one of them, the 
fool experiences pleasure and pain.
52. The Witchs Cauldron
Every little bit of experience becomes concocted in the Witchs 
cauldron of ones mind, due to minding (ma¤¤anà). So you are 
nearer Asankhata (Non-prepared, Non-concocted)  if you 
dont mind!

47 48
Ma¤¤amàno kho bhikkhave baddho Màrassa,
ama¤¤amàno mutto pàpimato…
S. N. IV. 2
Minding monks, one is bound by Màra, minding not, he is freed 
from the Evil One.
(ma¤¤anà = imagining in terms of I, and mine) 
53. The Power-House
You are being shown round a hydro-electric scheme, for the first 
time.
The guide takes you first to the vast reservoir overlooking the dam 
(Stage I). You wonder how this sleepy reservoir can give you 
something like electricity, but the guide explains to you that these 
calm and placid waters are channelled almost unseen into a tunnel 
through the hills, at some point in the reservoir (Stage II). Then you 
are taken further down and shown the four big pipe-lines which run 
towards the power-house at the other end of the tunnel (Stage III). 
You can also see now that last small pipe line which conveys all that 
vast stock of water into the power-house (Stage IV). Lastly, you are 
taken into the power house itself where you can see how that 
gushing current of water turns the huge turbine at a terrific speed to 
give you electricity (Stage V).
These five stages of the scheme are somewhat comparable to the 
five groups of grasping as sankhatasankhàrà or preparedpreparations, i.e. the pent-up vibrant forces that impel, propel 
and compel.
Stage I - The Grasping Group of Form
Stage II - The Grasping Group of Feeling 
Stage III - The Grasping Group of Perception
Stage IV - The Grasping Group of Preparations
Stage V - The Grasping Group of Consciousness
54. Watch the scenes on the eye-screen and listen to 
the beat of the ear-drum.
55. Many a battle is fought and won at the weakest point in your fortress.
56. Breathe  as if every breath were  our last  then you will never be 
breathless.
57. From the complex to the compound
The resolution of the perception-of-the-compact (ghanasa¤¤à) 
by developing the perception of the heap (ràsisa¤¤à) is a step in 
the passage from the complex to the compound. Every slight shift 
of focus is understood as a separate instance of perception  
however minute.
58. The Element-ary
This and that = Pañhavi, àpo, tejo, vàyo.
  (earth, water, fire, air)
So and So = Pañhavi, àpo, tejo, vàyo, àkàsa, vi¤¤àõa.
  (earth, water, fire, air, space, consciousness)
59. Sankhàrà  Ever-new, but Never-lasting
In this drama of LIFE you can never ask for a repeat 
performance. When once a scene is gone  it is gone, gone, gone 
forever.
……….… yàva¤cidaü bhikkhave alameva 
sabbasa§khàresu nibbinditu§ ala§ 
virajjitu§ ala§ vimuccitu§.
A.N.IV 102
So much so, monks, it is enough to get disgusted of all 
preparations, enough to get detached, enough to get released from 
them.

49 50
60. Sankhàre parato disvà hetujàte palokine
Having seen the preparations as alien, causally arisen and brittle 
…. (Sakulà Therã, Thig)
Life expends itself through sankhàrà  a pre-occupation with short- 
lived identifications (tammayatà) courting after-images.
61. Sankhàrà
No preparation is final and complete.
…….. aniccà bhikkhave sankhàrà addhuvà 
bhikkhave sankhàrà anassàsikà bhikkhave 
sankhàrà……..
…….. impermanent, monks, are preparations, unstable, monks, 
are preparations, unsatisfying, monks are preparations ……..
A.N.IV. 102
62. Let-go-ism:
To see sankhàras as circum  stantial,  not as substantial.
63. Non-identification (atammayatà)
To be like a brick in any wall.
64. A strip-tease for nibbidà-viràga (disenchantment  dispassion) 
Undress upto the skeleton!
(Stages: 1. headhairs  2. bodyhairs  3. nails  4. teeth  5. skin  
6. flesh  7. sinews)
65. How to be measure-less:
Strike off the bottom and be free from reckoning.
…. ya§ kho bhikkhu anuseti ta§ anumãyati, ya§
anu§ãyati, tena sa§kha§ gacchati
That which lies latent, monks, by that is one measured and that by 
which one is measured, by that is one reckoned.
66. T-w-a-n-g
The world is in a whirl, but the winding comes only with 
upàdàna  grasping!
Suppose two persons are trying to wind up some strands into a 
long long rope, and some mischief maker is keeping a tight hold at 
the middle, unseen by them. Somehow, the winding itself  queer 
enough - has started in the same direction from both ends, but to 
all appearance, a rope is being steadily made up owing to the tight 
hold at the middle. The two at either end are ignorant of the fact 
that their winding is at the same time an unwinding. The Rope, 
however, gets more and more tensed, taut and vibrant,
 
                                    T-w-a-n-g
The mischiefmaker suddenly lets go of his hold at the middle. 
Now, where is the Rope?
Was there a Rope in truth and fact?
Find the answer in the following quotes:
1. mu¤ca pure mu¤ca pacchato
majjhe mu¤ca bhavassa pàragå
sabbattha vimuttamànaso
na puna jàtijara§ upehisi
-Dhp. v. 348

Let go what has gone before
Let go that which comes after
Let go of the hold at the middle as well
And get well beyond all existence
Thus with mind released in every way
Thou comest never more to birth and decay.
2. Yassa pure ca pacchà ca
Majjhe ca natthi ki¤cana§
aki¤cana§ anàdàna§
tamaha§ bråmi bràhmaõa§
-Dhp. v. 421
Who has naught before or behind him
And naught in the middle to call his own
Who owns naught and to naught will cling
Him do I call a Brahmin.
67. One or Two?
Existence involves a duality which has to be transcended. The 
problem cannot be solved by grasping it as ONE, because by the 
very grasping, it becomes TWO. (See T-w-a-n-g above)
The moment you grasp the rope that is being whirled round with 
only a semblance of winding, it becomes a REAL rope with two 
ends. The result is stress and tension (Dukkha).
Upàdàna paccayà bhavo
dependent on grasping, existence
This winding is a deviation caused by ignorance. All this is notSUCH (sabba§ vitatha§ ida§  Uraga S. Sn)
The whirl of the world is the Norm (Tathatà  Suchness), where 
every winding is, at the same time, an un-winding.
Ya§ ki¤ci samudayadhamma§
sabba§ ta§ nirodhadhamma§
Whatever is of a nature to arise, all that is of a nature to cease.
Let-go  and you return to Suchness. This is the end of all stress 
and tension.
68. ânàpànasati
The long and the short of it
When one is able to be mindful of the entire process of in-breathing 
and out-breathing thus:-
I
       X          X
More details of the phenomenon of breathing will become 
apparent. At this point, a breakthrough in vipassanà may occur, as 
the rise and fall of breath is now clear. If the understanding of 
breath as long and short (I) is horizontal, its understanding as 
rise and fall is rather vertical (II).
II
    X
    X
51 52

The very uniformity of attention which negotiates the hitherto 
unseen bends (X) in the process, ensures greater calm, hence the 
next step  (calming down bodily preparations …. )
It is a RHYTHM that makes for CALM. One that goes DEEP as 
well.
69. SATI  memory or mindfulness or both?
The relation between memory and mindfulness is sometimes a 
point of controversy. While the Pali word sati denotes both, there 
is reluctance in some quarters to grant any connection between 
memory and mindfulness.
Suppose, instead of the term mindfulness we use a term like 
collectedness as the English equivalent for sati. Then there 
would not be such a wide gulf between the two meanings so well 
expressed by the Pali original. Memory, then, could be 
represented by recollectedness (cf. anussati  recollection), if 
verbal similarity is needed.
To be mindful is to be collected (i.e not-distracted see Oxford 
English Dictionary), and this has strict relevance to the present 
moment as required by the finer nuance of the term in its Buddhist 
usage. But the net result of this diligent practice of living with a 
collected-mind in the present moment is the ability to recall  to 
recollect  things done and said long ago (cirakatampi 
cirabhàsitampi sarità anussarità) in accordance with the standard 
definition of the Pali term in its generic sense.
So, after all, it is only the conceit behind the English term 
mindfulness, that obscured the whole issue.
70. Satipaññhàna:
An objective approach to understand the subjective in ones 
experience.
71. Asankhata  The Un-prepared
To be unprepared is to be prepared for anything.
72. Upàdàna paccayà bhavo
(dependent on grasping, existence)
WHAT you grasp
THAT you are.
The Purpose of Life
A misuse of the word? Excuse would be a better substitute, 
because there is no purpose that does not itself presuppose some 
form of life. All so-called purposes foisted on life by the worldling 
to brighten it up, are but mere excuses.
Buddhism faces squarely the utter hollowness of life when it 
equates it with Dukkha  the bitter truth (of suffering). According 
to its analysis, if one can speak of the purpose of life, it is none other 
than the endeavour to bring about the cessation of sa§sàric 
existence  the vicious circle. This is the only excuse that is 
justifiable.
**************
53 54

Appendix
1.   Athassa susira§ sãsa§
matthaluïgassa påritam
subhato na§ ma¤¤atã bàlo
avijjàya purakkhato
Vijaya S., Sn., v. 196
And the cavity of his skull is filled with 
brain-matter. The fool led by ignorance, 
thinks of it as beautiful.
2.   Evameva kho bhaginiyo yo nu kho eva§ vadeyya: 
cha hi khome ajjhattikà àyatanà aniccà, ya¤ca kho 
cha ajjhattike āyatane pañicca pañisa§vedeti 
sukha§ và dukkha§ và adukkhamasukha§ và ta§ 
nicca§ dhuva§ sassata§ aviparinàmadhammanti 
sammà nu kho so bhaginiyo vadamàno vadeyyàti. 
No heta§ bhante. 
Ta§ kissa hetu?
Tajjam tajja§ bhante paccaya§ pañicca tajjà tajjà 
vedanà uppajjanti, tajjassa tajjassa paccayassa 
nirodhà tajjà tajjà vedanà nirujjhanãti.
Nandakovàda S., M.N.
So too, sisters, would anyone speak rightly who spoke thus: 
These six internal spheres are impermanent, but that feeling, 
dependent on the six internal spheres, which I feel as pleasant, 
unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant, is permanent, 
everlasting, eternal and not liable to change ? 
No, Venerable Sir
Why is that?
Because Venerable Sir, specific feelings arise dependent on a 
specific condition, and with the cessation of the specific 
condition, specific feelings cease.
3.  Therefore, monks, that sphere should be known wherein the 
eye ceases and the perception of forms fades away; the ear 
ceases and the perception of sounds fades away, the nose 
ceases and the perception of smells fades away, the tongue 
ceases and the perception of tastes fades away, the body 
ceases and the perception of tangibles fades away, the mind 
ceases and the perception of ideas fades away  that sphere 
should be known, that sphere should be known
S.N.IV. 98
55 56

* 1. Uttaritara Hudekalawa - Damsak No. 172/173 - (1990) 
  -do- (New edition)  D.G.M.B. - (2001)
 2. Vidasun Upades - (1996)
 3. Nivane Niveema - Volume I (1997) 4. Nivane Niveema - Volume II (1998)
 5. Nivane Niveema - Volume III (1998) 6. Nivane Niveema - Volume IV (1998)
 7. Nivane Niveema - Volume V (1999) 8. Nivane Niveema - Volume VI (1999)
 9. Nivane Niveema - Volume VII (1999) 10. Nivane Niveema - Volume VIII  (2000)
 11. Nivane Niveema - Volume IX (2001) 12. Nivane Niveema - Volume X (2002)
 13. Nivane Niveema - Volume X1 (2004)
 14. Nivane Niveema - Library Edition (1-6 Volumes) (2000)
 15. Nivane Niveema - Library Edition (All 11 Volumes) (2010)
 16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. I - (1999)
 17. Hithaka Mahima - I (1999) 18. Hita Thanima - (2000)
 19. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. II - (2000)
 20. Pavatma Hà Navatma - (2000) 21. Athi Hati Dakma - (2001)
 22. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. III - (2001)
 23. Divi Katare Sanda Andura - (2001) 24. Kaya  Anuwa Giya Sihiya - (2001)
 25. Mà-Piya Uvatana - (2002) 26. Prathipatti Påjàwa - (2003)
 27. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. IV - (2003)
 28. Abinikmana - (2003) 29. Hitaka Mahima  II - (2003)
 30. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. V - (2005)
 31. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. VI - (2006)
 32. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. VII - (2009)
 33. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. VIII - (2012)
 34. Budu Samaya Pudgalaya ha Samajaya (2009)
 35. Manase Mayawa (2010)   36. Bhavana Margaya (2011) 37.  Sasun Pilivetha (2011)
 38.  Pilivethin Pilivetheta (2011) 39.  Meth Sithe Wimukthiya  (2012)
  40. Hithaka Mahima III - (2012) 41.  Thisarana Mahima (2012) 42.  Kaye Kathawa (2012) 
*1.  Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought -(1971)
  -do- D. G. M. B. Edition (2012) 
*2.  Samyutta Nikaya - AnAnthology, Part II - Wheel No, 183/185 -(1972)
  - do - D. G. M. B. Edition (2009) 
*3.   Ideal Solitude - Wheel No, 188 - (1973)
  - do- D.G.M.B. Edition - (2010)
*4.  The Magic of the Mind - (1974) 
  - do - D. G. M. B. Edition - (2007) 
    5. Towards Calm and Insight - (1991) 
  - do - D. G. M. B. Edition - (1998)
 6.  From Topsy - turvydom to Wisdom -Volume I  - (2003)
 7. From Topsy - turvydom to Wisdom -Volume II - (2012)
 8. Seeing Through (1999)    
 9.  Towards A Better World  (2000)
 10. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume  I    -   (2003)
 11. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume  II   -   (2005)
 12. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume  III  -   (2005)
 13. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled - Volume  IV  -   (2006)
 14. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  - Volume  V   -   (2007)
 15.   Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  - Volume  VI  -   (2010)
 16. Nibbana and The Fire Simile  (2010)  
* Buddhist Publication Society, P.O. Box, 61, Kandy 
 fn!oO .%J: m%ldYk iñ;sh" ;e'fm' 61" uykqjr
By the same author
All enquiries regarding participation in the Dhammadana should be addressed to:
Mr.G.T.Bandara
The Settlor,  D.G.M.B. 
Royal Institute.  191, Havelock Rd, Colombo 05.
01. Nivane Niveema Volume I 11000
02. Nivane Niveema Volume II 8000
03. Nivane Niveema Volume III 5000
04. Nivane Niveema Volume IV 8000
05. Nivane Niveema Volume V 7000
06. Nivane Niveema Volume VI 5000
07. Nivane Niveema(Lib Ed) Part One (I-VI Volumes)   500
08. Nivane Niveema Volume VII 5000
09. Nivane Niveema Volume VIII 5000
10. Nivane Niveema Volume IX 7000
11. Nivane Niveema Volume X 7000
12. Nivane Niveema Volume XI 3000
13. Nivane Niveema(Lib Ed) Part One (I-XIVolume)   2500
14. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume I 13000
15. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume II 12000
16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume III 10000
17. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume IV 11000
18. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume V 10000
19. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume VI 8000
20. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume VII 4000
21. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshana Volume VIII 5000
22. Hitaka Mahima Volume I 10000
23. Hitaka Mahima Volume II 7000
24. Hitaka Mahima Volume III 1000
25. Uttareetara Hudekalawa   12000
26. Vidasun Upades  8000
27. Chalana Chitraya  7000
28. Diya Suliya  11000
29. Manase Mayawa  4000
30. Bhawana Margaya  14000
31. Meth Sithe Vimukthiya  11750
32. Towards A Better World   17000
33. Seeing Through   3000
34. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  Volume I   5000
35. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  Volume II   3000
36. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  Volume III   3000
37. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  Volume IV   5000
38. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  Volume V   2000
39.    Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  Volume VI  2000
40.    The Magic of the Mind  5000
41.    Towards Calm and Insight                                          2000
42. Samyutta Nikaya An Anthology   2000
43. Ideal Solitude   3000
44. Nibbana and The Fire Simile   5000
Books Published by D.G.M.B. No. of
Copies