Title: Walk to Nibbana
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Walk-To-Nibbana.pdf
Word Count: 7230

Pothgulgala Dhamagrantha 
Dharmasravana Mādhya Bhāraya 
 
 This is to inform our readers that all 
Dhamma books so far written and yet to 
be written by Venerable Bhikkhu 
Kaṭukurunde Ñā ṇananda will hereafter 
be published by the P.D.D.M.B (Kandy) 
and that the D.G.M.B. (Colombo) would 
not be publishing any of his books. 
 
P.D.D.M.B. 
Kandy 
2013.07.07

i 
 
 
WALK TO NIBBĀNA 
A Guide to Walking Meditation 
 
 
 
 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
ISBN 978-955-41497-4-8 
 
 
 
 
Published by 
Pothgulgala Dharmagrantha Dharmasravana Mādhya Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2015

ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published strictly for free distribution 
All Rights Reserved. 
 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited. However, permission to 
print for free distribution as a gift of Dhamma is hereby granted 
and no further permission need be obtained. 
 
This book is available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net

iii 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
First Impression – 2015 
Copies of this book may be obtained from: 
1. Mr. Anura Rupasinghe – No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy. 
2. Mr.Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
3. Mr. D. T. Weragala – 422, Welipara, Thalawatugoda. 
4. Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
5. Mr. Sanjeewa Nawaratne 
308/17 B, Kiriwaththuduwa Road, Magammana, Homagama. 
6. Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe – No. 26, Havelock Road, Galle. 
7. Mr. S.A. Lionel 
140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
8. Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
9. Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
Saman”, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
10. Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
Jayamanna Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
11.  Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
  Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
12.  Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
  Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa. 
 Web Site: www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Tel: 011 4 870 333

iv 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
The Cover Picture  vii 
Introduction  x 
1. The Importance of Walking Meditation  1 
2. The Place for a Promenade  6 
3. Advantages of Walking Meditation  8 
4. Serenity in the Promenade  12 
5. Insight in the Promenade  14 
6. Appendix  19

v 
 
About the P.D.D.M.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda of Pothgulgala Aranyaya, Kandegedara, Devalegama, 
that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be offered as a 
pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -thirsty world. 
The recently established Trust, officially named “Pothgulgala 
Dhamagrantha Dharmasravana Mādhya Bhāraya” centred in the 
sacred city of Kandy enshrining the Tooth Relic of the Buddha, 
has dedicated itself to the task of fulfilling the noble wish. 
 Accordingly, P.D.D.M.B. has taken upon itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
‘seeingthroughthenet.net’. Th ose wishing to participate in this 
multifaceted Dhammadana may note the Account Number of our 
Trust given below. Our readers are cautioned that there is no 
other number in the same Bank to remit their contributions. 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Mr. Anura Rupasinghe  
No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy, 
Sri Lanka. 
 
P.D.D.M.B. 
Acc. No. 100761000202 
Sampath Bank 
Kandy. 
 
Tel: 0777-801938 
e-mail: pothgulgala@seeingthroughthenet.net

vi 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
Pali Texts: 
(References are to page numbers in P.T.S. Editions) 
 
A.  Anguttara Nikāya 
M.  Majjhima Nikāya 
S.   Saṁyutta Nikāya 
Thag. Theragāthā 
 
Smp.  Samantapāsādikā (Vinaya Commentary) 
S.H.B. Simon Hewavitharana Bequest

vii 
 
The Cover Picture 
– A symbolic representation of a promenade? 
 Archaeologists have for a 
long time been grappling with the 
problem of interpreting the 
significance of the Standing 
Statue at the famous Gal Vihāra 
in Polonnaruwa. Various 
interpretations have been put 
forward with a view to 
determining the exact motif of 
this historic artefact. We are of 
the opinion that this statue is a 
symbolic representation of the 
Buddha turning right about at the 
end of the promenade 
(‘caṅkamana’). 
 Whereas the two statues on either side of this statue depict 
the Buddha in the seated posture and the reclining posture, we 
feel that this unique artifact symbolizes at once the two other 
postures, namely, walking and standing. The following are the 
evidences we can offer in support of this conclusion. 
1. The left foot shows a slight turn and the right thigh 
suggests a protrusion. (This protrusion is in sharp relief in 
the above side-view.) 
2. The two arms lying relaxed on the chest could even be an 
indication of a more relaxed way of keeping the arms 
while on the caṅkamana. 
3. The half -closed eyes are symbolic of the concentration 
that comes up in the standing posture at the end of the  
caṅkamana.

viii 
 
4. The depicting of the loose end of the robe hanging on the 
left shoulder could be an indication of a more relax ed and 
open way of robing while on the caṅkamana.            
5. The circular pedestal with its lotus -motif probably 
signifies the circle effortlessly drawn on either end of the 
caṅkamana (if it is sand -strewn) by mindfully pacing up 
and down for a long time. 
 
 
                  ‘P – a – c – e’ 
                                        and 
                                               Ponder! 
 
 
[ ‘caṅkamana’ – pronounce ‘c’ as in ‘child’ ]

ix 
 
 
 
Walk to Nibbāna 
First Edition – 2015 September 
Sponsored by the P.D.D.M.B.

x 
 
Introduction 
“Catucakkaṁ navadvāraṁ 
puṇṇaṁ lobhena saṁyutaṁ 
paṁkajātaṁ mahāvīra 
kathaṁ yātrā bhavissati 
Chetvā naddhiṁ varattañca 
icchā lobhañca pāpakaṁ 
samūlaṁ taṇhaṁ abbuyha 
evaṁ yātrā bhavissati” 
 – Catucakka Sutta, Devatā Saṁy. S. I 16. 
The Four-wheeled and Nine-doored 
This greed-bound heap born in mud 
Tell me how, O! Great Hero 
Can there be for it an outlet 
Cut off the thong and snap the rope 
Evil wish and greed as well 
Pull out craving with its root 
That’s how it can see an outlet 
  The ‘four-wheels’ alluded to in this riddle – verse are the 
four postures the body assumes in the course of its daily routine. 
The body is always rolling on these four wheels. The journey to 
Nibbāna is also a ‘Four-wheeled Drive.’  
 The Buddha has clearly ex plained to us how these four -
wheels are made to roll towards Nibbāna in the sub -section on 
postures in the section on body-contemplation in the Satipaṭṭhāna 
Sutta.  
 ‘And again, monks, a monk when going, knows ‘I am 
going’. When standing, knows ‘I am stand ing.’ When seated, 
knows ‘I am sitting.’ When lying down, knows ‘I am lying 
down.’ In whatever way his body is disposed, he unders tands that 
it is so disposed.’ 
 – Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, M.I 56.

xi 
 
 Out of these four postures, the two most helpful for a 
meditator who has set out on the Path to Nibbāna, are the seated 
posture and the walking posture ( caṅkamana). These two 
postures are greatly helpful in developing mindfulness, 
concentration and wisdom. Quite a lot of books have been written 
on ‘sitting meditation’ but not enough attention has been given to 
‘walking-meditation’. This little book is an attempt to fulfil that 
need. 
 Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
January 2015 (B.E. 2558) 
 
 
 
Notes: 
1. ‘navadvāraṁ’ – the nine apertures of the body 
2. ‘puṇṇaṁ’ – full of impurities 
3. ‘paṁkajātaṁ’ – born in the marsh-like womb 
4. ‘naddhiṁ’ – hatred 
5. ‘varattaṁ’– the rope of craving 
6. ‘yātrā’– the stepping-out from existence

1 
 
The Importance of Walking Meditation 
 In the practice of meditation leading to Nibbāna, the two 
postures – sitting and walking are mutually helpful. Generally, 
we depict the idea of meditation by the figure of a person sea ted 
in the cross -legged posture. For that very reason the importance 
of walking meditation in the promenade ( caṅkamana) is very 
often overlooked. When the Buddha was explaining the path of 
practice recommended for attaining Nibbāna with the help of a 
simile of taming a wild elephant, he presented the wakeful 
dwelling routine of an ideal meditator ( jāgariyānuyoga) in the 
following words:  
 “Come monk, dwell devoted to the practice of 
wakefulness. During daytime, cleanse the mind of hindering 
qualities pacing  up and down ( caṅkamena) and sitting 
(nisajjāya). In the first watch of the night, cleanse the mind of 
hindering qualities pacing up and down and sitting. In the middle 
watch of the night, go to sleep in the lion posture reclining to the 
right side placing one foot on the other, mindful and fully aware, 
paying attention to the idea of waking up. In the last watch of the 
night, having got up cleanse the mind of hinderin g qualities, 
pacing up and down and sitting.” 1     
 Pacing up and down and sitting provide that exercise and 
rest conducive to the balanced maintenance of wakefulness 
because excessive walking tends to restlessness and excessive 
sitting tends to sloth and torpor.  
 The particular order of the two words ‘ caṅkamena 
nisajjāya’ is suggestive of the fact that pacing up and down in the 
caṅkamana should precede sitting. This is understandable since 
the activeness and the wakefulness aroused in the former posture 
helps the meditator to remain restful in the seated p osture for a 
long time. However, one should not be hasty in returning to the  
caṅkamana as soon as drowsiness sets in while in the seated

2 
 
posture. This is what, we can infer from the following set of 
instructions given by the Buddha to Venerable Mahā Moggallāna.  
 Once when the Buddha was dwelling at Suṁsumāragira 
in Bhagga territory, Venerable Mahā Moggallāna was meditating 
in the village called Kalalavālamutta in the Magadha country. He 
was drowsing in his meditation seat when the Buddha saw him 
with his divine eye since he was invigilating him from a distance. 
Then the Buddha approached him through his psychic powers 
and as if catching him napping, said:  
 “Aren’t you drowsing Moggallāna. Aren’t you drowsing 
Moggallāna!” 
 Venerable Moggallāna admitted to h is weakness and the 
Buddha gave a systematic course of treatment to it as if 
administering 7 ‘ waking pills ’ – the peerless ‘ physician – cum 
surgeon’ that he is:2   
1. If that is so, Moggallāna, whatever perception you had 
when drowsiness overcame you, that pe rception you 
should not attend to. That perception you should not make 
much of.  
2. If that drowsiness does not leave you even when you are 
dwelling this way, then Moggallāna you should think 
about, reason out and mentally ponder over the Dhamma 
as you have heard and learnt. 
3. If that drowsiness does not leave you even when you are 
dwelling in this manner, then Moggallāna, you should 
recite at length the Dhamma as you have heard and learnt. 
4. If that drowsiness still persists even when you are 
dwelling this way, then Moggallāna, you should pull both 
your ear lobes and go on rubbing your limbs with the 
palm. 
5. If that drowsiness does not leave you even when you are 
dwelling like this, then Moggall āna, you should get up

3 
 
from the seat, rub water over the eyes and look around in 
the directions and look up at the stars in the sky. 
6. If that drowsiness does not leave you even when you are 
dwelling like this, then Moggallāna, you should attend to 
the perce ption of light. Determine the perception of day: 
‘Just as day, so is n ight. Just as night, so is day.’  Thus 
with a clear unshrouded mind develop a luminous mind. 
7. If that drowsiness does not leave you even when you are 
dwelling this way, then Moggallāna, de termine the pacing 
up and down ( caṅkamana) being conscious of ‘the 
behind’ and ‘the before’ ( pacchā-pure-saññī) 3 with sense 
faculties turned inwards and with mind unstrayed.            
If that drowsiness is not abandoned even as you are dwelling this 
way, then Moggallāna, you assume the lion’s sleep lying to the 
right side, placing one foot on the other, mindful and fully aware, 
attending to the perception of waking up. And on waking up, 
Moggallāna, you should  get up quickly with the idea: ‘I will not 
dwell giving way to the ease of lying down, the ease of contact 
and ease of drowsiness.’ 
 Thus should you, Moggallāna, train yourself.”  
 This exhortation makes it clear that the meditator should 
try to maintain the seated posture which is more  restful and take 
to the walking posture ( caṅkamana) only as the last resort in 
one’s course of training for overcoming drowsiness. One should 
not uncritically interpret the onset of drowsiness as an invitation 
to the promenade. Owing to the necessity of a  fixed timetable, in 
some meditation centres, the routine of one hour sitting and one 
hour walking is recommended. It is true that it affords a certain 
amount of training to the beginner. But if even a beginner builds 
up some concentration ( samādhi) toward s the end of the period 
                                                 
 As a matter of fact, even the last step is a ‘waking pill’ – for the following 
day

4 
 
for sitting, it is not advisable to make it compulsory for him to 
break that samādhi and go to the caṅkamana. 
 However, it might occur to a certain meditator who had 
mastered the training for wakefulness ( jāgariyānuyoga) by 
following the instructions given by the Buddha, that the 
‘caṅkamana’ is more conducive to his concentration according to 
his character. If that is so, there is nothing wrong in his spending 
a greater part of his time in the  caṅkamana. Generally speaking, 
the reclining posture is not very advisable for a meditator because 
of its proximity to sleep. But in the case of a meditator who has 
done excessive pacing up and down to the point of restlessness, it 
may so happen that in the reclining posture, his restlessness 
subsides allowing a balancing of spiritual faculties heralding the 
attainment of concentration and wisdom. 
 Venerable Ānanda’s attainment of arahanthood could be 
an illustration of the above psychological norm. He probably 
thought it unbecoming of him to att end the First Council for 
reciting Dhamma Vinaya  scheduled for the following day as a 
non-arahant and spent the greater part of the night in the 
caṅkamana developing mindfulness relating to the body. At last 
when he was retiring to the bed, his mind became  influx-free and 
emancipated just at the moment he was lowering his head to the 
pillow, having sat on the bed. Traditionally, it is regarded as a 
unique feat on the part of Venerable Ānanda that he attained 
arahanthood free from the four postures. But ther e could be some 
other reason for it. As he had resolved on rigorous mindfulness 
on all four postures with the firm determination: “I must 
somehow or other attain arahanthood before the morrow”, he was 
bound to all four postures with restlessness. The only ‘interval’ 
left open for him was the easily overlooked ‘ posture-junction.’ 
Most probably the balancing of faculties occurred accidentally or 
automatically at the posture -junction between sitting and 
reclining which he had not reckoned with.4

5 
 
 Provided a meditator is careful enough not to give way to 
restlessness in   the caṅkamana, he can reap the fruits of his 
efforts even at the end of the promenade. Commentators record 
instances of meditators attaining arahanthood even in the 
caṅkamana. Therefore one should by no means underestimate the 
importance of caṅkamana meditation in the daily routine  of a 
meditator.

6 
 
The Place for a Promenade 
 Pacing up and down with mindfulness within a certain 
limit is generally regarded as ‘Walking Meditation’. Therefore a 
suitable venue for it has to be prepared. A caṅkamana could be 
either indoors or outdoors.  
 Traditionally, the length recommended for an outdoor 
caṅkamana is either 60 or 45 or 20 cubits and the breadth is 3 
cubits. There should also be a border or an ‘access’ (‘ upacāra’) 
about 1 foot broad around the caṅkamana, some 4 inches lower to 
prevent the intrusion of reptiles etc., to the caṅkamana proper. 
The caṅkamana should be prepared on level ground with a thin 
layer of fine sand to walk on. At one end of the caṅkamana a 
meditation seat should be made preferably with a roof above it.  
 All these specifications are not so essential. One can 
improvise a caṅkamana in a meditation centre or in one’s home 
garden with a border of bricks around a sand -strewn stretch of a 
narrow-walk. Even if the caṅkamana is long, one should learn to 
walk slowly and even if it is broad, one should be mindful 
enough to pace up and down in a straight line. As a result of such 
training, what a meditator leaves on the caṅkamana at the end of 
a long period of walking meditation is only a sign of footsteps 
like a foot -path with a circle at either end – provided the 
caṅkamana is sand-strewn. 
 The indoor -caṅkamana should be prepared inside a 
building in a place where there is good ventilation. It should be 
about 45 ft. long and sufficiently broad with a seat at one end. It 
could be useful to a strenuous meditator to have a rope  running 
overhead ( ālambana rajju ) to hold on and pause when tired or 
else some sort of railing on one side as a support. 
                                                 
 A cubit is the length from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger, 
approximately 17 – 21 inches (43 -53 cm).

7 
 
 Even in one’s residence, whenever and wherever 
practicable one can temporarily determine a corridor or a 
verandah as a caṅkamana – provided there is sufficient seclusion  
and freedom from interference.

8 
 
Advantages of Walking Meditation 
“Pañcime bhikkhave caṅkame ānisaṁsā. Katame pañca? 
1. addhānakkhamo hoti 
2. padhānakkhamo hoti 
3. appābadho hoti 
4. asita-pīta-khāyita-sāyitaṁ sammā pariṇāmaṁ gacchati 
5. caṅkamādhigato samādhi ciraṭṭhitiko hoti” 
 – Caṅkamānisaṁsa Sutta. A. III 29f. 
“Monks, there are these five advantages of the use of a 
promenade. Which five? 
1. Can walk long distances 
2. Can put forth strenuous effort 
3. Has few ailments 
4. Whatever is eaten, drunk, chewed and tasted is well 
digested. 
5. Concentration attained in the promenade lasts long.” 
 
1. By slowly pacing up and down in an orderly manner 
within the limits of the promenade, the fatiguing feeling of 
‘distance’ does not come up. One comes to  understand that a 
journey is only a succession of paces. Even in walking long 
distances if one simply converts it to a relaxed pacing with 
mindfulness, one can get rid of the concept of distance so far 
covered and distance yet to be covered which brings f atigue and 
experience a wonderful Walk-in-the Present . Provided one is 
bare-footed one can also attend to the touch sensation of the soles 
of the feet and get an impression of having walked on an 
escalator. Thereby one feels that the ‘long’ journey has bec ome 
‘short’.  
The pause at either end of the caṅkamana minimizes 
fatigue and controls speed of walking. That is why one can spend 
a long time in the caṅkamana. A mind accustomed to this ‘speed -

9 
 
control’ is prepared to accept even a long journey on foot as a  
relaxed pacing on a caṅkamana.  
How the meditative monks of the past who did long treks 
(cārikā) all on foot without resort to vehicles, with a measured 
tread, restrained by the disciplinary rules of procedure ( sekhiyā) 
covered unimaginable long distances , is something that the 
speed-crazy modern world racing wi th time can hardly 
understand.  
2. By pacing up and down in a promenade sleepiness goes 
away and wakefulness comes up. The body gets some exercise 
which dispels laziness. One becomes lively enough to p ut forth 
energy. By using the caṅkamana for a long stretch of time with a 
firm determination, the mind is preconditioned for resolute effort 
in the meditation seat. As it is said: ‘One arouses an interest 
(‘chandaṁ janeti’), puts forth effort (‘ vāyamati’), stirs up energy 
(‘viriyaṁ ārabhati’), steadies one’s mind (‘ cittaṁ paggaṇhāti’) 
and strives resolutely (‘ padahati’), that pacing up and down 
paves the way to strenuous effort which reaches its peak in the 
meditation seat. 
Venerable So ṇa Ko ḷivisa who was born with such a 
delicate body that his palms and soles had hair on them and yet 
put forth the utmost exertion on the caṅkamana, was declared by 
the Buddha to be the foremost ( etadagga) among his disciples 
who are strenuous in striving because he walked until the 
caṅkamana was wet with blood. The Buddha had to convince 
him of the necessity of balancing the spiritual faculties by giving 
the simile of the lute with strings neither too taut nor too slack. 5  
3. Pacing up and down especially in an outdoor 
caṅkamana where there is good ventilation is conducive to 
health. Spending a long time in the caṅkamana invigorates the 
body. Any rheumatic pains, disturbances of the wind element and 
other complications that may arise due to a long sitting session 
would b e alleviated in the caṅkamana. Even for a bed -ridden 
patient who can still move about with some difficulty, an

10 
 
occasional aided -walk could minimize ailments. Those points in 
the soles of the feet which need massaging according to 
Reflexology would get mass aged automatically in the 
caṅkamana, thereby curing some bodily disorders. Even for heart 
patients the alternation between walking and standing in the 
caṅkamana prevents fatigue by providing a moderate type of 
exercise.  
4. Bhuktvā niṣīdatah sthaulyaṁ 
tiṣṭhato balavardhanaṁ 
āyuṣcankramato nityaṁ 
mṛtyur dhāvati dhāvatah 
 – Vyāsakāra. 55. 
‘To one who sits after eating (comes) plumpness, to one 
who stands – growth of strength, to one who walks – longevity, 
and to one who runs – Death is always close at the heels.’ 
According to this saying of the ancient seers, standing and 
walking postures are preferable to sitting after the meal, because 
they are conducive to proper digestion. Pacing up and down, as 
an interim posture between sitting and running gives a lig ht type 
of exercise to the body which helps the proper functioning of the 
digestive system. Moreover, the dull indolence that comes after 
the meal tends to drowsiness for which caṅkamana is an antidote.  
5. Generally the quietude in the meditation seat is hel pful 
in attaining a level of concentration ( samādhi). But due to 
attachment to the bliss of concentration sometimes imperceptibly 
sloth and torpor may set in. On the other hand that wakefulness in 
the caṅkamana helps one to stabilize a samādhi already attained. 
Provided that the standing and turning round at either end of the 
caṅkamana is done with mindfulness and full awareness, one can 
effectively conduct one’s meditation topic in the caṅkamana 
without interruption and attain a level of concentration.

11 
 
The phrase: ‘ ciraṭṭhitiko hoti ’ in the Caṅkamānisaṁsa 
Sutta gets the following commentary in the Manorathapūraṇī 
(Commentary to the Anguttara Nikāya)  
‘ciraṭṭhitiko hoti ciraṁ tiṭṭhati. Ṭhitakena gahita nimittaṁ 
hi nisinnassa nassati nisinnena gahita nimitta ṁ nipannassa. 
Caṅkamaṁ adhiṭṭhahantena calitāramma ṇe gahita nimitta ṁ 
pana ṭhitassapi nisinnassapi nipannassapi na nassati.’   
  – Mano. II 592 (S.H.B.)   
‘Lasts long’ means ‘persists for a long time.’ Why? 
(Because) The sign grasped while sta nding is lost when one is 
seated. The sign grasped while sitting is lost when one lies down. 
But in the case of one who determines on using a caṅkamana, the 
sign grasped on a meditation topic while moving is not lost when 
one stands or sits or lies down. 
Steadying the mind on a moving meditation sign is 
difficult – but for the same reason it is more stable.

12 
 
Serenity in the Promenade 
 One can develop serenity (samatha) or insight (vipassanā) 
or both serenity and insight in the caṅkamana. However for 
facility of assessing facts, we shall discuss serenity in the 
caṅkamana as a separate chapter.  
 When pacing up and down with a meditation topic meant 
for serenity, it is advisable first of all to pace up and down several 
times with mindfulne ss and arouse a relaxed rhythm of pacing. 
Then one can call to mind a term like ‘ Arahaṁ’ or ‘ Buddho’ in 
the case of ‘Recollection of the Buddha’ ( Buddhānussati) or a 
phrase like ‘May you be happy!’ in the case of meditation on 
‘Universal Love’ or Mettā, an d continue pacing up and down 
with unbroken mindfulness attending to it. A brief pause at either 
end of the promenade (preferably with closed eyes) attending to 
the meditation topic and mindfully turning round right about is 
conducive to concentration. 
 One can make use of the promenade even when 
developing such visual meditation topics like the skeleton 
(aṭṭhika), the bloated -corpse (uddhumātaka) and the livid -corpse 
(vinīlaka). For instance, while continuously attending to the 
skeleton (‘skeleton -skeleton-skeleton’) if the ‘learning sign’ 
(‘uggaha-nimitta’) appears clearly enough one can remain 
standing at the end of the promenade for some time attending to 
it. If the ‘counterpart -sign’ (‘patibhāga-nimitta’) also comes up, 
one can develop it seated at the end of the promenade. If the sign 
appears in rough outline even to one’s open eyes, one can carry it 
about like one’s own shadow. Then one gets the ability to look 
around with ‘the perception of the skeleton’ (‘ aṭṭhika-saññā’), for 
instance, at the end of the promenade. When one can pace up and 
down not only with a meditative-mind but also with a meditativeeye, there is less occasion for distraction by one’s environment. 
The preparatory practice of conducting a meditation topic in the 
caṅkamana is one that encourages the practice of carrying the

13 
 
meditation topic even on one’s alms -round (‘ gata-paccāgatavatta’ – going and coming with one’s meditation topic). 
Scriptures record instances of meditative -monks who looked at 
visual objects tending to defilements with a meditative -eye and 
attained arahanthood while on their alms-round. 6       
 Although ‘ānāpānasati’ (‘Mindfulness of Breathing’) is a 
meditation specially meant for the seated posture, one who has 
practised it for a long time can arouse it  even in the caṅkamana. 
If one walks mindfully attending to the touch sensation at the 
soles of one’s feet, it is easy to attend to the feel of the breath 
when one comes to the end of the caṅkamana. By determining to 
the caṅkamana in accordance with the la st ‘waking -pill’ the 
Buddha had administered to Venerable Mahā Moggallāna – that 
is to say: ‘pacing up and down being conscious of ‘the behind’ 
and ‘the before’, with sense faculties turned inwards and mind 
unstrayed’, one can arouse the sign of ānāpānasati in the  
caṅkamana without much difficulty. 
 Concentration thus aroused in the caṅkamana could be 
maintained for a long time in the meditation seat because, as we 
mentioned before, the wakefulness and vigour derived from the 
caṅkamana keeps away drowsiness.

14 
 
Insight in the Promenade 
 Meditating zealously in the caṅkamana mindfully and 
fully aware with radical attention ( yonisomanasikāra) one can 
arouse the knowledge of name -and-form ( nāmarūpa), develop 
insight and attain Nibbāna. 
 For the purpose of accelerating attention one has to slow 
down the pacing gradually. As he goes on slowing down, the 
meditator becomes aware of a number of stages in the process. 
Generally six stages are traditionally distinguished but there 
could be slight differences in naming them. Here is one method. 7  
1. Lift 2. Bend 3. send 
  4. drop 5. put 6. press 
 After getting down to the caṅkamana, for a start one may 
pace up and down lightly several times so that one can arouse the 
wieldiness necessary for this delicate type of exercise. 
 Then one can simply note the pacing as ‘left -right’ for a 
short while attending also to the touch sensation of the soles of 
the feet. It is good to pause a little at the end of the caṅkamana 
and get used to turning by the right with mindfulness. As a lready 
mentioned, if the caṅkamana is sand -strewn and the pacing is 
done mindfully in a way that it leaves traces of a foot path, after 
some time circles would be drawn at either end of the 
caṅkamana. This method is helpful in getting used to pacing 
mindfully without allowing the mind to get distracted.  
 As one progresses this way, the speed of pacing will be 
controlled gradually. If by now one can effortlessly distinguish 
                                                 
 “Feeling, perception, intention, contact, attention – these, O friends are called 
‘name’. The four great elements and form dependent on them – these, O 
friends are called ‘form’  
 - Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M.I.53.

15 
 
three stages as ‘lifting – sending – putting down’, one may attend 
to three stages.   
 With more practice, in due course one also becomes aware 
of the ‘bending’ of the lifted foot.  
 Further practice accompanied by keener and keener 
attention will enable the meditator to catch up with the other 
stages gradually – namely, sending, dropping , putting and 
pressing.  
 When attention is able to pick up all the six stages almost 
effortlessly, the meditator will become aware that there is a cyclic 
rhythm in pacing and that his entire attention is on it. Since 
simultaneous with the ‘pressing’ of th e front foot comes the 
lifting of the foot behind, attention gets no opportunity to slip out. 
Even for a spectator outside, this wheel like cyclic pacing 
movement would illustrate the advantages of unbroken 
mindfulness.  
 Even as one is distinguishing thes e six stages keeping 
one’s body erect, the speed of pacing will be greatly reduced, but 
the speed of attending  will increase in proportion to it. Thereby 
one becomes aware of the possibility of a series of interim stages 
of attention. That is to say, being  able to attend to the ‘ preceding 
intention’ that prompts the above stages.  
 eg. Intending to lift – lifting 
Intending to bend – bending 
 However, there is something special that needs 
mentioning. The meditator might expect to get 12 stages in all 
when the interim stages just mentioned are also mastered (i.e. 6 x 
2 = 12). But be it noted that only 11 stages can actually be 
distinguished. 
 Although one can attend to the intention to drop and 
dropping of the foot, one cannot attend to the intention to put and

16 
 
putting – for the simple reason that the end of dropping is  
(effortlessly enough) putting! 
 What we have outlined above is a technique to practice 
meditation of pacing up and down ( caṅkama) in a way to arouse 
penetrative insight. Briefly stated its adv antage is the 
understanding of the constituents of name -and-form by 
accelerating attention. This meditation is helpful in arousing a 
keener understanding of the functioning of the constituents of 
‘name’ i.e. feeling, perception, intention, contact and atte ntion. 
With the awareness of the process of preparations involved in the 
pacing, the perception of the compact (‘ ghana saññā ’) nurtured 
by egoism tends to get ‘liquidated’ giving way to the perception 
of the heap (‘ rāsi sa ññā’). The impermanence of prepara tions 
could be seen then and there.  
 By paying keener attention to the above mentioned stages 
one becomes aware of the arising and ceasing of a heap of 
vibrations. The touch sensation at the soles of the feet provides 
the hint to the understanding of the form aspect of name and 
form. Flashes of insight that occur during pacing could become 
fruitful at the end of the promenade. Pausing for a while and 
turning right about mindfully could be helpful in this concern. 
Attending to the breath in the case of ānāpānasati and fixing the 
mind on the visual sign that occurs in the light of the Three 
Signata (impermanence, suffering and not -self) in the case of 
such cemetery meditations like the skeleton, the bloated corpse, 
and the livid corpse, could usher in insight . Meditation on the 
four elements and the perception of impermanence could be 
effective at the end of the promenade.  
 If one can gradually reduce the speed of walking and 
sharpen the attention to muster all the eleven stages in attending, 
the perception o f the compact regarding the objects of the six 
senses would get attenuated giving way to the perception of heap 
almost effortlessly. The sense data flowing in through the six 
senses (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind) could then be

17 
 
subsumed under a fin er four fold category i.e. the seen ( diṭṭha), 
the heard ( suta), the sensed ( muta) and the cognized ( viññāta). 
The gist of the realization that comes along with it could be 
worded as follows: 
1. No one to see and nothing to see, 
- Only a ‘seen’ is there. 
(diṭṭhe diṭṭhamattaṁ) 
2. No one to hear and nothing to hear, 
- Only a ‘heard’ is there. 
(sute sutamattaṁ) 
3. No one to sense (i.e. through nose, tongue, and body) and 
nothing to sense, 
- Only a ‘sensed’ is there. 
(mute mutamattaṁ) 
4. No one to cognize and nothing to cognize, 
- Only a ‘cognized’ is there. 
(viññāte vññātamattaṁ) 
Out of these four, ‘ the heard’ is subtler than ‘ the seen’, and ‘ the 
sensed’ is subtler than ‘the heard’. Now, if the ‘interest’ (chanda) 
with which attention (manasikāra) released from the sensed  is 
searching for an object is stilled then -and-there, the realization 
comes that the object  (dhamma = ‘thing’) is mind -made. This 
seeing-through that mind -consciousness arises depending on 
mind and ‘mind -object’ (i.e. ‘ dhamma’) is the insight into the 
interior of t he Magic -show of consciousness . With this insight, 
consciousness ceases or subsides ( viññāṇa nirodha , 
viññāṇūpasama). The furthest limit of radical attention is wisdom 
(paññā). With the lustre of wisdom comes the deliverance from 
the magical illusion of co nsciousness and the realization of 
NIBBĀNA.

18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Rooted in interest (desire) friends, are all things.  
Born of attention, are all things. 
Arising from contact, are all things. 
Converging on feeling, are all things. 
Headed by concentration, are all things. 
Dominated by mindfulness, are all things. 
Surmountable by wisdom, are all things. 
Yielding deliverance as essence, are all things. 
Merging in the Deathless, are all things. 
Terminating in Nibbāna, are all things.’ 8 
– A.V 106f.

19 
 
Appendix 
1. “Ehi tvaṁ bhikkhu j āgariyaṁ anuyutto vih arāhi. Divasa ṁ 
caṅkamena nisajj āya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi citta ṁ 
parisodhehi. Rattiyā paṭhamaṁ yāmaṁ caṅkamena nisajjāya 
āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi citta ṁ parisodhehi. Rattiy ā 
majjhimaṁ yāmaṁ dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyya ṁ 
kappeyyāsi, pāde pāda ṁ accādhāya sato sampajāno 
uṭṭhānasaññaṁ manasikaritvā. Rattiyā pacchimaṁ yāmaṁ 
paccuṭṭhāya caṅkamena nisajj āya āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi 
cittaṁ parisodhehi.”  
– Dantabhūmi Sutta, M.III 135. 
2.  
i. “Tasmātiha tvaṁ Moggallāna, yathā saññino te vih arato 
taṁ middhaṁ okkamati, taṁ saññaṁ mā manasākāsi, taṁ 
saññaṁ mā bahulamakāsi. Ṭhānaṁ kho paneta ṁ vijjati 
yaṁ te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
ii. No ce te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato tvaṁ 
Moggallāna yathāsuta ṁ yathāpariyattaṁ dhammaṁ 
cetasā anuvitakkeyyāsi anuvicāreyyāsi 
manasānupekkheyyāsi. Ṭhānaṁ kho paneta ṁ vijjati ya ṁ 
te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
iii. No ce te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato tvaṁ 
Moggallāna, yathāsuta ṁ yathāpariyattaṁ dhammaṁ 
vitthārena sajjhāya ṁ kareyyāsi. Ṭhānaṁ kho paneta ṁ 
vijjati yaṁ te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
iv. No ce te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato tvaṁ 
Moggallāna, ubho ka ṇṇasotāni āviñjeyyāsi, pā ṇinā 
gattāni anumajjeyyāsi. Ṭhānaṁ kho panetaṁ vijjati yaṁ te 
evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
v. No ce te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato tvaṁ 
Moggallāna, u ṭṭhāyāsanā udakena akkhī ṇi anumajjitvā 
disā anuvilokeyyāsi, nakkhattāni tārakarūpāni

20 
 
ullokeyyāsi. Ṭhānaṁ kho paneta ṁ vijjati ya ṁ te eva ṁ 
viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
vi. No ce te evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato tvaṁ 
Moggallāna, ālokasaññaṁ manasi kareyyāsi, divāsaññaṁ 
adhiṭṭhaheyyāsi yathā divā tathā rattiṁ, yathā rattiṁ tathā 
diva, iti viva ṭena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsa ṁ 
cittaṁ bhāveyyāsi. Ṭhānaṁ kho paneta ṁ vijjati ya ṁ te 
evaṁ viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
vii. No ce te eva ṁ viharato ta ṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato 
tvaṁ, Moggallāna, pacchāpuresaññī ca ṅkamaṁ 
adhiṭṭhaheyyāsi antogatehi indriyehi abahigatena 
mānasena. Ṭhānaṁ kho paneta ṁ vijjati ya ṁ te eva ṁ 
viharato taṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha. 
No ce te eva ṁ viharato ta ṁ middhaṁ pahīyetha, tato 
tvaṁ, Moggallāna, dakkhi ṇena passena sīhaseyya ṁ 
kappeyyāsi pāde pāda ṁ accādhāya sato sampajāno 
uṭṭhānasaññaṁ manasi karitvā. Pa ṭibuddheneva te, 
Moggallāna, khippa ṁ yeva pacc uṭṭhātabbaṁ – na 
seyyasukhaṁ na phassasukha ṁ na middhasukha ṁ 
anuyutto viharissāmīti. Evaṁ hi te Moggallāna, 
sikkhitabbaṁ. 
– Pacalāyana Sutta, A.IV 85-87. 
3. Pacchā puresaññi – conscious of the lifting of the foot behind 
and the putting down of the foot in front. 
4. Smp.p7. (S.H.B) 
5. A.III 374 
6.  
i. Alaṅkatā suvasanā – mālinī candanussadā 
majjhe mahāpathe nārī –  turiye naccati nāṭakī 
ii. Piṇdikāya paviṭṭhohaṁ – gacchanto taṁ udikkhisaṁ 
alaṁkataṁ suvasanaṁ – maccupāsaṁva oḍḍitaṁ 
iii. Tato me manasikāro – yoniso udapajjatha 
ādīnavo pāturahu – nibbidā samatiṭṭhatha

21 
 
iv. Tato cittaṁ vimucci me – passa dhammasudhammataṁ 
tisso vijjā anuppattā – kataṁ buddhassa sāsanaṁ 
 – Nāgasamāla Theragāthā, Thag. N. 267-270 
i. Adorned and well -dressed, decked with garlands and 
anointed with sandal paste, a dancing woman is 
performing in the midst of the highway to the rhythm of 
the orchestra. 
ii. Having set out on my almsround I looked up and saw the 
adorned and well -dressed form like the snare laid by 
Māra. 
iii. And then there arose in me radical attention, perils 
became manifest, and disenchantment set in. 
iv. Then my mind got released. Just see the good norm of the 
Dhamma. The three knowledges have I reached. Done is 
the Buddha’s behest.  
7. The Path of Purification. p.724. 
8. “Sace bhikkhave aññatitthiyā paribbājakā evaṁ puccheyyuṁ 
‘Kiṁmūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā 
Kiṁ sambhavā sabbe dhammā 
Kiṁ samudayā sabbe dhammā 
Kiṁ samosaraṇā sabbe dhammā 
Kiṁpamukhā sabbe dhammā 
Kimādhipateyyā sabbe dhammā 
Kimuttarā sabbe dhammā 
Kiṁ sārā sabbe dhammā 
Kimogadhā sabbe dhammā 
Kimpariyosānā sabbe dhammā’ 
Evaṁ puṭṭhā tumhe bhikkhave tesa ṁ aññatitthiyānaṁ 
paribbājakānaṁ evaṁ vyākareyyāsi – 
‘Chandamūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā 
Manasikāra sambhavā sabbe dhammā 
Phassa samudayā sabbe dhammā 
Vedanā samosaraṇā sabbe dhammā

22 
 
Samādhipamukhā sabbe dhammā 
Satādhipateyyā sabbe dhammā 
Paññuttarā sabbe dhammā 
Vimuttisārā sabbe dhammā 
Amatogadhā sabbe dhammā 
Nibbāna pariyosānā sabbe dhammā” 
– Kimmūlaka Sutta, A. IV 106f. 
“If monks, wandering ascetics of other sects question thus:  
‘Friends, what is the root of all things? 
What is the origin of all things? 
Where do all things arise? 
Towards what do all things converge? 
What is at the head of all things? 
What dominates all things? 
What is the point of transcendence of all things? 
What is the essence of all things? 
In what do all things merge? 
What is the termination of all things? 
When thus questioned, monks, you may reply to those 
wandering ascetics as follows: 
‘Rooted in interest (desire) friends are all things. 
Born of attention are all things. 
Arising from contact are all things. 
Converging on feeling are all things. 
Headed by concentration are all things. 
Dominated by mindfulness are all things. 
Surmountable by wisdom are all things. 
Yielding deliverance as essence are all things. 
Merging in the Deathless are all things. 
Terminating in Nibbāna are all things.  
When thus questioned monks, you may reply in this way to 
those wandering ascetics of other sects.”

23 
 
Cf. ‘And then Venerable Samiddhi approached Venerable 
Sāriputta. Having approached he worshipped Venerable 
Sāriputta and sat on one side. Venerable Sāriputta told this to 
Venerable Samiddhi who was seated on one side: 
 "With what as objects, Samiddhi, do thoughts and concepts 
(saṁkappa vitakkā) arise in a man?"   
"With name-and-form as object, venerable sir." 
"But wherein, Samiddhi, do they assume diversity?"  
"In the elements, venerable sir." 
"But from whence, Samiddhi, do they arise?"  
"They arise from contact, venerable sir." 
"But on what, Samiddhi, do they converge?"  
"They converge on feelings, venerable sir." 
"But what, Samiddhi, is at their head?"   
"They are headed by concentration, venerable sir.” 
"But what is it, Samiddhi, that dominates them?"   
"They are dominated by mindfulness, venerable sir." 
"But what, Samiddhi, is their (point of) transcendence?"  
"They are transcended by wisdom venerable sir." 
"But what is it, Samiddhi, that forms their essence?"  
"They have deliverance as their essence, venerable sir." 
"But in what, Samiddhi, do they get merged?"  
"They get merged in the Deathless, venerable sir." 
– Samiddhi Sutta, A.IV 385f.

By the Same Author 
1. * Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought    (1971) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition (2012) 
2. * Samyutta Nikaya – An Anthology, Part II – Wheel No, 183/185  (1972) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition (2009) 
3. * Ideal Solitude – Wheel No, 188     (1973) 
4. * The Magic of the Mind      (1974) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition (2007) 
5. Towards Calm and Insight     (1991) 
  – do –                  D.G.M.B. Edition (1998) 
6. From Topsy – turvydom to Wisdom – Volume I   (2003) 
7. From Topsy – turvydom to Wisdom – Volume II   (2012) 
8. Seeing Through       (1999) 
9. Towards A Better World      (2000) 
10. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume I    (2003) 
11. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume II    (2005) 
12. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume III    (2005) 
13. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume IV    (2006) 
14. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume V    (2007) 
15. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume VI    (2010) 
16. Nibbana – The Mind Stilled – Volume VII   (2012) 
17. Nibbana and The Fire Simile     (2010) 
18. A Majestic Tree of Merit     (2012) 
19. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective   (2014) 
 
* Buddhist Publication Society P.O. Box. 61, Kandy 
බ ෞද්ධ ධර්‍ම ග්‍රන්‍ථ ප්‍රකාශන  සමිතිය, තැ.බෙ. 61, මහනුවර
 
All enquiries regarding participation in the Dhammadana should be 
addressed to: 
Mr. Anura Rupasinghe 
No.27, Colombo Street, Kandy, Sri Lanka 
Tel: 081-2232376

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
1. * උත්තරීතර හුදකලාව –  (මුල් මුද්‍රණය)  ද්සකක් ංකක 172/173  (0991  
       – එම –       (නව මුද්‍රණය))  ධමම ග්‍රන්‍ථ මුද්‍රණය ාාර)  (1110  
2. පින් රුකකක මහිම       0911(  
3. විදකුන් උපකදක්        0991(  
4. නිවකන් නිවීම – පළමු කවළුම      0991(  
5. නිවකන් නිවීම – කදවන කවළුම      0991(  
6. නිවකන් නිවීම – කතවන කවළුම      0991(  
7. නිවකන් නිවීම – කිවුවන කවළුම      0991(  
8. නිවකන් නිවීම – පක්වන කවළුම      0999(  
9. නිවකන් නිවීම – ක)වන කවළුම      0999(  
10. නිවකන් නිවීම – කත්වන කවළුම      0999(  
11. නිවකන් නිවීම – ංටවන කවළුම      1111(  
12. නිවකන් නිවීම – නවවන කවළුම      1110(  
13. නිවකන් නිවීම – දකවන කවළුම      1111(  
14. නිවකන් නිවීම – එකකාකළාක්වන කවළුම     1112(  
15. නිවකන් නිවීම – පුක්තකාල මුද්‍රණය) – පරථම ාාග්‍)  (0-6 කවළු්ස    1111(  
16. නිවකන් නිවීම – පුක්තකාල මුද්‍රණය)  ( 0-00 කවළු්ස     1101(  
17. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 0 කවළුම     0999(  
18. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 1 කවළුම     1111(  
19. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 3 කවළුම     1110(  
20. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 2 කවළුම     1113(  
21. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 5 කවළුම     1115(  
22. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 6 කවළුම     1116(  
23. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 1 කවළුම     1119(  
24. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 1 කවළුම     1101(  
25. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 9 කවළුම     1102(  
26. හිතක මහිම – 0       0999(  
27. හිතක මහිම – 1       1113(  
28. හිතක මහිම – 3        1101(  
29. හිත තුනීම        1111(  
30. පුවුත්ම හා නුවුත්ම       1111(  
31. ඇති හුටි දැක්ම        1110(  
32. දිවි කතකේ කුඳෑ ංඳූර       1110(  
33. ක) ංනුව ග්‍ි) කිහි)       1110(  
34. මා-පි) උවුටන       1111(  
35. පරතිපත්ති පජාාව        1113(

36. චලන චිතර)        1112(  
37. දි) කුළි)        1115(  
38. ංබිනික්මන        1113(  
39. බුදු කම) පුද්ග්‍ල)ා හා කමාා)      1119(  
40. මනකක් මා)ාව        1101(  
41. ාාවනා මාේග්‍)        1100(  
42. කකුන් පිළිකවත        1100(  
43. පිළිකවතින් පිළිකවතට       1100(  
44. තිකරණය මහිම        1101(  
45. කක)් කතාව        1101(  
46. කමත් කිකත් විමුක්ති)       1101(  
47. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 0 කවළුම      1101(  
48. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 1 කවළුම      1102(  
49. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 3 කවළුම      1102(  
50. පටිච්ච කමුප්පාද ධමම) – 4 කවළුම      1102(  
51. කක්මකන් නිවන       1101(  
52. තකපෝ ග්‍ුණයමහිම       1103(  
53. කමම චකරක)න් ධමම චකර)ට      1103(  
 * කබෞදධ ග්‍රන්‍ථ පරකානන කමිති), තු.කප. 61, මහනුවර.