Title: Towards a better world
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/towards_a_better_world.pdf
Word Count: 11804

ii
Towards
A
Better World
^f,dajev iÕrdj&
' Lo-w áda Sangar ~~~~~va'
A Sinhalese poem of
the 15th century
by
Venerable V§d~gama Maitreya Mah~thera
Translated by:
Bhikkhu K. N~~~~~nananda
Published by:
Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bh~~~~~raya
Sri Lanka

First Edition : 2000
Second Edition : 2005
ISBN 955-1255-04-6
Printed by:
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd
17/2, Pangiriwatta Road,
Gangodawila, Nugegoda.
Tel: 011-4870333
.

iii iv
Dedicated with gratitude
to the Venerable Great Poet of
V§d~~~~~gama
and
to my departed parents
for the influence of this poem
on the formative years of my life
'Dhamma is priceless'
Strictly for free distribution
'Sabbad~~~~~nam dhammad~~~~~nam jinati'
The Gift of Dhamma excels all other gifts'
Copies of this book may be obtained from:
1. Pothgulgala Aranya
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara,
Devalegama.
2. Royal Institute
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo 05.
3. Mr. D. T. Weragala
422, Welipara,
Thalawatugoda.
4. The Department of Public Trustee
No. 02, Bullers Road,
Colombo 07.
5     .Mr  Anura  Rupasinghe
No. 27, Colombo Street,
Kandy.
     6     .Mrs Hema  Rupasinghe
No. 26, Havelock Road,
Galle.

v vi
flavour of the 'come-and-see' quality of the Dhamma (ehipassiko) as well as the
quality of 'leading-one-onwards' (opanayiko)
The poem vibrates through and through with a note of compassion for the
morally degraded, lifting them up to an awareness of their potential for higher
things. The hortative tone of the poem comes-it seems-not from an 'ivory' - tower
but from a heart that almost bleeds for those who have gone astray due to
ignorance or 'non-knowledge'. Clarification has to precede purification, at least
initially. So the poet has modestly chosen the common medium of the natives,
making a case for its effectiveness rather  apologetically in preference to the more
fashionable Pali of the elite. True to his promise, the poet has succeeded in
portraying vividly the manifold    dangers in sams
~ra (the cycle of recurrent births
and deaths) with its     relentless law of karma (the moral law of cause and effect),
and in   highlighting the ideal of the sublime peace of Nibbana as the ultimate goal
in life.
At a juncture in which the West is looking up to the wisdom of the East to
make its own concept of the millenium a reality, this time-honoured didactic
poem of the Venerable V
§d~gama Maitreya Mah~thera is presented here in translation in the hope that it will contribute towards a better world. The a-moral and
the immoral trends in moden society, wedded as it is to material progress as the
hand-maid of prosperity, are leading towards moral anarchy with disastrous
consequences. May this translation - 'Towards a Better World' - help bring about
an inner  transformation by an awakening to the true values of life !
Bhikku K. N
~~~~~nananda
Pothgulgala }ranya
"Pahan Kanuwa"
Kandegedara
Devalegama
Sri Lanka
June 2000 (B. E. 2544)
(Note: As the poem has come down with many variant readings, several editions
had to be collated for the present text and translation).
INTRODUCTION
"Towards a Better World' is a translation of the famous Sinhala   didactic
poem "Lo-wada Sangar ~va" composed by the Venerable V §d~gama Maitreya
Mah~thera (15th C.A.D). This venerable poet flourished during the Kotte period
of Sri Lankan history, which saw a revival of Sinhala literature. As the head of the
V
§d~gama Sri Ghan~nanda monastery, a leading educational centre of the Kotte
Era, the Venerable Mah~thera made a notable  contribution to Sinhala literature
and Buddhist culture with his rare poetic talent and eloquence in preaching.
"Lo-wada Sangar
~va" is the best known among his literary works, both for its
remarkable poetic excellence and the vast impact it has made on the lives of the
Buddhists ever since it was composed.
Drawing his inspiration from the Canonical discourses which emphasized the
value of birth as a human being in an extremely rare  Buddha-age  with  its
prospect of an exit from the samsaric cycle of births and deaths, the venerable
poet sounds a clarion call to arouse a sense of urgency in making the best use of
that rare opportunity. He makes no    pretence in addressing the poem directly to
the reader himself, awakening him gradually from common-sense to a deeper
sense of   values. The    purpose of the poem is to instil and inspire, aiming at an
inner transformation in the reader and the listener. The language and the idiom
used are geared to the benevolent purpose of character-moulding.
Couched in the classical Sinhala metre abounding in alliteration, the poem is
a perfect blend of sound and sense. Its powerful diction is marked by an effective
employment of stirring metaphors and similes both  Canonical and original. The
imagery is often so picturesque that most of the verses could well be depicted
pictorially. We have resisted the temptation to render the poem into English
verse, in order to be more faithful to its contents. Any traces of poetic diction,
however, that may have crept into the present    translation, are probably due to
the very inspiration coming from the original itself.
Lowada Sangar
~va has had an immense appeal to several  generations of
Buddhists over the past few centuries, mainly because of its lucid  presentation
of the salient teachings of the Buddha. Within the space of four lines full of
rhyme - and - reason the poet would often drive - home a deep truth of Dhamma
through homely similes and  metaphors. In just four lines he could make one
vividly aware of the ironies of one's present life situation so as to bring about a
transformation in one's total outlook on life. In this respect the poem has the
.

1 2
kfuda nqoaOdh
HOMAGE TO THE BUDDHA !
01' fi;a isß fok uy .=K uqyq odKka
i ;a yg jk nj ÿlg  fj odKka
;s ;a .K÷re ÿr,k  Èks |dKka
is ;a if;diska kuÈï  uqks |dKka
Glad at heart, I pay homage to the supreme sage-the giver of
Blissful Peace, the Great Ocean of virtue, the physician for the
sams
~ric ills of beings, the sun that dispels the pitchy darkness of
false views.
02' we u mu Kska mejiQ uqks ±k ;;=
fuu yeu fok n,jhs ±laúh hq;=
; u ;u keK muKska ±k.; hq;=
u u ku Èï ioyï myod is;=
Pleased in mind, I pay homage to the true Dhamma proclaimed
by the Buddha with discerning wisdom to suit the levels of
understanding of all beings-the Dhamma which invites one to
come-and-see and which is comprehensible by each according
to his degree of intelligence.
03' isßu;a nU isrfiys md msiskd
ießhq;a uyuq.,ka ms<sfj<skd
ms<sfj;a ire uy iÕ.K fidnkd
uqÿk;a ne| kuÈï ne;s fmñkd
With  clasped  hands  on  my  forehead  I  bow  down  to the
Great Sangha-the  worthy  order  rich  in  virtue,  coming  down
from  the  lineage  of  the  venerables  S
~riputta  and  Moggall~na
for whom  the heads of illustrious Brahmas served as a door-mat
for rubbing their feet on.
0 4 ' u  k  r  ï  kroï ießoï iÕkg
fuf,iska ne;sfhka woßka kufldg
fjfiiska fm<oï fkduo;a okyg
mjiï l<lï m,±ka fy¿ fldg
Having  thus  expressed my  adoration  with  fervent  devotion  to
the Incomparble Tamer of the tameable, to the Dhamma and to
the Sangha I shall now  go on  to relate  the results  of Kamma  in
Sinhala,  particularly for the benefit of those who do not know
the teachings in the Pali Canon.
0 5 'oyug ißfldg t¿fjka fmr lS
lúhg is; myod isg ksielS
isys fldg l| ms<sfj< fodia fkdfhlS
ks j k g  imeñKs iÕ ieg kfulS
On listening with rapt attention to a recitation of some Sinhala -
verses composed in tune with the Dhamma, sixty monks attained
Nibb
~na in the past  by  reflecting  on  the  manifold  perils  in  the
process  of  the (Five) Aggregates 1
06' t neúka t¿fjka lSjhs wkor
fkdjñka ne;sfhka woßka kulr
if;diska weiqfjd;a fuoyï ukyr
ieneúka isÿfjhs i.fudla isßir
Therefore, without showing any disrespect simply because it is
worded in  Sinhala,  if  you listen  to this  marvellous Dhamma
with worshipful devotion  and gladness,  you  will  surely  gain
heavenly  bliss  and  the bliss of emancipation.

3 4
07' ì u  b| isg lS nK kdikafka
úu ;sj Wv b| isg kdikafka
leu ;sj lSfjd;a úuid ikafka
tu jo i.fudla iem idokafka
Do not listen  to a sermon  seated  on the  floor while the  preacher
is standing. Do not listen to it with a confused mind seated on a
higher seat than the preacher. When someone is  preaching,
listen attentively with  interest.  It is  such hearing of  the
Dhamma that  holds  the prospect of heavenly bliss and the bliss
of emancipation.
08' is h ,a iirÿla ÿrelr fkdfhlS
w i ,a lrk fudla isß iem ksielS
is h ,a i;=ks mska lrjhs uqks lS
fkdl,a wfgls mskalï l< fkdyelS
Let all beings do meritorious deeds which difinitely lead them
towards the bliss of emancipation freeing them from the manifold ills of sams
~ra. This is the advice of the Buddha. There are
however, eight inopportune circumstances which make it impossible for one to do merits.
09' is ;= j ;a ìh lrjk wr;rfha
jegqfkd;a tlaish i;sila ksrfha
n , j ;a ÿla ú¢fkh lrorfha
u | l= ;a msKlg ke; wjirfha
If one falls into one of the 136 hells which are frightful even to
think of, one will  have to undergo  immense suffering  and
hardship. Then there will not be the slightest opportunity for  doing
merits.
10' ;sßika cd;sfh Wmk;a mõ fldg
wjika fkdj ìh mj;S msg msg
u|ika iqka lul=;a ke; yeu úg
i,ika fka flf,i o is;= msKlg
If one is reborn in the animal realm as a result of doing evil
deeds, one will be endlessly gripped by constant  fear. There will
not be the   slightest peace of mind at any time. How then can
one direct one's attention to merit ?
11' Wmk;a fma;j mõ fldg fkdmK;a
lf,l;a fkd,efnhs fiï fidgq muKla
W .= r ;a fkdf;fuhs iqr.Õ jegqk;a
lf,l;a mska fkdl<elsuehs is;=k;a
When one is reborn as a peta (a ghostly being) having done evil
deeds which violate moral laws, one will never get at least phlegm
and snot (as drink) One's throat will remain parched even if one
falls into the heavenly river. It is imposible then to do any merit,
even if one wishes to.
12' mõ ñi msKlehs fkdlrk yeu l,
uqKs nK fkdmj;skd msg ilaj,
ksis f,i Wmk;a ,en ok ukl,
lsislf,l;a l=i,la fkdl<els n,
When one is born in outer regions where the Buddha's teachings
are unknown, and where people are always doing evil deeds
with no idea of merits, one can never do any worth while skilful
deed even if one is born in to wealthy circumstances.

5 6
13' o o ñksiqka nia f.k lsis lf,lh
;o wl=i,a fldg l=i,ska je<lh
w| f.d¨ ìysßj ,ÿj;a fïlh
u| msKl=;a fkdmsfrhs n, ksielh
If one has got this body in a blind, dumb and deaf form, having
committed grave unskilful deeds and neglected the skilful, owing
to one's faith in the  words of foolish  people at some  time or
other,  one cannot gather even a little merit. Have no doubt about
it.
14' is ; ñi lh ke;s nUf,dj i;frls
is; ke;sju lh we;s nU ;,fhls
fuo i; mska fldg WmÈk fmfofils
t ys Wmk;a l=i,la fkdu l< yels
There are four Brahma worlds where only the mind exists but
not the body.  There  is also  a Brahma  realm where  the body
exists without the mind. These too are realms where beings are
born due to merits done. But once born there, they are unable to
do any skilful deeds.
15' n, fldgq jka ;r fuiir kqjf¾
uq , ie gq jka o¨ ,k mõ m÷f¾
ú i l gq jka i.fudla u. w;=f¾
ñ i È gq jka whg;a mska fkdmsf¾
Merits do not accrue also to those who adhere to wrong views,
which are comparable to a citadel within the city of sams
~ra, or
to a  parasitic  root  which throws out a  flush of  sprouts in  the
bush of evil deeds, or to poisonous thorns on the pathway to
heaven and Nibbana.
16' nqÿ flfkl=;a fï f,dj kQmka jr
w÷ frlauh ioyï ke;s fuiir
b÷ rd fkd±fkhs mõmska f;dr;=r
isÿ fkdl<els bka i.fudla isßir
In an age in which no Buddha is born in this world, this sams
~ra
is in utter gloom as it is deprived of the Good Dhamma. There is
no clear-cut distinction then between demerit and merit and therefore it is not possible to attain either heavenly or Nibbanic bliss.
17' ienúka nK weiqj;a uqks÷ka lS
f.d¿jka ìysrka fia fkdj ie< lS
b¢fkka ñi f;dm l=i,ska je< lS
fuf,iska mska fkdl<els l,a wfglS
Though it is a fact that you have heard the Dhamma preached
by the Buddha, you are now neglecting skilful deeds only because you do not pay heed to it like the dumb and the deaf.
There are only those aforesaid  eight occasions which  truly make
it impossible to perform merit.
18' È.= mq¿,ska ilaj< jka is÷ l=i
ishjilska Wv tk leiand ysi
úhisÿfrka kef.;;a ÿ.;sh nei
;j WmÈka kg neß fu ñksia l=i
Even if a turtle
2, rising up to the surface of the ocean which is as
long and as wide as the world - system itself-once in every hundred years-would succeed in inserting its head into the hole in a
yoke by chance, it is far more difficult for one who has gone
down into a bad bourn, to get the chance of being reborn again
into the human world.

7 8
19' l, lsks nqÿ flfkl=ka Wm Èkafka
ÿ l ls ks ñksi;a nj ,en .kafka
fufolsks fuiir ÿla ÿr ,kafka
iqofkks lsu ùßh fkdlrkafka
Rare indeed is the birth of a Buddha. Hard it is to get human
birth. It is with the help of these two that one makes an end of
this sams
~ric suffering. Good men! Why don't you put forth your
best efforts?
20' m ia mõ fldg fu;k;a ,en fidalh
f.dia ksrfha ÿla ú¢;s wfka   lh
/ ia fldg bka mska fuñksia f,dalh
is ia fkdlrõ l,lsks ,;a fï lh
Committing the five evil deeds and being remorseful here itself,
they go down into hell to undergo manifold sufferings there. So,
do your best  to accumulate  merit  now that you  are still in  this
human world. See  to it that you do not throw away  this rare
chance of a human birth.
21' lka kka fuka úi wU m, ßiafia
uka ika f;dia lr lsu m, fiiafia
± ka ± ka ths urejd miq miafia
bka mska uh lghq;= kï oiafia
What is the use in gloating over the pleasures of sense like those
who go on eating with relish poisoned mangoes? Close on your
heels comes Death-even  now.  So it is merit  that you should do,
if you are  clever enough.
22' b i .sks .;a;l= t.sks ksjk f,i
l= i ,g u|l=;a mud fkdjkq ñi
fui ir w;ayer fkdhk fuÿla /i
fji iska ke; w;ayßkd Wmfoi
There is no other special advice to be given for abandoning this
mass of suffering which does not leave this samsaric existence,
than to be as heedful in  doing skilful  deeds as  one whose  head
is  on fire,  is in trying to put out that fire
3.
23' ;e; lska f.k ±uqj;a leg kqnl=i
w ; rl fkdr|k fuka fï ìu ñi
is ; if;diska mska fkdlf<d;a ksis f,i
ke; isákd ;eka i;r wmd ñi
Just as a pebble even though thrown up skywards with effort,
rests nowhere in  between but  falls back  to the ground,  even
so,  if you do not do merit in the proper way with a joyous heart,
there is nowhere you can rest except in the fourfold hell.
24' ;srj fkdis; l=Kq lh u; udfha
fkd;sr njg úÿ,sh Wm udfha
ks;r fulh mjlg fkdk udfha
lrj l=i,a ùßh fkdm udfha
Do not regard this rotten body of yours as stable. The  lightning
streak is the  simile  for its  unstable nature. Without ever  bending  this body towards any evil deed, always strive on to  do
skilful  deeds without delay.

9 10
25' w÷frys wiaf,du úÈkg ÿr §
úÿ,sh meye jerÿk fyd;a jr §
úÿ,sh jka fï lh ,;a ;ek §
isÿ fkdlf<d;a u;= i.fudla jr §
In shooting an arrow in the darkness of a night at a hair of a
horse's tail from afar, if you miss the flash of lightning-you have
missed the target
4. Now that you  have got this  body  which is
comparable to a lightning streak, if you neglect skilful deeds you
will miss the chance of winning heaven and Nibb
~na.
26' fld;k jqk;a ke; ureyg ndod
ú ¢ k fuiem mska we;s f;la fõod
f. j k iir ÿla nqÿ nK kdod
l= u k kegqï fl<s ljg iskdod
For Death-there is no hindrance anywhere. Isn't it a fact that all
these pleasures last only so long as one has merits? Without
believing in the words of the Buddha which bring samsaric
sufferings to and end, what is the use of dancing-of fun and
frolic?
27' ie±ye;a ;kayg nj ÿla fkdleu;s
h y m ;a l,a fï l,a ñi fjk ke;s
oksf;d;a okais,a .=K i; fkdkej;s
mehl=;a wjqreÿ oyila ú;/;s
To those  who  have faith,  who do  not like  the suffering in
existence there is no better  opportunity  than this  (Buddhaage).  If beings only knew  the  value  of  charity  and  morality,
even an  hour is  worth a thousand years.
28' wo wo ths ure mska lr .kafka
flf,io fig ure fka;s is; kafka
ls l , o uyfika ure wem  jkafka
l= u g o  l=i,g lïue,s jkafka
Today-even today-Death might come. How can you rest assured
that Death  will  not come  tomorrow? When  will  M
~ra  with his
mighty army be your guarantor5? Why are you so lazy in doing
skilful deeds?
29' l= u g o  ld î ks;s ierfikafka
fld;ko fï lh werf.k hkafka
weu i| fkdue<sj mska lr .kafka
tujo nj ihqfrka f.dv ,kafka
For what are you always getting ready-eating and drinking and
adorning yourself? Where are you going  to take this body? Be
diligent at all times in doing merits. Isn't that what takes you
beyond the ocean of existence?
30' f;rj iir ihqfrka f;dm fkd,id
; srj ,nk fudla isß iem Wfoid
f;drj múka ks;ru uqks nKid
lrj l=i, ùßh miq fkdneid
In order  to  attain the  stable  bliss of Emancipation  by crossing
the ocean of sams
~ra, always abstain from evil with diligence
having lisened to the Buddha's teachings and devote yourself to
skilful deeds with unremitting endeavour.

11 12
31' yeu úg msKgu is; mdokafka
ks j k g  u. tujo idokafka
jevlg lS nia lsu kdokafka
ks r h g jka l,foda f;dm okafka
Be ever keen on meritorious deeds, for that is what opens up the
road to Nibb~na. Why don't  you  have faith in  what is  said  for
your own good?  Are you  going to  realize the  truth  of it only
after  falling into hell?
32' fudla isß fok uqks÷kaf.a Wm;ls
lmafl< ish oyilskq;a fkd,±ls
m;ajQ t nqÿkaf.ka hq;a ful,ls
t;a jerÿk ke; mrf,dj msysfgls
The birth of a Buddha which offers the prospect of the bliss of
Emancipation is hard to come by even in a hundred thousand
aeons. This is such an age of a Buddha. If you miss this opportunity, you will find yourself helpless in the next world.
33' w ;a jev mr jev iuj is;kafka
fu;a is; iõi; flfrys lrkafka
t ;a neß kï f;dm iir f.jkafka
fi;a mqr iem flf,il o ,nkafka
Regard  as  equal  your  own  welfare  and the  other's welfare.
Have thoughts of mett
~ (universal love) for all living beings. If
you cannot do even  that  much  you will  languish  long in sams~ra.
How are you going to attain the peaceful bliss of Nibb~na?
34' uia f,a ke;s weg n¨ f,jlkafka
l=ia msreula m,hla fkd,nkafka
f,ia ta iemf;ys f,dn fkdis;kafka
fodia fkdfmfkkq ñi ÿlauhs jkafka
A dog licks in  vain a fleshless  bone which has  nothing in it  to
fill its stomach6. So vain are sensual pleasures  for which  you
should not feel greedy. Though you may not see anything wrong
in them, they lead only to suffering.
35' uia leáhla .;a Wl=fil= wyfia
uia fkd±uqj Wl=ikaf.ka jekfia
mia lï ri f,dn l<fyd;a tufia
mia úis uy nhlska ÿla ie,fia
An eagle  which soars  up into the  sky with a  morsel of flesh,
will be pecked to  death  by other  eagles unless  it drops that
piece of flesh
7.Even  so,  if  you  crave  for the  five-fold  plasures
of sense,  you  will come to grief through twenty five great fears8.
36' fi; i,ik uqks nK we; iqñysß
we ; f;dmf.a lka weiqug fkdìysß
ke; lrkg msKl=;a fu f;dmg neß
i;r wmd ÿla jo ú¢kg neß
There are the sermons of the Buddha which are so sweet to the
ear. You  have your ears to hear which are not at all deaf. There
is no merit too, that you are unable to do. Is it only the suffering
in the four hells that you cannot endure?

13 14
37' lrk l,g mõ óßh ó fia
ú¢k l,g ÿla ±ä fjhs .sks fia
we¢k tmõ ÿr,k Wmfoa fia
kqÿk uekú ;=kafodr wjldfia
As sweet  as  honey is  evil-when  you are doing it
9. As  scorching as fire is pain-when you suffer for it. Getting acquainted with
the advice that helps you abandon that evil, leave no room for
any transgression through the three doors of action.
38' woñka Ôj;a fjkjd ú;rg
±yeñka ñhhkq fid|uehs oykg
fuf,iska joy< uqks nK isys fldg
ieneúka mska fldg meñfKõ ksjkg
Far,  far better  it is,  for beings  to die  righteously than  to go  on
living unrighteously. Calling to mind this teaching of the Buddha,
be ever earnest in doing merits and attain Nibb
~na.
39' tlu i;l= ;u uõ u< ÿlgd
fjku yeËQ l÷f,a ì÷j, gd
fuyeu uqyqÿ Èh wvqjk l, gd
;ju iir wd,h wehs f;dm gd
When the drops of tears that a single being has shed in weeping
for his dead mother alone is far more than the waters of all the
seas taken  together, why are you still attached to this cycle of
recurrent births and deaths-sams
~ra10?
40' ,s m .sks fud,jk f;la Èh ie<sfha
iem hla hhs ll=¿j Èh fl<sfha
t m j;a f;dm is;f;d;a fkdyels<sfha
iem hla kï ke; lïri fl<sfha
The crab in the water pan revels in water sport until the fire is
kindled in the  fire place.  If you do  not  shrink from pondering
over that fact, you would realize that there is no true happines in
sense-enjoyment.
41' Wvq iq< Õg w,ajd f.k h kafka
;K iq< fkd±ó kï w; okafka
jrm, hhs lïri f;m ,k afka
to l< lï ksrfha mei jkafka
Walking  against  the wind  with a  grass torch in hand,  if one
does not drop it in time, one will burn one's hand
11. One might
speak of sense pleasures  as  if  they  are  the  highest  gain,  but
the  evil  deeds  one commits for their sake, will mature into
sufferings in hell.
42' msref,ka wr.;a wnrK u.=,g
o u ñ ka .e;s jk whfuka wkqkg
fmr mska we;s f;la ú¢kd iem;g
f;ms ±ka WvÕ=j fkdjÈõ ksrhg
Like  those  who  become  humiliated  by  others  due  to  wearing  ornaments  borrowed  for  a  wedding
12,  do  not  be  proud
of  your  pleasures now, which last only as long as you have
merits, and find yourself thrown into hell.

15 16
43' jo hg ne|f.k f.k hk fidregd
jo u,a oïÆ fnr msßjr gd
,o biqfrys f,dn jQfjd;a mskgd
to iemf;ys l< lï ure rjgd
Even as  a robber  in bondage, while  being led  in procession  to
the place of execution would pride himself on his symbolic bloodred  garlands and the death knell of tom-tom beatings, if you are
greedy of the prosperity you have got, you will be tricked by
M
~ra in the very enjoyment of the fruits of your good deeds.
44' ±uqfjka .sß uqÿfkka fyk fidregd
mjkska lï ke;s fuka weÕ .sugd
crfhka ñfoñka hk ure uqjgd
iem;ska lsu mõ lï l< f;dmgd
As the robber, flung from a hill-top in punishment, has no use of
the resulting cool breeze to allay the heat of his body, what is the
use of that wealth to you with all your evil deeds, as you drop
from (the hill-top of) old age into the gaping mouth of death.
45' w, jk fï lï ri fodi úuid
m, hõ ;mig mq¿jka jh id
m, ri ú| .i Wv Wka ñksid
uq, is¢kd f;la b¢foda fkdneid
Discerning the peril in these sensual pleasures that are so alluring, go into  ascetic  seclusion  while  you  are still  able-bodied.
Will  the man who is enjoying the sweet taste of fruits at the top
of the tree, stay put without climbing down, until the tree is cut
down at the root?
13.
46' nK kï ksfndreh uqksjrhskafka
lh kï fkd;srh woyd .kafka
mK kï ;K w. msKs ì÷ jekafka
msK kï fkdmudju lr .kafka
The teachings of the Buddhas are never false. The body is
unstable-have no doubt about it. Life is like the dew - drop on the
tip of a blade of grass
14. Merit is something to be done without
delay.
47' wika fuud lS foa jev we;s jk
mika is;ska Wkak;a mõ lr ñk
Wmka fkd;ska u;= hla nQ msiiqk
ihska weúo msKl=;a neß tmúk
Listen to what I say for your own good. Though you are happy
now, doing evil deeds, if you get reborn among devils, goblins and
ghosts, you will only hang around in hunger, unable to do any
merit, due to those evil deeds.
48' f,dfí is;ska mõ l< yeu i; gd
i fí lsh;s f.k f.dia hu rcq gd
b fí bkag fkdfh§ is;= rÕgd
,e fí ksrdÿla meñKs tú gd
All beings who commit evil deeds with thoughts of greed, are
taken into  the  presence  of Yama
15,  the  king  of  the  dead,  and
accused before his court. Then they will not be allowed to have
their own way but will have to suffer tortures of hell.

17 18
49' f;diska fkdfhla iem ú| iuyre ks;s
we is ka u ±l mõ mska l<jqka .;s
n is ka lsj;a woyd mska fkd lr;s
f.diska ksf¾ jegqfKd;a ÿla ksï ke;s
Some who are always happily enjoying various pleasures, though
they may see with their own eyes the state of the evil doers and
of those who do meritorious deeds, refuse to believe in it even if
some one explains it, and so neglect the doing of merits. But
once they end up in hell, they will have to undergo endless
suffering.
50' mska mõ fkd±ku wkqjK lï fldg
lka kka uia ri fid|uehs lr ;=g
bka .e,fjkq neß fkdf.diska ksrhg
± ka tu wd,h wßfka wo isg
Those who eat meat, relishing its taste with joy, being ignorant of
the distinction between merit and demerit, are acting unwisely.
They are unable to escape the evil results of those deeds without
going to hell. So give up that attachment to the taste of meat now
onwards-from today itself.
51' ld,d riuqiq fndack lr fmï
.d,d iqj|e;s i÷kq;a uk rï
,d,d wnrK ksis f,i ieriqï
md,d .sh jeks nyqrE flda,ï
Eating greedily tasty foods, applying fragrant sandal wood paste
and adorning oneself with ornaments to match, one is only playing one's comic parts in a variety-show.
52' funia ;u kqjKskau úuid fkd;sr jQ lh .;s wikafka
fo;sia l=Kqfjka hq;=j u|l=;a idrkQ nj keKska okafka
ñksia nj,;a ;efka l=i,la fkdlr Wkafkd;a wm,jkafka
i;sia tlaish ksf¾ jegqfkd;a tohs wkqjK lï ±fkkafka
With your own powers of reasoning, examine what I have to say
about the nature of this unstable body. Understand with wisdom
that this body with its thirty-two repulsive parts
16 has no essence
at all. If you neglect skilful deeds having won this opportunity of
human birth, your life is useless. The day you fall into one of the
136 hells, you will realize your folly.
53' fmr;a cd;sfh m;d .;a ±ka fya;= n,fhka fu;ekafka
<Õ;a fjka fkdj iu. ojier Wkakquq;a fifkyiskafka
mK;a hk l, ;ksj f.hs Wka wh;a fjka fj;s n|skafka
msKq;a l< ks;s legqj fhhs .sh ;efka § iem ú¢kafka
Due to some wish made in a past birth, you find yourself now
thrown together with your near and dear ones, with whom you
affectionately spend your days without separation. But when you
breathe your last, all alone, your connection even with those in
your own household will be broken. It is only the merit you have
done that will accompany you and make you happy wherever
you are reborn.
54' id r kQ l=Kq lhla werf.k lrk nyqkdgl ;foa
kE r ;u ysñ iu. ojier Wka kuq;a iem ú| úf|a
f.dar urejd meñKs l,a±k hkag le|jd tu if|a
nd r ju isgqjkag neßfjo msKla lr .;af;d;a fidf|a
Going about with a putrid body with nothing substantial in it, you
give yourself a variety entertainment-dancing and prancing. You
may spend your days enjoying pleasures with your husband without
leaving him. But when ferocious death comes to snatch you away,
knowing the right time for your departure who will stand you
surety to keep you here? Don't you think it worth your while to
do some merit in time?

19 20
55' irK uqks÷f. woy msKl=;a fkdlr bkafka l=ug foda
urK meñfKk l,g huhd wjq;a le|jd hkag foda
lrk fid|lï oka msKla l< lshkq kqjKska fid| fjfoda
l=uk wkqjK lï o kEhsks wËkq isgqjd .kag foda
Why don't you do any meritorious deeds with faith in the refuge
of the Buddha? Are you waiting for Yama to come and take you
when it is the time for death? The best thing to do for the sake of
a dying man-if one is wise enough-is to remind him of the meritorious deeds he has done. How unwise it is to weep for him-you
relatives? Can you make him stay on by weeping?
56' wËd,d lïmdj Wkak;a b;ska ±laula fkdjkafka
;kd,d is; msKla fkdlru lsïo Wmhd ;nkafka
oud,d hk krl l=Kq lh l=ug foda iem ú¢kafka
Èkd,d fudla mqrg hkakg ulS fï nK wikafka
Though you may weep and grieve, never again will you see him.
Without developing your mind and doing any merit, why do you
simply earn and hoard? What is the use of entertaining this
wretched putrid body which you have to abandon and go? Listen
to this sermon of mine so that you can conquer your passions
and reach the city of Nibb
~na.
57' isák weúK f.k fuiir ì<sfha
ú¢k fuiem crfhka ;e<s ;e<sfha
olsk kegqï jeks úÿ,sh t<sfha
fu±k fkdlr l=i,g lï ue<sfha
Stuck on the hook of sams~ra and oppressed again and again by
old-age, your indulgence in these pleasures is like seeing a dance
by the flash of lightning. Knowing this as a fact, be not lazy in
doing skilful deeds.
58' oka mska neß foalehs fkd is;kafka
wka l< mska wkqfudaoka jkafka
Wka ,o mska iß mska ,en .kafka
bka jo i.fudla iem idokafka
Do not think that charity and merit are impossible things. Rejoice
in the merit done by others and thereby earn as much merit as
they themselves have got. Isn't that what assures you of
heavenly and Nibb
~nic bliss?
59' i h g fõ o ri uqiq n;a lkafka
. | g fõ o weÕ iqj| lrkafka
f,vg fí;s fï fuf,dj i;=kafka
l=ug óg iemfhlehs is;kafka
Is it not for hunger, that you eat tasty rice? Is it not for the foul
smell, that you apply scent on your body? These are only
medicines for the sicknesses of beings in this world. Why, then
do you regard these as pleasures?
60' udfkka b¢;;a fï iem fmreuh
iSfkka .E iqj|la fia fndreuh
odfkka iSf,ka fkdlf<d;a oreuh
mdfkka w÷rg f.k hhs lreuh
Though you proudly think that these pleasures are the highest,
they are as false as a scent applied in a dream. If you do not
practise the Dhamma with liberality and virtue, your Kamma will
take you from the lamp to the gloom.

21 22
61' o r / i .sks wejq¿Kq l, ksnf|a
.sks ñ i or hhs hk ni fkdfhfoa
t u f,i tla fldg joy< uqksf|a
ÿl ñ i lhlehs hk ni fkdfhfoa
When a heap of firewood is fully ablaze with fire, 'firewood' is
not the proper word for it-but 'fire'. Even so has the Buddha
brought the two together in his teaching, that to call this 'a body'
is improper as it is nothing but 'suffering'.
62' b¢f;d;a fnda l,a crfhka úisf¾
ke;fyd;a jeohhs ureuqj l=yf¾
fu u y ;a crur fofokd w;f¾
fuiem;a iemhhs .ksfoda ljf¾
If one lives long, one will crumble up by old-age. If not, one will
be swallowed up by the gaping mouth of death. Sandwiched between these two major predicaments, who will truly regard these
pleasures as pleasures?
63' wi,a f.fhl fidrlï .sh ojfil
l=yq,a is;ska b¢fka ;u f.h /l
ish,a i;=ka ure f.k hkjd ±l
l=i,a fkdlr b¢fka wehs fkdj iel
The day your neighbour's house is burgled, you keep watch and
ward over yours, with a cautious mind.  Seeing how Death is
snatching away all beings, why are you so complacently looking
on, without doing skilful deeds?
64' .Õ hk we;a l=K b| uia rigd
is÷ ueo jeo jekiqKq fuka lmqgd
, o biqfrys f,dn l<fyd;a f;dmgd
nj ihqfrka .ufkla ke; f.dvgd
Like the crow that perished in mid-ocean owing to its greed for
the taste of meat, as it perched on the carcass of an elephant
that drifted down the river, if you are greedy of the prosperity
that has come your way, there is no prospect of crossing the
ocean of existence for you.
65' m r i;=rka t;s t;s hk nigd
ye r wUqorejka hk f;dm j,gd
f.dr cr ure tkq ±l ±l fj;gd
m r udoj b¢fka wehs msKgd
On hearing the alarming news of an invasion of foreign enemies,
you desert your wife and children and resort to the forest. Why
then, are you heedless in doing merits, being in full view of the
approach of terrible old-age and death?
66' .Õ j;=frys hk ñksil= ÿlsfka
<Õ l< Trejg fkdkef.k f,isfka
i.fudla fok nK woyd fkdf.fka
ÿ.;sh jeo f;dm lsu ÿla ú¢fka
Just like a man, miserably swept down a river, would refuse to
climb into the boat that is drawn near him, refusing to believe in
the Dhamma that offers you the prospect of heaven and Nibb
~na,
why do you fall into hell and suffer?

23 24
67' is,am kegqï fiajd lï mE ;o
w,am fohla Wfoid ú¢kd jo
is,am yod /laflda;ska ;;= f,o
l,am oyia iqrisß ú¢fka jo
Just see the tortures people undergo for the sake of a measly
pay, displaying their skill in crafts, dancing and risky warfare.
Could you not enjoy heavenly bliss for thousands of aeons if only
you would gladly observe the moral precepts in the proper way.
68' Wkak;a ke.s isákg neß ;Srej
is á h ;a b¢kg n, ke;s udrej
crm;a jQ l, fkd;sfnhs fï rej
lrf;d;a lr.ka oka mska iSrej
When you are old and decrepit, you cannot stand up straight
once seated, or sit down unaided once you have stood up. Then
your shape will not be the same. If you wish to practise giving
and do merit-be prompt.
69' uqka yeu wUqorejka WmÈkafka
mska n,fhka fnda l,a mj;skafka
Wka l< mskauh Wka r|jkafka
bka is; f,dnuh f;dm mj;skafka
Your wife and children are all born due to their own merit. They
live long by virtue of their own merit. What sustains them here, is
the merit they themselves have done. So, all what you have is
the greed (for them) in your own mind.
70' iS , .=fKa msysgd f.k fkdhsf|a
wd, h lr rlskd f;dm ksnf|a
nd, mshUqorefjda kï fuif|a
nd, l,g fl<skd W;= j<f|a
Your dear wife and little children for whom you are now showing so much affection and care always, without establishing yourself  on any standard of morality, are comparable to the coconut
shells, which are one's playthings in childhood.
71' ÿ la f.k /ia lr ok yeu leu;S
ks la fuk ksrhg krhska isß;S
ÿ la fok wUqorejka ks;s rls;S
fudla fok msßisÿ is,a fkdu rls;S
People are in the habit of amassing wealth as desired, taking
great pains and then leaving it behind to go down into hell. They
are always taking care of their wives and children who only give
them suffering but never do they care for their own moral purity
which offers the release of Nibb
~na.
72' fkd,o;a wyrla idÿla ÿre fldg
ke;=j;a lv froaola tl mglg
n , j ;a ksrfha ;o ÿla isys fldg
u | l= ;a miq fkdnisõ f;ms msKlg
Even if you do not get a square meal to dispel hunger or a rough
piece of cloth just enough to go round your body once, calling to
mind the terribly intense suffering awaiting you in hell, do not, for
a moment, shrink from doing merits.

25 26
73' kif;d;a is; f,dn wkqjK fodiuh
jif;d;a ie±ye;a;ka we;s foiuh
foif;d;a i.fudla fok Wmfoiuh
wif;d;a uqks÷ka joy< ni uh
If you are to destroy-destroy the greed hatred and delusion in
your mind. If your are to dwell-dwell in a locality where there
are people with faith. If you are to preach-preach a sermon that
holds the prospect of heaven and Nibb
~na. If you are to listenlisten to a word preached by the Supreme Sage.
74' jekqjd kï nqÿ .=K jekqjd uh
;ekqjd kï ;u is; ;ekqjd uh
fokqjd kï oka mska fokqjd uh
È kq jd kï mrf,dj Èkqjd uh
True praise-is the praise of the qualities of the Buddha. True
building- is the building up of one's own mind. True giving-is the
giving of alms and merits. True winning-is the winning of the
(fear of) the next world.
75' wif;d;a ksfndrej uqks÷ f;mq,auh
yßf;d;a fkd;nd oi wl=i,auh
rlsf;d;a is; msßisÿ fldg is,auh
oksf;d;a fuish,a,g fï l,auh
For a true hearing-hear the Buddha-word. For a perfect giving
up-give up the ten unskilful states. For a perfect safeguard-guard
the precepts with a pure mind. As a matter of fact to knowknow this as the time for all these.
76' fu i ir ÿla rel úi m,.;a w;=
f, i isáhd fuka ish m,fhka hq;=
f;di jvñka bka neyer fk,d is;=
o i wl=i,a m, wij fuhska u;=
Like branches of the tree of sams
~ric suffering bearing
poisonous fruits, are the evil deeds which produce their fruits in
hundreds. Therefore with an undistracted mind, be glad to listen
to the results of the ten unskilful deeds from now onwards.
77' nqÿ  nK wiñka is; i; mdfha
l=re mK lï yer msh ta mdfha
mr  mK keiqfjd;a ljr Wmdfha
w m u K ÿla fohs i;r wm dfha
Hearing the Buddha's teachings, calm down your mind and give
up despicable low deeds. If you destroy the lives of other beings
by any method whatsoever, it will give you limitless suffering in
the four hells.
78' ueähka khs uqj f.dÿrej b| hd
mKqjka lk fuka ri ú| ú| hd
ief,ñka crf.dr ure uqj jeo hd
n , uq ka mrmK jkik f,o hd
Just as frogs fallen prey into the mouth of cobras, go on eating
worms with much relish, see how these people go on destroying
the lives of others, while they themselves are trembling with fear
caught in the jaws of terrible decay and death.

27 28
79' n,fhka j;a lsishï fidr is;lska
ish;ska j;a ±kajQ Wmfoi lska
mrika ;l foh .; fidrlulska
ksrfhka ksrhg meñfKhs t;lska
If one steals what belongs to another, either by force or with a
stealthy mind, either with his own hand or by instigating another,
one will go from hell to hell, as a result of that evil deed.
80' f,dìkd ñysßj fidrlï l< i;
ú ¢ kd ÿla fï f,dj fuf;lehs ke;
fu È kd ta ±l ±l bka fkdkej ;
b ¢ kd l, lsl,l fõ foda fi;
The sufferings that beings undergo in this world itself, having
committed theft overcome by greed, is immeasurable. Seeing all
that again and again, you do not give it up and mend your ways.
When are you going to have any peace of mind?
81' wiq fldg .; fkd;n;s wdodrh
jo fldg uerej;a ke; t úpdrh
,.= fldg fkdis;õ mõ mrod rh
ks r h g  weof.k hk tu mdrh
If you are caught, you will find yourself helpless. Even if you are
tortured to death, there will be no inquiry. Do not think lightly of
the evils of adultery. It is a path that drags you down to hell.
82' wijd ulshk nia wr ;rfha
uqijd nia lSjd tl uqrfha
jijd foõf,dj hk ux ;rfha
meijd ñi kdÍ f.dr ksrfha
Listen with attention to what I have to say! If you utter a lie even
once, it can block your way to heaven and will not set you free,
until it has ripened into sufferings in the terrible hell.
83' m, fok mõ mska fol fkdn,dfï
m j i k nia Wrila ud,dfï
ì | j k nia jev ke;s fla,dfï
u ;= j k  ÿla fkd±fkk fõ,dfï
Those words that you speak, ignoring the (distinction between)
merit and demerit which produce their results, are like a beautiful necklace that cuts the neck. Malevolent speech that brings
about estrangement is slander. One is not aware now of the sufferings arising out of it.
84' weúi fkdlsh nia lkg hjq,a f,i
is;i f;diska lsh lshf;d;a msh ni
mrei f;mq,a ìKqjd kï uy fodi
túi fkdhhs mrf,dj ÿla § ñi
Being enraged, do not speak harsh words like driving iron spikes
in another's ears. If you are to speak, speak lovable words pleased
in mind. Harsh speech is a serious fault. Its poisonous effect will
not go down until it has given you sufferings in the next world.

29 30
85' fmr isg úh;=ka fkdlshd je<lS
fof,djg jev ke;s nia wl=if,lS
fl<shg j;a ta jev ke;s nfilS
ks r h g jeo hk rc udjf; lS
Frivolous talk which does not conduce to the good of this world
of the next, which the wise from times past have abstained from,
is unskilful speech. Do not indulge in it even for fun. It is a royal
road to hell.
86' wkai;= iem;la ±l o< f,dìfka
Wkag fkdù ug fõjhs is;sfka
uka l< ta is; wg.;a múfka
Wka u;= ksrfha ÿlauhs ú¢fka
Those who, on seeing others' wealth, think with intense greed;
'O! how I wish it were mine-not theirs', will have to undergo
suffering in the future, due to the evil tendency of arousing such
a thought.
87' ß is kq okyg lr jd foahd
kis jhs hk is; jEmd foahd
nis kd ksrhg ta md foahd
lsis lf,l;a ta tamd foahd
Being hostile to people whom one does not like and wishing;
'May they perish!', is a thought of ill-will. It is a path for going
down to hell. Such a thought should never be entertained.
88' ks j k g u. fï hhs uqks lS hï
o y u g fjka jQ foiegla iuhï
iß fldg .;a is; fjhs ñiÈgq hï
i i r g ìcqjguhs ta iu hï
Wrong-view is the thought that takes as right, the sixty-two
religious views
17 which are contrary to the Dhamma declared by
the Buddha as the path to Nibb~na. All those religious views are
merely seeds for the growth of Sams ~ra.
89' kg is,a ñiÈgq .;a wh leu;S
w g .;a lma .sks l| ueo mefi;S
w g uy krlh meiqk;a fkdue;S
msg ilaj< tla fmfoil mefi;S
Those who have no morality and have taken up wrong views of
their own liking, burn in the cataclysmic blaze of the holocaust at
the end of the aeon. As if not content with the burning in the
eight great hells, they go on with the same dire experience in a
region outside this world-system.
90' fkdfhlS ri ìu ksU ìcqjg ,;
t ue lS isáfkh ;s;a;j m,.;
fuu lS ñiÈgq woyia we;s i;
l < lS foh wl=i,a ñi mska ke;
Even as a margosa seed
18, when planted on the earth which has
various tastes, yields a fruit with only the bitter taste, obscuring
all other possible tastes, the words and deeds of those beings
who hold wrong views and ideas, turn out to be unskilful-not at
all meritorious.

31 32
91' fï o i wl=i,s fkll=;a l<fyd;a
Wm foi lska nilska lrjQ fjd;a
t ú . i tla woyi is; is;=fjd;a
fkdj,i fudyq yeu fok ksrhg fh;a
If one commits even one of these ten evil unskilful deeds or gets
another to do it by means of instruction, or with a word of assent,
or else instantly thinks the same thought with which another is
doing them, before long they all will find themselves in hell.
92' lror oi wl=i,fhka fkdñ§
jerier mEfjd;a fuñksia f,dj§
fur.sß uqÿfkka yqKq fuka fkd/£
mrf;r ke;s ÿla ihqf¾ lsñ§
Without abstaining from these ten perilous unskilful deeds, if one
behaves in a cruel and harsh way in this human world, he will
dive deep down into the limitless ocean of suffering as if he has
slipped from the top of mount Meru with nothing to check his fall
in between.
93' nqÿj;a fuf;lehs fkdlshels msßis|
n,j;a uyÿla ú÷jk yeu i|
is;=j;a ìh jk wguy krlo
Tiqm;a iy tlaish i;sfila jo
The eight great hells together with the 'sword-leaf' hells make up
a total of hundred and thirty six which are full of agonizing
torture. Not even a Buddha can sufficiently describe the
sufferings in those hells, even the thought of which drives terror.
94' f; is h la f;ma uqj jeo isÿrej .;
o j i la ñksil= ú¢ ÿla fkdkej;
fudfyd;la ksrfha ú¢ ÿla iuj;
w ne g la yd iß fkdfjfoda ysuj;
If the sufferings a man undergoes throughout a day when his
body is pierced by three hundred spear-heads could be compared to a single moment's suffering in hell-is not Mount
Himalayas comparable to a mustard seed?
95' fmr wÕ kla tla t¿ fokl biis|d
is h , Õ je<¢ .sks±,a ksrh ÿla ú|d
weh weÕ f,dau .Kfka bia lemqï ,od
fu u r Õ fõh ldg;a wl=if,a f,od
A woman who cut off a she-goat's head in the past had to suffer
in hell with her entire body wrapped in flames, and also had her
own head cut off as many times as the number of hairs on the
she goat's body. This is the way an evil unskilful deed works its
result on any one.
96' fl<s hg lvla iÕjd hy¿jl= f.fka
fy<s fldg kej; ÿka ñksil=g tf;lsfka
ú <s jeiaula fkd,eìKs  foú jqk;a wfka
fl<s hg j;a fkdlrõ fidrlula ±fka
A man who teased a friend of his by hiding his clothes for fun
only to reveal them later, suffered-alas!-for that practical joke
alone, even as a god, by not getting a cloth to cover his nakedness. Do not, even for fun, intentionally do any act of stealing.

33 34
97' fkdkej;s wfhla fmr mror mõ leu;s
.= .= r ;s .ef,;s ;siajd oyiska Wfv;s
ysï ke;s ;ju f,dal=Uq ksrfha mefi;s
fkdlr;s fumõ kqjKe;s wh jev leu;s
One who, in the past, had indulged in adultery again and again, is
still being boiled alive in the hell of melting lead-pots, diving down
with shrieks and surfacing only once in every 30,000 years. The
wise who wish for their own welfare, never commit such evil
deeds.
98' ,e È j rfcla fndre nia lS ú.i lhd
ke ;s j ßoaÈ n,h;a ta ñksia lhd
fmdf<dj m<df.k f.dia jegqKs kr lhd
fuf,dj i;=ks bka fndre lSu krlhd
A king who uttered a lie under temptation, lost his psychic powers immediately and went down into hell in his human body as
the earth opened up to let him in. So, let beings in this world
know that lying is bad.
99' msiqkq lshd iÕ fokula fjkia fldg
meiqkq tflla ksrfha l,amhla isg
uqyqKq l=Kqj ;j fma;j ú| .eyeg
msiqKq nila fkdlshõ wo mgka fldg
A person who estranged two monks by slander, got burnt in the
hell for an aeon and suffered further as a peta with a rotten face.
Do not speak a word of slander from today onwards.
100'fm r uyfKla iÕ .Kyg neK kmqre
ks r fha jeà ìu i;a .õ jefvk ;=re
f.dr ÿla ú¢ ;j fma;j isg l=ßre
m r yg thska fkdlshõ nia fkdmshlre
A monk who, in the past abused the sangha in harsh words, fell
into hell and having remained there until the earth grew seven
gavutas (leagues), is still going through terrible sufferings as a
cruel peta (ghostly being). Do not therefore speak words
disagreeable to others.
101' lsfjd;a jevla ke;s nia f.dr ksrd .efí
u y ;a l=ßre ÿla ú| h<s wfjd;a fudfí
ls j ;a ienE fkd.ks;s Tyqf. nia ifí
f.j ;a iir ÿla fuu fkdlshf;d;a iefí
If one indulges in frivolous talk, one will suffer grievous pains in
hell and on returning to this world, one's words will not be
accepted in an assembly even if they are true. Those who do not
speak frivolous words will surely put an end to samsaric
suffering.
102'wka i;= fohla fõjhs is;=j ;uyg
bka ÿ.;sfhys ÿla ú| wj fï f,djg
Wka is;=jd isÿ fkdufjhs is;= f,ig
ñka u;= is;la fkdis;õ tjeks mjlg
With regard to something belonging to another, if one thinks, "I
wish it were mine" one will have to suffer in bad bournes and on
returning to this world, he will find all his hopes belied. So from
now onwards, do not entertain such an evil thought.

35 36
103' fndajd o yia meijk ksrh fjk fjk
jE md o kï reÿ uk nj kmqre jk
wd nd o ÿla ú÷jk Wmkqmka ;ek
jE md o hla fkdis;õ ±k ±k is;sk
The cruel state of mind called ill-will which makes one suffer in
various hells, is dangerous. Do not knowingly give way to any
thoughts of ill-will which make you suffer pains of disease wherever you are born.
104'l , la ksrd ÿla ú| úfgl f.dv ÿgq
fkdfhla frda. wgf.k .; fjhs wßgq
W o la kqjK ke;sfõ is; fjhs ls¨gq
fu j la mgka úi fuka is;j ñiÈgq
When one comes out having suffered for a long time in the hell,
one's body will become ugly due to various diseases. One will be
lacking in wisdom and one's mind will be impure. Therefore from
now onwards look upon wrong view as poison.
105'njfhka njfhys flf<iqka fkdfhlS
f;dm±ka ú¢kd ÿla ±k ksielS
i i ß ka f.dv ke.=ug uqks÷ka lS
f,imska mjiï weiqfjd;a fhfylS
I shall now declare the merits as the Buddha has preached them,
having understood clearly the sufferings you now undergo due to
various defilements accumulated life after life, so that you may
get beyond sams
~ra. You may do well to listen to it.
106'wka yg w,ij fkdfldg úodkh
mska ñi wkslla fkdfldg modkh
;=ka is; msßisÿ fldg ÿka odkh
Wka .sh .sh ;ek ,efnhs ksodkh
That act of giving done with a thought pure in three respects 19
without lazily ordering another to do it on one's behalf, giving
prominence to no other motive than that of doing merit, will provide one with a treasure wherever one is reborn.
107'we;=<g j eof.h weúf,; .skafka
msg;g y< nvquh jev jkafka
fuis;g f.k f,dn fkdj oka fok afka
;uyg tujo u;= m, fok afka
When fire enters your house and is catching hold of everything
in it, it is only the things that you take out that would be of use
20.
Bearing this in mind, practise giving without greed. Isn't that what
turns out to be fruitful for you in the future?
108'nq È k g .;a n;a msË ñi fjk ke;
h È y g okafoj u;= ÿla fkdú¢;
fuu yg we; b;sßh foñ hk is;
y eurg rcisß iem ,ÿj;a ke;
You may have nothing to give except the mouthful of rice you
are ready to eat. Give it to the beggar even then, so that you may
not suffer in the future. The thought; 'This is enough for me. The
rest I will give,' will never occur, even if you have got the splendour
of sovereignity over all the countries.

37 38
109' mska fkdlrk ÿokka nia kdod
;=ka fodia u, ÿrelr is; mdod
mka is,a ks;s wgis,a /l fmdaod
bka fudlamqr meñfKõ fkdj ndod
Without believing in the words of the wicked who do no merits,
cleanse your mind by removing the three taints of evil and keeping the five precepts regularly and observing the eight precepts
on Poya days, attain thereby Nibb
~na unhindered.
110' f,d,a is; uq, is| ks;s ;e;a is;sfka
is ,a msßisÿ fldg i|/ia f,isfka
j ,a rlskd fiurl= fuka rlsfka
l ,a fkdhjd bka fudla isß ,nfka
With constant endeavour cut off the root of greed. Keep your
virtue as pure as moon-beams and protecting it like the yak its
tail, win to the Bliss of Release before long.
111'fj;ajd iõ i; ieul,a ksÿlS
m ;a jd iem;g frda ÿla je<lS
fh;ajd iu.sj ksjkg uqks lS
fu;and jk kï jeä mska lfulS
'May all beings at all times be free from suffering! May they be
immune form disease and be at ease! In amity and concord, may
they attain Nibb
~na proclaimed by the Buddha!' Such meditation
on Mett~ (universal love) is of greater merit.
112'h y m ; fkdis;k ieá fï okhd
ls ms i ; Wkqkg fo;s fõ okhd
ye u i ; fj; l< fu;a nd jkhd
iel ke; i.fudla iem ido khd
Just see how these people do not care to think of welfare. When
angry these beings inflict pain on one another. Meditation on Mett~
directed towards all beings, will undoubtedly conduce to heavenly bliss and the Bliss of Release.
113'fokakka ±k ÿka rka fia fmd<shg
ÿka ÿka fia ;u l< mska wkqkg
tkafkka ÈhqKqj ;shqKqj ;u yg
bka ±k kql=iS jqj mska §ug
Like gold coins lent on interest to those who are sure to return
them, if you transfer to others the merit you have done, it will
come back to you increased twofold and threefold. Do not, therefore, be lazy in giving merits.
114'uqks÷ka lS nK lrñka mqyqKQ
foiñka okyg jvñka l=¨KQ
tmsfkka fkdmeñK ksrhg oreKQ
,en.ka u;= i.fudla isß ÈhqKQ
By practising the Dhamma proclaimed by the Buddha and preaching it to the people out of compassion, avoid dangerous hells on
account of that merit and attain both heavenly bliss and the Bliss
of Release in due course.

39 40
115'Èj uka uqks÷ka ÿgq fuka f;dijd
nK oka kka yg je| w;a Tijd
mofhka mohg woßka wijd
tmsfKka ksrhg hk ux jijd
Being joyful as if you have met the living Buddha himself, raise
your clasped hands in worship to those who know the Dhamma,
and listen to it, word after word, with respectful attention. By
that merit you can block the path to hell.
116' ÿre fldg yeu úg is; we;s udfka
.re fldg je| je| ÿgq f;la udfka
uqks÷g mqo l< n;a u,a mdfka
i;yg i.fudla u. tu mdfka
Always doing away with the conceit in the mind, and worshipping with honour again and again from the very sight of the
image of the Buddha, if beings make offerings of food, flowers
and lamps, that merit will show them the way to heaven and
Release.
117' we; f,dj jk mi u,a yeu ojid
fld; kl msÿj;a uqks÷ka Wfoid
is; fuú;r mskg;a fkdu i,id
i; iißka .e,fjkafka flf,id
Flowers bloom in the forests everyday in this world. Wherever
they are offered, they are in honour of the Buddha. Without turning their minds even to this much merit, how can beings escape
the cycle of births and deaths?
118' uqks mq;a iÕ .K uõmsh .=rejr
c r m ;a l=, fogq .s,kqka ;jir
/l is;a fia l< w;amd fufyjr
iq j m ;a lr isß ú÷jhs iqrmqr
Caring for and faithful attendance on, the Sangha-the sons-ofthe-Buddha-and one's parents, teachers, aged elders, the sick,
and ascetics, will conduce to one's own health and heavenly bliss.
119' f,dj we;a;ka kqjKska úuid ±l
ys; ke;a;ka hhs fkdis;d fjkil
.=K we;a;ka .=K lSu fkdù iel
kqjKe;a;ka mska lrk Wmdfhl
Examining beings in the world with one's wisdom and praising
unstintingly the virtues of the virtuous without any discrimination
against those who are unfriendly, is one of the ways in which
those who are wise accumulate merit.
120' f.dv ,ñfka i;aj. nj ÿlsfka
f.k ksjfka isgqjk ;=gq u;sfka
;= Kq re j fka .=K isys l< is;sfka
ke; ú¢ fka ÿla iifrys b;sfka
One who reflects on the qualities of the Triple Gem which even
by virtue of being pleased in it, takes beings beyond sams
~ric
suffering to establish them in Nibb~na, will not have to suffer in
sams~ra anymore.

41 42
121' mska ñi kEhka jk msysfgla ke;
Wka fok u;= ysñ jk fohl=;a ke;
bka u;= woyd isys lrf;d;a i;
wka l=i,la fkdl<;a fuu foa we;
Relatives cannot be of any help-other than merit itself. There is
no inheritance that they can give for the future. If beings, therefore, reflect on the qualities of the Triple Gem in view of their
own future, it is enough for their well being even if they do no
other skilful deed.
122'mq rjd i;a rejkska uq¿ forKh
lrjd mdhla nUf,dj muKh
n | jd rkaoo ,d ñKs f;drKh
fokjd g;a jeä mska nq;airKh
Greater than the merit one gets by offering a heap of seven
kinds of gems covering the entire earth and a mansion built as
high as the brahma-world with gem-set gateways flying golden
flags, is the merit acquired by going to the refuge of the Buddha.
123'wmuK iem imhd fok i; yg
l=remK wjìh mej;=ï ke;s fldg
nqÿ nK f,i mej;=ï neß fuf;dmg
;sirK ñi msysgla ke; iirg
Apart from the Three Refuges, there is no succour for you in
samsara, even if you cannot live upto the teachings of the
Buddha which bring boundless happiness, preventing rebirth in
terrible hells.
124'w i ñ ka fu oyï w,ij fkdbf|a
mq r ñ ka fu ish¨ mskalï ksnf|a
flf,iqka uq,a fkd;nd is; misf|a
,en. ka i.fudla u;= ÿla fk dúf|a
Without remaining lazy after listening to this Dhamma, fulfil all
these meritorious deeds at all times, and eradicating completely
the defilements from the mind, attain heavenly bliss and the Bliss
of Release to be free from suffering in the future.
125'isÕm;a tflla fmr wkqreÿ f;reka ±l
;u, ;a n;ska ÿkafka tlu iekaol
n , j ;a thska iqrm;s ùh bka ol
keKj;a lrõ oka mska m, fuhska ±l
In the past, a certain beggar on seeing the Venerable Anuruddha
Thera, gave only a ladleful of rice out of what he has received.
But by that merit he became a powerful king of gods named
Indaka. Practise giving and do merit, O! Wise men, seeing these
good consequences.
126'ojila ú;r is,a /ls l=<Õkla fmrd
oyila iqrU msßjrñka reúka ird
;jila foú÷ ,Õ isß ú| ksrka;rd
ú.ila tis,a f;dr fkdlrõ is;ska ord
A lady who observed the precepts just one day, was reborn in
heaven by that merit and is still enjoying heavenly pleasures in
the company of Sakka, the king of gods, at the head of a thousand heavenly nymphs excelling in beauty. Do not neglect, even
for a moment, the precepts you have taken upon yourself.

43 44
127' flf,iqka flfrka f;dr lr is;= ;kduh
ks ÿ ls ka ,efnhs nUf,dj iem ukduh
ÿ o iq ka ksjka fohs urfika Èkduh
ms k ls ka W;=ï msk kï ndjkduh
When one's mind is developed, getting rid of the defilements, one
attains the excellent bliss of the brahma world without difficulty.
It also brings Nibb
~na so hard to see and conquers the hosts of
M~ra. The highest of all merits is indeed that of meditation.
128'l< mska §u kï ;u is; i;=gq fldg
ne¢ rka ysfKls foõf,da ihg ke.=ug
ke.smqka if|l wjìh .sï ksùug
ks;smska thska foj ÿgq ÿgq okka yg
The transference of the merit one has done with a joyous mind,
is a golden ladder to climb into the six heavens. It is the full moon
risen to cool down the heat of the fear of hell. Therefore always
give the merit you have done to whatever people you happen to
meet.
129'oka fok if|ys foõrï fjfyr uqks÷g
mska wkqfudaokaj ñksfila t;ek isg
mska ,en .;sh jeä ;rñka tisgq yg
bka ÿk kqÿk lsu wkqfudaokd jg
On the occasion of the offering of Jetawana monastery to the
Buddha, a man who was present there, rejoiced over the merit
and thereby earned a greater merit than that millionaire (who
offered it). So what difference does it make whether one has
given or not, so long as one can rejoice over it?
130'nq ÿ ka foik nK ñysfrkau is; ;ekS
mi ka j Wka ueäfhla flúfglska wekS
t hska ñh ;soi ,o biqre fnfyúkS
fujka oyï weiqug ue<s fkdjõ ±kS
A frog which calmed down its mind and was pleased at the sweetness of the Buddha's sermon, got transfixed by a walking stick
and died then and there to get a great boon of pleasures in
T
nvatimsa heaven. Knowing this fact, be not lazy in listening to
such a Dhamma.
131'ÿla m;a if;la uqks÷ka fj; is; mE§
tla od.efnl Èh fnr,sh u,la ms§
ila ú;s iem;a bka mka;sia jfrl ,§
ÿla ke; fumqo lrf;d;a wl=i,ska ñ§
A poor man with a mind pleased with faith in the Buddha offered
a tiny flower of a common weed to a relic-shrine. By that merit
he attained the splendour of a wheel-turning monarch thirty-five
times. If one makes such offerings being free from evil unskilful
mental states, one will not have to face suffering.
132'fj ia inq uqks÷ ±l tl jfrl jekafoa
;s ia tl lfml ÿ.;sh ÿla fkdúkafoa
f;dia jvjk iqrkr biqre úkafoa
fi ia i ke;;a ful=i,a neß l=ukafoa
A man who on seeing the Buddha Vessabhu had worshipped
him just once, did not have to suffer in any evil bourn for thirtyone aeons. He enjoyed human and divine prosperity as well. Why
cannot one do such a skilful deed, even if one is unable to do
anything else?

45
133' ñka ,nó fkdis;d lsis WmlrK
uqka iißka f.dv,ñ hk is; l=¨K
mska mõ folu fkdjrojd lsfjd;a nK
bka f;dm ú¢k iem fuf;lehs ke; muK
If you preach correctly the distinction between merit and demerit without any motive of selfish gain in terms of requisites,
but with the pure compassionate intention;' Let me take these
beings beyond (the ocean of) Sams
~ra-the happiness you get as
a result of it is inestimable.
134'l< fyd;a is,aj;=ka yg ks;s j;dj;
ÿ gq i ;a flfkla fj;s ´yg b;d ys;
keKwe;a ;jqka idok mska j;dj;
b u y ;a msfkls ±k .ksf;d;a ys;dys;
If one always attends on the virtuous, those good people who
happen to see it, will become very friendly towards him. That
attendance to personal needs by which the wise make merit, is
indeed an act of immense merit-should one know what is beneficial and not beneficial.
135' mska lï lrk wh ta ÈhqKq jk f,i
uka ika f;diska tys .=K lsh; we;s f,i
Wka Wmkqmka ;ek me;sfrhs f,dj hii
mqka i| myka jQfuks woyj funi
If those who do meritorious deeds, speak in praise of them with
joy so that the practice may increase, their fame will spread in
the world as if the moon has arisen, wherever they are reborn.
Do have faith in these words!
136';s i r K .;a tla ñksfila tla lf,l
fkdmeñK ÿ.;shg isg lma tla ;sfil
w m u K iem;a i.fudla iem ,È ksiel
t i r K fkdf.k f;dm ú¢fka lsu fu ÿl
A man who once took the three refuges, just by virtue of that,
was saved from going down into any bad bourn thirty one aeons
and attained inestimable heavenly pleasures and the Bliss of
Release. Why are you going through all this suffering without
such a resort as the Triple Gem.
137' wkqjK lñka isys fkdlrkq ñi i;;
wirK f;dmg ms<sirKlauh ksh;
nqÿ.=K is;ska tlÕj isys lr; fyd;
wmuK iem; isÿfjhs iel fkdlr is;
Though you are not always recollecting the qualities of the Buddha due to ignorance, it is definitely a refuge for you-helpless as
you are. If only you go on recollecting the qualities of the Buddha with a concentrated mind, you will get happiness beyond
measure. Have no doubt about it.
138' f,djg W;=ï uqksrcqf.a .=K úmq,
is ; g /f.k isys l< kqjKska ksu,
i ; g fkdù lf,l;a nj ÿla wi,
h i g thska isÿ fõ iqn isß u.=,
If beings bear in mind the great qualities of the Buddha who is
supreme in the world, and recollect them with pure wisdom,
Sams
~ric suffering will never approach them. It will certainly be
a blessing for their well being.
46

139' fkdo k f,jka yg mõmska kshu fldg
n | f,dajev iÕrd msfkks yeu úg
, o iem;ska f;dr fkdj ,en ks;s msysg
je o iõi; iekfi;ajd fudla mqrg
By the merit of composing this work 'Lo-wada Sangar
~wa' showing the distinction between demerit and merit for those peope in
the world who are ignorant of it, may beings never be deprived
of the happiness they have got and always receiving help, attain
the peaceful bliss of Nibb
~na!
140'ù od .u fjfyfrys fu;a f;ß÷ i|
idod rKj mejiQ fu;a is;ska k|
ndod fkdù fudla ±l=ug ne¢ fu mo
mdod i;ka is; mj;Sjd ksn|
May these verses justly composed by Maitreya Thera of
V
§d~gama monastery and declared with thoughts of mett ~ and
happiness, for the attainment of Nibb~na without hindrance, dwell
in the minds of beings gladdening them for ever.
47

NOTES
Abbreviations
D.......................D §gha Nik~ya
M...................... Majjhima Nik~ya
S....................... Samyutta Nik~ya
A....................... Anguttara Nik~ya
Dhp................... Dhammapada
1. the five groups which comprise the so-called "being";
1. form  2. feeling  3. perception  4. preparations
(formations)  5. consciousness
2. the simile of the blind-turtle; M III 169; S; (V) 455.
3. A. IV 320
4. A. I. 284
5. M. III. 187
6. M. I. 364
7. M. I. 364
8. 25 Great - fears; (1) birth (2) decay (3) disease
(4) death (5) - sorrow in relation to the 3 periods,
past present and future, make up 15. the other
10 are; the fears of; (1) thieves (2) enemies (3)kings
(4) water (5) fire (6) punishment (7) hells
(8) epidemics (9) self - reproach (10) other's reproach
9. Dhp. V . 69
10. S. III 178 ff
11. M. I. 365
12. M. I. 366
13. M I. 366
14. A. IV 137
15. M.III 178 ff; A. I. 138 f
16.
1. head - hairs 17. small - intestines
2. body - hairs 18. contents of the stomach
3. nails 19. faeces
4. teeth 20. bile
5. skin 21. phlegm
6. flesh 22. pus
7. sinews 23. blood
8. bones 24. sweat
9. bone-marrow 25. fat
10. kidneys 26. tears
11. heart 27. grease
12. liver 28. spittle
13. diaphragm 29. snot
14. spleen 30. oil - of - the joints
15. lungs 31. urine
16. large - intestines 32. brain - matter.
17. D. I. 12 ff
18. A.I. 32
19. Purity of the thought before, during, and after the act of
giving.
20. S.I. 31.

Books Published by D.G.M.B. No. of
Copies
01. Nivane Niveema V olume One 6000
02. Nivane Niveema V olume Two 11000
03. Nivane Niveema V olume Three 5000
04. Nivane Niveema V olume Four 6000
05. Nivane Niveema V olume Five 5000
06. Nivane Niveema V olume Six 3500
07. Nivane Niveema ^Lib Ed& Part One ^1-6V olume& 500
08. Nivane Niveema V olume Seven 3000
09. Nivane Niveema V olume Eight 6000
10. Nivane Niveema V olume Nine 3000
11. Nivane Niveema V olume Ten 3000
12. Nivane Niveema V olume Eleven 3000
13. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume One 9000
14. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Two 8000
15. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Three 6000
16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Four 3000
17. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Five 3000
18. ~Hitaka Mahima~ V olume One 6000
19. ~Hitaka Mahima~ V olume Two 6000
20. Uttareetara Hudekalawa 8000
21. Vidasun Upades 9000
22. Towards A Better World 3000
23. Seeing Through 3000
24. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume I 3000
25. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume II 3000
All enquiries regarding participation in the Dhammadana should
be addressed to:
Mr. G .T. Bandara
The Settler
D.G.M.B.
Royal Institute
191, Havelock Rd,
Colombo 05.
fjk;a lD;s
*1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought -(1971)
*2. Samyutta Nikaya - AnAnthology, Part II - Wheel No, 183/185 -(1972)
*3. Ideal Solitude - Wheel No, 188 - (1973)
*4. The Magic of the Mind - (1974)
*5. W;a;Í;r yqfol,dj -~oïila~ wxl 172$173 - ^1990&
-tu- ^kj uqøKh&" Ou_ .%J: uqøK Ndrh ^2001&
6. Towards Calm and Insight - (1991)
7. úoiqka Wmfoia - ^1996&
8. ksjfka ksùu - ^1997-2004&
-Ou_ .%J: uqøK Ndrh" uyd Ndrldr fomd;_fïka;=j
^iïmQK_ fmd; fj¿ï 11 lska ksl=;a ù we;'&
9. From Topsy - turvydom to Wisdom -V olume 1 - (1998)
(Essays written for 'Beyond the Net, - A website on the Internet
- Website address http:// www.beyond thenet.net)
10. myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 1- fj¿u - ^1999&
11. Seeing Through - (1999)
12. ys;l uysu - 1 - ^1999&
13. ksjfka ksùu - m%:uNd.h - ^1-6 fj¿ï& - mqia;ld, uqøKh^2000&
14. ys; ;ekSu - ^2000&
15. myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 2 fj¿u - ^2000&
16. Towards A Better World -Translation of 'Lo-wada-Sangarava' - (2000)
17. meje;au yd keje;au - ^2000&
18. we;s yeá oelau - ^2001&
19. myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 3 fj¿u - ^2001&
20. Èú l;f¾ ie|E w÷r - ^2001&
21. lh wkqj .sh isysh - ^2001&
22. ud-msh Wjegk - ^2002&
23. m%;sm;a;s mQcdj - ^2003&
24. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  -  V olume I  -  (2003)
25. myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 4 fj¿u - ^2003&
26. wìkslauk - ^2003&
27. ys;luysu - 2 - ^2003&
28. myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 5 fj¿u ^2005&
29. myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 6 fj¿u ^2006&
30. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  -  V olume II  -  (2005)
31. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  -  V olume III  -  (2005)
32. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  -  V olume IV  -  (2006)
33. Nibbana - The Mind Stilled  -  V olume V  -  (2007)
34. The Magic of  the Mind-   (2007)
* Buddhist Publication Society, P.O. Box, 61, Kandy
fn!oO .%J: m%ldYk iñ;sh" ;e'fm' 61" uykqjr