Title: Glossary | A Heart Released
URL: https://www.dhammatalks.org/books/HeartReleased/Section0007.html
Word Count: 403

Anusaya: Latent obsession—sensual passion, irritation, views, doubt, pride, passion for becoming, and ignorance.
Apāya: State of deprivation; the four lowest levels of existence—rebirth in hell, as a hungry shade, as an angry demon, or as a common animal.
Arahant: A person whose heart is freed from mental fermentations (see āsava) and is thus not destined for further rebirth .
Āsava: Mental fermentation or effluent—sensual passion, states of becoming, and ignorance. Some lists add views as a fourth member of the list.
Avijjā: Ignorance, unawareness, counterfeit knowledge.
Dhamma: Event; phenomenon; the way things are in and of themselves; their inherent qualities; the basic principles underlying their behavior. Also, principles of behavior that human beings ought to follow so as to fit in with the right natural order of things; qualities of mind they should develop so as to realize nine transcendent qualities: the paths, fruitions, and nibbāna. By extension, ‘Dhamma’ is used also to refer to any doctrine that teaches such things.
Dhātu: Element; property; potential. The four physical properties are those of earth (solidity), water (liquidity), fire (heat), and wind (energy or motion).
Jhāna: Meditative absorption. Rūpa jhāna denotes absorption in a physical object; arūpa jhāna , absorption in a non-physical object.
Kamma: Intentional acts that lead to renewed states of becoming and birth.
Khandha: Component parts of sensory perception—which, when clung to, constitute suffering and stress: rūpa (physical phenomena); vedanā (feelings of pleasure, pain, or neither pleasure nor pain); saññā (perceptions, labels, concepts, allusions); saṅkhāra (mental fabrications, formations, processes); and viññāṇa (consciousness).
Lokadhamma: Ways of the world—fortune, loss, status, loss of status, praise, criticism, pleasure, and pain.
Nibbāna: Liberation; the unbinding of the mind from passion, aversion, and delusion, and thus from the round of death and rebirth.
Nīvaraṇa: Hindrances to concentration—sensual desire, ill will, torpor & lethargy, restlessness & anxiety, and uncertainty.
Ogha: Flood; factors that sweep the mind along the round of death and rebirth—sensual passion, becoming, and ignorance. Some lists add views as a fourth member of the list.
Pāramī: Perfection; qualities that lead to awakening—generosity, virtue, renunciation, discernment, persistence, endurance, truthfulness, determination, goodwill, and equanimity.
Paṭibhāga: The manipulation of visions that appear in meditation.
Satipaṭṭhāna: Establishing of mindfulness: the practice of staying focused on body, feelings, mind, or mental qualities in and of themselves.
Uggaha nimitta: An image appearing spontaneously during meditation.
Upakkilesa: Mental corruption or defilement—passion, aversion, and delusion in their various forms.
Vinaya: The monastic discipline.