Title: samyutta Nikaya low mem
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/samyutta_nikaya.pdf
Word Count: 32356

Printed by
The  Quality Printers
17/2, Pangiriwatta Road, 
Gangodawila, Nugegoda.
Tel : 011-4870333, 2 809499
Ii ii
Sa§yutta  Nikāya
An Anthology
with notes
ISBN 978 - 955 - 1255 - 26 - 8
Bhikkhu Kañukurunde ¥àõananda
From the D.G.M.B. . . . . . .
We wish to acknowledge the generous support 
received from our readers and benefactors who 
continue to pool in their resources into this 'Ford-ofNectar'. Convinced of the Buddha's words that the gift 
of Dhamma is far superior to a gift of material things, 
some of them even take this opportunity to transfer 
merit to their departed relatives as a mark of gratitude.
May the merit of this Dhammadàna conduce to 
their attainment of the supreme Bliss of Nibbàna!

iii iv
An Anthology from the
Sa§yutta  Nikāya
with Notes
by Bhikkhu Kañukurunde Ñāõananda
Originally published by the Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy 
in 1972
The present revised edition by the D.G.M.B. is strictly for free 
distribution
as a gift of Dhamma
Available for free download at :
Published by
Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bhāraya
SRI LANKA

www.seeingthroughthenet.net
Dhamma is Priceless !
Strictly for free distribution
First Impression - 2009
Copies of this book may be obtained from:
1.Pothgulgala Aranyaya
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara,
Devalegama.
2.Mr. G. T. Bandara
Royal Institute
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo 05.
3.Mr. D. T. Weragala
422, Welipara,
Thalawatugoda.
4.Mr. Anura Rupasingha
No. 27, Colombo Street
Kandy.
5.Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe
No. 26, Havelock Road
Galle.
6.The Department of Public Trustee
No. 02, Bullers Road,
Colombo 07.

v vi
About the D.G.M.B. . . . . .
Rare is the birth of a Buddha in this world. So rare too, is the 
opportunity to listen to his Dhamma. This conviction has inspired many a 
devoted Buddhist to cherish the Dhamma as something extremely 
precious.
The Buddha has declared that salutary friendship (Kalyàna-mittatà) is 
almost synonymous with his dispensation. The gift-of-Dhamma is the 
link that moulds the bond of this friendship. Dhamma deserves no pricetag precisely because it is price-less.
It is in this spirit that the D.G.M.B. launched its Dhamma-dàna 
movement in 1997. Many a parched traveller on the desert path has had a 
refreshing drink of the nectar of Dhamma free of charge ever since. Many 
an enthusiastic benevolent heart seized the opportunity to participate in a 
genuine act of Dhammadàna.
Should we always go for things that sport a price-tag? Is everything 
that comes free to us, necessarily worthless? What about the air and the 
sunshine?
It is in point of merit that the gift of-Dhamma excels all other gifts. 
Dhamma is the nectar that quenches the insatiate samsàric thirst of beings. 
The gift of Dhamma is therefore of far greater merit than an ordinary gift 
of food or drink. For the magnanimous-Dhammadàna is for ever an 
unfailing source of altruistic joy.
All enquiries regarding participation in this Dhammadàna should be 
addressed to:-
Mr.G.T.Bandara
The Settlor, D.G.M.B.,
Royal Institute,
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo – 05.
Fax : 2592749, 2580564
CONTENTS
Preface To First Edition
Preface To (Revised) New Edition
Part One: The Book of the Sayings with Stanzas (Sagātha 
Vagga)
(1). The Flood 1
(2). Deliverance 2
(3). They are not 2
(4). With-but-one-root 3
(5). Name 3
(6). The Mind 4
(7). The World 4
(8). Dāmali 5
(9). Kakudha 5
(10). Rohitassa 7
(11). The Ploughman 8
(12). Selā 9
(13). Suciloma 10
Part Two: The Book on Causes (Nidana Vagga)
(14). Phagguna 12 
(15). Bhūmija 14
Part Three: The Book on Aggregates (Khandha Vagga)
(16). Nakulapitā 17
(17). Approaching 21
(18). The Seven Points 22 
(19). Full-Moon 26

vii viii
Part Four: The Book on the Sixfold Sphere of Sense
(Salāyatana Vagga)
(1). Upasena 33 
(2). Dyad 34
(3). Not-including 35
(4). Isidatta 36
(5). Bhadragaka 39
Part Five: The Great Chapter (Maha Vagga)
(6). The She-falcon 42 
(7). Sedaka 44
(8). The Province 45
Abbreviations
Notes:
Part One 48
Part Two 74
Part Three 76
Part Four 86
Part Five 93
Preface To First Edition (by the BPS)
     An anthology of the Sa§yutta Nikāya, prepared by Mr. John D. 
Ireland, has already appeared in the 'Wheel' series (No. 107-109). It 
contained selections from all the five Books of this large collection 
of the Buddha's discourses. The present volume supplements it with 
a further selection from the same books.
     As this Discourse Collection which follows an arrangement 
according to subject is representative of all the basic teachings of 
the Buddha, it places at the disposal of the anthologist an array of 
suttas (discourses) rich both in variety and in excellence. He can, 
however, do justice to them within limits, choosing such texts as 
bring out the salient features of those teachings in a more appealing 
way. Naturally, he would have a preference for pithy discourses and 
those well illustrated by scintillating similes and metaphors.
     The present anthology, while drawing from the existing 
translations and the commentaries, attempts to repay a part of this 
'debt' in the form of suggested improvements on both. In the Notes 
to the Anthology, discussion of certain doctrinal points has entailed 
the inclusion of many parallel texts which are likely to elucidate the 
meanings of the selected Discourses.
Bhikkhu Kañukurunde ¥àõananda.
Island Hermitage,
Dodanduwa.
February 1972.

ix 1
Preface To Revised New Edition (by the D.G.M.B.)
  As indicated in my Preface to First Edition, this Anthology was 
originally intended to supplement another of its type prepared by 
Mr. John D. Ireland for the Wheel Series of the Buddhist 
Publication Society, Kandy. It was published as Part II of the 
Sa§yutta Nikāya Anthology ( Nos. 183/184/185) in 1972. 
Subsequently, Mr. Maurice Walshe compiled a Part III, after which 
all three works appeared as a bound volume among BPS 
Publications.
  Since the three parts of the Anthology turned out to be independent 
attempts representing all Five Books of the Samyutta Nikāya, the 
D.G.M.B. is now bringing out our anthology as a separate book on a 
new format for free distribution as Dhammadāna. The present 
revised edition has profited by many suggestions for improvement 
in form and content given by Dr. Navaratne Jayasiri. Mr. Zoimbu 
Sudesh collaborated with him in resetting the type. Mr. C. 
Jayasoma and his staff of the Quality Printers gave of their best to 
present a neat and attractive volume. To them and all generous 
supporters of the D.G.M.B. we wish the blessings of a priceless 
Dhammadāna.
'Nibbāna§ parama§ sukha§'
'Nibbāna is Bliss Supreme'
   -  Bhikkhu Kañukurunde ¥àõananda
Pothgulgala Aranyaya,
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara,
Devalegama
Sri Lanka.
December 2007 (B.E. 2551)
Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammā Sambuddhassa.
Sa§yutta Nikāya
Part One: The Book of the Sayings with Stanzas
(Sagātha Vagga)
I.  The Flood.
     Thus have I heard :- The Exalted One was once staying near 
Sāvatthi at Jeta Grove, in Anāthapindika's Park. Now a certain deity, 
when the night was far spent, shedding radiance with his effulgent 
beauty over the whole Jeta Grove, came into the presence of the 
Exalted One, and coming, saluted him and stood at one side. So 
standing, he spoke thus to the Exalted One:-

     "How did you, dear sir, cross the flood ?"  
[The Exalted One :-]
     "Without tarrying, friend, and without hurrying did I cross the 2
flood." 
     "But how did you, dear sir, without tarrying, without hurrying, 
cross the flood ?" 3
     "When I, friend, tarried, then verily I sank;  when I, friend, hurried, 
then verily was I swept away. And so, friend, untarrying, unhurrying, 
did I cross the flood.
[The deity :-]
Lo! now what length of time since I beheld4 5
A saint  with all his passions quelled 
One who, neither tarrying nor yet hurrying6
Has, got past the world's viscosity  – Craving.
     Thus spoke the deity, and the Teacher approved. And then the deity, 
noting that approval, saluted the Lord, and having circumambulated 
him by the right, vanished there and then.
          (I. 1. 1.)

2 3
2. Deliverance
     The Exalted One was once staying near Sāvatthi, at the Jeta Grove 
in Anāthapindika's Park. Now a certain deity, when the night was far 
spent came into the presence of the Exalted One, and coming, saluted 
him and stood at one side. So standing he spoke thus to the Exalted 
One :-
     "Do you, dear sir, know for them that live, deliverance, freedom, 7
detachment ?" 
     "I do know, O! friend, for them that live, deliverance, freedom, 
detachment."
     "In what manner and how, dear sir, do you know for them that 
live, deliverance, freedom, detachment ?"

When delight and existence  are exhausted9
When perception and consciousness  are both destroyed10
When feelings cease and are appeased  – thus, O friend,
Do I know, for them that live
Deliverance, freedom, detachment.
     (I. 1. 2.)
3.   'They are not'
     The Exalted One was once staying near Sāvatthi, at the Jeta Grove 
in Anāthapindika's Park. And a great number of the Satullapa company 
of deities, when the night was far spent came into the presence of the 
Exalted One and stood at one side. So standing, one of the deities 
uttered this verse before the Exalted One :-
No permanent pleasures of sense are there among human-beings
Here are charming things enmeshed in which a man dallies
And thus from realms of death doth never come to that
Wherefrom there is no coming back again!
Desire-born misery, desire-born pain
Desire disciplined is misery quelled,
When misery is quelled, pain too is quelled.
They are not the sense-pleasures – those beautiful things in the 
world
Lustful intention is man's sense-pleasure
They endure as before - those beautiful things in the world 
But the will thereto, 'tis, that the wise discipline.
Let one put wrath away and conceit abandon12
And get well beyond the fetters all 13
That one, by name-and-form untrammelled  14
And possessionless  – no pains befall.
He cast off reckoning, no conceit assumed
Craving he cut off in this name-and-form
That bond-free one – from blemish and longing free 
Him no gods nor men, in their search could ken 15
Searching here and beyond – in heavens and in all abodes. 
If him they find not thus released [thus said the reverend 
Mogharājā],
Gods and men, here or beyond 16
Him best of men that brings weal for men  
They that revere him are they worthy of praise?
Yea, they become praiseworthy also, O monk, Mogharājā, [so said    
the Exalted One),
They that revere him thus released
Yea, if knowing the Norm they give up all doubt 
They too become bond-liberated, O monk!
(I, 4, 4)
4.   'With – but – one – root'
With but one root and turning twice 
With triple stain and arenas five
The ocean with its eddies twelve 17
The quaking abyss – the sage has crossed.
(I, 5, 4)
5.  'Name'

What is it that overwhelmed  everything ?
What is it that nought else excels ?

4 5
What is it that to which one thing 
Everything else its course doth bend ?
'Tis name that has overwhelmed everything
Nought else exists that excels name
And Name itself is that one thing 19
Beneath whose sway all others came. 
(I, 7, 1)
6. The Mind
What is it that whereby the world is led ? 
What is it that whereby 'tis being dragged ? 
And what is it that in whose sole sway
One and all have come to stay ?

By mind  is it that the world is led
By mind is it that the world is dragged 
And mind is it in whose sole sway 
One and all have come to stay.
(I, 7, 2)
7. The World
In what has this world arisen?
In what does it hold concourse?
On what depending – in what respect  –
Does this world get oppressed ?

In the six the world arose 
In the six it holds concourse
On the six themselves depending 
In the six it gets oppressed.
(I, 7, 10)
8.  'Dāmali'
. . . . . near Sāvatthi in the Jeta Grove.....
    Now Dāmali, son of the gods, when the night was far spent  . . . .  
came into the presence of the Exalted One, and coming, saluted him 
and stood at one side. So standing he spoke thus to the Exalted One :-
Endeavour must herein be made
By that saint who knows no fatigue 
That by abandoning sense-desires 
He may not hanker for existence
There is naught left to do, O Dāmali, 
For the saint – so said the Exalted One
The saint is one whose task is done
So long as he no footing finds
A creature swept by river-currents
Toils with all his limbs
But finding a footing, when on dry ground he stands 
He toils no more: passed over, sooth, is he.
A parable this, Dāmali. Even so
The saint whose cankers are extinct,
Ripe in wisdom, given to Jhāna,
On reaching the end of birth and death 22
He toils no more: passed over sooth is he.
(II. I. 5.)
9. 'Kakudha'
     Thus have I heard :- The Exalted One was once staying at Sāketa, in 
the Añjana Grove, in the deer Park. Now Kakudha, son of the gods, 
when the night was far spent, came into the presence of the Exalted 
One and stood at one side. So standing Kakudha the son of gods, spoke 
thus to the Exalted One:

6 7
"Do you rejoice, recluse ?"
"On getting what, friend ?"
"Then do you grieve recluse ?"
"What is lost, friend ?"
"Well then, recluse, you neither rejoice nor grieve ?"23
"That is so, friend." 
[Kakudha :-]
How now, O monk! you are not depressed 
And yet you seem to have no joy ?
How now! are you, seated so lovely there 
Not overwhelmed by discontent?
[The Exalted One :-]
Yea, I, O fairy, am no wise depressed,
And yet no joy arises in me;
Nor yet, though I am seated lonely here,
Am I overwhelmed by discontent.
Joy is verily for him who is sad 24
Sadness is verily for the joyous one. 
But as for the monk  – know this, O friend 
He is neither joyful nor is he sad.
[Kakudha :-]
Long time it is since I beheld,
As now, a saint with his passions quelled, 
This monk who, being neither glad nor yet sad, 
Has got past the viscosity in the world.
[II. 2. 8.]
10. 'Rohitassa'
      . . . . . at Sāvatthi . . . . standing at one side, Rohitassa, son of the gods, 
spoke thus to the Exalted One :-
      "Where, lord, one does not get born, nor grow old, nor die, nor pass 
away, nor get reborn, is one able, lord by walking to come to know that 
end of the world, or to see it, or to get there ?"
      "Where, friend, one does not get born, nor grow old, nor die, nor 
pass away, nor get reborn, that end of the world, I say, you are not able 
by walking, to come to know, or to see, or to arrive at."
     "Wonderful is it, lord, marvellous is it, lord, how well it is said by the 
Exalted One :- 'Where, friend, one does not get born . . . . . or to arrive 
at.'
     In times past, lord, I was a seer, Rohitassa by name, son of Bhoja, 
gifted so, that I could fly through the air. And so swift, lord, was my 
speed, that I could fly just as quickly as a master of archery, welltrained, expert, proficient, a past master in his art, armed with a strong 
bow, could, without difficulty, send a light shaft far past the area 
covered by a palm-tree's shadow. And so great, lord, was my stride that 
I could step from the eastern to the western sea.
     In me, lord, arose such a wish as this: I will arrive at the end of the 
world by walking. And though such, lord, was my speed, and such my 
stride, and though, with a life-span of a century, living for hundred 
years I walked continuously for hundred years, save the while I spent in 
eating, drinking, chewing or tasting, or in answering calls of nature, 25
save the while I gave way to sleep or fatigue,  yet I died on the way 
without reaching the end of the world. Wonderful is it, lord, marvellous 
is it, lord, how well it is said by the Exalted One:- 'Where, friend, one 
does not get born. . . . . or to arrive at.' "
     "But neither do I say, friend, that without having reached the end of 
the world there could be an ending of ill. It is in this very fathom-long 
physical frame with its perceptions and mind, that, I declare, lies 
the world, the arising of the world, the cessation of the world, and 26
the path leading to the cessation of the world."

8 9
Ne'er may world's end be reached by walking
No release is there from ill, till that end is reached, 
Therefore that wise one, the knower of the world27
Is the one who has reached the end of the world,  
Consummate in him is the holy life.
Knowing the world's end that sage serene
Yearns not for this world nor for the other.
(II, 3, 6.)
11. 'The Ploughman'
     At Sāvatthi . . . . . On one occasion the Exalted One was instructing, 
enlightening, inspiring and gladdening the monks by a sermon relating 
to Nibbāna. And the monks with their whole mind applied, attentive 
and intent, were listening to the Dhamma.
     Then it occurred to Māra, the evil one : ''This recluse Gotama is 
instructing, enlightening, inspiring and gladdening the monks by a 
sermon relating to Nibbāna. What if I were now to approach the recluse 28
Gotama in order to blindfold him ?"  So Māra, the evil one, assuming 
the guise of a ploughman, bearing a mighty plough on his shoulder, 
and holding an ox-goad in his hand, his hair dishevelled, his raiment 
hempen, his feet spattered with mud, drew near to the Exalted One and 
said :-
"Have you seen my oxen, O recluse ?"
"But what have you, evil one, to do with oxen ?"
"Mine only, recluse, is the eye, mine are the visible forms, mine is the 
sphere of consciousness of the eye's contact. Where, recluse, will you 
go to escape from me ? Mine only, recluse, is the ear, . . . the nose, . . .  . 
the tongue, . . . . the body, . . . . . the mind, mine are the mental objects, 
mine is the sphere of consciousness of mental contact. Where, recluse, 
will you go to escape from me ?"
     "Thine only evil one, is the eye, thine are the visible forms, and 
thine is the sphere of consciousness of the eye's contact. But where, O 
evil one, eye is not, visible forms are not, the sphere of consciousness 
of the eye's contact  is  not,  there O evil one, is no access  for  you.
 Thine only, O evil one, is the ear . . . .  the nose . . . . the tongue . . . . . the 
body . . . . the mind . . . . But where, O evil one, mind is not, mental 
objects are not, the sphere of consciousness of mental contact is not, 30
there, O evil one, is no access for you." 
[Māra :-]
Things of which they say: 'this is mine '! 
And those folk who say: 'this is mine' 
If you mind those things and them
You will not, O recluse, escape from me.
[The Exalted One :-]
That of which they speak, that's not for me
The folk who speak so, one of them I am not,
Thus should you know, O evil one,
You will not see even the way I go.
     Then Māra, the evil one, thought : The Exalted One knows me! The 
Blessed One knows me! and sad and sorrowful he vanished there and 
then.
(IV. 2. 9.)
12.  Selā
 …. at Sāvatthi . . . . . Sister Selā,  dressed herself in the forenoon and 
taking bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthi for alms. And when she had 
gone about Sāvatthi for it, and had returned after the meal, she seated 
herself at the foot of a certain tree for noon-day rest. Then Māra, the 
evil one, desirous of arousing fear, trepidation and horripilation in her, 
desirous of making her lose her concentration, went up to her and 
addressed her in verse :

"By whom was this image  wrought ? 
And where can its maker be ? 
Where has this image arisen ?
And where does it come to cease ? "

10 11
Now, it occurred to Sister Selā : 'Who now is this, human or nonhuman, that utters this verse ? And then, it occurred to her : 'Sure it is 
Māra, the evil one who utters this verse, desirous of arousing in me 
fear, trepidation and horripilation, desirous of making me lose my 
concentration.' Then the Sister Selā,  knowing it was Māra, the evil 
one, replied him with verses :-
"Neither self-wrought is this image 32
Nor yet other-wrought is this misery 33
By reason of a cause  it came to be
By breaking up the cause it ceases to be.
Even as in the case of a certain seed
Which, when sown on the field, doth feed 
On the taste of the earth and moisture34 
And by these twain doth grow  – even so
All these, the aggregates, the elements and the six-spheres 
By reason of a cause have come to be
By breaking up the cause they cease to be."
      Then Māra, the evil one, thought : 'Sister Selā knows me,' and 
sad and sorrowful, he vanished there and then.
                (V, 9)
13.  Sūciloma
     The Exalted One was once dwelling near Gayā, on the Stone Couch, 35
at the haunt of the Yakkha  Sūciloma.
     Now at that time Khara ('Shaggy'), the yakkha, and Sūciloma 
('Needle-hair'), the yakkha, were passing by, not far from the Exalted 
One. And Khara said to Sūciloma: "That's a recluse."
     "No, that's not a recluse, that's a mere shaveling; but let me first 
ascertain whether he is a recluse or a mere shaveling."
Then Sūciloma came up to the Exalted One and bent his body up 
against Him. And the Exalted One bent his body away. Then Sūciloma 
said: "Do you fear me, recluse ?"
     "It is not that I fear you, friend, but contact with you is an evil thing."
     "Recluse, I will ask you a question. If you do not answer me, I will 
either derange your mind, or split your heart, or I will take you by the 
feet and throw you over the Ganges."
     "I see no one, friend, in the whole world, with its gods, Māras and 
Brahmas  – with its progeny of recluses and brahmins, gods and men, – 
who is able to derange my mind, or split my heart, or take me by the feet 
and throw me over the Ganges; nevertheless, friend, ask whatever 
question you like. "
[The Yakkha :-]
Lust and hate – whence caused are they ? 
Whence spring dislike, delight and terror ? 
Whence arising do thoughts disperse 36
Like children that leave their mother's lap ? 
[The Exalted One :-]
'Tis hence that lust and hate are caused 
Hence spring dislike, delight and terror 
Arising hence do thoughts disperse,
Like children that leave their mother's lap.

Moisture-born and self-begotten 
Like the banyan's trunk-born runners
They cleave to divers things of sense
Like the Māluvā creeper entwining the forest.
And they that know wherefrom it rises
They dispel it – listen ! O Yakkha
They cross this flood so hard to cross
Never crossed by them – re-becoming no more.
(X, 3.)

12 13
Part Two: The Book on Cause ( Nidāna Vagga ) 
14. Phagguna
Thus have I heard:- The Exalted One was once staying near 
Sāvatthi, at Jeta Grove, in Anāthapindika 's Park :-
     "There are these four nutriments, monks, for the maintenance of 
beings that have come to birth or for the assistance of them that seek to 
become. Which are the four? Material food, coarse or fine, secondly 
contact, thirdly volition, fourthly consciousness. These four are 
nutriments, monks, for maintenance of beings that have come to birth 
or for the assistance of them that seek to become.
    
     When this had been said, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna said to the 
Exalted One :-
     "Who now is it, lord, who feeds on the consciousness nutriment ?"
      "Not a fit question", said the Exalted One. "I am not saying 
(someone) feeds on. If I were saying so, to that the question would be a 
fit one. But I am not saying so. And I not saying so, if anyone were to 
ask me 'of what now, lord, is consciousness the nutriment ? ', this were 
a fit question. And the fit answer to it is: the consciousness nutriment is 38
condition for renewed becoming, for rebirth in the future.  When that 
is come to pass, the sixfold sense-sphere becomes, and conditioned by 
the sixfold sense-sphere contact comes to be."
      
"Who, now, lord, exercises contact ?"
      "Not a fit question ", said the Exalted One. "I am not saying 
(someone) exercises contact. If I were saying so, the question would be 
a fit one. But I am not saying so. And I not saying so, if anyone were to 
ask thus : 'Conditioned, now, by what, lord, is contact ? ', this were a fit 
question. And the fit answer there, would be: 'Conditioned by the 
sixfold sense-sphere, is contact, conditioned by contact is feeling'. "
"Who now, lord, is it who feels ?"
     "Not a fit question" said the Exalted One. "I am not saying 
(someone) feels. If I were saying so, the question would be a fit one. 
But I am not saying so. And I not saying so, if anyone were to ask thus : 
'Conditioned now by what, lord, is feeling ?', this were a fit question. 
And the fit answer there would be : 'Conditioned by contact is feeling, 
conditioned by feeling is craving'."
    
"Who now, lord, is it who craves ?"
     "Not a fit question", said the Exalted One. "I am not saying 
(someone) craves. If I were saying so, the question would be a fit one. 
But I am not saying so. And I not saying so, if anyone were to ask thus: 
'Conditioned now by what, lord, is craving ?', this were a fit question. 
And the fit answer there would be: 'Conditioned by feeling is craving, 
conditioned by craving is grasping'. "
"Who now, lord, is it who grasps ?"
     "Not a fit question", said the Exalted One. "I am not saying 
(someone) grasps. If I were saying so, the question would be a fit one. 
But I am not saying so. And I not saying so, if anyone were to ask thus: 
'Conditioned now by what, lord, is there grasping ?', this were a fit 
question. And the fit answer there, would be: 'Conditioned by craving 
is grasping. Conditioned by grasping is becoming. Conditioned by 
becoming, birth, and conditioned by birth, decay and death, grief, 
lamenting, suffering, unhappiness, despair come to pass. Such is the 
arising of this entire mass of ill.
     But from the utter fading away and cessation of the sixfold sphere of 39
sense-contact,  Phagguna, comes cessation of contact, from cessation 
of contact, cessation of feeling, from cessation of feeling cessation of 
craving, from cessation of craving cessation of grasping, from 
cessation of grasping cessation of becoming, from cessation of 
becoming cessation of birth, cessation of decay–and–death, of grief, 
lamenting, suffering, unhappiness, despair. Such is the cessation of 
this entire mass of ill."
(XII, 12, ii.)

14 15
15. Bhūmija.
. . . . . at Sāvatthi  . . . . .
Now the Venerable Bhūmija, arising at eventide from solitary 
meditation, came into the presence of the Venerable Sāriputta, and 
exchanging greetings with him and compliments of friendship and 
courtesy, sat down at one side. And so seated the Venerable Bhūmija 
spoke thus to the Venerable Sāriputta.
"There are, friend Sāriputta, certain recluses and brahmins, 
believers in kamma, who declare that happiness and ill have been 
wrought by oneself. There are, friend Sāriputta, certain other recluses 
and brahmins, believers in kamma, who declare that happiness and ill 
have been wrought by another. There are, friend Sāriputta, yet other 
recluses and brahmins, believers in kamma, who declare that 
happiness and ill have been wrought by oneself as well as by another. 
And there are, friend Sāriputta, still other recluses and brahmins, 
believers in kamma, who declare that happiness and ill have been 
wrought neither by oneself nor by another but they have arisen by 
chance.
Herein, friend Sāriputta, of what view is the Exalted One ? What 
has he declared ? And how, if we were answering, should we be 
repeating his views correctly without misrepresenting him, and be 
explaining in accordance with the Dhamma so that no blame, with 
justification, can come upon us ?"
"The Exalted One has said, friend, that happiness and ill have 40
arisen through a cause. And because of what ? Because of contact.  
Thus speaking, one will be repeating the views of the Exalted One 
correctly, without misrepresenting him and one will be explaining in 
accordance with the Dhamma, and no blame, with justification, can 
come upon him.
Therein, friend, those recluses and brahmins, believers in kamma, 
who declare that happiness and ill have been wrought by oneself – even 
that they do because of contact. Whatever recluses and brahmins, 
believers in kamma,  who   declare   that   happiness  and  ill have been
 wrought by another – even that they do because of contact. Whatever 
recluses and brahmins, believers in kamma, who declare that 
happiness and ill have been wrought by oneself as well as by another – 
even that they do because of contact. And whatever recluses and 
brahmins, believers in kamma, who declare that happiness and ill have 
been wrought neither by oneself nor by another but have arisen by 
chance –even that they do because of contact.
Therein, friend, recluses and brahmins believers, in kamma, who 
declare that happiness and ill have been wrought by oneself – that they 
will experience without contact is verily an impossibility. . . . . And 
whatever recluses and brahmins, believers in kamma, who declare that 
happiness and ill have been wrought neither by oneself nor by another 
but have arisen by chance – that they will experience without contact, 
is verily an impossibility. " 
II.
The Venerable Ānanda was listening to this conversation between 
the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable Bhūmija. Then the 
Venerable Ānanda went into the presence of the Exalted One, saluted 
him and sat on one side. Thus seated, the Venerable Ānanda, so far as 
the Venerable Sāriputta had conversed with the Venerable Bhūmija, 
told all to the Exalted One.
presence of the Exalted One, saluted him and sat on one side. Thus 
seated, the Venerable Ānanda, so far as the Venerable Sāriputta had 
conversed with the Venerable Bhūmija, told all to the Exalted One.
"Well said! Well said!  Ānanda, well might Sāriputta explain as he 
has done. Indeed, Ānanda, I have said that happiness and ill have 
arisen through a cause. And because of what ? Because of contact. 
Thus speaking, one will be repeating my views correctly without 
misrepresenting me, and be explaining in accordance with the 
Dhamma, and no blame, with justification, can come upon him.
Therein, Ānanda, those recluses and brahmins, believers in 
kamma, who declare that happiness and ill have been wrought by 
oneself – even that they do because of contact . . . . . (as above)
Therein, Ānanda, those recluses and brahmins, believers in 
kamma,  who  declare that happiness  and  ill  have  been  wrought  by

16 17
oneself – that they will experience without contact is verily an 
impossibility . . . . (as above).
     
When body is there, Ānanda, due to bodily-intention there arises 
internally pleasure and pain. When speech is there, Ānanda, due to 
verbal-intention there arises internally pleasure and pain. When mind 
is there, Ānanda, due to mental-intention there arises internally, 41
pleasure and pain.
     Conditioned by ignorance, Ānanda, either one by oneself concocts 
a bodily preparation, owing to which there arises for him that internal 
pleasure and pain; or others concoct for him that bodily preparation 42
owing to which there arises for him that internal pleasure and pain.   
And, Ānanda, either he deliberately concocts that bodily preparation 
or he does so unwittingly.
  
      Either, one by oneself, Ānanda, concocts that verbal preparation 
owing to which there arises for him that internal pleasure and pain, or 
others concoct it for him. And, Ānanda, either he deliberately concocts 43
it or he does so unwittingly.
     Either, one by oneself, Ānanda, concocts that mental preparation 
owing to which there arises for him that internal pleasure and pain, or 
others concoct it for him. And, Ānanda, either he deliberately concocts 
it or he does so unwittingly.
 
     These items, Ānanda, are affected with ignorance. But from the 
utter fading away and cessation of ignorance, Ānanda, that body is not, 
whence arises for him that internal pleasure and pain. That speech is 
not, whence arises for him that internal pleasure and pain. That mind is 
not, whence arises for him that internal pleasure and pain. That field is 
not, that ground is not, that sphere is not, that occasion is not, 
conditioned by which there arises for him internal pleasure and pain." 44 
                                                                                       (XII, 25, I., ii.)
Part Three: The Book on Aggregates (Khandha Vagga)
16. Nakulapitā
                                                     
     Thus have I heard :- The Exalted One was once staying in the 
territory of the Bhaggas, at Crocodile-haunt in Bhesakala Grove in the 
Deer Park. Then the householder Nakulapitā came to the Exalted One, 
saluted him and sat down at one side.
     Seated at one side, the householder Nakulapitā said thus to the 
Exalted One :-  "Lord, I am a decrepit old-man, aged, far gone in years. 
I have reached the last stage of my life. I am sick in body and always 
ailing. It is rarely that I get the opportunity to see the Exalted One and 
those monks whose very sight is edifying. Let the Exalted One 
admonish and instruct me, so that it will conduce to my weal and 
happiness for a long time to come."
     "True it is, true it is householder, that your body is sickly, soiled and 
cumbered. For, householder, who would claim even a moment's 
health, carrying this body about, except through sheer foolishness ? 
Wherefore, householder, thus you should train yourself :- 'though my 
body is sick, my mind shall not be sick.' Thus, householder, must you 
train yourself."
     Then Nakulapitā, the householder, rejoiced in and appreciated the 
words of the Exalted one, and rising from his seat he saluted the lord, 
circumambulated him by the right, and then approached the Venerable 
Sāriputta. Having approached and saluted him, he sat down at one side. 
And the Venerable Sāriputta said thus to the householder Nakulapitā 
who was seated at one side : "Clear are your faculties, householder; 
pure and clean is the complexion of your face. Have you had the 
opportunity today to listen to a talk of Dhamma from the very presence 
of the Exalted One ?"
    
"How could it be otherwise, Venerable Sir ? I have just been 
sprinkled with the nectar of a talk of Dhamma by the Exalted One."
     
     "And in what way, householder, were you sprinkled with the nectar 
of a talk of Dhamma by the Exalted One ?"

18 19
     "Well, Venerable Sir, I went to the Exalted One, saluted him and sat 
down at one side. As I sat thus, Venerable Sir, I said to the Exalted One 
:- 'Lord, I am a decrepit old-man, aged, far gone in years. I have reached 
the last stage of my life. I am sick in body and always ailing. It is rarely 
that I get the opportunity to see the Exalted One and those monks 
whose very sight is edifying. Let the Exalted One admonish and 
instruct me, so that it will conduce to my weal and happiness for a long 
time to come.'
  
      When I spoke thus, Venerable Sir, the Exalted One said to me : 'True 
it is, true it is, householder, that your body is sickly, soiled and 
cumbered. For, householder, who would claim even a moment's 
health, carrying this body about, except through sheer foolishness ? 
Wherefore, householder, thus you should train yourself :- 'Though my 
body is sick, my mind shall not be sick.' Thus, householder, must you 
train yourself. '
     Thus it was, Venerable Sir, that I have been sprinkled with the nectar 
of a talk of Dhamma by the Exalted One"
     "But did it not occur to you, householder to question the Exalted 
One further ? Thus : "Pray, how far, Lord, is body sick and mind is sick 
too ? And how far is body sick and mind not sick ?"
   
     "I would travel far indeed, Venerable Sir, to learn the meaning of 
this saying from the presence of the Venerable Sāriputta. It is good if 
the Venerable Sāriputta should think it fit to expound to me the 
meaning of this saying."
     "Well then, listen, householder; apply your mind thoroughly and I 
will speak."
      
     "Even so, Venerable Sir," said householder Nakulapitā in response 
to the Venerable Sāriputta.
 The Venerable Sāriputta spoke thus:- "And how is body sick, 
householder, and mind sick too?
Herein, householder, the untaught average person, taking no account 
of the noble ones, unskilled in the doctrine of the noble ones, untrained 
in the doctrine of the noble ones, taking no account of the good men, 
unskilled in the doctrine of the good men, untrained in the doctrine of 
the good men, regards form as self, or self as having form, or form as 
being in self or self as being in form. 'I am form' says he; 'form is mine', 
and is obsessed with that idea. Even as he is so obsessed, that form 
changes, becomes otherwise, and owing to the change and 
transformation of form, there arise in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, 
grief and despair.
    He regards feeling as self, or self as having feeling, or feeling as 
being in self, or self as being in feeling. 'I am the feeling' says he, 
'feeling is mine', and is obsessed with that idea. Even as he is so 
obsessed, that feeling changes, becomes otherwise, and owing to the 
change and transformation of feeling, there arise in him sorrow 
lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
     He regards perception as self, or self as having perception, or 
perception as being in self, or self as being in perception. 'I am 
perception' says he, 'perception is mine', and is obsessed with that idea. 
Even as he is so obsessed, that perception changes, becomes 
otherwise, and owing to the change and transformation of perception, 
there arise in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. 
     He regards preparations as self, or self as having preparations, or 
preparations as being in self or self as being in preparations. 'I am the 
preparations' says he, 'preparations are mine,' and is obsessed with that 
idea. Even as he is so obsessed those preparations change, become 
otherwise, and owing to the change and transformation of 
preparations, there arise in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and 
despair.
    He regards consciousness as self, or self as having consciousness, 
or consciousness as being in self, or self as being in consciousness. 'I 
am consciousness' says he, 'consciousness is mine,' and is obsessed 
with that idea. Even as he is so obsessed, that consciousness changes, 
becomes otherwise,  and  owing  to the  change and transformation of

20 21
consciousness, there arise in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and 45
despair.
     That, householder, is how body is sick and mind is sick too.
  
     And, householder, how is body sick, but mind not sick?
     Herein, householder, the well-taught noble disciple, who discerns 
the noble ones, who is skilled in the doctrine of the noble ones, welltrained in the doctrine of the noble ones, who discerns the good men, 
who is skilled in the doctrine of the good men, well trained in the 
doctrine of the good men, regards not form as self, nor self as having 
form, nor form as being in self, nor self as being in form. He says not 'I 
am form'; he says not 'form is mine,' nor is he obsessed with that idea. 
That form of him who is not so obsessed, changes, becomes otherwise, 
but owing to the change and transformation of form there do not arise 
in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
     
     He regards not feeling as self, nor self as having feeling, nor feeling 
as being in self, nor self as being in feeling. He says not 'I am the 
feeling; feeling is mine', nor is he obsessed with that idea. That feeling 
of him who is not so obsessed, changes, becomes otherwise, but owing 
to the change and transformation of feeling there do not arise in him, 
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
    
     He regards not perception as self, nor self as having perception, nor 
perception as being in self, nor self as being in perception. He says not 
'I am perception; perception is mine', nor is he obsessed with that idea. 
That perception of him who is not so obsessed, changes, becomes 
otherwise, but owing to the change and transformation of perception, 
there do not arise in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
     He regards not preparations as self, nor self as having preparations, 
nor preparations as being in self, nor self as being in preparations. He 
says not 'I am the preparations, preparations are mine' nor is he 
obsessed with that idea. Those preparations of him who is not so 
obsessed, change, become otherwise,  but  owing  to  the change and
transformation of preparations, there do not arise in him sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief and despair.
  He regards not consciousness as self, nor self as having 
consciousness, nor consciousness as being in self, nor self as being in 
consciousness. He says not 'I am consciousness, consciousness is 
mine', nor is he obsessed with that idea. That consciousness of him who 
is not so obsessed, changes, becomes otherwise, but owing to the 
change and transformation of consciousness, there do not arise in him 
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. Thus householder, body is 
sick but mind is not sick."
     
    Thus spoke the Venerable Sāriputta, and the householder 
Nakulapitā rejoiced in the words of the Venerable Sāriputta.
                                                                                              (XXII. I.)
17.  'Approaching.'
. . . . . At Sāvatthi . . . . . Then the Exalted one said –
      "The one who approaches is not released; the one who does not 
approach is released.
    45A
     Approaching  form, monks, consciousness, when it persists, 
would persist. With form as its support, with form as its foothold, 46
sprinkled over with delight,  it may come by growth, increase, 
abundance. Approaching feeling . . . Approaching perception . . . . 
Approaching preparations, monks, consciousness when it persists, 
would persist. With preparations as its support, with preparations as its 
foothold, sprinkled over with delight, it may come by growth, increase, 47
abundance.
     Were a man, monks, to declare thus: "Apart from form, apart from 
feeling, apart from perception, apart from preparations, I will show 
forth the coming or the going or the decease or the rebirth or the growth 
or the increase or the abundance of consciousness" – to do that were 48
impossible.

22 23
     If lust for the form-mode, monks, is abandoned by a monk, by that 
abandonment of lust the support is cut off and there is no establishment 
of consciousness. If lust for the feeling-mode . . . . . If lust for the 
perception-mode . . . . If lust for the preparations-mode . . . . If lust for 
the consciousness-mode, monks, is abandoned in a monk, by that 
abandonment the support is cut off and there is no establishment of 49
consciousness.
  That unestablished consciousness, not growing and not 50
concocting,  is freed; due to its freedom, it is steady; by its steadiness, 
it is contented; owing to its contentment, he is not troubled. Being 
untroubled, of himself he is perfectly tranquillized, and he knows: 
'Exhausted is birth, lived is the holy life, done is the task, there is 
nothing beyond this for (a designation of) the conditions of this 51   
existence.' " 
    (XXII. 53.)
18. The Seven Points
At Sāvatthi  . . . . . Then the Exalted One said :-
     "A monk who is skilled in the seven points, monks, who is an 52
investigator in three ways, is called 'accomplished'  in this Norm and 
Discipline, one who has reached mastership, a superman.
And how, monks, is a monk skilled in the seven points ?
     Herein, monks, a monk fully understands form, the arising of form, 
the ceasing of form, and the path leading to the ceasing of form. He 
fully understands the satisfaction there is in form, the misery that is in 
form, the escape from form.
He fully understands feeling . . . . . 
He fully understands perception . . . . . 
He fully understands preparations. . . . .
He fully understands consciousness, the arising of consciousness, 
the ceasing of consciousness,  and the path  leading  to  the ceasing of 
consciousness. He fully understands the satisfaction there is in 
consciousness, the misery that is in consciousness, the escape from 
consciousness.
      
    And what, monks, is form ? It is the four great elements, and that 
form which is dependent on the four great elements. From the arising 
of nutriment comes the arising of form; from the ceasing of nutriment 
is the ceasing of form; and the path leading to the ceasing of form is 
this Noble Eightfold Path, to wit: Right Views, Right Thoughts. Right 
Speech, Right Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort, Right 
Mindfulness, Right Concentration.
       
    That pleasure, that happiness, which arises because of form, that is 
the satisfaction that is in form. In so far as form is impermanent, is 
fraught with suffering and is liable to change, that is the misery that is 
in form. That restraint of desire and lust, that putting away of desire 
and lust which are in form, that is the escape from form.
       
 Whatsoever recluses or brahmins, monks, by thus fully 
understanding form, its arising, its ceasing and the path leading to its 
ceasing, by thus fully understanding the satisfaction that is in form, the 
misery that is in form, and escape from form, are treading towards the 
disgust for, the detachment from and the cessation of form, they are 
rightly treading. They that are rightly treading, are firm grounded in 
this Norm and Discipline.
 And whatever recluses or brahmins, monks, by thus fully 
understanding form, its arising, its ceasing, and the path leading to its 
ceasing, by thus fully understanding the satisfaction, the misery and 
the escape from form, are liberated without grasping, due to their 
disgust for, detachment from and cessation of form – they are truly 
liberated. They that are truly liberated, are 'accomplished', and to them 
that are 'accomplished' there is no whirling round for purposes of 53
designation.
   
     And what, monks. is feeling?
     Monks, there are these six classes of feeling, to wit: feeling that is 
born of contact with eye, feeling that is born of contact with ear, . .

24 25
nose . . . . tongue . . . . body . . . . . mind. This, monks, is called feeling. 
From the arising of contact comes the arising of feeling; from the 
ceasing of contact is the ceasing of feeling; and the path leading to the 
ceasing of feeling is this Noble Eightfold Path, to wit: Right Views . . . . 
Right Concentration.
    
     That pleasure, that happiness, which arises because of feeling – that 
is the satisfaction that is in feeling. In so far as feeling is impermanent, 
fraught with suffering, and liable to change, this is the misery that is in 
feeling. That restraint of desire and lust, that putting away of desire and 
lust which are in feeling, that is the escape from feeling.
    
     Now whatsoever recluses or brahmins, monks, by thus fully 
understanding feeling, its arising, its ceasing, and the path leading to 
its ceasing, by thus fully understanding the satisfaction, the misery, 
that is in feeling and the escape from feeling, are treading towards the 
disgust for, the detachment from and the cessation of, feeling, they are 
rightly treading. They that are rightly treading, are firm grounded in 
this Norm and Discipline.
     And whatsoever recluses and brahmins, monks, by thus fully 
understanding feeling . . . . . are liberated without grasping, due to their 
disgust for, detachment from, and cessation of, feeling – they are truly 
liberated. They that are truly liberated are 'accomplished' and for them 
that are 'accomplished', there is no whirling round for purposes of 
designation.
And what, monks, is perception?
Monks, there are these six classes of perception, perception of form, 
perception of sound, of smell, taste, tangibles and ideas; that, monks, is 
called perception. From the arising of contact, comes the arising of 
perception; from the ceasing of contact, is the ceasing of perception; 
and the path leading to the ceasing of perception is this Noble 
Eightfold Path, to wit: Right Views . . . . Right Concentration . . .  (as 
above) . . . . . there is no whirling round for purposes of designation.
And what monks, are the preparations?
Monks, there are these six classes of intentions. The intention of 
forms, the intention of sounds, of smells, of tastes, of tangibles and of 
ideas. These, monks, are called preparations. From the arising of 
contact comes the arising of preparations; from the ceasing of contact 
is the ceasing of preparations; and the path leading to the ceasing of 
preparations is this Noble Eightfold Path, to wit: Right views . .  . . . 
Right Concentration. . . . . (as above) . . . . . there is no whirling round 
for purposes of designation.
And what monks, is consciousness?
Monks, there are these six classes of consciousness: eyeconsciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongueconsciousness, body-consciousness, and mind-consciousness. From 
the arising of 'name-and-form' comes the arising of consciousness; 
from the ceasing of name-and-form, is the ceasing of consciousness; 
and the path leading to the ceasing of consciousness is this Noble 
Eightfold Path, to wit: Right Views . . . . Right Concentration.
That pleasure, that happiness which arises because of 
consciousness – that is the satisfaction that is in consciousness. In so 
far as consciousness is impermanent, fraught with suffering, and liable 
to change, this is the misery that is in consciousness. That restraint of 
desire and lust, that putting away of desire and lust which are in 
consciousness, that is the escape from consciousness.
  Now whatsoever recluses or Brahmins, monks, by thus fully 
understanding consciousness, its arising, its ceasing, and the path 
leading to its ceasing; by thus fully understanding the satisfaction, the 
misery that is in consciousness, and the escape from consciousness, 
are treading towards the disgust for, the detachment from and the 
cessation of consciousness, they are rightly treading. They that are 
rightly treading, are firm grounded in this Norm and Discipline.
    
     And whatsoever recluses and Brahmins, monks, by thus fully 
understanding consciousness, its arising, its ceasing, and the path 
leading to its ceasing, by thus fully understanding the satisfaction, 
the misery and the escape from consciousness, are liberated without

26 27
grasping, due to their disgust for, detachment from and cessation of 
consciousness – they are truly liberated. They that are truly liberated, 
are 'accomplished', and to them that are 'accomplished', there is no 
whirling round for purposes of designation.
     
     In this way, monks, is a monk skilled in the seven points.
    
     And how, monks, is a monk an investigator of the three ways ?
     As to that, monks, a monk investigates things by way of the 54 55
elements,  by way of the sense-spheres,  by way of Dependent 56
Arising.
     That is how, monks, a monk becomes an investigator of the three 
ways.
     A monk who is skilled in the seven points, monks, who is an 
investigator of the three ways – he is called 'accomplished' in this 
Norm and Discipline, one who has reached mastership, a superman.
      (XXII. 57.)
19.  Full-Moon
     Once the Exalted One was staying near Sāvatthi in East Park at the 
mansion of Migāra's mother, with a great gathering of monks.
     Now, on that occasion, – it was the Uposatha day of the fifteenth on 
the night when the moon was full – the Exalted One was seated in the 
open air surrounded by the community of monks.
     
     Then a certain monk rose from his seat, and arranging his robe on 
one shoulder, bowed before the Exalted One with folded hands and 
thus addressed the Exalted One : "Lord, I would fain question the 
Exalted One on a certain point. If the Exalted One would grant me an 
answer to the question. "
"Then sit in your own seat, monk, and ask what you like."
   
      "Even so lord," replied that monk to the Exalted One, and having 
sat down in his own seat, thus addressed the Exalted One: "Are these 
the five aggregates of grasping, Lord, to wit: the form-aggregate of 
grasping, the feeling-aggregate of grasping, the perception-aggregate 
of grasping, the preparations-aggregate of grasping and the 
consciousness-aggregate of grasping?"
     "That is so, monk. Those are the five aggregates of grasping, as 
you say."
     "It is well, Lord," said that monk rejoicing in and appreciating the 
words of the Exalted One, and put another question: "But these five 
aggregates of grasping, lord, in what are they rooted ? "
    "These five aggregates of grasping, monk, have their root in 
desire."
 
    "It is well, lord," said that monk . . . . . and put another question: 
"Lord, are just these five aggregates of grasping the whole of grasping 
or is there any grasping apart from these five aggregates of grasping ?"
     "No indeed, monk, these five aggregates of grasping are not the 
whole of grasping, and yet there is no grasping apart from those five 
aggregates of grasping. But it is the desire and lust in these five 57
aggregates of grasping that is the grasping therein." 
     "It is well, lord", said that monk and put another question : "Might 
there be, lord, a variety of desire and lust in the five aggregates of 
grasping ?"
    "There might be, monk", replied the Exalted One. "Herein, monks, 
one thinks thus: 'May I be of such a form in the future. May I be of such 
a feeling in the future. May I be of such a perception in the future. May I 
be of such a preparation in the future.  May  I be of such a consciousnes

28 29
in the future'. In this way, monk, there might be a variety of desire and 
lust in the five aggregates of grasping."
 
     "It is well, lord" said that monk and put another question: "Pray, 
lord, how far does the definition of the term 'aggregate' go, in the case 
of the aggregates ?"
     "Any kind of form, whatever, whether past, future or present, in 
oneself or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near – 
this is called the aggregate of form.
Any kind of feeling. . . . .
Any kind of perception. . . . .
Any kind of preparations. . . . .
     Any kind of consciousness, whatever, whether past, future or 
present, in oneself or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far 
or near – this is called the aggregate of consciousness.
      
     Thus far, monk, does the definition of 'aggregate' go, in the case of 58
the aggregates." 
     
    "It is well, lord", said that monk . . . . . and put another question:
      
     "What, lord, is the reason, what is the condition, for designating the 
form-aggregate ? What is the reason, what is the condition, for 
designating the feeling-aggregate ? What is the reason, what is the 
condition, for designating the perception-aggregate ? What is the 
reason, what is the condition for designating the preparationsaggregate ? What is the reason, what is the condition, for designating 
the consciousness-aggregate ?"

     "The four great elements,  monk, are the reason, the four great 
elements are the condition for designating the form-aggregate. 
Contact is the reason, contact is the condition for designating the 
feeling-aggregate. Contact is the reason, contact is the condition for 
designating the perception-aggregate. Contact is the reason, contact is 
the condition for designating the preparations-aggregate. Name-andform is the reason, name-and-form is the condition, for designating the 
consciousness-aggregate."
     "It is well, lord," said that monk . . . . . and put another question:
     "Pray, lord, how does there come to be the personality-view ?"
     "Herein, monk, the untaught average person, taking no account of 
the noble ones, unskilled in the doctrine of the noble ones, untrained in 
the doctrine of the noble ones, taking no account of the good men, 
unskilled in the doctrine of the good men, untrained in the doctrine of 
the good men, regards form as self or self as having form, or form as 
being in self, or self as being in form (and so with feeling, perception, 
the preparations and consciousness) .  .  .  .  .  h e  r e g a r d s  
consciousness as self, or self as having consciousness, or 
consciousness as being in self, or self as being in consciousness. That 
is how, monk, there comes to be the personality-view."
     "It is well, lord" said that monk .........  and put another question:
     "But, lord, how does there not come to be the personality-view ?"
     "Herein, monk, the well-taught noble disciple who discerns the 
noble ones, who is skilled in the doctrine of the noble ones, welltrained in the doctrine of the noble ones, who discerns the good men, 
who is skilled in the doctrine of the good men, well-trained in the 
doctrine of the good men, does not regard form as self . . . . . . does not 
regard consciousness as self, or self as having consciousness, or 
consciousness as being in self, or self as being in consciousness. That 
is how, monk, there does not come to be the personality-view. "
    "It is well, lord", said that monk . . . . and put another question:
       
     "Pray, lord, what is the satisfaction, what is the misery, and what 
is the escape in the case of form ? What is the satisfaction, what is 
the misery,  what  is the escape, in the case  of feeling ?  What is the

30 31
satisfaction, what is the misery, what is the escape, in the case of 
perception?  What  is  the  satisfaction,  what  is  the  escape in the 
case of preparations? What is the satisfaction, what is the misery, 
what is the escape in the case of consciousness? "
     "The pleasure and happiness, monk, that arises in dependence on 
form – this is the satisfaction in the case of form. Form is impermanent, 
painful and subject to change - this is the misery in the case of form. 
The restraint of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust, for 
form – this is the escape in the case of form.
     The pleasure and happiness that arise in dependence on feeling . . . . . 
in dependence on perception in dependence on preparations . . . . . in 
dependence on consciousness . . . . . . – this is the escape in the case of 
consciousness. "
     "It is well, lord", said that monk  . . . . . . and put another question.
      
     "How, lord, should one know, how should one see, so that in this 
bcdy with its consciousness and in all external signs, there be no idea 
of' 'I' or 'mine', no latent conceits therein ?"
      
     "Any kind of form, monk, whatever, whether past, future or present, 
in oneself or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, 
he sees all of it with right understanding, thus: 'This is not mine; this am 
not I; this is not my self.'
    
Any kind of feeling whatever . . . . . 
Any kind of perception whatever . . . . . 
Any kind of preparations whatever . . . . .
     Any kind of consciousness whatever . . . . . this is not my self.'
    
     It is when one knows thus, monk, and sees thus, that there come to 
be in him no idea of 'I' or 'mine' and no latent conceits, in this body with 
its consciousness and in all external signs."
     
     At that moment there arose in a certain monk this train of thought:
'So, it seems, form is not self, feeling is not self, perception is not self, 
preparations are not self, consciousness is not self. Then what self will 
the actions done by the not self touch ? '
Then the Exalted One knew with his mind the thought in that 
monk's mind, and he addressed the monks thus:
     
     "It is possible, monks, that some foolish man, unknowing and 
ignorant, with his mind dominated by craving, might fancy that he 
could by-pass the Master's teaching thus: 'So, it seems, form is not self . 
. . . Then what self will the actions done by the not-self touch? ' But, 60 
monks, you have been trained by me by the counter-question method 
on certain occasions, in regard to certain teachings. Now, what do you 
think, monks ? Is form permanent or impermanent ? "
     
     "Impermanent, lord."
     "That which is impermanent, is it painful or pleasant ? "
     "Painful, lord."
     "That which is impermanent, painful and subject to change, is it fit 
to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this am I, this is my self ?"
    "Surely not, lord."
    "What do you think, monks? Is feeling permanent, . . . perception 
. . . . , preparations . . . ,  consciousness . . . . . ? "
    "Surely not, lord."
     "Therefore, monks, any kind of form, whatever, whether past, 
future or present, in oneself or external, gross or subtle, inferior or 
superior, far or near, all form should be seen as it is with right 
understanding, thus: 'This is not mine, this am not I, this is not my self. 
Any kind of feeling . . . . perception . . . . . preparations . .  .  . 
consciousness . . .  . not my self.'

32 33
Thus seeing, the well-taught noble disciple becomes dispassionate 
towards form, becomes dispassionate towards feeling, becomes 
dispassionate towards perception, becomes dispassionate towards 
preparations, becomes dispassionate towards consciousness. Being 
dispassionate, he lusts not for it; not lusting, he is liberated; when he is 
liberated, there comes the knowledge: "liberated". And he 
understands: 'Exhausted is birth, lived is the holy life, done is the task, 
there is nothing beyond this for (a designation of) the conditions of this 
existence. ' "
(XXII.82.)
Part Four: The Book on the Sixfold Sphere of Sense
20. Upasena
     Once the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable Upasena were 
staying near Rajagaha in Cool Grove, at Snakeshood Grotto.
     Now at that time a snake had fallen on the Venerable Upasena's 
body. Then the Venerable Upasena addressed the monks, saying: 
"Come hither, friends, lift this body of mine on to a couch and take it 61
outside before it be scattered here, just like a handful of chaff ." 
     At these words the Venerable Sāriputta said to the Venerable 
Upasena: "We see no change in the Venerable Upasena's body, no 
change for the worse in his faculties. Yet the Venerable Upasena says: 62
'Come hither friends, . . . . . just like a handful of chaff.' " 
     "Indeed, friend, Sāriputta, it is to him who thinks: ' I am the eye, the 
eye is mine ' or  ' I am the ear, the ear is mine ', or  ' I am the nose, the 
nose is mine, ' or ' I am the tongue, the tongue is mine' or  'I am the body, 
the body is mine ' or  ' I am the mind, the mind is mine ', that there 
would be any change in the body, any change for the worse in the 
faculties. But as for me, friend, I do not think: 'I am the eye, the eye is 
mine'. , , . . or ' I am the mind, the mind is mine'. How then, friend 
Sāriputta, could there be for me any change in the body, any change for 
the worse in the faculties?"
     "So then, it seems the Venerable Upasena has long since eradicated 
the latent conceits of  ' I ' and 'mine'. Hence it is that it occurs not thus to 63
the Venerable Upasena: 'I am the eye', 'the eye is mine' , . . ,  or  ' I am 
the mind, the mind is mine ' ''.
Then those monks put the Venerable Upasena's body on a couch and 
bore it outside.
And the Venerable Upasena's body there and then was scattered just 
like a handful of chaff.
             (XXXV 69.)

34 35
21. Dyad
     "Owing to a dyad, monks, consciousness comes into being. And 
how, monks, does consciousness come into being owing to a dyad ?
     Owing to the eye and forms arises eye-consciousness. The eye is 
impermanent, changing, 'becoming-otherwise'. Forms are 
impermanent, changing, 'becoming-otherwise'. Thus this dyad is 
fleeting and transient; impermanent, changing and 'becoming 
otherwise'. That cause, that condition, which gives rise to eyeconsciousness – that also is impermanent, changing, 'becomingotherwise'. And how, monks, could eye-consciousness, having arisen 
dependent on an impermanent condition, become permanent? Now 
the coming-together, the falling together, the meeting-together, of 
these three things – this, monks, is called 'eye-contact'. Eye-contact 
too, is impermanent, changing, 'becoming-otherwise'. That cause, that 
condition, which gives rise to eye-contact – that also is impermanent, 
changing, 'becoming-otherwise'. And how, monks, could eye-contact, 
having arisen dependent on an impermanent condition, become 
permanent? Contacted, monks, one feels. Contacted, one intends. 
Contacted, one perceives. Thus these states also are fleeting and 
transient; impermanent, changing, ' becoming-otherwise '.
     Owing to the ear and sounds arises ear-consciousness. The ear is 
impermanent . . . .
      
   Owing to the nose and scents arises nose-consciousness. The nose 
is impermanent  . . . .
    Owing to the tongue and savours arises tongue-consciousness. The 
tongue is impermanent . . . .
     Owing to the body and tangibles arises body-consciousness. The 
body is impermanent . . . . .
  
    Owing the mind and ideas arises mind-consciousness.  The mind is 
impermanent . . . . contacted, monks, one feels. Contacted, one intends.
Contacted, one perceives. Thus these states also are fleeting and 
transient; impermanent, changing, 'becoming-otherwise'. 

    Thus, monks, consciousness comes into being owing to a dyad."      
(XXXV. 93.)

22.  'Not-including' 
     "Gods and men, monks, delight in forms, they are excited by forms. 
Owing to the change, the fading away and the cessation of forms, 
woefully, monks, dwell gods and men. They delight in sounds, scents, 
savours, tangibles and ideas, and are excited by them  . . . . . . Owing to 
the change, the fading away and the cessation of ideas, woefully, 
monks, do gods and men dwell.
                  
     But the Tathāgata, monks, the Arahant, the Fully Awakened One, 
having understood, as they really are, the arising, the passing away, the 
satisfaction, the misery and the escape from forms, – he delights not in 
forms, is not attached to forms, is not excited by forms. By the change, 
the fading away, and the cessation of forms, blissfully, monks, dwells 
the Tathāgata.
     So also of sounds, and the rest  .  .  .  .  blissfully, monks, dwells the 
Tathāgata."

 Thus spoke the Exalted One. So saying, the Well-farer, the Teacher, 
added this further :
"Forms, sounds, smells, savours, touches, ideas, 
All that's deemed desirable, charming and pleasant,
Of which they claim: 'It is' – and as far as their claim extends,
The world with its gods, holds all these as bliss,
And wherein they cease: 'That's the pain in them' – say they67
As bliss the Ariyans saw, the curb on the self-hood bias  
In contrast with the whole world is this vision of theirs.
What others spoke of in terms of bliss,
That – as woe the saints declared,

36 37
What others spoke of in terms of woe, 68
That – as bliss the saints have known.  
Behold a Norm that's hard to comprehend
Baffled herein are the ignorant ones.
Murk it is to those enveloped, as darkness unto the 
undiscerning.
But to the Good, wide ope' it is, as light is unto those 
discerning.
So near ! and yet they know not – Fools, unskilled in the 
Norm !
By those who are given to lust for becoming
By those who are swept by the current of Becoming 
By those who have slipped into Māra's realm69
Not easily comprehended is this Norm.
Who but the noble ones deserve
To 'waken fully unto that state,
By knowing which, being influx-free
Tranquil Nibbāna they attain."
     "Gods and men, monks, delight in forms . . . . . woe-fully, monks do 
gods and men live.
     But the Tathāgata monks . . . . . blissfully, monks, dwells the 
Tathāgata."        
                                                                                    (XXXV. 136)
23. Isidatta.
     Once a number of elder-monks were dwelling at Macchikāsanda 
in Wild Mango Grove.
     Then Citta, the householder, approached those elder-monks. Having 
approached them, he saluted them and sat down at one side. So seated, 
Citta, the householder, said to those elder-monks: "Let the Venerable 
sirs, the elders, accept of me tomorrow's meal. "
And those elder-monks accepted by silence.
     Thereupon Citta, the householder, understanding the acceptance of 
those elder-monks, rose from his seat, saluted them and having 
circumambulated them by the right, went away.
   
  Now the elder-monks, when the night was gone, robed themselves 
in the forenoon, and taking bowl and robe, went to the dwelling of 
Citta, the householder, and on reaching it, sat down on seats prepared.
  Then Citta the householder, came to those elder-monks and 
saluting them sat down at one side. So seated, Citta, the householder, 
said to the Venerable (chief) elder:
         
     "As to these divers views that arise in the world, Venerable Sir, such 
as Eternal is the world; not eternal is the world, finite is the world, 
infinite is the world, soul and body are the same, soul and body are 
different, the Tathāgata exists after death, he exists not after death, he 
both exists and exists not after death, he neither exists nor exists not 70
after death; also as to the sixty-two views set forth in the Brahmajala,  
– owing to the existence of what, Venerable Sir, do these views prevail: 
owing to the non-existence of what do these views not prevail ? "
     At these words the Venerable chief-elder was silent.
    Then Citta, the householder, put the same question for a second and a 
third time . . . . but the Venerable chief elder was silent.
          
     Now on that occasion the Venerable Isidatta was the junior of that 
company of monks.

38 39
Then the Venerable Isidatta said to the Venerable chief elder: 
"Venerable Sir, may I reply to this question of Citta, the householder?"
     
     "You may reply to it, Isidatta "
     "Now, householder, your question was this, was it not ?" (and 
he repeated the question).
        
     "Yes, Venerable Sir."
     "Now, householder, as to those divers views that arise in the 
world, such as: Eternal is the world . . .  . and as to these sixty-two 71
views set forth in the Brahmajala, it is owing to the 'personality-view'  
that they arise, and if the personality-view exists not, they do not 
exist."
     "But, Venerable Sir, how comes to be the personality-view ?"
   
     "Herein, householder. the untaught average man  .  .  .  .  .  (as on 
p. 29.) . . . . . That is how, householder, there comes to be the 
personality-view."
     
     "But, Venerable Sir, how does there not come to be the 
personality-view?"
     "Herein, householder, the well-taught noble disciple  . . . . . (as on 
pp. 29 f.) . . . . . That is how, householder, there does not come to be the 
personality-view."
     "Whence comes the Venerable Isidatta, my lord ?" 
     "I come from Avanti, householder."
     "There is at Avanti, Venerable Sir, a clansman named Isidatta, an 
unseen friend of ours, who has gone forth. Has your reverence seen 
him ?"
     "I have, householder."
"Pray, Venerable Sir, where does that Venerable one now dwell ?"
At these words the Venerable Isidatta was silent. "Is your reverence the 
worthy Isidatta ?"
"I am, householder."
 "Then may the worthy Isidatta take his pleasure at 
Macchikāsanda. Lovely is wild Mango Grove ! I will do my best to 
supply the worthy Isidatta with the requisites of robes, alms, lodgings 
and medicaments."
    
     "That is kindly said, householder."
     Thereupon Citta, the householder, was delighted with the words of 
the Venerable Isidatta, and rejoicing in them, with his own hand he 
served the elder monks with choice food both hard and soft until they 
had eaten their fill.
     Then the elder-monks, having had their fill and withdrawn hand 
from bowl, rose up and went away.
     
     Then said the Venerable chief elder to the Venerable Isidatta :
     
  "It was good, friend Isidatta, the way that question occurred to 
you. That question did not occur to me. Therefore, friend Isidatta, if on 
another occasion such a question arises, you may reply in like 
manner."
     
     Then the Venerable Isidatta, having set his lodgings in order, took 
bowl and robe, and departed from Macchikāsanda. And in thus 
departing from Macchikāsanda, he was gone for good and came not 72     
back any more.
                                                                                           (XLI. 3.)
    
24. Bhadragaka
Once the Exalted One was staying among the Mallas at 
Uruvelakappa, a township of the Mallas.

40 41
Then Bhadragaka, the headman, approached the Exalted One. 
Having drawn near, he saluted him and sat down at one side. So seated 
Bhadragaka, the headman, said to the Exalted One :
     "Well for me, lord, if the Exalted One would teach me the arising 
and the passing away of ill. "
   "If I were to teach you, headman, the arising and the passing away 
of ill, with reference to past time, saying. 'Thus it was in the past,' you 
would have doubt and perplexity. And if, headman, I were to teach you 
the arising and the passing away of ill with reference to future time, 
saying, 'So will it be in the future', you would likewise have doubt and 
perplexity. But seated here as I am, headman, I will teach you, even as 
you are sitting there, the arising and the passing away of ill. Do listen 
attentively. Apply your mind and I will speak."
   "Even so, lord," replied Bhadragaka, the headman, to the Exalted 
One.
The Exalted One said :-
  "Now what think you, headman ? Are there any people in 
Uruvelakappa, owing to whose death or imprisonment or loss or 
blame there would come upon you sorrow and lamentation, pain, grief 
and despair ?"
     "There are such people in Uruvelakappa, lord."
     "But headman, are there any people in Uruvelakappa owing to 
whose death or imprisonment or loss or blame no sorrow and 
lamentation, pain, grief and despair would come upon you ? "
     "There are such people in Uruvelakappa, lord."
   "Now, headman, what is the reason, what is the cause why sorrow 
and lamentation, pain, grief and despair would come upon you in 
respect of some, but not of others ?"
    "In the case of those, lord, owing to whose death or imprisonment or 
loss or blame there would come upon me sorrow . . . . I have desire and 
attachment. And as for the others, lord, I do not have such desire and 
attachment in their case".
    
     "You say, 'I do not have such desire and attachment in their case'. 
Now, headman, by this Norm thus seen and known, attained and 73
plumbed into without any time-lag , you draw an inference in regard 74
to the past and future, thus:  ' Whatsoever ill that has arisen in the past,   
– all that is rooted in desire, caused by desire. And whatsoever ill that 
will arise in the future, – all that is rooted in desire, caused by desire. 
Desire, indeed, is the root of ill.' "
     "Wonderful, lord! Marvellous, lord, how well said is the saying of 
the Exalted One: 'Whatsoever ill that arises, all that is rooted in desire, 
caused by desire. Desire indeed, is the root of ill.' "
    
     "Now, Lord, there is my boy – Ciravāsi is his name. He lodges away 
from here. Rising up betimes, lord, I send off a man, saying;  'Go my 
man, inquire of Ciravāsi.' Then, lord, till that man comes back again, I 
am in an anxious state, lest some sickness may have befallen Ciravāsi."
    
     "Now what think you, headman? Would sorrow and lamentation, 
pain, grief and despair come upon you if your boy Ciravāsi were slain 
imprisoned or suffered loss or blame? "
     "Lord, if such were to befall my boy Ciravāsi even my life will be at 
stake, how should I not have sorrow and lamentation, pain, grief and 
despair ? "
    
     "In this manner too, you must know this fact: 'Whatsoever ill that 
arises, all that is rooted in desire, caused by desire. Desire is indeed the 
root of ill. ' "
     
     "Now what think you, headman? When you had not seen Ciravāsi's 
mother, had not heard about her, did you then have any desire or 
longing or love for her ?"

42 43
     "No indeed, lord."
     "But headman, when you got sight of her, heard about her, did 
you then have desire or longing or love for her ? "
      
     "Yes, Lord."
    
     "Now what think you headman? Would sorrow and lamentation  . . . 
. come upon you if Ciravāsi's mother were slain or imprisoned or had 
any loss or blame ? "
     
     "Lord if such were to befall Ciravāsi's mother even my life itself 
will be at stake, how should, I not have sorrow . . . . . and despair ?"
    
     "So in this manner too, headman, you must know this fact: 
'Whatsoever ill that arises, all that is rooted in desire, caused by desire. 
Desire indeed is the root of ill. ' "
(XLII. 11.)
Part Five: The Great Chapter.
25. The She-Falcon.
      Once upon a time, monks, a she-falcon suddenly swooped down 
and seized a quail. Then, monks, the quail, while it was being carried 
away by the she-falcon, thus lamented:
      "Just my bad luck and lack of merit ! (It serves me right) for 
trespassing outside my own pasture into others' property. If I had kept 
my own ancestral beat today, this she-falcon would have been no 
match for me, if it came to a fight."
     "But what is that pasture, quail, which is your own ancestral beat?"
    
     "It is a field turned up by the ploughshare, a place all covered with 
clods."
Then, monks, the she-falcon, without being stiff in her assertion of 75
strength, not caring to argue with the quail on her own strength,  
released the quail saying, "Off with you, quail, but even by going there 
you will not escape me."
  So monks, the quail went off to a ploughed field, to a place all 
covered with clods, perched on a great clod and stood challenging the 
she-falcon, thus: "Now come on, you falcon! Now come on, you falcon 
!"
   Then, monks, the she-falcon, without being stiff in her assertion of 
strength, not caring to argue with the quail on her own strength, poising 
both her wings, swooped down upon the quail.
   But, monks, as soon as the quail knew that the she falcon had come 
too close to her, she slipped inside that very clod. And then, monks, the 
falcon shattered her breast thereon.
  So it is, monks, with one who goes roaming out of his own pasture, 
in others' property. Wherefore, monks, roam ye not outside your own 
pasture, in others' property. To those who so roam, monks, Māra will 
get access. In them, Māra will find a support.
       
    And what, monks, is not one's own pasture, but others' property, in 
the case of a monk ? It is the five kinds of sense-pleasure. What five?
    
 Forms cognizable by the eye, desirable. charming, pleasant, 
delightful, passion-fraught and alluring. Sounds cognizable by the ear . 
. . . . scents cognizable by the nose . . . . . savours cognizable by the 
tongue .  .  . tangibles cognizable by the body, desirable, charming, 
pleasant, delightful, passion-fraught and alluring. This, monks, is not 
one's own pasture but other's property, in the case of a monk.
   Monks, do ye range your own pasture, keep to your ancestral beat. 
To those who range their own pasture, who keep to their ancestral beat, 
Māra will get no access. In them Māra will find no support.
    
   And what, monks, is a monk's own pasture? What is his ancestral 
beat? It is the Four Foundations of Mindfulness. What four?

44 45
Herein, monks, a monk dwells, as regards body, contemplating 
body, ardent, fully aware and mindful, having overcome covetousness 
and grief concerning the world. He dwells, as regards feeling, 
contemplating feeling, ardent, fully aware . . . . . He dwells, as regards 
mind, contemplating mind . . . . . He dwells, as regards mind-objects, 
contemplating mind-objects, ardent, fully aware and mindful, having 
overcome covetousness and grief concerning the world. This, monks, 76
is a monk's own pasture; this is his ancestral beat.
(XLVII. 6)
26.  Sedaka
     On a certain occasion, the Exalted One was dwelling in the Sumbha 
country, in a township of the Sumbhas, called Sedaka. There the 
Exalted One addressed the monks:
    
   "Once upon a time, monks, a bamboo-acrobat set up his pole and 
called to his pupil, Medakathālika, saying : " Come, my lad, 
Medakathālika, climb the pole and stand on my shoulders!"
     
   "All right, master," replied the pupil to the bamboo-acrobat, 
climbed the pole and stood on his master's shoulder.
  Then, monks, the bamboo-acrobat said to his pupil: "Now 
Medakathālika, my lad, you protect me well and I shall protect you. 
Thus watched and warded by each other, we will show our tricks, get a 
good fee and come down safe from the bamboo-pole."
     At these words Medakathālika the pupil said to the bambooacrobat : "No, no! That won't do, master ! You look after yourself, 
master, and I'll look after myself. Thus watched and warded each by 
himself, we'll show our tricks, get a good fee and come down safe from 
the bamboo-pole."
     "Therein that is the right way," – said the Exalted One, "Just as 
Medakathālika the pupil said to his master. "I'll protect myself", 
so monks, should the Foundations of Mindfulness be practised. 
"I'll protect others" so should the Foundations of Mindfulness be
practised. Protecting oneself, monks, one protects others; protecting 77
others, one protects oneself.
     And how, monks, does one, in protecting oneself, protect others? 
By frequent practice, development and making-much-of (the 
Foundations of Mlndfulness). Thus, monks, in protecting oneself one 78
protects others.
   
     And how, monks does one, in protecting others, protect oneself ? 
By forbearance, by non-violence, by loving kindness, by compassion. 79
Thus, monks, in protecting others, one protects oneself.
     "I shall protect myself", with this intention, monks, the 
Foundations of Mindfulness should be practised. "I shall protect 
others", with this intention the Foundations of Mindfulness should be 
practised. Protecting oneself, one protects others; protecting others, 
one protects oneself. "
(XLVII. 19.)
27. The Province
  Once the Exalted One was dwelling in the Sumbha country at 
Sedaka, a township of the Sumbha people. There the Exalted One 
addressed the monks:
"Suppose, monks, a large crowd of people flock together, crying: "The 
beauty-queen ! The beauty-queen !" And if that beauty-queen is also a 
highly gifted performer as to dancing and singing, a still larger crowd 
would flock together, crying: "The beauty-queen is dancing, she is 
singing !"
     Then comes a man, who wishes to live and does not wish to die, 
who desires happiness and abhors suffering. The people say to him: 54
"Look here, man ! Here's a bowl filled  to the brim with oil. You must 
carry it around between the large crowd and the beauty-queen. A man 
with uplifted sword will follow, behind your back,  and  wherever  you

46 47
spill even a little drop of the oil, there itself he will chop off your head !"     
"Now, what do you think, monks ? Would that man, without paying 
attention to that bowl of oil, solicit heedlessness from outside?"
     "Surely not, lord"
     "Well, monks, this parable I have given to make the meaning clear. 
And its significance is this: 'The bowl filled to the brim with oil', 
monks, is a term for mindfulness relating to body. "
     "Wherefore, monks, thus must you train yourselves: 'Mindfulness 
relating to body shall be cultivated by us, shall be made much of, made 
a vehicle, a ground-plan. It shall be made effective, well-acquainted, 80
and consummate in us.' Thus, monks, must you train yourselves." 
(XLVII. 20.)
------
Abbreviations
References are to page numbers in P. T. S. editions.
D. – Dīgha Nikāya
M. – Majjhima Nikāya
S. – Sa§yutta Nikāya 
A. – Anguttara Nikāya 
Dhp. – Dhammapada 
Ud. – Udāna
Itiv – Itivuttaka
Sn. – Sutta Nipāta 
Thag. – Theragāthā
Vin. I. – Vinaya Mahāvagga
S.A. – S. Commentary (Sāratthappakāsinī)
Dhp.A. – Dhp.    ,, (Dhammapadaññhakathā)
Sn.A. – Sn.       ,, (Paramatthajotikā)
Translations: Pali Text Society Translation Series.
M.L.S. – Middle Length Sayings 
K. S. – Kindred Sayings
P.E.D. – Pali English Dictionary (P.T.S.)

48 49
NOTES
Part One
1. Four types of 'flood' (ogha) are distinguished: i. sense-desires 
(kāma); ii. becoming (bhava); iii. views (diññhi); iv. ignorance (avijjā).
 2. The two words 'appatiññha§' and 'anāyūha§' point to the Middle 
Path (majjhimā pañipadā) in its broadest sense.
 
     In the case of the first flood (ie. sense-desires), they bring out the 
ethical significance of the Noble Eightfold Path in its avoidance of the 
two extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification. The former 
extreme tends to moral stagnation while the latter leads to extreme 
forms of asceticism which are not conducive to a healthy development 
of the mind. Since both attitudes of 'stagnation' and 'struggling' are 
ineffective against the flood of sense-desires, the Buddha's Middle 
Path advocates sanity and moderation.
     Extreme reactions to the second flood (i.e. becoming), took the 
form of Eternalism and Annihilationism, which again reflect attitudes 
of attachment and aversion. The Eternalist 'leaned back' while the 
Annihilationist 'over-reached' himself in the face of the problem of 
existence. ". . . . . Delighting in existence, monks, are gods and men; 
they are attached to existence and rejoice in it. When Dhamma is being 
preached (to them) their minds do not leap towards it, do not become 
pleased, established or released therein. Thus, monks, do some lean 
back. And how, monks, do some others over-reach themselves? Being 
afflicted by and loathing this very existence, some others delight in 
non-existence, thus: 'Inasmuch as this being, when the body breaks up, 
after death, gets annihilated, will be destroyed and be no more after 
death, this is peace, this is excellent, this is the true state.' Thus, monks 
some others over-reach themselves . . . . ." (Itiv. 43f). 
The former ran after his shadow while the latter tried in vain to 
outstrip it, both being equally obsessed in taking it to be real. Here 
the Buddha's solution was to recognize the shadow for what it is 
by  'seeing-things-as-they-are'  (yathābhūtañāõadassana)  – as 
dependently arisen – thus dispelling both Narcissistic love and morbid 
hate for it and ushering in equanimity in the light of wisdom. " . . . and 
how, monks, do those who have eyes, see ? Herein, a monk sees the 
'become' (bhūta§) as 'become'. Having seen the 'become' as 'become', 
he treads the path towards disenchantment, dispassion and cessation 
with regard to the 'become'. Thus it is, monks, that those who have eyes 
see. . . . ." (ib).
     The third flood (ie. views) brought forth the dichotomy between the 
extreme views of absolute existence ('sabba§ atthi' – 'everything 
exists') and absolute non-existence ('sabba§ natthi' –   'nothing 
exists'). Avoiding these two extremes runs the Middle Path of 
Dependent Arising: 'He who with right insight sees the arising of the 
world as it really is, does not hold with the non - existence of the world. 
And he who, with right insight sees the passing away of the world as it 
really is, does not hold with the existence of the world.' (Kaccāyana S. 
S. II. 17). In place of the static world-view of the metaphysicians and 
the nihilists, we have here a dynamic vision of the rise and fall of 
phenomena.
     The fourth flood (i.e. ignorance) resulted in the polarisation of the 
extreme attitudes of extraversion and introversion, both of which spelt 
delusion (moha). This is the paradox of consciousness (viññāõa), 
inter-dependent as it is on name-and-form (nāmarūpa) – each 
providing a footing or support (patiññhā) for the other. The deepest 
riddle of existence (bhava) lay between them as they doted upon each 
other forming the whirlpool of sa§sāra. (See below. Notes 38, 51). 
'Consciousness turns back from name-and-form, it does not go 
beyond ' (D. II. 32). However much it tried to dart out of the vicious 
cycle with the force of sa§khāras or preparations, it found itself 
confronted by name-and-form. Epistemologically, all views – even 
those based on jhānic experience – stood condemned, because they all 
centred round some aspect or other of name-and-form, which in its 
turn implicated consciousness itself. 'A seeing man will see nameand-form, and having seen, he will understand just those things. 
Verily, let him see much or little, yet the experts do not speak of purity 
thereby.' (Sn. 909). Similarly, the almost refrain-like pronouncement

50 51
running through the concluding sections of the Brahmajāla Sutta (D. 
I. 41-44): 'even that is due to contact' (tadapi phassapaccayā), is a 
disqualification of the whole range of sixty-two views, because 
'contact' comes under 'name-and-form'. (See below: Note 13.) 
The Buddha discovered a way out of this impasse in a unique realm of 
meditation in which consciousness neither partakes of extraversion 
nor of introversion and is free from the sa§khāras that keep one 
leashed to existence (bhava). It is the 'Deliverance - through - 
Knowledge' (aññāvimokkha - Sn. 1107), having as its Fruit, the 
Knowledge of Nibbānic freedom (Aññāphala - A. IV. 428.) 
Consciousness, now, is 'non-manifestative' (anidassana D. I. 213), 
providing no footing for name-and-form, and it is neither distracted or 
diffuse without (... 'bahiddhā c'assa viññāõa§  avikkhitta§ avisaña§ 
– M. III. 223) nor established within (ajjhatta§  asaõñhita§' - ib.); 
neither 'approaching' (anupāyo – M. III. 25) nor 'receding' (anapāyo – 
ib.); neither 'turned - towards' (nacābhinato – A. IV. 428, S. I. 28) nor 
'turned-outwards' (nacāpanato  – ib.); neither 'focussed' (asa§hīra§ 
– M. III. 187) nor 'excitable' (asa§kuppa§ – ib.). Having no object 
(anārammana§ – Ud. 80), it is 'unestablished' (appatiññha§ – ib.) and 
'non-continuing' (appavatta§ – ib.) It is not a state of pent up tension, 
forcibly held in check by preparations ('na sasaïkhāraniggayhavāritavato – A. IV. 428). This level of transcendental experience was 
so subtle and refractory to definition, that the Buddha declared: "This 
too were a state very difficult to see, that is to say the calming of all 
preparations, the renunciation of all assets, the destruction of craving, 
dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna. " (' Idampi kho ñhāna§ sududdasa§ 
yadida§ sabbasa§khārasamatho sabbūpadhipañinissaggo 
tanhakkhayo virāgo nirodho nibbāna§ – S. I. 136, Vin I. 5).
The two words, 'appatiññha§' and 'anāyuha§' can thus be interpreted 
with reference to the four floods in their ethical, existential, 
metaphysical and epistemological aspects.
     
 3. 'It is he in whom delight and existence are extinct, that does not sink 
in the deep' ('nandībhava-parikkhīno-so gambhīre na sīdati' – Sn. v. 
175).
4. The term 'brāhmana' is often used as an epithet of the perfect 
saint, the arahant.
5. Here the text has 'parinibbuta§' in the sense of complete extinction 
of the three 'fires' of lust, hatred and delusion. Though in later usage 
there came in a tendency to associate this word exclusively with the 
death of an arahant, suttas frequently apply it even to the living arahant 
experiencing the bliss of complete emancipation. A similar tendency is 
evident in the usage of the term 'nirupadhi' 'without possessions or 
assets'. (cf. Itiv. 46: 'Having touched with his body the Deathlesselement, the 'Asset-less' and realized the abandonment of all assets, the 
Perfectly Awakened One, the cankerless, proclaims the sorrowless, 
dustless state.').
6. Visattikā – a synonym for craving (taõhā) in its agglutinative aspect, 
which is also implicit in such expressions as 'sibbanī' (seamstress – Sn. 
vv. 1040, 1042), 'lippati' ('to be smeared or soiled' –ib.) and 
'tatratatrābhinandinī' ('finding delight now here, now there' – Vin. I. 
10).
 
7. 'nimokkha§ pamokkha§ viveka§': These three terms are explained 
in the comm. (S. A.) in two ways. Firstly, they are said to refer to the 
Path, the Fruit and Nibbāna respectively. Secondly, as an alternative 
interpretation, all of them are treated as synonyms for Nibbāna. It is 
only the latter interpretation that appears to be valid according to the 
context.
8. Delight (nandi) is said to be the root of existence (bhava), and hence 
the fading away of the former results in the cessation of the latter. It 
amounts to a realization, here and now, of the fact that one has crossed 
over all forms of existence (bhavassa pāragū – Dhp. v. 348). This 
experience that the consciousness is not established anywhere – 
neither here (neva idha), nor beyond (na hura§) nor in between (na 
ubhayamantare – Ud. 81) – provides for the arahant, certitude often 
expressed in the words: 'Extinct is birth, lived is the holy life, done is 
the task, and there is nothing beyond this for (a designation of) the 
conditions of this existence. '

52 53
9. This refers to the experience of the cessation of consciousness 
(viññāõanirodha – D. I. 213) with the removal of its support nameand-form. The experience is described in the suttas as a very unusual 
kind of 'jhāna' or 'samādhi', since it does not partake of any perceptual 
data. (A, IV. 427, V. 7, 8, 318, 319, 321, 324f, 353ff.)
  
10. The cessation and appeasement of feelings, is yet another aspect of 
this experience. Thereby the Arahant realizes the extinction of all 
suffering mental as well as physical (see Sakalika S:, SI. 27), which in 
effect is the bliss of Nibbāna as the deliverance from all Sa§sāric 
suffering. What is most significant about this paradoxical jhāna is that, 
despite the extinction of all what normally constitutes our waking 
experience, the arahant is still said to be mindful and aware. It is 
sometimes referred to as 'the sphere' (āyatana) in which the six sensespheres have totally ceased. (See. M. III. 218; S. IV. 98).
11. Nibbāna is called 'apunāgamana' ('from which there is no coming 
back again') as it is an irreversible attainment. This transcendence of 
the world is often compared to a 'crossing-over to the farther shore.' 
'The saint having crossed over and gone beyond, stands on dry ground' 
('tiõõo pāra§gato thale tiññhati brāhmaõo' – S. IV. 175.). 'Once he has 
crossed over, the such-like one comes not back' ('pāra§gato na 
pacceti tādī – Sn. v. 803). 'To the farther shore they go not twice' ('na 
pāra§ diguna§ yanti – Sn. v. 714). The sense of irreversibility is also 
conveyed by the term, 'akuppā-cetovimutti' (unshakeable deliverance 
of the mind') signifying arahantship.
12. The ten fetters that are to be abandoned in the course of one's 
progress towards Arahantship: They are: i. personality-view ii. 
uncertainty iii. adherence to rites and rituals iv. lust for sensepleasures v. resentment vi. attachment to Realms of Form vii. 
attachment to Formless Realms viii. conceit  ix. agitation x. 
ignorance.
13. 'Name-and Form' (nāmarūpa): "Feeling, perception, conation, 
contact,  attention – these,  friends,  are called 'name'.  The   four  great
elements and form dependent on them – these, friends, are called 'form'  
" –  M. I. 53 Sammādiññhi S. As the object and support of 
consciousness, name-and-form is sometimes conceived as a net in 
which consciousness is enmeshed. Thoughts and intentions have, 
as their object, some aspect or other of this name-and-form (A. IV. 
385). So long as the agglutinative tendency of craving is not 
eliminated, consciousness is unable to transcend name-and-form, and 
is perpetually caught in a vicious circle. The Buddha and the arahants 
succeeded in escaping the net by giving up all attachment. Their 
consciousness, now illumined by wisdom, penetrated it and soared 
untrammelled and unrestricted, out into an infinitude (D. I. 223.), by 
way of the three deliverances – the 'signless' (animitta), the 
'undirected' (appaõihitta) and the 'void' (suññatā).
14. akiñcana: ('possessing-nothing'). An epithet of the arahant, 
connoting the absence of lust, hatred and delusion. "Lust, friend, is a 
something (kiñcano), hatred is a something, delusion is a something. 
In a monk whose influxes are extinct, they are abandoned, cut-off at the 
root, rendered groundless, made extinct and are incapable of arising 
again. "  – M. I. 298. Mahā Vedalla S.
15. When the subtle conceit 'I am' (asmimāna) is eradicated and the 
attachment to name-and-form is given up, consciousness loses its 
support and becomes unestablished' (appatiññhita viññāõa – S. I. 122). 
It does not stand in any realm of existence ('viññāõam bhave na tiññhe' –  
Sn. v. 1055).
16. Here, the reference is to the Buddha.
17. This is a riddle verse the clue to which lies in the correct 
identification of the metaphors used. According to the comm., the root 
is craving; the two whirlpools (ie. 'dvirāvaññam': rendered above as 
'turning twice') are the eternalist and annihilationist views; the three 
stains are lust, hatred and delusion; the five arenas are the five types of 
sense-pleasure; the ocean is craving itself in its insatiable aspect; the 
twelve eddies are the internal and external spheres (of sense) and the 
abyss is craving in its 'bottomless' aspect. (Note that craving plays a 
triple role in this interpretation).

54 55
    The validity of the interpretation is doubtful as there is Canonical 
evidence to show that some of the metaphors are suggestive of a 
different order of facts. To begin with, the 'abyss' (pātāla) is clearly 
defined in the eponymous sutta at S. IV. 206 in terms of physical pains. 
"A synonym, monks, is this for painful feelings of the body, namely, 
the 'abyss'. " Similarly, 'the ocean' is defined for us at S. IV. 157 in the 
'Ocean' Sutta ('samuddo') in words which are in full accord with the 
imagery of the verse: "The eye, monks, is the ocean for a man. It has the 
'force' of visual forms. Whoever withstands that force of visual forms, 
he, O monks, is called 'one who has crossed the ocean of eye with its 
waves, eddies seizures and demons. Having crossed over and gone 
beyond, the saint stands on dry ground. . . . . . The ear. . . . . The nose. . . . 
. The tongue. . . . . The body. . . . . The mind, monks, is the ocean. . . . . 
stands on dry ground." This quotation itself provides the clue to the 
twelve eddies, which, as the comm. also suggests, are the internal and 
external spheres of sense. The five arenas are, indeed, the five types of 
sense-pleasures, for, at S I. 126 the arahant is called 'one who has 
crossed the five floods'. It is the floods or currents that provide the 
sphere of action for the eddies and the abyss. The three stains also can 
be interpreted, in accordance with the comm., as lust (rāgo), hatred 
(doso) and ignorance (avijjā), on the strength of the following 
reference at S. IV. 158 (cf. Itiv. 57): "He in whom lust, hatred and 
ignorance have faded away, is the one who has crossed this ocean so 
hard to cross, with its seizures, demons, and the danger of waves." The 
'turning-twice' most probably refers to the painful feeling and the 
pleasant feeling which form the counterparts in the 'see-saw' 
experience of the wordling. (See below Note 24). That it is a kind of 
blind alley for him, is clearly stated at S. IV. 208: "He, on being touched 
(phuññho samāno) by painful feeling, delights in sense-pleasures. And 
why is this? Because the uninstructed wordling, O monks, knows no 
way out of painful feeling other than the sense-pleasures . . . . .". Lastly, 
as for the significance of that one root, in the verse, the following 
citation from 'Phassamūlaka Sutta' ('Rooted - in - Contact') at S. IV. 
215., should suffice: "Monks, there are these three feelings which are 
born of contact, rooted in contact originating from contact and which 
depend on contact. Which are the three ? Pleasant feeling, unpleasant 
feeling and neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant  feeling."
It is the painful bodily feeling that constitutes the most 
immediate and palpable aspect of suffering. The arahant's claim to 
have transcended all suffering will not be fully valid unless he has 
'crossed over' this 'quaking abyss' as well. That paradoxical samādhi of 
the arahant is just the 'refuge' (or 'island') from the 'floods', the  'eddies' 
and the 'abyss'. The most emphatic illustration of this fact is perhaps 
the Sakalika Sutta at S. I. 27., where the Buddha, being mindful and 
aware, is seen bearing up with an unruffled brow, the bodily pains 
which are 'painful, sharp, acute, distressing and unwelcome', while 
gods draw near and express wonder and admiration at this remarkable 
feat of endurance. (See above Note 10). This aspect of Nibbānic bliss is 
summed up in a verse at S. IV. 204: 'Concentrated, mindful and aware, 
the disciple of the Buddha, understands feelings, the origin of feelings, 
the state wherein they are destroyed and the path leading thereto. By 
the destruction of feelings, the monk is devoid of hankering and is fully 
appeased (parinibbuta).'
      The significance of the metaphor used with reference to painful 
bodily feelings can also be appreciated in the context of the Buddha's 
definition of the 'development of the body' (kayabhāvanā) and the 
'development of the mind' (cittabhāvanā) in the Maha Saccaka Sutta 
(M. I. 239). "In whomsoever, Aggivessana, in this manner and on either 
side, the pleasant feelings that are arisen do not obsess the mind due to 
the development of his body, and the painful feelings that are arisen do 
not obsess the mind due to the development of his mind, it is thus, 
Aggivessana, that he becomes one who is developed as to body 
(bhāvitakāyo) and as to mind too (bhāvitacitto)." The arahant. in 
attaining to the 'Influx-free Deliverance of the Mind and the 
Deliverance through Wisdom' ( '. . . . . anāsava§ cetovimutti§ 
paññāvimutti§  . . . . ' – D. I. 156) reaches the perfection of these two 
ideals. As the 'unshakable deliverance of the mind' ('akuppā 
cetovimutti'), arahantship is the unfailing refuge and shelter even from 
the quaking abyss of bodily feelings. While the 'Influx-free Deliverance 
of the Mind' provides him with an inner retreat from painful bodily 
feelings, the 'Deliverance through Wisdom' serves as a permanent safeguard against the  seductive  and  deluding  character  of  pleasant  
feeling.  (cf.  "Experiencing   taste,   the   revered   Gotama   partakes

56 57
of food, but not experiencing an attachment to taste" – Brahmāyu S., M. 
II. 138). The arahant 'freed-in-both-ways' (ubhatobhāgavimutta) can, 
therefore, disengage himself from all percepts in addition to remaining 
undeluded in the face of experience.
'saññāvirattassa na santi ganthā
paññāvimuttassa na santi mohā '. . . . .  – Sn: v. 847.
'Unto him who is detached from percepts, there are no fetters, and to 
him who is emancipated through wisdom there are no delusions.'
18. 'addhabhavi' v, l. 'anvabhavi'): The verb being in the active voice, is 
probably a derivation from 'adhi +√ bhū' (cf. 'mā vo kodho ajjhabhavi;' 
'Let no anger overwhelm you' – S. I. 240). The other possible 
derivation, 'addha + bhū' yielding the meaning. 'soiled or wet', is less 
plausible in this context.
19. The Sutta highlights the power of 'name'. Everything comes under 
its sway. The 'Comm. observes: 'There is no being or formation without 
a name, whether this be attached primordially or by convention. Even 
when people do not know a particular tree or stone by this or that name, 
it will still be called a 'no-namer' (anāmako).'  This over-riding power 
of name has been recognized by Lao-tse too, when he calls it 'the 
mother of all things'. In magic, one's knowledge of the secret names of 
spirits is deemed a weapon effective in itself against their evil 
influence. In panegyric, the ability to muster a wide range of epithets is 
considered a rewarding skill.
     Everything comes under the sway of name as a result of man's urge to 
familiarize himself with the world. Sorting out, naming and defining things, 
are practical necessities in ordinary life, since they help us avoid 'trippingover' just as in the case of one groping in the dark. There is a constant need to 
re-cognize things and the easiest way of doing it, is by putting a sign on 
them. While the five senses have their own separate modes of indentation, 
mind largely relies on the labelling-mode of attaching a name, in the course 
of its own groping. Since mind partakes of the 'range' (visaya) and pasture 
(gocara) of the other five senses as well (M. I. 295.), its own mode of 
indentation has a preponderating influence over the rest. Thus, perceptual 
data of  the five  external  senses, in all their permutations and combinations,
finally come to be assigned names and 'pigeon-holed' as 'things'. This 
convenient but superficial indentation beclouds the mind and prevents 
the immediate understanding of sense-contact (phassa). Its mode of 
apperception, therefore, is largely a process of 'imagining' and 
'figuring-out' of objects located in the darkness of ignorance, and in its 
blind groping, the phenomenon of sense-contact as such, hardly 
receives any serious attention.
     The over-riding power of name could only be nullified by the 
process of 'attending-by-way-of-matrix' (yoniso manasikāra) in order 
to understand the very structure of sense-experience. By 
comprehending the phenomenon of sense-contact for what it is, the 
imaginary world of 'things' will cease to obsess the mind. When the 
light of wisdom is turned on, there will be no 'groping-in-the dark', and, 
consequently, no necessity to imagine or 'figure-out' things, for one 
now 'knows and sees' for oneself that there is 'No - thing.' ('Jānato 
passato natthi kiñcanam' – Ud. 80: 'Naught for him who knows and 
sees.').
20. This assertion of the primacy of mind (citta) is a distinctive feature 
in the teachings of the Buddha. The declaration in this sutta is 
reinforced by the opening verse of the Dhammapada: 'Mind is the 
forerunner of all phenomena. Mind is their chief; they are mind-made . 
. . . '. In this sutta the term 'citta' is used whereas the Dhammapada 
verse has 'mano'. Though for all practical purposes both may be 
rendered by 'mind', the former term may be said to emphasize the 
impulsive and emotional aspects often associated with the word 
'thought', while the latter, as the sixth sense-faculty proper 
(manindriya), is perhaps less vivid, as far as the nuances are 
concerned.
21. 'World' is defined in Buddhism directly with reference to the six 
senses: "That by which one is conscious of the world, by which one has 
conceit of the world – that is called 'world' in the Noble One's 
discipline. And through what is one conscious of the world? Through 
what has one conceit of the world? Through the eye, friends, through 
the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind . . . . ..' (S. IV. 95).

22. See above: Note 11.
23. This lively dialogue clearly brings out the supreme equanimity of 
emancipated ones. They have given up attachment to all 'possessions' 
or 'assets' (akiñcana, nirupadhi) whereby one becomes subject to the 
polarization between joy and grief. 'There is nothing grasped or 
rejected by him' (atta§ niratta§ na hi tassa atthi' –  Sn. v. 787). 'He is 
neither attached nor is he averse' 'na hi so rajjati no virajjati'  – Sn. 
v.813.).
24. The worldling is on a 'see-saw' experiencing the alternation of 
pleasant and unpleasant feelings. (See above Note: 17). He rarely finds 
himself balanced in the neutral position of 'neither-unpleasant-norpleasant' feeling. As the arahant-nun, Dhammadinnā explains in the 
Cūla Vedalla Sutta (M. I. 303.) the pleasant and the unpleasant feelings 
are mutual counterparts. It is the neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant 
feeling that provides a way out of this polarization, since its 
counterpart is ignorance, which in its turn has as its counterpart, 
knowledge. The counterpart of knowledge is release and that of release 
is Nibbāna.
25. Here the P. T. S. translation runs: '. . . . . . and though I waited not to 
eat or drink or rest . . . .' (K. S. I. 86). The text and the comm., however, 
make allowance for Rohitassa's physical needs, which must have been 
the only interruptions to his otherwise continuous journey.
26. The import of this significant declaration can be understood in the 
context of those suttas in which the Buddha defines the concept of the 
world. The 'world', for the Buddha, arises in the six sense-spheres (see 
above Note 21). Hence its cessation too, is to be experienced there, in 
the cessation of the six sense-spheres (salāyatananirodha).
 "I will teach you, monks, how the world comes to be and passes away  . 
. . . What monks, is the arising of the world? Dependent on eye and 
forms, arises visual consciousness. The concurrence of the three is 
contact. Conditioned by contact is feeling. Conditioned by feeling, 
craving. Conditioned by craving, grasping. Conditioned by grasping, 
becoming. Conditioned by becoming, birth. And conditioned by birth, 
arise decay, death, grief, lamentation, suffering, despair. This is the 
arising of the world.
And what, monks, is the passing away of the world? Dependent on 
the eye and forms arise visual consciousness. The concurrence of the 
three is contact. Conditioned by contact is feeling. Conditioned by 
feeling is craving. By the utter fading away and cessation of that 
craving, grasping ceases, by the ceasing of grasping, becoming ceases, 
by the ceasing of becoming birth ceases, by the ceasing of birth, decayand-death, grief, lamentation, suffering, despair, cease. Such is the 
ceasing of this entire mass of ill.
      
    This, monks, is the passing away of the world." (Such is also the 
case with the other senses).
    The same sermon is introduced in the preceding sutta with the 
words: "I will teach you monks, the arising and passing away of 
suffering. . . . ."
     'Arising and passing away of the world' is thus synonymous with 
'arising and passing away of suffering.'
27. According to the Buddha, that end of the world where there is no 
birth, decay or death, in search of which Rohitassa walked for a 
hundred years, is not somewhere in outer space, but within this very 
fathom long body. The cessation of the six sense-spheres, constitutes 
for the arahant, a transcendental sphere (āyatana) of experience in 
which he realizes, here and now, that he is free from all suffering 
connected with birth, decay and death, and indeed from all forms of 
existence (bhavanirodho). These aspects of Nibbānic bliss find 
expression in such epithets as 'ajāta§' ('non-born'), 'abhūta§' ('nonbecome'), 'ajara§' ('non-decaying') and 'amata§' ('deathless').
" . . . . With the utter fading away of ignorance, even that body is 
not there, dependent on which there arises for him inwardly happiness 
and unhappiness; that speech is not there . . . . that mind is not there, 
dependent on which there arises for him inwardly happiness and 
unhappiness. That field does not exist, that ground does not exist, that 
sphere does not exist, that reason does not exist, dependent on which 
arises inwardly happiness and unhappiness" (A. II. 158f). When body, 
speech, and mind,  which  are  at  the  root  of  all  discrimination  and
58 59

conceit, fade away in the jhānic experience of the arahant, he finds 
himself free from all suffering, mental as well as physical. (See above, 
Notes 17, 24). Such epithets of Nibbāna as 'khema§' (security) 'dīpa§' 
(island), 'tāõa§' (protection) 'leõa§' (cave), 'saraõa§' (refuge) and 
'parāyaõa§' (resort) suggest this transcendence of worldly 
imperfections.
     The culmination of the 'not-self' attitude is the eradication of the 
conceit, ' (I) am' : ". . . . the percipient of 'not-self' attains to the 
eradication of the conceit 'am', which is Nibbāna here and now," (A. V. 
358). The removal of the subtle conceit, 'am' (asmimāna) is 
tantamount to a destruction of that delusive superimposed 'frame' from 
which all measurings and reckonings of the world were directed 
through the instrumentality of the sense-faculties, and by which the 
mass of relative concepts in the form of sense-data were so organized 
as to give a picture of 'the world' with 'self' mirrored on it. What we call 
the normal functioning of the five external senses, is but the outward 
manifestation of the notion 'am': "Given the notion 'am', monks there 
set in then the five sense-faculties." * (S. III. 46). When this 'frame' is 
dismantled, the conveyors – the senses – losing their provenance and 
sanction, become ineffective, and their usual objects too fade away 
into insignificance: "Wherefore, monks, that sphere  should  be known
-------------------------
     *  This quotation provides the clue to that much-disputed passage in 
Itiv. (38f.) which defines the two 'Nibbāna Elements' – the one with 
residual clinging or appendages ('Saupādisesā Nibbānadhātu') and the 
one without them ('Anupādisesā Nibbānadhātu')." …. And what monks, 
is the Nibbāna Element with residual clinging? Herein, monks, a monk is 
an arahant, whose influxes are extinct, who has lived the Holy Life, 
accomplished the task, laid down the burden, reached his Goal, whose 
fetters of existence are fully extinct, and who is freed through right 
knowledge. His five sense-faculties still remain, which being 
undestroyed, he partakes of the pleasant and the unpleasant, and 
experiences the pleasurable and the painful. The extinction of lust, hatred 
and delusion in him –  this, monks, is called the Nibbāna-Element with 
residual clinging. 
And what, monks, is the Nibbāna-Element without residual clinging? 
Herein monks, a monk is an arahant whose influxes are extinct,  . . . , and is 
freed through right knowledge. All his feelings, monks, will, even here, 
cool down, not having (See next page)
wherein the eye ceases and the perception of forms fades away, . . . . 
wherein the ear ceases and the perception of sounds fades away, . . . the 
nose ceases and the perception of smell fades away, . . . . . . . the tongue 
ceases and the perception of tastes fades away, . . . . the body ceases and 
the perception of touch fades away, . . . the mind ceases and the 
perception of ideas fades away. That sphere should be known; that 
sphere should be known." (S. IV, 98). 
All percepts are 'signs' (rūpanimitta, saddanimitta etc.), and when signs 
cease to be 'significant', they are as good as non-existent. The 'signless 
deliverance of the mind' (animittā cetovimutti) as one of the doorwaysto-deliverance (vimokkhamukha), points to this re-orientation of the 
arahant's mental life. Thus, although he is wide awake when he is in this 
paradoxical samādhi (D. II. 132; S. I. 126), although his sense-organs 
appear to be all intact, yet he is free from normal sense-experience. 
"That very eye will be there, those very visible forms will be there, yet 
one will not experience the corresponding sphere of sense, . . . that same 
body will be there, those very tactile objects will be there, yet one will 
not experience the corresponding sphere of sense." (A. IV. 426f). "He is 
not one with the normal perception, nor is his perception abnormal. He 
is not non-percipient, nor has he put an end to perception." ('na 
saññasaññī na visaññasaññī – no pi asaññi na vibhūtasaññī' – Sn. 874).
 "In the case of a monk who is fully emancipated in mind, friends, 
though many forms cognizable by the eye may come within the range of 
the eye, they never obsess his mind, unalloyed is his mind, steady 
---------
(continued from previous page)
been delighted in. This, monks, is called the Nibbāna Element without 
residual clinging". Once he has experienced within his own sensorium that 
transcendence which results from the removal of the latent conceit 'am', all 
his influxes are extinguished and he gains mastery over the 'mechanism' of 
the sixfold sense-sphere 
in its five aspects – the arising, the passing away, the satisfaction, the 
misery and the escape. For him, the sense-spheres become detachable, 
since he now knows the principle on which they function – the law of 
Dependent Arising in its direct and indirect order, which pivots upon 
Ignorance, involving the notion 'am'. While Saupādisesā Nibbānadhātu 
enables the arahant to live 'in the world', Anupādisesā Nibbānadhātu 
ensures that he is 'not of the world'. 'Once crossed over, the Such-like One 
comes not back', 'To the farther shore they go not twice'. (See above Notes: 
11 and 17).
60 61

and become imperturbable and he sees its passing away. Though many 
sounds cognizable by the ear may come  . . . many smells cognizable 
by the nose . . . . . many tastes cognizable by the tongue  . . . . many 
tangibles cognizable by the body . . . . many ideas cognizable by the 
mind may come within the range of the mind, they never obsess his 
mind, unalloyed is his mind, steady and become imperturbable and he 
sees its passing away . . . . ." (A. IV. 404).
    This 'non-manifestative consciousness' (anidassana viññāõa), of 
the arahant, which is uninfluenced by extraneous forces and is steady 
and imperturbable, is, perhaps, the 'Inertial Frame' in search of which 
Relativity Physics has, in modern times, set out. As the scientist 
gradually awoke to the truths of relativity, he too longed for a 'state-ofrest' from the ever-deepening conflict of 'view-points.' But his search 
for this imaginary laboratory was unsuccessful, for, like Rohitassa, he 
searched it outside, relying on the demonstrative apparatus known to 
science. The Buddha's exhortation to Rohitassa is, therefore, of 
refreshing relevance to the modern age, in that it implies that the 
sphere (āyatana) wherein one transcends the labyrinths of relativity is 
not somewhere in outer space but within this very fathom-long 
physical frame.
     As an interesting sidelight, it may be mentioned that according to 
the Theory of Relativity, light is the top velocity in the universe, it 
propagates even in vacuum, its velocity is constant and it 
propagates in all directions. Now, that non-manifestative 
consciousness of the arahant is described in the suttas as infinite and 
'lustrous-all-round' (viññāõa§ anidassana§ ananta§ sabbato 
pabha§ – D. I. 213; M. 1.329).* The arahant's consciousness is 
untrammelled by name-and-form (Dhp. v.221), and has no object as its 
point of focus (anārammaõa§  – Ud. 80). Hence it is infinite, and he is 
one of infinite range ('anantagocara' – Dhp. vv. 179, 180) as regards 
his mental compass. Wisdom (paññā), according to the Buddha, is a 
light which excels all other forms of light known to the
-----------------
      * Ñāõananda., 'Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought', 
Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy. 1971 pp.' 52 - 66.
('natthi paññāsamā abhā' –  'no lustre like unto that of wisdom' – S. I. 
6; A.II. 139f). It has the property of penetration ('paññāpañivedha'; 
'nibbedhikāpaññā') and its function is comprehension of 
consciousness, which is called an illusion ('māyā' –  S. III. 142). Hence 
in that illumination through wisdom, consciousness becomes infinite 
and 'lustrous-all-round'. The mind, thus 'lustre-become and gone to the 
Fruit of Arahantship' ('obhāsajāta§ phalaga§ citta§'  – Thag. v. I. 
3.5) lights up, in its turn, the five external senses. The sense-objects, 
which are but the denizens of the dark world of ignorance, fade away 
before the penetrative all-encompassing lustre. The illusion of 
consciousness – the magic of the senses  – thereby becomes fully 
exposed to the light of wisdom. The six spheres of sense cease 
altogether ('salāyatananirodha') and the arahant is now conscious 
merely of the cessation of existence which is Nibbāna itself 
('bhavanirodho Nibbāna§ – A. v. 9). He is conscious, in other words, 
of the voidness of the World ('suñño loko'  – S. IV. 54) which the 
scientist might prefer to call the 'vacuum' which this light-of-wisdom 
now pervades.
     The scientist, however, might hesitate to grant the possibility of a 
'light-of-wisdom' which is not amenable to any demonstrative 
apparatus. He has recognized only the purely physical notions of light, 
and has already set a limit to this 'top-velocity'  – 300,000 km per 
second. He considers that 'the discovery of the existence in the 
Universe of the top velocity is one of the greatest triumphs of human 
genius, and of the experimental capacity of mankind.' * 
On the basis of the foregoing observations, it can be said that this 
'greatest triumph' was made by the Buddha more than 2,500 years ago, 
when he discovered by means of his 'noble experiment' 
(ariyapariyesana), that the mind is intrinsically luminous 
('pabhassaramida§ bhikkhave citta§': 'This mind, monks, is 
luminous'  – A. I. 10) and that, when cleansed of all extraneous taints, it 
develops that penetrative, all-pervasive lustre of wisdom which 
liberates one from the labyrinths of the world of relativity. It is a 
---------------------------------
*   L. Landau, Y. Rumer; 'What is the Theory of Relativity', Peace 
Publishers. Moscow. 1965. pg. 41.
62 63

penetration into the truth of impermanence (aniccatā) by thorough 
reflection on the rise-and-fall of phenomena, and the deeper it 
proceeds, the more one becomes aware of the conflict (dukkha). For 
Buddhism, the conflict of view-points is a far more intricate affair than 
what the scientist would make it out to be. It is not simply a question of 
a spectator's physical presence at a point in time and space, but one that 
deeply involves such facts of psychological life as interest and 
attention. "Rooted in desire, friends, are all phenomena; originating in 
attention, are all phenomena; . . . . . ." ("chandamūlakā avuso sabbe 
dhammā, manasikārasambhavā sabbe dhammā . . . . "  – A. V. 106). 
The result is an awareness of a conflict that affects life as a whole 
(dukkhasaññā). This awareness, naturally enough, is the springboard 
for utter detachment through the perception of 'not-self' (anattasaññā), the culmination of which, as stated above, is the eradication of 
the most subtle conceit of all – the conceit 'am' (asmimāna). The 
Buddha has pointed out that the liberation from the world of senseexperience is not possible until the 'influxes' (āsava) are made extinct, 
and the influx of the notion of existence (bhavāsava) can only be 
destroyed by means of a penetrative perception of cessation (nirodho) 
focussed on sense-experience itself. 'As far as is the range of 
attainments to levels of perception, so far is there a penetration into 
Knowledge' ('yāvatā saññā samāpatti tāvatā aññāpañivedho'  – A. IV. 
426).
 The 'habit-energy' we have acquired in the course of our blind groping 
in Sa§sāra impelled by craving, readily flows in, in our ordinary sense 
experience, and, with its agglutinative effect, creates before us a world 
of  'things' that we can 'grasp'. Hence nothing short of an inner 
illumination could fully penetrate this facade and liberate us from the 
bondage of the senses. It is noteworthy that the paradoxical samādhi of 
the arahants is also called 'ānantarika' ('Immediacy') in the sense that 
in it the extinction of the influxes is immediate ('anantarā āsavānam 
khayo hoti  – A. III. 202. cf. Sn. v. 226). In his infinite and all-lustrous 
consciousness where view-points have been displaced by an all 
encompassing vision of truth, the 'signal-transmission' as to the 
impermanence of the senses and their objects, occurs at such an 
infinite velocity that it prevents the most elementary coagulation or 
compounding which accounts for the six spheres of sense.
Rohitassa's fantastic journey, which was perhaps the prototype of 
modern space-travel, was undertaken for the purpose of 'coming to 
know and to see and reach that end of the world where there is no birth 
or death.' According to the Buddha, everything could not be verified in 
this manner. "Monk, there are these four realizable things. What four? 
There are things, monks, that are realizable through the body. There 
are things, monks, that are realizable through memory. There are 
things, monks, that are realizable through the eye. There are things, 
monks, that are realizable through wisdom. And what, monks, are the 
things that are realizable through the body ? The eight deliverances, 
monks, are realizable through the body. And what . . . . through 
memory? One's former habitations, monks, are realizable through 
memory. And what . . . . through the eye? The death and rebirth of 
beings, monks, is realizable through the eye. And what, monks, are the 
things realizable through wisdom? The extinction of influxes, 
monks, is realizable through wisdom. These, monks, are the four 
realizable things" (A. II. 182f). 
    Just as much as one cannot board a time-machine and race back into the 
Past in order to verify the fact of one's former lives, even so it is inherently 
impossible for one to take a leap into the Future in order to ascertain 
whether one has actually destroyed all influxes that make for rebirth. The 
verification can only be made through the penetrative faculty of wisdom – 
the 'eye' of wisdom (paññācakkhu) –  which gives one the certitude, here 
and now, that all influxes of existence as well as the sediments of speech 
associated with them, 'are burnt out and are no more' ('bhavāsava yassa 
vacikharā ca –  vidhūpitā atthagatā na santi' – Sn. V. 472).    That his 
cycle of Sa§sāra is breached at its vortex (consciousness> <name-andform) is vouched for the arahant by the breached epicycle that he sees and 
experiences in his paradoxical samādhi. "The whirlpool cut-off, whirls no 
more – this, even this, is the end of ill" ('chinna§ vañña§ na vaññati – 
esevanto dukkhassa' – Ud. 75). The end of the world is thus seen and 
realized in this very life in one's own immediate experience, avoiding all 
pit-falls of speculative logic – a fact which accounts for such epithets of 
the Dhamma as 'sandiññhiko' ('visible in this very life'), 'akāliko' ('not 
involving time'), 'ehipassiko' ('inviting everyone to come and see for 
himself'), 'opanayiko' ('leading one onwards') 'paccatta§ veditabbo 
viññūhi' ('to be understood by the  wise, each  by himself '), and, above all,
64 65

'atakkāvacaro' ('not moving in the sphere of logic'). The ensemble of 
this realization is presented in that stereotyped sentence in the suttas 
which announces a new arahant. And he understood: "Extinct is birth, 
lived is the holy life, done is the task, and there is nothing beyond this 
for (a designation of) the conditions of this existence" ( 'Khīõā jāti, 
vusita§ brahmacariya§ kata§ karaõīya§ nāpara§ itthattāyati 
abbhaññāsi '  – see below Note 51).
     The fact that the arahant has transcended the relativity of space, 
mass, motion and time with which the scientist is still grappling, is 
clear enough from certain Canonical statements. It is said that in his 
'non-manifestative consciousness', the concepts of earth (pañhavi), 
water (āpo), fire (tejo) and air (vāyo) find no footing and that the 
relative concepts of long (dīgha§) and short (rassa§) are cut off 
altogether (D.I. 213, M.I. 329). Likewise, the concepts of 'here', 'there' 
and 'between-the-two', have lost their significance for him ('neva idha 
na hura§ na ubhayamantare'  – Ud. 8). He does not consider himself 
to be anywhere ('na kuhiñci maññati'  – M. III. 45), nor can any god or 
man trace him as to where he 'stands' (see above Note 15). He has done 
away with the 'abode of the mind' ('nivesana§ yo manaso ahāsi'  – Sn. 
v. 470) and is 'abodeless' (anoko – S. I. 126) in the fullest sense of the 
term. The distinctions between a 'subtle' (aõum) and a 'gross' (thūla§) 
which may well be a reference to the relativity of mass, have also faded 
away (D, I. 213). So too, the concepts suggestive of the relativity of 
motion, such as 'coming' 'going' and 'standing' (āgati gati ñhiti – Ud. 
80). Relativity of time which the modern world regards as the 'brainchild' of Einstein, was not only discovered but transcended by the 
Buddha in that extra-ordinary dimension of the mind. 'Death-andbirth' (cutūpapāta) – the most formidable dichotomy of all – has no 
sway at all in that jhānic consciousness of the emancipated one.
   The elusive phenomenon of time, is hypostatised in Buddhist usage 
in that multiple personality of Māra – the god of Death. As his 
epithet, 'kinsman of the indolent' (pamattabandhu) ironically 
suggests, he has the vicious trait of lying low in order to take his 
victim unawares. He is also very aptly called 'the Ender' (antaka). 
Māra as the symbol of death, is indeed 'the curfew' that 'tolls the knell 
of parting day.' Now, the Buddha and the arahants are those who have 
outwitted Māra, blinded him, put him off the track and attained the 
Deathless. (M. I. 160 Dhp. v. 274; Ud 46; Itiv 50, 53. etc). This feat was 
made possible by a recognition of the principle of the relativity of time. 
    The Buddha discovered that the concepts of birth and death are 
correlative – the one being given the other follows (D. II.55) And the 
concept of birth itself, is born in the matrix of the notion of becoming 
or existence (bhava). The 'becoming', the existence, is an attempt to 
'stand-forth' – that is, to stand forth in defiance of the universal law of 
impermanence. It is an ever-failing struggle, but the struggle (ie. 
Dukkha) itself continues depending on the supply of fuel, which is 
'upādāna' ('grasping'). 'Dependent on grasping is becoming; having 
become one undergoes suffering; unto the born there is death; this is 
the origin of suffering.' (Sn. v. 742). The Buddha realized that Māra's 
tragic drama of birth-decay-and-death, is staged on this supply of fuel 
itself: 'Whatever they grasp in the world, by that itself does Māra 
pursue a man' ('ya§ ya§ hi lokasmi§ upādiyanti -   teneva maro anveti 
jantu§' – Sn. v. 1103). "Whatever they egotistically conceive of, ipso 
facto it becomes otherwise" ('yena yena hi maññanti tato ta§ hoti 
aññathā' – Sn. v. 757). The only escape from Māra's strategy, 
therefore, lay in the complete 'giving-up' of all supplies of fuel which 
grasping implies (anupādā parinibbāna). "Save by their giving up all 
– no weal for beings do I behold" ('nāññatra sabbanissaggā - sotthi§ 
passāmi pāõina§' – S. I. 53). With the cessation of the process of 
grasping and becoming (i.e. 'upādānanirodha' and 'bhavanirodha') 
consequent on destruction of craving or 'thirst' (taõhakkhaya), all 
'assets' * are abandoned (nirupadhi), thus depriving Māra of the basic 
wherewithal for his drama. Once Mara, in his role as Tempter, 
declares, in the presence of the Buddha, that such assets like sons and 
cattle are a source of joy to a man,  but the   Buddha's reprisal was that, 
-------------------------------------* Upadhi : The word has two distinct shades of meaning. Primarily, in 
accordance with its etymology (upa + dhā – 'putting under or near ') it means 
'foundation', 'basis', 'ground', 'substratum' or 'support' (cf, upadhāna – pillow 
or bolster). Secondarily, in its canonical usage it often stands for one's 
possessions (wife and children, flocks and herds, silver and gold etc, M. I. 
162. Sn. v. 33=S. I. 6=S. I. 107. Translators who stressed the former sense
(see next page)
66 67

on the contrary, they are a source of grief (S. I. 107). All assets, in the 
long run, turn out to be liabilities. By giving them up, the arahant has 
transcended time, and the concepts of existence, birth, decay and death 
have lost their significance for him. (See A. V. 152; S IV. 207; Sn. vv. 
467, 500. 743, 902, 1048,1056, 1057). Nibbāna is not only the 
'Deathless' (amata§) it is also the 'Birthless' (ajāta§). Epithets of 
Nibbāna such as the 'not-become', (abhūta§), the 'not-made' (akata§) 
and 'not-compounded' (asaïkhata§) suggest the absence of that 
fundamental notion of existence which gives rise to the relative 
distinctions of birth, decay and death. "Monks, there are these three 
compound-characteristics of the compounded. Which are the three? 
An arising is manifest, a passing away is manifest, a change in 
persistence is manifest . . . . . Monks, there are these three 
uncompounded characteristics of the uncompounded. Which are the 
three? No arising is manifest, no passing away is manifest, no change 
in persistence is manifest . . ." (A. I. 152).
     The emancipated-one is 'in the world' but not 'of the world.' For 
him, the world is no longer the arena of a life-and-death struggle in 
which he is sorely involved but one vast illustration of the first 
principles of impermanence, suffering and not-self  – of the separative 
(nānābhāvo), privative (vinābhāvo) and transformative 
(aññathābhāvo) nature of all existence. He experiences the ambrosial 
Deathlessness in the very destruction of craving and consequent 
detachment characteristic of that unique samādhi ('khaya§ virāga§
----------------------
(continued from previous page)
preferred substratum' 'support' "basis' or 'ground', while those who went in 
for the latter, used such terms as 'possession', 'attachment' and 'clinging'. 
Perhaps 'asset' will do justice to both senses, since assets are 'things laid-by' 
which one 'relies on' as 'supports', (cf. 'upadhīsu tāõam na karonti buddhā' – 
S. I. 107:  'Buddhas do not seek refuge in assets'; 'Sammādiññhi sāsavā 
puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā – M. III. 72: 'Right view associated with 
influxes, on the side of merits and ripening into assets'). Being less 
impersonal than 'substratum', it captures the nuances of the secondary sense 
as well. Being less trenchant than 'clinging' or 'attachment', it is better suited 
in references to the arahant's 'Saupādisesa-Nibbāna-dhātu', since he is no 
longer attached to the assets, which are now, for him mere appendages 
(though upādi is of different derivation than upadhi). 
amata§ paõīta§ - yadajjhagā sakyamunī samāhito': 'That destruction 
(of craving), that detachment, that excellent deathless state which the 
Sākyan sage attained to, being concentrated.' – Sn. v. 225). His 
contemplative gaze is now fixed, not on the 'things' (dhammā) with 
their fluid, superficial boundaries, but on that nature of things 
(dhammatā, dhammadhātu) –  that causal-status (dhammaññhitatā), 
that causal orderliness (dhammaniyāmatā), namely, the 'relatednessof-this-to-that (idappaccayatā – S. II. 25). 'This being, this becomes: 
from the arising of this, this arises. This not being, this becomes 
not: from the ceasing of this, this ceases' (M. III. 63). 'Whatever is 
of a nature to arise, all that has the nature to cease' (S. IV. 192). This 
law of Dependent Arising itself being always 'such', invariable and 
not-otherwise ('tathatā avitathatā, anaññathatā idappaccayatā' – S. 
II. 26), in its contemplation the arahant's mind too is firm and steady. 
'Mind is steady and well-freed, and he sees its passing away' (ñhita§ 
citta§ vippamutta§ - vayañcassānupassati – A. III. 379). Hence he is 
'such' (tādi) in his adaptability and resilience, having understood the 
suchness (tathatā) of all conditioned phenomena. It is to one who takes 
his stand upon the concepts of existence and birth, that the fear of 
decay and death can occur. To the emancipated one who is fully 
attuned to the reality of impermanence by giving up all standpoints, 
there can be no fear at all. And when 'Death' does come, as surely it 
must, he is no more shocked at it than at the crash of an extremely 
brittle jar ascertained well in advance to be perforated, beyond use – a 
'jar' not-worth-its-name.
     The prospect of eluding death by travelling into outer space, has 
kindled the imagination of the modern scientist also, though unlike 
Rohitassa, he did not take it up in all seriousness. He has, however, 
speculated on the possibility of prolonging human life by flying to a 
distant star many light-years away in an Einstein rocket. '  . . . . 
Theoretically, travelling at a sufficiently high speed we can reach 
the star and return to the Earth within a minute! But on the Earth 80 
years will have passed just the same. To all appearances, we thus 
possess a way of prolonging human life, though only from the point 
of view of other people, since man ages according to "his" own time. 
To our regret, however, this prospect is illusory if we take a closer 
look at it . . . . .' (op. cit. p. 50).No wonder that the prospect is illusory,
68 69

particularly when it is examined in the context of the Buddha's 
teachings. Indeed, 'man ages according to "his" own time', and 
this, as shown above, was precisely the point of divergence for the 
Buddha.
     That end of the world where one does not get born, nor die, nor 
pass away, nor get reborn, is therefore, within this very fathomlong physical frame with its perceptions and mind. This 
momentous declaration is quite popular with writers on Buddhism, 
and perhaps for that very reason, it has rarely enjoyed the privilege of a 
long annotation. Traditionally too it does not seem to have been much 
favoured in this respect, if Buddhaghosa's commentary to the sutta is 
any indication. As Mrs. Rhys Davids remarks: 'It was a great 
opportunity for exegesis, but Buddhaghosa makes no use of it: (K. S. I. 
86 fn. 3).
28. In the suttas of this chapter, Māra as the tempter, appears in various 
guises trying to terrify, distract or mislead the Buddha and the monks 
by his actions and words. When he is recognized, he gives up his 
attempts in despair and 'vanishes there and then'. By representing the 
opposite view-point, he often provides a lively setting for an emphatic 
enunciation of doctrinal points.
29. The senses, their objects and spheres of sense contact, are all 
undermined by impermanence, and whoever grasps them comes 
under the sway of Māra. 'Whatever they grasp in the world, by that 
itself does Māra pursue a man' (see above Note: 27).
30. The sphere to which Māra has no access is that samādhi, peculiar to 
arahants, in which they experience the relinquishment of all 'assets' 
(sabbūpadhipañinissagga), which is Nibbāna. (A. I. 132f, V. 355f).
31. The Pali word is 'bimba', which means an image or reflection. The 
word has some pejorative associations (see Raññhapāla S. M. II. 64), 
in that it views individuality as a mere semblance or appearance –  as 
a mere product of imagination. Mrs. Rhys Davids renders it by 
'puppet' and 'human-doll' which bring out only its objective aspect. 
Though Māra's question stresses this aspect (i.e., an individual's 
appearance), Selā's reply seems to imply rather the subjective aspect,
namely, the concept of individuality or an individual's image of 
himself – the 'self-image' – which is none other than 'name-and-form' 
(nāmarūpa).
32. The words 'image' (bimba) and 'misery' (ogha) are used here 
synonymously in full agreement with the doctrine of Anattā which 
sums up existence by the single term 'suffering' (dukkha). The idea 
expressed by Selā in the first two lines is supported by the Buddha's 
declaration at S. II. 19 that suffering is neither self-made (saya§ 
kata§) nor created by another (para§ kata§) but is conditionally 
arisen (pañiccasamuppanna§). That the word 'image' refers to 'nameand-form' may also be inferred from the dialogue between the 
Venerables Sāriputta and Mahākoññhita at S. II 112f.
     "What now, friend Sāriputta, is name-and-form self-wrought or 
other-wrought or both self-wrought and other-wrought or else is it 
neither self-wrought nor other-wrought but arisen by chance?"
     
    "No indeed, friend Koññhita, name-and-form is neither self-wrought 
nor other-wrought nor both self-wrought and other-wrought, nor is it 
neither self-wrought nor other-wrought and arisen by chance, but, on 
the other hand, conditioned by consciousness is name-and-form."
       
33. The cause (hetu) is consciousness, as far as the aggregates, the 
elements and the six spheres of sense are concerned. With the cessation 
of consciousness (viññāõassa nirodhena  – D. I 223) name-and-form 
and its outgrowth, the six sense-spheres, cease to exist. The breakingup of this cause results in a consciousness which is infertile ('viññāõe 
avirūlhe' – S. II 66) and hence the arahants are referred to as 'those of 
extinct seed whose desires do not sprout forth.' ('te khīõa bījā 
avirūlhicchandā – Sn. v. 235).
34. It appears that this simile is not one chosen at random. It can lend 
itself to a deeper appreciation in the context of the relevant suttas. 
'Action is the field, consciousness the seed and craving the moisture' 
('kamma§ khetta§ viññāõa§ bīja§ taõhā sineho' – A. I. 224). The 
Arahant is 'one who, having destroyed what has sprung up, plants no 
more and waters not  the growing'   (' yo jātamucchijja na ropayeyya – 
70 71

jāyantamassa nānuppavecche'  – Sn. v. 208). 'Having reckoned the 
fields and surveyed the seed, he sprinkles no water on it' ('sa§khāya 
vatthūni pamāya bīja§ – sinehamassa nānuppavecche – ib. 209). The 
clue to the riddle of life-and-death in its macrocosmic form, is found in 
the 'consciousness seed' in a microcosmic form.* (See above: Note: 
27, 'cycle': 'epicycle'). While action which is ethically significant 
(kamma) is the field for the 'consciousness seed' in the case of rebirth, 
the very concepts of body, speech and mind constitute its field in its 
microcosmic aspect. 'Action' is but an affirmation of the existence of 
these three, in the case of the worldling. For him, the test of a thing's 
existence is the fact that 'it works' hence the relation between ignorance 
(avijjā) and preparations (saõkhārā) in the formula of Dependent 
Arising. Body, speech and mind have merely a functional unity but he 
ignores this fact and clings to the wrong assumption that they are fullfledged units, structurally and organically. Now the arahant in his 
unique jhānic experience of the cessation of consciousness (viññāõa 
nirodha), ascertains that the 'field', the 'seed' and the 'moisture' 
pertaining to his existence are no more (i.e. 'bhavanirodha' – 'cessation 
of existence'). He is, therefore, 'in full view of the end of birth' – 
which, at the same time, is the end of 'death' – 'and having given up 
logic,' which as a rule, sits pretty on relative concepts and is largely a 
transaction in worldly coinage, 'he comes not within reckoning' ('sa 
ve muni jātikhayanta dassī – takka§ pahāya na upeti sa§kha§ –  Sn. 
v. 209). 
35. A demon.
36. This stanza does not construe well if the simile given in the 
commentaries is applied to the last line. The simile centres round the 
doubtful reading 'dha§ka' (crow) in the last line, and runs as follows: 
'Just as village lads playfully tie a string to the leg of a crow and release 
it and fling it, even so arising from where do evil thoughts fling the 
mind which is bent on good ? ' (S. A. 1302ff).* The sutta does not lend 
support to this alleged allusion to a particular kind of sport among 
children. Moreover, the compound 'manovitakka'  in the  third line is 
---------
     * Here the words 'macrocosmic' and 'microcosmic' should be 
understood strictly according to the context.
split up and commented on separately as 'mano' (i.e., as the object – 
'manoti kusala citta§': 'Mind, that is, the wholesome mind' – Sn. A.) 
and 'vitakka' (i.e., as the subject –  'vitakkāti abhayasutte vuttā nava 
kāma vitakkādayo': ' "Thoughts", such as the nine sensuous thoughts 
mentioned in Abhaya Sutta' ib.), in order to convey the idea that 'evil 
thoughts fling the mind which is bent on good.' It seems more natural 
to take the compound as it is, (i.e., as the subject: 'thoughts-in-themind'. Note that it is thus commented at S. A. I. 36: 'manovitakketi 
manamhi uppannavitakke') so as to mean that 'thoughts-in-the-mind 
disperse'. The emphasis, all along, is on the source and origin of 
thoughts – 'Whence arising do thoughts disperse ? '. The simile of the 
village lads playing with the crow seems to miss this point of 
emphasis. The one suggested in the present translation ('Like children 
leaving their mother's lap') would perhaps be more relevant to the 
theme here. The variant reading 'va§ka§' adopted by the editors of the 
Sutta Nipāta (P. T. S. 1965) on the strength of five MSS collated by 
them can clear up the initial obstacles to such an interpretation. The 
letter 'v' can well be a 'hiatus-filler' (āgama) inserted between the two 
words 'kumārakā' and 'a§ka§', and it might have got changed into 
'dha' in course of time as a result of graphic corruption.
37.  The similes of the banyan-tree and the Māluvā creeper further 
illustrate how thoughts which originate from within, disperse and get 
attached to external sense-objects. There seems to be a play upon the 
words 'snehajā' and 'attasambhūtā'. Firstly, they refer to the trunkborn runners of the banyan-tree which are 'moisture-born' and are, in a 
sense, 'self-begotten'. Secondly, they refer to thoughts which are born 
of craving ('sneha' being a synonym for craving – see Note: 34) and 
originate from within. A third order of reference may also be 
postulated if the simile suggested above is recognized. 'Sneha' also 
means 'affection', and the two expressions can thus refer to the children 
who quit their mother's lap. They too are 'affection-born' and 'selfbegotten' – from a mother's point of view!
----------
      * The Sutta is found also in the Sutta Nipāta. Its commentary (Sn. A.) 
shows some modifications when compared with S. A.
72 73

The banyan-tree runners and the Māluvā creeper depict a significant 
feature of thought processes. Once those thoughts connected with 
love, hate, dislike, delight and terror which originate from within, get 
attached to sense-objects, their true source tends to be forgotten and 
the sense-objects themselves begin to dominate the scene. Just as the 
banyan-tree runners, having 'grown up' (down ?), conceal the original 
trunk, and even as the parasitic Māluvā creeper literally 'throws into 
shade' the trees which gave it nourishment, thoughts too, once they get 
'rooted' in sense-objects, bring about an obsession, in which their 
original source is completely ignored. And, as it is said at S. I. p. 70:
'Greed and hate and dullness of mind
Sprung from within bring harm on him 
Of evil heart, as does its fruit
The reed – for which the bark is pith.'
Part Two
38. 'āyati§ punabbhavābhinibbatti': 'Name-and-form' which is the 
reciprocal condition for consciousness, is already implicit in this 
expression. Except in the case of the arahants 'who have no vortex 
whereby to designate' (see below: Note: 51), the concepts of birth, 
decay, death and re-birth of all beings are necessarily dependent on 
this vortex between consciousness and name-and-form. The 
consciousness of the individual is always an 'establishedconsciousness' (patiññhitaviññāõa), that is to say, established on 
name-and-form. His Sa§sāric existence is a constant oscillation 
between the two. When the body breaks up at death, consciousness 
gravitates towards a fresh foot-hold, resulting in a crystallization of 
'name-and-form' into the form of a new individual existence. "If, 
Ānanda, consciousness were not to descend into the mother's womb, 
would 'name-and-form' be left remaining*inside the mother's 
womb?" " No lord . . . .  ." " If Ānanda, consciousness were not to get a 
foothold in name-and-form, would there be manifest any arising or 
origination of birth, decay, death and suffering?" "No, lord" (D. II. 
63).  The  (' sixfold sense-sphere, contact, feeling etc. represent the
growth of name-and-form supported as it is by consciousness. "And, 
Ānanda, if the consciousness of a boy or a girl comes to be cut-off at 
childhood itself, would name-and-form attain development, growth 
and plenitude?" "No, lord" (ib.).
     Phagguna's question: "Who feeds on the consciousness 
nutriment?" –  is not a fit question because the very concept of an 
individual implies both consciousness and name-and-form bound in a 
reciprocal relationship. The passage of consciousness at death is 
merely a gravitation towards its object name-and-form implicit in the 
last thought moment, which thereby crystallizes into a new existence. 
The vortex has shifted, consciousness has changed its station and a 
new world of experience has unfolded itself. This is the polarization 
between 'this-ness' (itthabhāva) and 'otherwise-ness' (aññathābhāva) 
in Sa§sāric existence (cf. Sn. v. 752). The other questions of 
Phagguna concerning contact, feeling, grasping and craving were 
similarly disallowed since they all fall within the orbit of the vortical 
interplay between consciousness and name-and-form.
39. With his ability to see the arising and cessation of his six sensespheres, the arahant tests the principle of Dependent Arising  (Pañicca 
Samuppāda) in the crucible of his own experience. Thus for him, the 
reflection on 'Pañicca Samuppāda' in its direct and indirect order (see 
Ud., Bodhivagga, Suttas 1-3.) is not a mere verbal or intellectual affair, 
but a thing of immediate experience.
40. This statement brings out the significance of Pañicca Samuppāda 
in the context of the theories of Kamma. It is in contrast with the views 
put forward by other recluses who theorised in terms of agency. 
Contact (phassa), as a condition, is pivotal to the Buddha's mode of 
exposition by way of Dependent Arising, as may be seen from the 
concluding sections of the Brahmajāla Sutta (D. I 41-44 See above 
Note: 2.)
 ---------------------------------  *  'samucchissatha': (P. E. D: 'derivation and meaning uncertain'). Probably 
from sa§ + ud + √ sish – to remain. Without the support of consciousness, 
name-and-form cannot remain within the mother's womb, nor can it result in 
rebirth. "If, Ānanda, consciousness, having descended into the mother's 
womb, were to slip out, would name-and-form be reborn into this state of 
existence?" "No, lord", ib.). 
74 75

41. By postulating the existence of the 'three doors of action'  – body, 
speech and mind – there sets in the possibility of any bodily, verbal or 
mental 'intention'. In fact, it is the very intention or purpose which 
prompts one to posit their existence. The former tendency is rooted in 
ignorance (avijjā) while the latter reflects the motive force of craving 
(taõhā) – the one being the raison d'etre for the other. Between them, 
they create the conditions necessary for the birth of preparations 
(saõkhārā). "Monks, to the uninstructed average person touched by a 
sensation born of 'ignorance-contact', there arises craving. Born 
thereof is that preparation", (S. III 96). Saõkhāras too, fundamentally 
manifest themselves as affirmations of self. "Herein, monks the 
uninstructed average person . . . . looks upon form as self. And that 
looking upon, O monks, is a preparation." (ib.). It is only under these 
circumstances that pleasure-and-pain is experienced subjectively 
(ajjhatta§).
42. Patterns of behaviour whether bodily, verbal or mental – 
productive of a person's pleasure and pain, are either evolved by 
oneself or fashioned by others. The difference is that between 'setting' 
a fashion and following it.
43. Bodily, verbal and mental preparations become manifest in 
deliberate as well as in reflex actions. They all take for granted the 
existence of body, speech and mind, and thus perpetuate ignorance 
(see above Note 34). The difference, then, is that between 
'commission' and 'connivance' 
44. When ignorance fades away, body, speech and mind cease to be the 
matrices for the arising of preparations. Thereby the 'field', the 
'ground', the 'base' or the 'occasion' for the most basic valuejudgement, namely that between pleasure and pain as subjective 
experiences – also disappears.
Part Three
45. These are the twenty types of 'personality-view'  (sakkāyadiññhi: 
lit. 'the  body- in- being  view')   which     comprise   all     possible
annihilationist and eternalist views. 'Sakkāya' is the notion that 'body' 
exists – 'body' here referring to that vaguely conceived pattern into 
which a living organism bundles up the totality of his experiences.
This basic assumption that one is an organic whole, becomes articulate 
in the twenty types of 'personality-views.' There the pattern seeks 
justification and recognition through the a-priori category of self 
(attā), which delegates to itself the exhaustive task of 'sorting-out' the 
elusive bundle. Though the attempt is unsuccessful, the prospect of 
success sustains the unending process of sorting out. The twenty types 
depict the ingenuity of the mind in its resolve to sustain that process.
45a. 'Upaya' as 'approaching', marks the incipient stage in the long 
psychological process implied by the string of terms: 'upayupādānā 
cetaso adhiññhānābhinivesānusayā'  – (S. III 10), which depicts, with a 
shade of a metaphor, the stages in an ascending order, thus: 
'approaching – grasping – mental-standpoint – entering into – lying 
dormant'. The metaphorical associations are quite in place, as they are 
suggestive of the 'abodes of the mind' (S. III 9ff; also, see above Note 
27 ). The process covers the entire range of 'ignorance-cum-craving'. 
The initial 'approach' is prompted as much by intellect as by emotion, 
in so far as curiosity and interest give rise to attention. The stages that 
follow, graphically depict the consummation of ignorance – 
crystallized into views (diññhi) – and craving. Consciousness, having 
'approached' its object, grasps it, acquires it, occupies it and is finally 
obsessed by it, which obsession is then carried over in the form of a 
seed-plot of latencies for the recurrence of the same process – ad 
infinitum.
46. Delight (nandi) is figuratively conceived as the water that is 
sprinkled to make the consciousness seed grow (nandupasecana§). 
The metaphor appears in full in the very next sutta (XXII. 54. 'Seed'):  " 
'As the earth-element' monks, so should the four stations of 
consciousness be considered. As the water-element, monks, so should 
'delight-and-lust' (nandirāga) be considered. As the five sorts of seed, 
monks, so should 'consciousness-with-nutriment' be considered."
76 77

The P. T.S. ed. follows the variant reading, 'nandupasevana§' 
(translated as 'seeking means of enjoyment' – K. S. III 45ff).
47. Each of the first four aggregates acts as a 'support' or a 'foothold' for 
consciousness. They are sometimes called 'abodes for consciousness'. 
(S. III 9ff).
48. This declaration disposes of the possibility of regarding 
consciousness as an entity that transmigrates by itself. In the 
Mahātaõhāsaõkhaya Sutta (M. I. 258) we find the Buddha rebuking 
the monk Sāti for misrepresenting him with the statement: "This selfsame consciousness fares on and transmigrates and no other *  
(anañña§) – thus do I understand the Dhamma as preached by the 
Exalted One." The Buddha in repudiating it, says: "Foolish man, have I 
not, in many a figure spoken of consciousness as something 
dependently arisen (thus): 'There is no origination of consciousness 
except in relation to conditions.' The role of consciousness, as a 
dependently arisen phenomenon in the context of rebirth, has always 
to be understood with reference to one or more of the other aggregates.
49. The 'lust' (rāgo) here referred to is but another shade of 'delight' 
(nandi), as shown above in Note 46. ' . . . By the destruction of delight 
comes the destruction of lust. By the destruction of lust comes the 
destruction of delight. And by the destruction of delight-and-lust the 
mind comes to be called 'freed', 'well-freed' (S. III 51). The lusting for 
consciousness is itself said to be a support for the establishment of 
consciousness. Consciousness is so 'parasitic' that in the absence of a 
more palpable support it gets established on the very latency to 
attachment. "Even if, monks, one neither wills, nor mentally concocts, 
but still has a latency – that becomes an object for the persistence of 
consciousness  . . . . "         (S. II. 67)
---------
   * For this sense of the word   'anañña§', (cf  . . . Mahāpurisassa dve'va 
gatiyo bhavanti  anaññā' – Sn. p. 106). 'To a Superman. . . . . there are only 
two careers and no other (i.e, no more).'
50. Consciousness, not having been concocted (anabhisaõkhacca), is 
set free. The same idea is conveyed by the phrase 'visa§khāragata§ 
citta§' (Dh p. v. 154 ) – 'the mind gone to the state of non-concoction.' 
The appeasement of preparations (saïkhārūpasama) is meant thereby.
51. The phrase 'nāpara§ itthattāya' is here rendered as 'There is 
nothing beyond this for (a designation of) the conditions of this 
existence'. This phrase has been variously rendered (e.g. 'for life in 
these conditions there is no hereafter' –  K.S. III 46; 'for life as we 
conceive it there was no hereafter' – K.S. I. 177; 'there is no more of 
being such or so'- M.LS. 70. etc.)
     The commentary gives more than one interpretation. For instance at 
S. A. I. 205 (VI. I. 3), it is exp1ained with particular reference to the 
preceding phrase, thus: 'Done-is-the-task': the meaning is that the 
sixteenfold task (viz comprehension, abandonment, realization and 
development of the Four Truths by means of the Four Paths) has been 
accomplished. 'No-more-for thisness': now there is no more Pathdevelopment to be done for this state, that is, as regards this sixteenfold 
task or the destruction of defilements. Or else, 'for-thisness' means 
beyond this present process of aggregates of such a type, there is no 
other process of aggregates. And he knew that these five aggregates on 
being comprehended, just stand like a tree cut off at the root.
     Perhaps the meaning of 'nāpara§ itthattāya' can best be elicited 
from the following two Canonical passages:
     I. "This consciousness turns back from name-and-form, it does 
not go beyond (nāparam gacchati). In so far can one be born, or grow 
old, or die, or pass away, or reappear, in so far as this is, to wit: 
consciousness is dependent on name-and-form, name-and-form on 
consciousness, the six sense-spheres on name-and-form, contact on 
the six sense-spheres, feeling on contact, craving on feeling, grasping 
on craving, becoming on grasping, birth on becoming, and old age, 
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair are dependent on 
birth. Thus is the arising of this entire mass of suffering." – D. II 32f. 
Mahāpadāna S.
78 79

II "In so far only, Ānanda, can one be born, or grow old, or die or pass 
away or reappear, in so far only is there any pathway for verbal 
expression, in so far only is there any pathway for terminology, in so 
far only is there any pathway for designations, in so far only is there 
any sphere of knowledge, in so far only is there a whirling round 
for a designation of 'this-ness' (ettāvatā vañña§ vaññati itthatta§ 
paññāpanāya) that is to say, as far as name-and-form together with 
consciousness. – D. II 63f Mahānidāna S.
     The very understanding that 'consciousness turns back from nameand-form and that it does not go beyond', is the saving-wisdom which 
amounts to a full comprehension of the illusion (māyā) that is 
consciousness. Between these two links of the Pañicca Samuppāda 
there is a vortex or a whirling round for a designation of 'this-ness' 
(i.e., 'the conditions of this existence').
Now, a vortex or an eddy, is 'a current running back, contrary to the 
main stream, thus causing a circular motion',* and this Sa§sāric 
vortex too is the outcome of defying the flux of nature with its three 
characteristics of impermanence (anicca), suffering (dukkha), and 
not-self (anattā). When the reflex-mechanism of consciousness is 
discovered, the motive force for this whirling round will lose its 
sanction. The nutriment-of-consciousness (viññāõāhāra) will expose 
itself to be a vicious 'feed-back system', even as in the case of a vortex. 
'Name-and-form' will be seen as a mere product of proliferation 
(papañca-nāmarūpam – Sn. v. 530) –  a Narcissistic image doted upon 
due to delusion. With this vision 'of-things-as- they-are' 
(yathābhūtañānadassana), there comes a disgust (nibbidā) for this 
interplay which is nothing but a secondary manifestation of a conflict 
(dukkha) with the 'main stream' of Nature. This disgust gives rise to a 
'turning-away' (virāga), which leads to the Freedom (vimukti) from the 
conflict that characterises Sa§sāric existence as a whole. There can be 
a designation or a 'pointing-out' (paññāpana) as a 'this-ness' (itthatta) 
only as long as the vortex of individual existence is kept going. When 
the  vortex  ceases, all  pathways  of  designation  lose  their  point  of 
--------
*  Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary p. 335.
reference, since where there was an ' itthatta', now 'tathatā' (thus-ness 
or such-ness) prevails. The Tathāgata, the Transcendent One, thus 
truly becomes 'deep, immeasurable, unfathomable, as is the great 
ocean' (M. I. 488), and the five aggregates which he has abandoned, 
have only a semblance of connection with him now, like the stirred up 
surface waters which still betoken a vortex long since ceased at its 
depths. 
     'Nāpara§ itthattāya' is the guaranty of this freedom from the 
Sa§sāric vortex. It conveys the arahant's conviction that 'in so far 
only' – that is as far as name-and-form together with consciousness – 
'can one be born, or grow old or die or pass away or reappear', and that 
there is nothing beyond this for the designation of these conditions of 
Sa§sāric existence.
52. 'Kevalī ' is one who lives by oneself – a-lone. The sense of 
completeness, of being fully integrated and accomplished, is also 
implicit. The primary sense seems to emerge for instance at Sn. v. 490: 
'Those who wander in the world unattached, possession-less, alone, 
and self-controlled' ('ye ve asattā vicaranti loke – akiñcanā kevalino 
yatattā').
 This 'being alone', however, has a deeper significance for the arahant, even 
as his being possession-less (see above, Note: 14). It refers to the arahant's 
non-entanglement in name-and-form, (see above, Note 13). He has put an 
end to name-and-form ('pariyanta§ akāsi nāmarūpa§ – Sn. v,537) and it is 
no longer reflected or manifest in his consciousness. At S. III. 105 it is said 
that the notion 'I-am' occurs when one reflects upon the five aggregates, just 
as in the case of one looking at his own image reflected in a mirror or in a 
bowl of water. Thus the very conceit 'I-am' (asmimāna), being a form of 
measuring, is essentially dependent and relative. Paradoxically enough, it 
reveals a split in living experience, since all identification presupposes a 
duality. The arahant who is free from that conceit does not rely on standards 
of judgement (see eg. Sn. vv. 842, 894), and is therefore truly alone, fully 
integrated  and accomplished. His  is  a  completeness  born  of  inner 
concord   due  to  the  fact  that  his   consciousness    does   not   'dwell'
80 81

anywhere. 'They say, it is a concord * for a monk who, completely 
withdrawn from the world, resorts to a secluded spot, in that he does 
not show himself in existence:'
Patilīnacarassa bhikkhuno
bhajamānassa vivittamāsana§
sāmaggiyamāhu tassa ta§
yo attāna§ bhavane na dassaye
– Sn. v. 810.
53. 'ye kevalino vañña§ tesa§ natthi paññāpanāya: (see above, Note: 
51). The 'whirling-round' is no more for the arahants since the 
counterpart of consciousnesss – 'name-and-form' –  is no longer 
'present'. This too is suggestive of the solitude meant by the term 
'kevalī'.
54. The eighteen elements are: eye, visual object, eye-consciousness; 
ear, sound, ear-consciousness; nose, odour, nose-consciousness; 
tongue, taste, tongue-consciousness; body, tangibles, bodyconsciousness; mind, ideas, mind-consciousness.
55. The twelve spheres of sense: eye, visual object; ear, sound; nose, 
odour; tongue, taste; body, tangible-object; mind, idea. These are 
usually divided into two groups as 'inner' (ajjhattika) and 'outer' 
(bāhira)- the former comprising the six senses, and the latter, their 
respective objects.
56. This refers to the 'contemplation of the rise-and-fall' 
(udayabbayānupassanā) of the Five Aggregates of Grasping 
(pancūpādānakkhandhā) in accordance with the principle of Pañicca
----------
     *  The word 'sāmaggiyam', though explained by the Comm. (Sn. A.) to 
mean 'fit and proper' ('patirūpa§'), seems to have a significance of its own, 
as suggested by the context. (Note: 'They say it is a 'sāmaggiya' for him . . . '). 
It connotes the inner concord of the fully-integrated arahant, its primary 
sense being 'concord' or 'unanimity', in a social context.
Samuppāda, as, for instance, set forth at S. II. 28:
'Thus is form; thus is its arising; thus is its passing away.
Thus is feeling; thus is its arising; thus is its passing away.
Thus is perception; thus is its arising; thus is its passing away.
Thus are the preparations; thus is their arising; thus is their 
passing away.
Thus is consciousness; thus is its arising; thus is its passing 
away.'
     Thus: 'this being, this becomes; from the arising of this, this 
arises; this not being, this becomes not; from the ceasing of this, 
this ceases'.
     
     That is to say, conditioned by ignorance, preparations come to pass; 
conditioned by preparations, consciousness comes to pass; 
conditioned by consciousness, name-and-form; conditioned by nameand-form, the sixfold sense-sphere; conditioned by the sixfold sensesphere, contact; conditioned by contact, feeling; conditioned by 
feeling, craving; conditioned by craving, grasping; conditioned by 
grasping, becoming; conditioned by becoming, birth; conditioned by 
birth, old-age and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, grief and 
despair come to pass. Such is the arising of this entire mass of 
suffering. But from the utter fading away and cessation of that very 
ignorance, comes the cessation of preparations; from the cessation of 
preparations, the cessation of consciousness; . . . . from the cessation of 
birth, old-age and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, grief and 
despair cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.'
     This 'investigation by way of Dependent Arising' is an illustration 
of the practical application of that law in order to understand the 
structure of experience. By tracing experience to its very source – 
ignorance – one understands the cumulative process (upacaya- M.III 
287) whereby the Five Aggregates of Grasping come into existence. 
'Attention-by-way-of-matrix' (yonisomonasikāra) is an integral 
element in the law of Dependent Arising, as the Mahāpadāna Sutta 
82 83

(D. II3Iff.) clearly reveals. Ignorance, when discovered, is transmuted 
into Knowledge, and as such, the outcome of this 'yonisomanasikāra' 
is the destruction of that foundation on which the structure of senseexperience rests precariously balanced.
     The three ways of investigation would thus lead to a comprehension 
of the three basic categories, 'khandhā' (aggregates), 'āyatanāni' 
(spheres) and 'dhātuyo' (elements).
     57. The point of this discussion is the determination whether the 
Five Aggregates of Grasping comprehend the entire concept of 
grasping or whether there is a mode of grasping outside of them. Both 
propositions are negated because the former does not take into account 
the 'desire-and-lust' (chandarāga), while the latter overlooks the fact 
that this 'desire-and-lust' which is called a grasping, is still something 
that has to do with the Five Aggregates of Grasping.
     Here the question concerns not so much the simple identity or 
difference between the two terms as the delimitation of their meaning 
and applicability. The usual Pali idiom for expressing identity and 
difference runs something like this: 'Ta§ jīva§ ta§ sarīra§, añña§ 
jīva§ añña§ sarīra§' –  S. IV 392, ('Is body the same as soul, or is 
body one thing and soul another'). In contrast with it, is the idiom used 
in the present context: 'Taññeva nu kho bhante upādāna§ te 
pa¤cupādānakkhandhā. udāhu aññatra pa¤cupādānakkhandhehi 
upādānanti'. Hence the rendering of this sentence at M. L. S. III 66, is 
to be preferred to the one given at K. S. III 85.
58. The definition explains why the 'Aggregates' are so called. It gives 
the justification for the nomenclature by showing how 
comprehensively each aggregate is conceived.
59. On the four elemental-modes, earth, water, fire and air (pañhavi, 
āpo, tejo, vāyo) depends the concept of form. The former themselves 
are abstractions from the experience of solidity, cohesion, heat and 
motion.
60. The correct reading should be:  'Pañipucchā vinītā kho me tumhe 
bhikkhave  tatra  tatra  tesu  tesu  dhammesu'.  The  variant   reading 
'pañiccavinīta' which some texts (see M. III 19.) have adopted, hardly 
makes sense, and at best it could only be rendered within the given 
context, as follows;
 (i) 'trained to look for causality' – P.E.D.
(ii) 'You, monks, have been trained by me (to look for) conditions now 
here, now there, in these things and in those.' – M.L.S. III 69. 
(iii) 'Now bhikkhus you have been trained by me in dependent 
conditionality, in various instances' – Ven. ¥ānamoli's Transl. of M. 
(unpublished).
Though the P. T. S. ed. reads ' pañipucchā vinītā', its translation fails to 
bring out the significance of this key-word: 'That question, brethren, I 
have already answered thus and thus in those teachings that I have 
given you.' (K, S. III 88).
     At A. I. 285 we get a classification of three types of assemblies 
according to the modes of training adopted, one of them being 'the 
assembly trained by the counter-question method' (pañipucchā 
vinītāparisā). Moreover, at A. II. 46 where four types of questions are 
mentioned, it is said that some questions have to be dealt with by a 
counter-question (pañipucchā vyākaranīyo). That one has to be skilled 
enough to use one's discretion in determining to which category a 
question belongs, is also clearly stated there.
'eka§savacana§ eka§ – vibhajja vacanā para§
 tatiya§ pañipuccheyya – catuttha§ pana ñhāpaye
yo ca nesa§ tattha tattha – jānāti anudhammata§
catupañhassa kusalo – āhu bhikkhu§ tathāvidha§.
'One (type of question) is that which admits of a categorical reply, 
another requires an analytical statement, the third type should be 
questioned-in-return, while the fourth should be set aside.
     That monk who knows what type is applicable here and there, 
according to circumstances, such a one, they say, is an expert in the 
tetrad of questions.'
84 85

The latter half of that sentence in the sutta with its clumsy-looking 
iteratives ('tatra tatra tesu tesu dhammesu . . . ') can be better explained 
in the context of the above two verses. Its import is exactly the same as 
that of the second verse. The prefix 'anu' in 'anudhammata§', fulfills 
the same distributive function as does the phrase 'tesu tesu dhammesu'. 
Hence it is clear that the Buddha is here reminding the monks that he 
has, upon occasion, trained them by the counter-question method, and 
this is just the method he proposes to employ on the present occasion 
too, in order to dispel the wrong view of that monk. The catechism on 
the Three Signata with its arrestive 'what-do-you-think?' is, in fact, a 
kind of counter-question by which the questioner's false assumptions 
are gradually exposed, layer by layer. The final rhetoric question: 'That 
which is impermanent, painful and liable to change, is it fit to be 
regarded thus: 'This is mine, this am I, this is my self?' – goes to the 
root of the matter, in its appeal to common sense. On the whole, this 
catechism serves the very practical purpose of disabusing the 
questioner's mind of his prejudices, thus shattering the very basis of his 
question (see above Note. 38).
     Some critics who have failed to appreciate the cathartic significance 
of this catechism in the present context, seem to have interpreted it as 
some sort of a cavalier escapade from the point at issue. When the full 
import of the expression 'pañipucchāvinītā' is understood, there can be 
no provocation for such an attitude, the less so since here the Buddha 
himself has taken the trouble to probe into the mind of that monk and 
bring out a question which, otherwise, might well have remained 
unasked. Equally unjustified is the attempt to find in this type of 
catechism, an excuse for 'a self-outside-the-five-aggregates'.
Part Four
61. The unruffled manner in which the Venerable Upasena announces 
his impending death, is typical of an arahant. There is a tone of 
detachment in his words as he requests the monks to take 'this body' 
outside before 'it be scattered here, just like a handful of chaff'- chaff 
signifying the value he attached to his body.
62. This sentence which should form part of the Venerable Sāriputta's 
comment, has been misconstrued at K.S. IV. 20, as an actual repetition 
of the request already made by the Venerable Upasena.
63. Probably due to the peculiar use of the third person as a polite form 
of address, K.S. treats these remarks of the Venerable Sāriputta, as a 
mere matter-of-fact observation and not as an inference on his part.
64. The doctrinal importance of this 'dyad' may well be gauged by the 
Buddha's declaration with reference to it in the preceding sutta (XXV. 
92.): "Whoever. monks, should say – 'Rejecting this dyad, I will 
proclaim another dyad' – it would be mere talk on his part, and when 
questioned, he would not make good his boast, and further, would 
come to an ill pass. Why so? Because, monks, it would be beyond his 
scope."
Now the following verse of the Dhp. (v. 384) has a reference to 
dyads:
'yadā dvayesu dhammesu – pāragū hoti brāhmano
athassa sabbe sa§yogā – attha§ gacchanti jānato'
     "When the arahant becomes 'one who has gone beyond' (pāragū) 
with regard to the things forming the dyads, then all fetters of the 
knowing-one pass away."
     The commentary (Dhp A.) takes the dyads to mean 'calm-andinsight' ('dvayesūti dvidhā ñhitesu samatha vipassanā dhammesu . . . '). 
However, on the strength of the Buddha's declaration cited above, it is 
more reasonable to interpret it in the light of the present sutta. The 
word 'pāragū' (lit. 'crossed to the farther shore') in the verse, may be 
taken as an allusion to the 'Ocean-sutta' at S. IV. 157. See above Note 
17, which compares each of the six senses to an ocean with its 
respective object as its 'force' (of waves), and speaks of the arahant as 
one who has 'crossed over and gone beyond' .
     A distinction has to be made between this 'dyad' (dvaya§) and the 
'dichotomy' (dvayatā) which  is  the  theme  in the  Dvayatānupassanā 
86 87

Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta, since the latter is set out in the form of 
contrasts (e.g., " 'Whatever suffering arises, all that is due to ignorance' 
– this is one mode of contemplation: 'from the utter fading away and 
cessation of that very ignorance, there is no arising, of suffering' – this 
is the second mode of contemplation" – (Sn. p.141).
65. This sutta is titled 'Agayha' ('not-including') in contrast with the 
one preceding it, which is called 'Sa§gayha' ('including'). The theme 
of the 'Sa§gayha Sutta' is the sixfold sphere of sense-contact as it is 
experienced in hells and heavens, whereas in this sutta the theme is that 
transcendental 'sphere' (āyatana) in which one realizes the cessation of 
the sixfold sense-sphere ('salāyatananirodha').
66. These verses are found also in the Dvayatānupassanā Sutta (Sn. 
vv. 759-65). They seem to have undergone much textual corruption. 
On the whole, the readings adopted by the Sn. (P.T.S. ed.) are 
preferable to those in the S., (P.T.S. ed.).
67. This translation follows the reading 'sakkāyassuparodhana§' 
(Sn.). With the cessation of the six sense spheres, the arahant becomes 
aware of the cessation of his existence (bhavanirodho) as an individual 
– the conceit 'am' having been removed.
68. 'Extinction', which is much dreaded by the world is the highest 
bliss for the arahant inasmuch as it is the destruction of the delusion of 
self and a blissful realization, here and now, of the truth of not-self. As 
Adhimutta Thera, an arahant, puts it: "He who understands it as it was 
taught by the Awakened One, does not grasp at any existence 
whatsoever, regarding all existence as a red-hot iron ball. It does not 
occur to me: 'I was'; nor does it occur to me: 'I will be'. (Mere) 
preparations will be destroyed. What is there to lament ? To one who 
sees, as they truly are, the pure arising of phenomena and the pure 
process of preparations, there is no dread, O headman. When, with 
wisdom, one sees the world to be comparable to straw and twigs, then 
one laments not, saying 'I have nothing', since he does not entertain any 
egoism," – Thag. vv. 714-717.
69. Ignorance and craving are essentially restrictive in character, the 
former being called a hindrance  (nīvarana)  and  the  latter,  a fetter
(saññojana). Hence the corresponding notions of' 'I' and 'mine' – 
paradoxically enough – are privative rather than acquisitive, because 
'to possess' is 'to-be-possessed-by'. The consequent 'ignoring' is the 
darkness that forms the background to this 'possession'. It is the insight 
into the law of Dependent Arising that lights up the ignored 
background. The distinctions between an 'internal' (ajjhattika) and an 
external (bāhira) sense-sphere (or 'base') with its concomitant 'here'-
and-'there' dichotomy (idha, hura§) can exist only so long as the 
sense-faculties function within the narrow confines staked out for 
them by the conceit, 'am'. Once consciousness has burst all these 
artificial bounds and become infinite (ananta§) and 'luminous-on-all 
sides' (sabbato-pabha§), those distinctions and dichotomies will no 
longer be manifest in it (viññāõa§ anidassana§). The ray of viewpoint fades away in the glare of an all-comprehending vision. Thus to 
the emancipated ones 'wide ope' it is, as light is unto those discerning.'
     Nibbāna, as the 'Unshakeable Deliverance of the Mind' (akuppā 
cetovimutti), is given four epithets in the Mahā Vedalla S. (M. I 198). It 
is called the highest form of 'Boundless Deliverance of the Mind' 
(appamāõā cetovimutti) since the limitative tendencies of lust, hatred 
and delusion are abandoned in the arahant. It is also the highest form of 
'Possessionless (i.e. Nothingness) Deliverance of the Mind' 
(ākiñcaññā cetovimutti), as it is devoid of those three taints each of 
which is a 'something' (kiñcano). For the same reason, it is at the same 
time, the highest 'Voidness Deliverance of the Mind' (suññatā 
cetovimutti). In so far as lust, hatred and delusion are 'significant' 
(nimittakaraõo), their absence in Nibbāna makes it the supreme 
'Signless Deliverance of the Mind' (animittā cetovimutti). These four 
aspects of that Unshakable Deliverance of the Mind – the 'Boundless', 
the 'Possessionless', the 'Void' and the 'Signless' are also suggestive of 
the infinite and non-manifestative nature of the arahant's 
consciousness.
70. This reference to the first discourse of the Dīgha Nikāya is rather in 
favour of its authenticity.
71. The ten  Unexplained  Points  (avyākatavatthūni)  and  the 
sixty - two views  set forth in the Brahmajāla Sutta, are, all of them,
88 89

manifestations of the 'personality-view' which in its twenty modes (see 
above Note 45) reflects a desperate attempt to justify and render 
articulate the self-bias. As such, it must not be reckoned as a separate 
view in itself – as the sixty third implied by the controversial reference 
to sixty-three views in the Sabhiya Sutta (Sn. v. 538). The commentary 
however, takes it to be so, presumably relying on Venerable Isidatta's 
reply for support.
     There is reason to believe that those 'three and sixty views' (yāni ca 
tīõi yāni ca saññhi) referred to in that verse include Sammā Ditthi 
(Right View) as the sixty-third. They are collectively called 'resorts' 
(osaraõāni) 'dependent on talks of recluses' (samanappavāda sitāni) 
'with percepts as their syllables and supported by percepts' 
(saññakkharasaññanissitāni) – all of which the Buddha is said to have 
dispelled when he reached the 'Flood's End' ( . . . . vineyya oghanta§ 
agā). In this connection, the summing-up occurring at the end of the 
Brahmajāla Sutta is particularly significant. After setting forth the 
types of speculative views falling under each sub-heading, the 
following declaration is made: "And this, monks, the Tathāgata knows 
– 'These view-points thus taken up, thus taken hold of, lead to such and 
such bournes, to such and such states after death.' That the Tathāgata 
knows, and he also knows something higher than that, and even that 
knowledge he does not take hold of, and not taking hold of it, within 
himself appeasement (nibbuti) has been understood. Having known 
the arising, the passing away, the satisfaction, the misery and the 
escape in regard to feelings, and not grasping, liberated, monks, is the 
Tathāgata."
 Towards the end of the sutta, where the final summary of all sixty-two 
views comes, it is clearly stated that this 'higher knowledge' is the 
understanding, as-they-truly-are, the arising, the passing away, the 
satisfaction, the misery and the escape in regard to the six spheres of 
sense-contact (D. I. 45). The very synoptic nature of this higher 
knowledge comprehending all the five aspects of the spheres of sensecontact, gives rise to detachment. It is the kind of mastery which an 
expert physician is endowed with, and the Buddha, as a matter of fact, 
claimed himself to be one (Sn. v. 560). The Four Noble Truths can be 
resolved,  respectively, into   the  Malady, its Cause,  Health  and  the 
Remedy,  the  mastery  of  all  four  being  the  sine qua non  for
emancipation. To the emancipated one, all dogmatic views appear as 
symptoms of a malady – as 'twitchings' and 'writhings' (diññhi 
visūka§, diññhivipphandita§), fraught with pain, vexation, despair and 
fever (sadukkha§ savighāta§ saupāyāsa§ saparilāha§ – M. I. 485), 
and through them he diagnoses the malady. Hence he is not in conflict 
with them, and like a kind physician, with perfect equanimity, he 
understands the law of Dependent Arising implicit in that situation:
'Given the malady – symptoms arise
Given the remedy – symptoms cease.'
    And his relations with the 'patient' will be purely on therapeutic 
lines. Likewise the above-mentioned synoptic understanding of the 
spheres of sense-contact gives rise to detachment and equanimity. It 
signifies the Middle Path underlying the law of Dependent Arising. At 
S. II. 17, Right view is defined as the law of Dependent Arising which 
avoids the two extreme views of absolute existence and absolute nonexistence. Thus, to the questions: 'Does it exist ?', 'Does it not exist ?', 
and, likewise, to the questions: 'Is it one ?'  'Is it many?' – S. II. 77, the 
reply is: 'It depends', and this dependence takes the form of the 
twelve-linked formula in its direct and reverse order. The theme, in 
brief, is :-
'When ignorance arises – the world arises 
When ignorance ceases – the world ceases.'
     Seeing the arising of the world within one's own sixfold sensesphere, one does not entertain the dogmatic view: 'Nothing exists'; and 
seeing the cessation of, the world therein, one does not incline to the 
other extreme view: 'Everything exists'.
       This 'Sammā Diññhi' as the understanding of the principle of 
Dependent Arising, has an essentially disengaging quality. It is 'in 
the proximity of non-attachment, disengagement, non-delighting, 
non-entanglement and non-grasping' (Apaõõaka Sutta M. I. 411). Its 
counterpart is 'disenchantment' (nibbidā) which in its turn leads to 
detachment, cessation, Nibbāna. Rather in keeping with the 
pragmatic concept of truth, the 'knowledge-and-vision-of-thingsas-they are' (yathabhūtañāõadassana) is one that merely serves the 
90 91

practical purpose of 'leading onwards' (opanayiko) without inviting 
dogmatic involvement (see S. II. 60). Hence when Anāthapindika, a 
'Stream-winner' (Sotāpanna) was questioned by the ascetics of other 
sects as to whether he is not himself attached to his view :- 'Whatever is 
become, compounded, thought out and impermanent, that is suffering 
and whatever is suffering that is not mine, that am I not, that is not my 
self – he silenced them with the reply that he knows a higher 'steppingout' (nissarana) even from that Right View (A. V. 188). Because all 
views couched in percepts and syllables have a centripetal tendency as 
the word 'osaraõāni' suggests, the Noble Disciple does not cling even 
to the Right View, but, on the other hand, developing the centrifugal 
force implied by 'nissarana', he attains Nibbāna.
72. The importance of this sutta lies not only in the philosophical 
problem which the Venerable Isidatta explained but also in the 
psychological problem which he left unexplained. On the whole, the 
sutta is a character-portrait of him in bare outline. Here was a situation 
where patronage was forthcoming both from his erstwhile friend and 
his chief-elder. And yet, despite all those prospects, we see him 
departing from Macchikāsanda 'for good'. A detailed analysis of the 
relevant words and phrases with a view to introducing colour into this 
character-portrait, might sometimes spoil the wholesome effect of the 
modest reticence of the sutta. Hence, let the thoughtful reader re-read 
the sutta and try to understand the psychological problem which – for 
us – the Venerable Isidatta left unsolved, and, perhaps – to solve which 
he left.
73. A clear illustration of the significance of the term 'akāliko' (lit: 'not 
involving time' – see above Note 27.) as an epithet of the Dhamma. 
Here the principle of Dependent Arising finds quite a practical 
application.
Its validity can be tested in one's own immediate experience (see e.g. 
Cūla Sakuludāyi S.; M. II. 32.) since the arising and cessation of 
suffering hinges on the fact of 'desire'. The Five Aggregates of 
Grasping which 'in brief' (sankhittena) constitute suffering, are rooted 
in desire. The entire process of their accumulation is  understood 
when    the    basic   principle   is   applied  to one's  own   immediate 
experience. It leaves no room for speculation as regards the past and 
the future, as the other significant epithet, 'atakkāvacaro' (not moving 
in the sphere of logic) implies. That this was a remarkable feature of 
the Buddha's teaching which marked it off from all other 
contemporary religious systems, is well expressed by Hemaka in the 
Pārāyana Vagga of the Sutta Nipāta :-
     "Those who explained to me before (so said the Venerable Hemaka) 
– outside the dispensation of Gotama – all of them said: 'So it was' and 
'so it will be'. But all that is 'so-and-so' talk. All that is productive of 
logic. I did not delight therein. But as for you, O sage, you have taught 
me the Dhamma that is destructive of craving, by knowing which, and 
mindfully faring along, one might get beyond the world's viscosity" 
(Sn. vv. 1084-5).
74. K. S. (IV. 233) seems to go off at a tangent here. It has: 'Now, 
headman, do you shape your course by this Norm, when you have seen 
and known it, when you have reached it without loss of time, – plunged 
into it both in respect of the past and the future, . . . . .'.
Part Five
75. The phrases 'sake bale apatthaddhā', 'sake bale asa§vadamānā' 
have created some difficulty (see K. S. IV. 125.) They occur twice and 
the meaning in both contexts should be the same, though K. S. gives 
'relaxed her efforts, did not increase her grip' in the first instance and, 
'putting forth her effort, not relaxing her effort', in the second. The 
'relaxation' meant by the word 'apatthaddhā' ('not-rigid') is 
psychological rather than physical. It was born of excessive selfconfidence, due to which the she-falcon, not being 'stiff' in her ways, 
first imposed on herself a handicap, and then swooped down unwarily 
on the quail. 'Asa§vadamānā' is probably suggestive of her disdainful 
attitude towards the quail in not caring to give merely verbal rejoinders 
to its challenges in both instances.
76. The Four Foundations of Mindfulness form the ground-plan for 
the development of the 'Knowledge and vision of things as they are'. 
Within its range, awareness is focussed directly  on  experience  as
92 93

such, reducing the tendency towards diffusion and proliferation in 
thought-currents. This insulation stems the tide of influxes which 
entices one into the "others' territory"-  the five-fold sense-pleasure.
77. It is noteworthy that the parable in this sutta has some peculiarity in 
that it is not on all fours with the doctrinal points discussed in relation 
to it. The maxims presented in connection with the practice of 
Mindfulness ("I'll protect myself "; "I'll protect others,") are an 
improvement on that recommended by the acrobat's pupil ("you look 
after yourself master, and I'll look after myself"). This is the 
significance of the Buddha's remark: "Therein, that is the right way." 
This point seems to have been overlooked when the P. T. S. edition and 
translation attribute these words to the acrobat's pupil, breaking up and 
distributing the sentence between two paragraphs (The sentence 
should read:- 'So tattha ¤āyoti bhagavā avoca, yathā medakathālikā 
antevāsī ācariya§ avoca'). The sentence thus wrongly broken up, is 
then taken to mean that the Buddha here recommends the same 
acrobatic principle to the monks. (' . . . Then said the Exalted One: 
"Now, monks, just as Medakathālika, the pupil said to his master “I'll 
look after myself." so ought ye to observe the station of mindfulness . . . 
. ' ). That principle, striking as it is, is less broad-based than the twinprinciple recommended by the Buddha himself: "Protecting oneself, 
one protects others; protecting others, one protects oneself". As clearly 
expounded in the Ambalaññhika Rāhulovāda Sutta (M. I 415ff), the 
way to purify one's bodily, verbal and mental actions is by constant 
reflection on their repercussions on oneself as well as on others. 
Mindfulness, then, is that benign agent of transmutation which 
preserves the inner consistency and harmony of this twin-principle.
78. ' . . . . in protecting oneself one protects others': The principle 
indicated here in brief can be appreciated the better with the aid of the 
following exhortation by the Buddha at S. II 29:-
     "Wherefore, monks, you stir up energy that you may reach what is 
still unreached, that you may attain what is still unattained, that you 
may realize what is still unrealized. 'Thus will this going-forth of ours 
not be barren, but fruitful and of consequence. And  those  offerings  of 
them whose requisites of robes, alms-food, lodgings and medicaments 
we enjoy, shall, on our part, be of great fruit, of great consequence for 
them'. Verily, it is thus, monks, that you should train yourselves. For 
one who discerns his own good, this is enough to call up diligent effort. 
For one who discerns another's good, this is enough to call up diligent 
effort. For one who discerns the good of both, this is enough to call up 
diligent effort."
    The frequent practice, development and making much of 
mindfulness' recommended by our sutta, is one that is conducive to the 
good of both oneself and others. As the commentary observes, even the 
mere appreciation of a monk who, by his diligent practice, attains to 
arahantship, will be a thought productive of great merit. Besides, one's 
devotion to the practice and exemplary life can be a source of 
inspiration to others. Since greed, hatred and delusion are the 
mainsprings of all evil intentions resulting in harm to oneself and 
others, in protecting one's mind from them, one is at the same time, 
protecting others as well.
79.  ' . . . . in protecting others, one protects oneself:'
     Forbearance, non-violence, loving-kindness and compassion, 
being positive altruistic attitudes, directly concern one's relations with 
the outside world. Yet, on the mental side too, they exercise a 
wholesome influence conducive to one's own spiritual growth. They 
are all 'object-lessons' in the practice of mindfulness.
80. This sutta presents one of the most impressive enunciations of the 
standard of mindfulness advocated by the Buddha. The parable is 
highly significant in that it depicts, the hazards involved in the worldly 
environment in regard to the practice of mindfulness.
 
The beauty-queen with all her charms probably symbolises those 
allurements of sense which evoke covetousness (abhijjhā). The 
restless crowd of people represents the other source of distraction 
–grief or mental uneasiness (domanassa). The bowl brimful of oil 
symbolising the 'mindfulness-relating-to-body' (kāyagatāsati) is 
always in danger of being 'spilt'  amidst  these  distractions. Hence, the 
94 95

most effective impetus for the diligent practice of mindfulness is the 
constant awareness of impending death.
By the same author
*1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought - (1971)  
*2. Samyutta Nik~ya - An anthology, Part. II Wheel No. 183/185 -(1972) 
*3. Ideal Solitude-Wheel No. 188 - (1973) 
*4. The Magic of the Mind - (1974)
*5. Uttaritara Hudekalawa - Damsak No. 172/173 - (1990) 
-do- (New edition)  D.G.M.B. - (2001)
6. Towards Calm and Insight - (1991)
7. Vidasun Upades - (1996)
8. Nivane Niveema - (1997-2004)  D.G.M.B.(All 11 Volumes issued)
9. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom - Volume-1 - (1998)
(Essays written for Beyond the Net)-
Website : http://www.beyondthenet.net 
10. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Vol I - (1999) (D.G.M.B.)
11. Seeing Through - (1999)
12. Hitaka Mahima -1 - (1999)
13. Nivane Niveema - Library Edition-Part I - (2000)
14. Hita Thanima - (2000)
15. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. II
16. Towards A Better World-Translation of Lo-Wada Sangarawa- (2000)
17. Pavatma H~ Navatma - (2001)
18. Athi Hati Dakma - (2001)
19. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Vol. III - (2002)
20. Kaya Anuwa Giya Sihiya - (2001)
21. Divi Katare Sanda Andura - (2001)
22. M~-Piya Uvatana - (2002)
23. Prathipatti Påj~wa - (2003)
24. Nibb~na-The Mind Stilled  Vol. I - (2003)
25. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Vol. IV - (2003)
26. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Vol. V - (2005)
27. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Vol. VI - (2006)
28. Abinikmana - (2003)
29. Hitaka Mahima  II - (2003)
30. Nibb~na-The Mind Stilled  Vol. II - (2004)
31. Nibb~na-The Mind Stilled  Vol. III - (2005)
32. Nibb~na-The Mind Stilled  Vol. IV - (2006)
33. Nibb~na-The Mind Stilled  Vol. V - (2007)
34. The Magic of the Mind (2007)
* Buddhist Publication Society, P.O.Box 61, Kandy
96 97

01' Nivane Niveema Volume One 11000
02. Nivane Niveema Volume Two 8000
03. Nivane Niveema Volume Three 5000
04. Nivane Niveema Volume Four 6000
05. Nivane Niveema Volume Five 5000
06. Nivane Niveema Volume Six 3500
07. Nivane Niveema^Lib Ed& Part One ^1-6Volume&   500
08. Nivane Niveema Volume Seven 6000
09. Nivane Niveema Volume Eight 6000
10. Nivane Niveema Volume Nine 3000
11. Nivane Niveema Volume Ten 3000
12. Nivane Niveema Volume Eleven 3000
13. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Volume One 13000
14. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Volume Two 12000
15. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Volume Three 6000
16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Volume Four 7000
17. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Volume Five 6000
18. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan~ Volume Six 4000
19. 'Hitaka Mahima~ Volume One 8000
20. ~Hitaka Mahima~ Volume Two 6000
21. Uttareetara Hudekalawa  8000
22. Vidasun Upades 9000
23. Chalana Chitraya 3000
24. Diyasuliya 6000
25. Towards A Better World  6000
26. Seeing Through  3000
27. Nibb~na - The Mind Stilled Volume I 5000
28. Nibb~na - The Mind Stilled Volume II 3000
29. Nibb~na - The Mind Stilled Volume III 3000
30. Nibb~na - The Mind Stilled Volume IV 3000
31. Nibb~na - The Mind Stilled Volume V 2000
32. The Magic of the Mind  2000
Books Published by D.G.M.B.
No. of
Copies
98