Title: Nibbāna fire simile final
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/nibbana_and_the_fire_simile.pdf
Word Count: 9494

From the D.G.M.B. . . . . . .
We wish to acknowledge the generous support 
received from our readers and benefactors who 
continue to pool in their resources into this 'Ford-ofNectar'. Convinced of the Buddha's words that the gift 
of Dhamma is far superior to a gift of material things, 
some of them even take this opportunity to transfer 
merit to their departed relatives as a mark of gratitude.
May the merit of this Dhammadàna conduce to 
their attainment of the supreme Bliss of Nibbàna!

I I
Nibbāna
and
The Fire Simile
( a 'Pahan Kanuwa' Sermon)
by
Bhikkhu Kañukurunde Ñāõananda
Published strictly for free distribution
All Rights Reserved
ISBN 978 - 955- 1255 - 37- 4
Published by
Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bhāraya
Sri Lanka

www.seeingthroughthenet.net
Dhamma is Priceless !
Strictly for free distribution
First Impression - 2010
Copies of this book may be obtained from:
1.Pothgulgala Aranyaya
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara,
Devalegama.
2.Mr. G. T. Bandara
Royal Institute
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo 05.
3.Mr. D. T. Weragala
422, Welipara,
Thalawatugoda.
4.Mr. Anura Rupasingha
No. 27, Colombo Street
Kandy.
5.Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe
No. 26, Havelock Road
Galle.
6. Mr. I.M.D.H. Sugathadasa
    No.80, Govt. Quarters
    Tisa Wewa, Anuradhapura.
7. Mr. S. A. Lionel
    140/19, Ruhunu Siri Udyanaya,
    Hakmana Rd, Matara. 
8.The Department of Public Trustee
No. 02, Bullers Road,
Colombo 07.
Printed by
The  Quality Printers.
17/2, Pangiriwatta Road, Gangodawila,Nugegoda, 
Tel : 011-4870333

IVIII
About the D.G.M.B. . . . . .
Rare is the birth of a Buddha in this world. So rare too, 
is the opportunity to listen to his Dhamma. This conviction has 
inspired many a devoted Buddhist to cherish the Dhamma as 
something extremely precious.
The Buddha has declared that salutary friendship 
(Kalyāna-mittatā) is almost synonymous with his 
dispensation. The gift-of-Dhamma is the link that moulds the 
bond of this friendship. Dhamma deserves no price-tag 
precisely because it is price-less.
It is in this spirit that the D.G.M.B. launched its 
Dhamma-dàna movement in 1997. Many a parched traveller 
on the desert path has had a refreshing drink of the nectar of 
Dhamma free of charge ever since. Many an enthusiastic 
benevolent heart seized the opportunity to participate in a 
genuine act of Dhammadāna.
Should we always go for things that sport a price-tag? 
Is everything that comes free to us, necessarily worthless? 
What about the air and the sunshine?
It is in point of merit that the gift of-Dhamma excels all 
other gifts. Dhamma is the nectar that quenches the insatiate 
samsàric thirst of beings. The gift of Dhamma is therefore of 
far greater merit than an ordinary gift of food or drink. For the 
magnanimous-Dhammadàna is for ever an unfailing source of 
altruistic joy.
All enquiries regarding participation in this 
Dhammadāna should be addressed to:-
Mr.G.T.Bandara
The Settlor, D.G.M.B.,
Royal Institute,
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo – 05.
Fax : 2592749, 2580564
From the D.G.M.B. . . . . . .
We wish to acknowledge the generous support received 
from our readers and benefactors who continue to pool in their 
resources into this 'Ford-of-Nectar'. Convinced of the Buddha's 
words that the gift of Dhamma is far superior to a gift of 
material things, some of them even take this opportunity to 
transfer merit to their departed relatives as a mark of gratitude.
May the merit of this Dhammadāna conduce to their 
attainment of the supreme Bliss of Nibbāna!
List of Abbreviations
A Anguttara Nikāya
It Itivuttaka
Ud Udāna
M Majjhima Nikāya
S Samyutta Nikāya
Sn Sutta Nipāta 
 
(References are to volume and page number of the PTS 
edition)

VIV
PREFACE
 The sermon presented in this little volume under the title 
'Nibbāna and the Fire Simile' is the translation of one of the  sermons I 
delivered to the local community at 'Pahan Kanuwa' on Poya days. 
Incidentally, this happens to be the very first sermon to be translated 
into English out of more than 160 sermons delivered so far.
   As indicated by the title, this sermon has something special 
to say about the famous fire simile given by the Buddha as an 
illustration to dispel certain misconceptions about Nibbāna. Though I 1
have done justice to this much debated topic in my earlier works , this 
sermon might have something more conclusive for those who 
continue to doubt and demur. It is hoped that the term 'extinction' - the 
biggest bug-bear behind the fire simile - will be understood in its 
correct perspective in the light of this sermon.
   I have already translated the entire series of 33 sermons on 
Nibbāna, 25 of which have come out in five volumes titled 'Nibbāna – 2
The Mind Stilled' . The 'Pahan Kanuwa' series which was delivered in 
a lighter vein, covers a wider range of topics relating to the Dhamma. 
If all goes well, it might be possible to bring out at least a fair selection 
of these sermons in translation. 
  I must record my deep appreciation of the invaluable services 
rendered by our 'Book Trust', the DGMB (Colombo), and our 'Audio 
Trust', the DSMB (Kandy) in making accessible all my writings and 
sermons to the Dhamma thirsty world free of charge as 
Dhammadāna. I wish them many more years of devoted service to the 
Buddha Sāsana.
Bhikkhu Katukurunde ÑāõanandaPothgulgala Aranyaya,
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara,
Devalegama,
Sri Lanka.
08.01.2010
“Delighting in existence O monks, are gods and men; 
they are attached to existence. they revel in  existence. 
When the Dhamma for the cessation of existence is 
being preached to them, their minds do not leap 
towards it, do not get pleased with it, do not get settled 
in it, do not find confidence in it. That is how, monks, 
some lag behind … .”
-It. p 43
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought - 1971
       The Magic of the mind - 1974
        - The Mind Stilled (Seven volumes)
2. Volume VI will be issued shortly. The seventh and last  volume will 
     appear in  due course with a comprehensive index. 
Nibbāna

21
     'Namo tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammāsambuddhassa'
'
'Homage be to the Fortunate One, the Worthy – Fully 
Enlightened'
 
Ayoghana hatasseva
jalato jātavedaso
anupubbåpasantassa
yathā na ñāyate gati
Eva§ sammā vimuttāna§
Kāmabandhoghatārina§
paññāpetu§ gatã natthi
pattāna§ acala§ sukha§
- Ud. p.93
Dear Listeners,
That deliverance from Sa§sāra which the Buddha 
discovered, we generally call 'Nibbāna'. Sometimes the Buddha 
made a special effort to explain to the world what sort of a 
deliverance it is. The passing away of the arahant Dabba 
Mallaputta was one such occasion. The topic we have chosen 
for our sermon today is a couplet of verses uttered with 
reference to that occasion.
Dabba Mallaputta was one of the wonderful disciples of 
the Buddha. The beginning as well as the end of his life was 
wonderful. He was born after his mother's death. That is to say, 
his mother died due to some sudden illness while he was still 
inside the womb. Relatives took the pregnant mother's dead 
body into the crematorium and put it on the funeral pyre. When 
they set fire to it, flames split the embryo and the child dropped 
on to a log of wood below. As the child was still alive, relatives 
picked it up and handed it over to the child's grandmother. It is 
said that the child was named 'Dabba' because its life was saved 
by falling on a log of wood. 'Dabba' is a term for 'wood' as well 
as for 'material'. Because he belonged to the Malla clan he was 
called 'Mallaputta' – son of Mallas.
When Dabba was seven years old the Buddha visited the 
country of the Mallas and stayed in the mango grove called 
Anupiya. On seeing the Buddha, Dabba aroused faith in him 
and begged permission to get ordained. At the ordination 
ceremony, as part of the procedure, his preceptor gave him the 
meditation topic known as the 'skin-pentad' ('tacapañcaka') – 
that is to say, the first five in the list of repulsive parts of the body 
– namely head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth and skin. Dabba 
attended to his meditation topic while his head was being 
shaved. It is said that he attained the fruit of Stream-winning 
(sotāpattiphala) when the shaving started, and attained 
arahanthood by the time it ended. So he was already an arahant 
when he was ordained, having attained that supreme goal inside 
the hall of tonsure itself.
     Because of this extraordinary achievement, Venerable 
Dabba Mallaputta while in solitude thought: 'The purpose for 
which I went forth is already fulfilled. What if I were to take 
upon myself some duty on behalf of the community ?' With this 
thought he decided to ask permission, to be given an 
opportunity of serving the community by taking upon himself 
the duties of two offices – namely, that of an allocator of 
lodgings to visiting monks (senāsana paññāpaka) and that of 
assigning the requisite number of monks in response to 
invitations to meals (bhattuddesaka). When he expressed his 
wish, the Buddha approved it with commendation and the two 
duties were made over to him with the formal sanction of the 
community. After that it was Venerable Dabba Mallaputta's 
responsibility to allocate lodgings to visiting monks and to 
assign the requisite number of monks to respond to the laity's 
invitations to meals.

43
   He acquitted himself well in the perfomance of both 
these duties. Particularly in regard to the duty of allocating 
lodgings to visiting monks, it is said that he was so efficient as 
to do it according to their dispositions and predelictions. He 
saw to it that visiting monks who devoted themselves to the 
preservation of discourses (suttantikā) lodged together with the 
wish : 'Let them spend the night reciting the discourses.' When 
monks expert in discipline arrived, he made them lodge 
together thinking : 'Let them spend the night discussing points 
of discipline.' When preachers of Dhamma came, he gave them 
lodgings at one spot with the wish : 'Let them pass the night in 
Dhamma discussions.' When garrulous monks given to 
frivolous talk, those who had gone forth to fatten their bodies, 
came visiting, he made them lodge together with the thought: 
'Let them waste the night in their accustomed frivolties.'
    Not only did Venerable Dabba Mallaputta methodically 
allocate lodgings according to personality types but adapted an 
extraordinary technique in conudcting visiting monks who 
arrive late in the evening to their appointed lodgings. He would 
determine to his fire-kasina attainment and with that light 
conduct these monks to their lodgings. It is said that some 
visiting monks purposely arrived late in order to see Venerable 
Dabba Mallaputta's miraculous powers. When asked for their 
preferences, they would mention distant lodgings like those in 
Gijjhakåña (Vulture's Peak), Isigili Rock, Vebhara Rock, 
Maddakucchi Park, and Jãvaka Mango Grove. And how would 
Venerable Dabba Mallaputta take them there in the darkness of 
the night? He would atain the Jhāna and determine his thumb to 
become somesort of a flashlight and holding it before him 
would lead the way. In that light those monks were shown their 
places of lodging. Because of his efficiency in performing this 
duty, the Buddha named him the foremost among monks who 
allocate lodgings to visiting monks.
    Though he was such a highly gifted monk he had a short 
life span probably due to some past kamma. He was still young 
when the time came for his parinibbāna (final passing away). 
The Buddha was dwelling at the Bamboo Grove in Rajagaha at 
the time. Venerable Dabba Mallaputta approached the Buddha 
and told him: “ Well-gone One, the time has come for me to 
attain parinibbāna.” The Buddha simply said : “Dabba, you may 
do whatever you think it is time for.” As soon as the Buddha 
expressed his approval, he worshipped the Buddha, took his 
final leave, rose up into the sky and seated in the cross-legged 
posture attained to the fire-kasina jhāna and arising from it 
attained parinibbāna. The extraordinary thing about his passing 
away was that he set fire to his body through his skill in the firekasina and cremated himself. It was such a perfect cremation 
that no ash or soot remained at the end of it. Venerable Dabba 
Mallaputta did not even leave any relics for us to worship.
   This was such a significant event that the Buddha 
uttered a paean of joy on the occasion. Whereas nowadays such 
occasions usually call for expression of condolences, here we 
find the Buddha giving expression to the following utterance of 
joy.
Abhedi kāyo nirodhi saññā
vedanā sãtibhavi§su sabbā
våpasami§su sa§khārā
viññāõa§ atthamagamā
Body broke up
Perceptions ceased
All feelings cooled off
Preparations calmed down
Consciousness came to an end
-Ud. p. 93
  This event was of such a great significance that the 
Buddha when he went to Sāvatthi from Rajagaha, related the

5 6
incident to the monks at Jetavana monastery and made it an 
occasion to preach the following two verses as if in memoriam.
Ayoghanahatasseva
jalato jātavedaso
anupubbåpasantassa
yathā na ñāyate gati
Eva§ sammā vimuttāna§
kāma bandhoghatārina§
paññāpetu§ gati natthi
pattāna§ acala§ sukha§
   - ibid.
  The two verses are of such depth that the traditional 
commentators have faced difficulties in interpreting them. The 
simile given in the first verse seems to have puzzled them. As 
we understand it, the reference here is to a fire, the flame of 
which resembles a red hot block of iron. So the two verses could 
be rendered as follows:
   'Just as when a fire burning like a red hot block of iron 
gradually subsides, the path it goes by is not known,
    - Even so, of those who are well released, having 
crossed the flood of sensual bonds and reached the 
immovable bliss, there is no path whereby to designate.' 
   So now we have before us the question of parinibbāna. 
The parinibbāna of Venerable Dabba Mallaputta is an 
exemplary one. Why ? Because he did not leave behind 
anything. Nor did he – it seems – preserve for himself anything 
to be taken along with him, because all what he had namely, 
form, feelings, perceptions, preparations and consciousness, 
came to an end. He did not leave for us any remains like relics, 
to be enshrined. It was a perfect parinibbāna in every sense. 
That must be the reason why the Buddha, as we saw, uttered 
paeans of joy about it on two occasions.
 But when we say this, some might feel a trace of fear 
coming up. Why so ? Because as we see so often, funeral 
banners display in bold letters:
"May the late Mr. 'So-and-So' attain Nibbāna"     
 
  We generally believe that it is after death that 'Mr. 
Sovanso' attains Nibbāna which he could not attain here. It is 
supposed to be something that happens 'hereafter'. In fact, more 
than 95% of those who think, reason out, speculate, and preach 
about Nibbāna believe in a 'Mr. Sovanso's Nibbāna'. For them 
all Buddhas and arahants or whoever is said to have attained 
Nibbāna end up in a holy citadel called the Great City of 
Ambrosial Nibbāna ('Amā-maha-nivanpura'). "Only don't ask 
us where it is" they say, "It is for sure our true destination. We 
should one and all try to go there". This is the whole story they 
tell us.
    How far we are justified in believing this story is the 
question before us now. We can find an answer by analyzing the 
two verses we have already quoted as the heading.
   'Ayoghana hatasseva – jalato jātavedaso'
          We have here the word 'ghana' (compact, dense, solid) 
which has a deep significance. As a matter of fact, the reason for 
all this delusion in the worldlings is the personality view which 
virulently holds on to existence. It takes as self one or the other 
of the five aggregates – form, feeling, perception, preparations 
and consciousness. In particular, it clings to consciousness as 
self – invisible as it is. So then we are in a fix. On the one hand 
we want to put an end to suffering in this existence. On the other 
we want to remain existing somehow or other. We are working 
with a contradiction. We are running with the hare and hunting 
with the hound. To justify our stand we somehow try to posit a 
city of the Deathless by some clever legerdemain.

87
       But here the Buddha has given a meaningful hint about 
the fire that went out in the phrase 'Ayoghana hatasseva'. A fire 
that is ablaze appears as compact (solid) as a red -hot block of 
iron. The notion of the compact ('ghana saññā) represents the 
worlding's deluded point of view. Even such a 'realistic' flame 
when it goes out cannot be traced. It is by means of the rhetoric 
question 'where does a fire go when it goes out ?' that the 
Buddha answered the questions relating to the after-death state 1
of an arahant.  In short many tend to forget the fact that the 
obvious meaning of the term 'nibbāna' is extinction, i.e. going 
out of a fire.
    According to the Buddha the totality of existence is 
comparable to a fire. It is a fire which, as a rule, is dependent on 
some fuel or other, which is called 'upādāna' – the term for 
grasping as well as for fuel. A fire grasps, grabs, seizes or holds 
on to the fuel which it consumes. Its extinction – the proverbial 
'going out' – is Nibbāna. For the Buddha, nibbāna is not a 
destination after death. The most telling evidence we get is his 
lion's roar in the Udumbarika Sãhanāda Sutta.
Buddho so Bhagavā bodhāya dhamma§ deseti
Danto so Bhagavā damathāya dhamma§ deseti     
Santo so Bhagavā samathāya dhamma§ deseti
Tiõõo so Bhagavā taraõāya dhamma§ deseti
Parinibbuto so Bhagavā parinibbānāya dhamma§ 
deseti
Enlightened as he is, the Fortunate One preaches 
the Dhamma for enlightenment
Tamed as he is, the Fortunate One preaches 
the Dhamma for taming
Calm as he is, the Fortunate One preaches 
the Dhamma for calming
Crossed over as he is, the Fortunate One preaches 
the Dhamma for crossing over
Perfectly extinguished as he is, the Fortunate One 
preaches the Dhamma for perfect extinguishment
     If we take the term Buddha to mean 'Enlightened' 
(though there is also the nuance 'Awakened'), having attained 
enlightenment he preaches the Dhamma for the enlightenment 
of others. Tamed or disciplined as he is, he preaches the 
Dhamma for the taming or disciplining of others. Calm and 
tranquil as he is, he preaches the Dhamma to make others calm 
and tranquil. Having crossed over the floods (of sense desire, 
becoming or existence, views and ignorance) he preaches the 
Dhamma to make others cross over. But now comes the 
statement which might appear problematic. Perfectly 
extinguished as he is, the Fortunate One preaches the Dhamma 
for perfect extinguishment. If as is commonly believed the term 
parinibbāna refers to an after-death state, how can the Buddha 
preach after he has passed away ? This is clear proof of the fact 
that parinibbāna is a state realized in this very world – here and 
now, and not hereafter.
   As regards the arahants too, this is the norm. Even in the 
case of Venerable Dabba Mallaputta when it is said that he first 
determined to the fire-kasina and attained parinibbāna, we have 
to understand by it that he brought his mind to the released state. 
Then he set fire to his body as if setting fire to a dress taken off. 
That is why instead of a heat we are told of a cooling-off of all 
feelings. That cooling off was due to parinibbāna. In fact that is 
the state of parinibbāna.
   However, there are many who hold that the Buddhas, 
Pacceka Buddhas, and arahants who pass away go and lodge 
somewhere in some nondescript realm. There is a particular 3 
discourse they draw upon to prove it – namely Pahārāda Sutta.
In that discourse we find a discussion between the Asura king 
Pahārāda and the Buddha. First of all Pahārāda, the Asura king, 
enumerates eight wonderful and marvellous qualities of the

109
ocean seeing which the Asuras delight in the great ocean. Out of 
them we shall mention here the fifth as it is relevant to our 
discussion.
     Pahārāda says that even if all the rivers in the world 
flow into the ocean and torrents of rain fall on it, there is no 
apparent decrease or increase in it, and that the Asuras delight 
in this quality of the great ocean. By way of comparing his 
dispensation (lit. 'doctrine and discipline' – 'dhammavinaya') 
with the great ocean, the Buddha enumerates eight wonderful 
and marvellous qualities to be found in his dispensation. Out of 
them the fifth is worded as follows:
 'Just as there is no apparent decrease or increase in the 
waters of the great ocean even if all the rivers of the 
world flow into it and torrents of rain fall from the sky, 
even if many monks pass away in the Nibbāna Element 
without residual clinging ('Anupādisesā 
Nibbānadhātu'), there is no decrease or increase 
apparent in the Nibbāna Element without residual 
clinging.' 
  On the strength of this comparison many scholars try to 
argue it out that Anupādisesā Nibbānadhātu is some sort of a 
spacious destination for the Buddhas and arahants when they 
pass away. But the fallacy of this argument is exposed when we 
examine the eighth wonderful and marvellous quality of this 
dispensation.
    As the eighth wonderful and marvellous quality of the 
great ocean Pahārāda states that there are enormous creatures in 
it such as whales, sharks, Asuras, Nāgas and Gandhabbas. The 
Buddha by way of comparison says that in his dispensation too 
there are enormous creatures. Who are they ? The eight Noble 
Persons in the community, namely, the Stream-winner, the one 
who is treading the Path for the realization of the Fruit of 
Stream-winning, the Once-returner, the one who is treading the 
Path for the realization of the Fruit of Once-returning, the Nonreturner, the one who is treading the Path for the realization of 
the Fruit of Non-returning, the Arahant, and the one who is 
treading the Path to Arahanthood. Only the eight Noble Persons 
are mentioned. The arahant who has passed away or attained 
Parinibbāna is not menioned here, though this is the proper 
context for it. He it seems is conspicuous by his absence. Why is 
that ? How then are we to understand the problematic fifth 
quality of this dispensation ?
   Let us suppose that there are whirlpools in the great 
ocean. If for some reason or other they cease and disappear, 
there is no consequent decrease or increase in the waters of the 4
great ocean.  As a matter of fact, there is a very deep concept in 
the Dhamma – namely that existence is a perversion. 'What the 
worldlings take as the truth, that for the noble-ones is an 5
untruth.'  The Buddha has declared this fact on a certain 
occasion. Though the world attributes so much importance to 
existence, the Buddha points out that it is only a pervert state of 
affairs. According to him all concepts of birth, death, and 
existence are traceable to a vortex or a whirlpool which is called 
'vañña'. As he puts it: 'ettāvatā vañña§ vaññati itthatta§  6
paññāpanāya'  – in so far does a whirlpool whirl, for the 
designation of a 'thisness' (i.e. this state of existence). It is as if to 
indicate some spot that a whirlpool whirls. In the great ocean 
there is a possibility of pointing out a 'this spot' and a 'that spot' 
only when there are whirlpools. But a whirlpool is a 
manifestation of some pervert activity. It is when some runaway 
current of water tries to go against the mainstream and is foiled 
in its attempt that it turns round only to get pushed back to come 
round again. When it cannot progress, it spirals downwards to 
form a vortex or an eddy with its abyss.
 In the same way, beings 'ignore' the true state of affairs 
in the world. Impelled by ignorance and craving, their

1 21 1
consciousness goes in search of permanence in a world of 
impermanence, beauty in a world of ugliness, pleasure in a 
world of suffering, and a self in a world of not-self. It is due to 
this perversion that this whirlpool or eddy of a person comes to 
be. Even the Buddha as a Bodhisatta has been a whirlpool in 
Sa§sāra. So also are Pacceka Buddhas and arahants. In the end, 
by wisdom, they see the futility of this whirling round. It is when 
the vanity of this whirling round between consciousness and 
name-and-form is understood, and the mind is weaned away 
from it, that the whirlpool ceases. However many whirlpools 
cease in the ocean, there is no decrease or increase in the water. 
It is this simile of the whirlpool that holds the answer to the 
question about the after-death state of the arahant.
      The answer is aleady implicit in the statement: 'The fire 
has gone out.' How ridiculous it is to conclude that the fire goes 7
somewhere when it goes out.  If one asks whether the 
extinguished fire has gone to the East or West or North or South, 
it is a foolish question. If something exists depending on causes 
and conditions, when those causes and conditions are removed, 
it has to cease. This truth is implicit in the dictum 'bhavanirodho 8
nibbāna§'. 'Cessation of existence is extinction (or Nibbāna).'  
The cessation of existence itself is Nibbāna. Apart from this 
there is no other Nibbāna. What the Buddha points out to us is 
the fact that this Nibbāna is to be realized here and now.
    That is why we come across in the Ratana Sutta the 
following lines which you all are familiar with in your chanting.
Khaya§ virāga§ amata§ paõãta§
yadajjhagā Sakyamunã samāhito 9
na tena dhammena samatthi kiñci … 
  'That destruction (of craving), that detachment, that 
excellent Deathlessness, which the concentrated Sakyan sage 
attained, there is nothing comparable to that Dhamma.' 
The Deathless experience is something to be realized 
here and now. That is why the arahants are said to partake of that 
'ambrosia'. Deathlessness is not an experience that comes after 
death.
 It is by putting his mind to this Deathlessness that the 
Venerable Arahant Dabba Mallaputta experienced no pain of 
death. Pain of death comes due to grasping (upādāna) because 
of attachment to aggregates of form, feeling, perception, 
preparations and consciousness. Where there is not even a trace 
of attachment there is extinction. It is due to that grasping 
conditioned by the fire of craving that rebirth occurs. 10
'Conditioned by grasping is existence.  With the cessation of 
grasping there is parinibbāna. That is called 'Anupādā 
Parinibbāna'. So now we have to understand what is meant by 
'parinibbāna', what this perfect extinction amounts to.
In that quotation we brought up it was said that the 
Fortunate One, perfectly extinguished as he is, preaches the 
Dhamma for perfect extinguishment. But today the moment one 
hears the word 'parinibbāna' one is reminded of the after-death 
state of the arahants. As a matter of fact, the last thought of the 
arahant gets connected with the experience of the Fruit of 
Arahanthood. It is an attainment an arahant has already gone 
through. At the moment of death it invariably comes up. That is 
what helps him to overcome the pain of death. In addition to the 
verse we cited above, the following verse in the Ratana Sutta 
also refers to that concentration.
Ya§ Buddha seññho parãvaõõayã suci§
samādhimānantarikaññamāhu 11
samādhinā tena samo na vijjati …  
'That pure concentration the Supreme Buddha extolled 
in particular, which they call 'Immediacy' – there is no 
concentration comparable to it. This too is an excellent quality 
of the Dhamma …'

141 3
It seems, no worldly concentration can excel this 
wonderful concentration which is supramundane. We might as 
well say something about this 'Immediacy Concentration'. 
What is known as the Supramundane Path comes at the peak of 
insight knowledges and immediately one falls into the Fruit of 
it. That is why that concentraion is called '?nantariko Samādhi' 
('Immediacy Concentration'). All the eight factors of the Noble 
Eightfold Path occur as a single thought at the supramundane 
moment. It cuts through the worldly defilements and 'shows the 
other shore' as it were. So it is called the Supramundane Path. It 
is an extraordinary concentration. In fact there is a particular 12
discourse  which highlights the extraordinariness of this 
supramundane concentration.
Once when Venerable ?nanda was staying at 
Ghositārāma in Kosambi, Venerable Bhaddaji came to see him. 
In the course of conversation Venerable ?nanda put the 
following questions to him as if to test his acquaintance with 
the Dhamma.
“ What is the highest seeing ?
    What is the highest hearing ?
    What is the highest bliss ?
    What is the highest perceiving ?   
    What is the highest level of being ?  “
            
 To these questions Venerable Bhaddaji gave the 
following answers :
 “There is a great Brahmā called Vasavatti. Seeing him is 
the highest seeing.
There is a class of Brahmas called ?bhassarā (The 
Radiant). From time to time they let out a joyous exclamation 
'O! What bliss! O! What bliss!' Hearing it, is the highest 
hearing. 
There is a class of Brahmas called Subhakinnā. They 
experience a wonderful bliss. That is the highest bliss.
       There is a formless attainment of Brahmas in the Realm 
of Nothingness which has as its object the perception : 'There is 
nothing. There is nothing.' Their perception is the highest 
perception.
    There are Brahmas who have attained to the realm of 
neither–perception nor non-perception. This is the highest level 
of being.”
     When Venerable Bhaddaji gave these answers, 
Venerable ?nanda simply remarked: “Friend Bhaddaji, your 
answers tally with the view of the majority of people.” 
Venerable Bhaddaji understood the hint that his answers are not 
acceptable from the point of view of Dhamma. So he invited 
Venerable ?nanda to express his own view, saying “Venerable 
?nanda is very erudite. May the answers occur to yourself, 
Venerable ?nanda.”
     Venerable ?nanda now gives the correct answers to the 
five questions:
     “Seeing in whatever manner, friend, there comes to be 
the immediate destruction of influxes – that is the highest 
seeing.
      Hearing in whatever manner, friend, there comes to be 
the immediate destruction of influxes – that is the highest 
hearing.
      Being happy in whatever manner, friend, there comes to 
be the immediate destruction of influxes – that is the highest 
bliss.

15 1 6
      Perceiving in whatever manner, friend, there comes to 
be the immediate destruction of influxes – that is the highest 
perception.
      Being in whatever state, friend, there comes to be the 
immediate destruction of influxes – that is the highest (form of) 
being.”
    From the last statement here, one can form an idea as to 
what the highest or ultimate point of existence is. From the 
dictum, 'Bhavanirodho nibbāna§' – 'Cessation of existence is 
Nibbāna', it is clear that the Buddha has called the cessation of 
existence itself Nibbāna. But this cessation of existence is a 
realization. The ultimate point from which one falls into this 
realization is that Immediacy Concentration ('?nantarika 
samādhi'). Immediately after that concentration, one falls into 
the cessation of existence which is Nibbāna. That is a REALization. So the cessation of existence itself is Nibbāna – an 
experience here and now. It is not Mr. Sovanso's 'hereafterNibbāna', but a perfect experience an arahant goes through in 
this world. That experience comes in as the unfailing resort and 
refuge at the last moment of the arahant's life as it is said in the 
following verse of the Ratana Sutta :
Khãõa§ purāõa§ nava§ natthi sambhava§
virattacittā āyatike bhavasmi§
te khãõabãjā avirūëhicchandā
nibbanti dhãrā yathāyampadãpo
'Khãna§ purāna§' - Whatever past karma there was, 
all that is exhausted,
'nava§ natthi sambhava§' – there is no new karma to 
bring about any existence,
'virattacittā āyatike bhavasmi§' – detached in mind 
as regards future existence,
'te khãõabãjā avirūëhicchandā'- they whose seed (of 
consciousness) is destroyed and desire does not 
sprout forth, 
'nibbanti dhãrā yathāyampadãpo' those wise ones get 
extinguished like this lamp.
     The ordinary person's consciousness seed has that 
germinating power to bring about rebirth in the field of karma, 
watered by craving – true to the dictum: 'Kamma§ khetta§, 13 
viññāõa§ bãja§ taõhā sineho' – 'Karma is the field, 
consciousness is the seed, and craving the moisture'. But an 
arahant's consciousness has lost that germinating power, and 
there is no moisture of craving for desire to grow up. It is a 
foolish question to ask: “Where does the flame of a lamp go, 
when it goes out?” When the oil is exhausted and the wick is 
burnt out, there is perfect extinction. There is nothing to lament 
because all suffering has ended.
    Many brahmins who held on to a soul theory accused 
the Buddha for being an annihilationist. But now not only such 
brahmins, even Buddhists level such accusations at us when we 
highlight these controversial issues. The Buddha answers those 
accusations fairly and squarely pointing out that their criticism 
is groundless. “They are falsely accusing me for something I do 
not say. For monks, formerly as now, I make known only a 
suffering and a cessation of suffering. “Pubbecāha§ bhikkhave 14
etarahica dukkhañceva paññāpemi dukkhassa ca nirodha§.”
  
       The teaching of the Four Noble truths is extremely 
wonderful in that the five aggregates of grasping without 
exception are equated to suffering. The five aggregates are as a 
whole comparable to the pervert activity of a whirlpool. The 
whirlpool whirls between consciousnes and name-and-form 
('ettāvatā vañña§ vaññati' – in so far does the whirlpool whirl). In 
those discourses where the doctrine of Dependent Arising 
(Pañicca Samuppāda) is explained, it is mentioned that there is a 
vortex or a whirlpool between consciousness and name-andform. It is as a result of this turning round or whirling that the 
five aggregates of grasping get accumulated. As we know,

1 8
when a whirlpool is whirling, initially there is an attempt to push 
forward. When the pervert current of water fails in its attempt to 
go against the mainstream it turns round and round gradually 
forming an abyss as it spirals downward. The centripetal force 
created in the process attracts as if by some magnetic force, all 
the jetsam and flotsam it can lay hold of.
     So also is our conscious body. From the day of 
conception inside our mother's womb, we were drawing upon 
and assimilating the nutritional essence while inside the womb 
through the umbilical cord. This miniature vortex when it 
comes out of the womb draws upon all the essence of the world 
just to build up the five aggregates – not only food but other 
things too, even the neighbour's land and others' property. Now 
it is this personal vortex or whirlpool that we call a being, a 
person, or an individual. Even the Buddhas and arahants are 
such whirlpools that have been whirling through Sa§sāra. 
Despite our honour and respect for them, we cannot escape the 
conclusion that they too have been whirling round for aeons 
upon aeons in this Sa§sāra before they found release by 
understanding the secret of it in the light of wisdom.
   How did they find release ? They understood the 
interrelation between consciousness and name-and-form. 
Instead of taking name-and-form as self they understood the 
mutual relationship between them. If consciousness is there 
because of name-and-form and name-and-form is there because 
of consciousness, neither can arise by itself. The simile given by 
Venerable Sāriputta to illustrate this is that of two bundles of 15
reeds.  When two bundles of reeds are made to stand supporting 
each other at the top, if you draw one the other would fall. The 
mutual inter-relation (aññamaññapaccayatā) between 
consciousness and name-and-form is like that. Only a Buddha 
discovers this norm. Till then ascetics grasped something or 
other as self. At least the subtle attainment of neitherperception-nor-non-perception they would identify as self. It 
was only the Buddha who pointed out that there is nothing that 
can be regarded as a unit. Even if we call something a sphere, 
still it involves a conflict – a struggle. That iself is the suffering 
in it.
Now at whatever moment this conflict – this revolving 
of the whirlpool – settles down, only the great ocean remains. 
There is no decrease or increase in the great ocean as a 
consequence. So all what was said about the great ocean in the 
Pahārāda Sutta is in perfect symmetry with the image of the 
vortex. Apart from that there is no mysterious non-descript 
realm or conclave where all arahants after their demise find 
eternal repose.
In order to clarify this point further, we may hark back 
to the statement that the consciousness seed can lose its 
germinating power ('khãnabãjā .. '). It can germinate so long as it 
is involved or entanged in name-and-form. Consciousness 
usually clings to name-and-form – its object. There is a 
particular term in the Dhamma to indicate the consciousness 
which lacks germinating power – namely 'Anidassana 16
viññāõa'  – non-manifestative consciousness. There is nothing 
in that consciousness that can manifest itself or show up. This is 
the state that the Buddha made known to the world as an 17
extraordinary sphere (āyatana).  The world is familiar with 
only the six sense spheres – eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and 
mind. They become spheres when they are involved in activity 
with their respective sense objects.   That activity is similar to 
what is going on in the whirlpool mentioned above. According 
to the Buddha it is in these six sense spheres where this activity 
is going on, that the whole world is to be found. Whatever 
modern science may say, the Buddha has proclaimed that the 
world is something that arises and ceases in the six sense 18
spheres.  That is why the Buddha declared that within this 
fathom-long physical frame with its perception and mind he 
would point out the world, the arising of the world, the 
1 7

19 2 0
cessation of the world and the path leading to the cessation of 19
the world.
     Sometimes the Buddha preached about a state wherein 
the six sense spheres cease. That cessation of sense spheres 20
itself is called a sphere – a sphere one can realize.  He even 
gives a description of it. “Monks, there is that sphere” – what 
sort of sphere ? In that sphere the Buddha has described, there is 
nothing of those elements like earth, water, fire and air with 
which we associate matter or form, none of the formless realms 
like the realm of infinity of space, no this world, no other world, 
no sun, no moon, no coming, no going, no standing, no passing 
away, no being born. In short, as the Buddha sums it up, that 
state is unestablished (appatiññha§), non-continuing 21
(appavatta§) and objectless (anārammana§).  The long list of 
negations is suggestive of the absence of all Sa§sāric bonds – 
everything that mattered including 'matter' itself. It is this nonmanifestative consciousness that the arahants experience in the 
attainment of the Fruit of Arahanthood. By way of an 
illustration we may cite an instance from the Buddha's life itself. 
In he Mahā Parinibbāna Sutta we find the Buddha coming out 22
with such an experience.
    “Monks, when I was once staying in the chaff - house at 
?tumā, there was a torrential downpour with flashes of lightning 
and peals of thunder. Two farmers – brothers – and four bulls 
were struck down by lightning. A large crowd had gathered 
there. I came out of the chaff house and asked a man who came 
up to me why such a crowd has gathered there. He told me that 
there was a torrential downpour of rain with flashes of lightning 
and peals of thunder and that two farmers and four bulls were 
struck down dead by lightning. He then asked me :
“But where were you Venerable Sir ?”
“I was here itself, friend.”
“But didn't you see it Venerable Sir ?”
“No friend, I did not see it.”  
“But didn't you hear the sound Venerable Sir ?”
“No friend, I did not hear the sound.”  
“But then, Venerable Sir, were you asleep ?”
“No friend, I was not asleep.”  
“But, Venerable Sir, were you conscious ?”
“Yes friend.”
   That man then expressed his surprise at the fact that the 
Buddha had not seen or heard anything though he was 
conscious (or percipient – 'saññã'). The Buddha was in that 
extraordinary samādhi at the time. When the mind is fully 
detached from the world, there is no seeing or hearing.
   Though there are several instances of arahants in 
arahattaphalasamādhi mentioned in the discourses, those who 
believe in a 'Mr. Sovanso's Nibbāna' interpret them as referring 
to some mysterious non-descript realm. According to them, that 
is the final destination of arahants. The majority of Buddhists 
today are imprisoned in this pernicious view. We have to 
emphasize that this view only reasserts the personality view, 
encourages craving for existence and reaffirms the brahmin 
prejudices.
   If we are to resolve this conflict of views we must be 
ready to grant the fact that according to the Buddha even the 
notion of existence is a perversion. Whereas for the worldling 
existence is a blessing, for the Buddha it is a manifestation of a 
pervert tendency. It is like that runaway current of water trying 
to do the impossible. Though it tries to go its own way it has to 
turn back. When it fails after repeated attempts to forge ahead, it 
starts digging down into an abyss. But one significant thing 
emerges from all this. That is to say, we get an opportunity to 
indicate and designate. There is nothing in the great ocean to 
point out. But when there is a vortex or a whirlpool we can point 
out as 'there' or 'here' – as 'that one' or 'this one'. We can use all 
these designations because there is a whirlpool. However,

21 2 2
simply because we get such an opportunity we should not jump 
to the conclusion that it is some sort of a self or soul. What we 
get there is only a conflict – not an integral unit. The Buddha has 
proclaimed to the world that it is only suffering. No other 
religious teacher has revealed that truth. They were blind to it 
because they tenaciously clung to a view of a self.
   The Buddha expounded this truth through his teaching 
on the law of Dependent Arising (Pañicca Samuppāda). Due to 
ignorance there arise a multiplicity of preparations. The 
discrimination between consciousness and name-and-form is 
itself the outcome of these preparations. This discrimination is 
something like getting involved in a game of chess. When we 
want to play chess we have to have two sides – even if we are the 
best of friends. That is a precondition for any competition. Even 
friends have to agree to disagree and appear as opponents. 
  The process of existence is something similar. There is a 
competition going on between consciousness and name-andform. It is a going round, a whirling round, that never ends. The 
Buddha saw this as a conflict – a suffering. The same conflict, 
the same whirling round goes on within our body all the time. 
Can we stop breathing after taking in one breath?  We are forced 
to breathe out. Can we finish with that? No. We are forced to 
breathe again. We took a meal in the morning; can we hold onto 
it ? Is that the end of our eating ? So this is the story of the body, 
prided on as 'I' and 'mine'.
    If we form a concept of a 'here', a 'there' comes in as a 
matter of course. If we conceive of a 'there', a 'here' too haunts 
somewhere. 'This one' implies 'that one', and 'that one' implies 
'this one'. The world is imprisoned within this duality. That is 
why the Buddha declared:
    “Monks, I will teach you a dyad. What 'monks' is the 
dyad ? The eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and 
odours, the tongue and tastes, the body and tangibles, mind and 
mind-objects. This is called the dyad.
    If anyone, monks, were to say : 'Having rejected this 
dyad I shall make known another dyad' – that would be a mere 
vain boast. When questioned he would not be able to 23
substantiate it, and further he would end up clueless.”
   In this way, inside our body and in our life process, 
there is a constant transaction – a give and take. This give and 
take never becomes even. The Buddha therefore equated the 
entirety of existence to suffering – i.e. the five aggregates of 
grasping as a whole. Many scholars who get down to 
explaining the Noble Truth of Suffering go on citing: 'birth is 
suffering, decay is suffering, death is suffering,' and so on, but 
forget that the Buddha concludes with the statement: “In short, 
the five aggregates of grasping is suffering”.   
   Let us now direct our attention to the perception of the 
compact (ghanasaññā) we mentioned earlier. Here we have a 
concept relevant to insight meditation. The worldling holds on 
to the perception of the compact. That is why he takes a flame as 
one. A little child might mistake a flame for something solid 
and try to catch it. Perception of the compact determines the 
worldling's reactions. But the insight meditator with a 
concentrated mind awakens radical attention according to the 
Buddha's instructions. With mindfulness and full awareness, he 
discerns name-and-form. What appeared as compact now 
appears as a heap. It is with this perception of the heap that one 
gradually gets on to the path of insight. As one progresses on it, 
dejection or disenchantment sets in. Knowledge and vision of 
things as they are (yathābūtañāõadassana) invariably gives 
rise to dejection. One cannot see things as they are and not be 
dejected or disenchanted. This dejection leads to detachment. It 
is then that parinibbāna or perfect extinction is realized. Even 
the four elements, earth, water, fire and air, highly prized by the 
world, do not get a footing in that released mind.

23 2 4
This is an age in which materialistic views are 
predominant. Talking about matter, we are again reminded of 
Venerable Dabba Mallaputta. As we mentioned earlier, 'dabba' 
means matter in general – not only wood. Venerable Dabba 
Mallaputta's life is a challenge to matter. Because of his power 
of merit, flames of his mother's funeral pyre could not burn 
him, but by his power of determination, he cremated his own 
body with his skill in fire kasina leaving no ash or soot. There 
too he gave a challenge to matter. That is what elicited from the 
Buddha, some special utterances of joy.
    As a matter of fact, we find such a challenge to matter 
implicit in the Dhamma proclaimed by the Buddha. If we 
compare the entire Dhamma to a library, the portals of this 
library open with the two significant lines of the first two verses 
of the Dhammapada.
'Mano pubbaïgamā dhammā
manoseññhā manomayā'
'Mind is the fore-runner of mind objects
mind is their chief, mind-made are they '
    These two lines occurring in both verses express a first 
principle in this Dhamma. In the Dhamma proclaimed by the 
Buddha, mind is primary, not matter. Mind precedes all things. 
Mind is superior to them. In the last analysis they are made by 
mind itself. According to this mind-oriented vision, even the 
so-called matter has no impact on that supramundane 
concentration. It is as if the elements earth, water, fire and air 
are non existent. Concepts relating to them such as coming, 
going, staying, being born and passing away, do not register 
themselves in that non-manifestative consciousness. That is 
why the term 'khãõabãjā' (with the consciousness seed 
destroyed) is used with reference to arahants. Their 
consciousness seed cannot germinate in a mother's womb.
That incident at ?tumā mentioned above is also 
suggestive of this non-manifestative consciousness. Yet another 
instance is the occasion the Buddha's foot was wounded by a 
splinter from a rock hurled on him by Venerable Devadatta. 
Initially the Buddha did experience grievous pain so much so 
that the physician Jãvaka had to be called in. But we are told that 
subsequently he bore up the pain by overcoming it with that 24
supramundane concentration.  Particularly at the last moment 
of an arahant's life this extraordinary cncentration steps in as a 
matter of course. That is what enabled venerable Dabba 
Mallaputta to cremate his body as if taking out one's dress and 
setting fire to it.
All this goes to prove that 'parinibbāna' is something to 
be realized here and now. If it is conceived as something that 
comes after death, no one will make a genuine effort to realize it. 
There is nothing wrong in a wish like this:
'May the merits accumulated by Mr. Sovanso in this life 
and whatever merits we make over to him to rejoice in, 
conduce to his attainment of Nibbāna'!
  But to wish him some sort of eternal Nibbāna after death 
is contrary to the spirit of the Dhamma. It is also wrong to 
attribute such a Nibbāna to Buddhas and arahants. They too are 
whirlpools which have been whirling for aeons upon aeons in 
Sa§sāra. Understanding the vanity of this whirling round - this 
conflict – they put an end to it. Nibbāna is its very cessation.
 'Dukkha nirodho nibbāna§' – cessation of suffering is Nibbāna. 
When brahmins disparaged the Buddha for preaching 
annihilationism he pointed out that he is simply showing the 
path to the cessation of that suffering which everybody is 
complaining about. “Formerly as now, I point out suffering and 
its cessation.” Some scholars try to tag on something to this 
definition of Nibbāna under the influence of their virulent 
atachment to existence. They want to keep back some trace of

2 5 2 6
existence somewhere. But that is diametrically opposed to the 
spirit of this wonderful Dhamma. The following thematic 
statement of Reflection on Peace (upasamānussati) highlights 
the spirit of this unique Dhamma:
 
“Eta§ santa§ eta§ paõãta§ yadida§ sabbasa§khāra 
samatho sabbåpadhipañinissaggo taõhakkhayo virāgo 25
nirodho nibbāna§”           
“This is peaceful, this is excellent, namely, the stilling 
of all preparations, the relinquishment of all assets, 
the destruction of craving, detachment, cessation, 
extinction.” 
    Therefore dear listeners, we must not forget the fact that 
if the aiming is wrong the arrow will not reach the target. If in the 
name of Right View one entertains a wrong view one will never 
attain Nibbāna. So we only hope that this sermon has helped you 
to purify your view.
   Today you have observed the higher precepts and 
practised meditation. Making use of this sermon may you be 
able to forge ahead in your meditation to reach the end of this 
perilous Sa§sāra – the end of this vortex, and realize the bliss of 
Nibbāna. May you be able to understand that Nibbāna is an 
experience here and now. Whatever beings there are from the 
lowest hell to the highest Brahma world who wish to rejoice in 
the merits accrued from preaching and listening to this sermon – 
may they all realize the sublime peace of Nibbāna ! 
   NOTES
1. eg . M I  484 Aggivacchagotta Sutta
2. D III 54.
3. A IV 197.
4. Note that the vortex simile is in perfect consonance with 
the implications of the phrase 'na tena nibbānadhātuyā 
ånatta§ vā påratta§ vā paññāyati' – 'by that there is no 
apparent decrease or increase in the Nibbāna element.'
5. Sn p. 147 Dvayatānupassanā Sutta.
6. D II 63f Mahā Nidāna Sutta.
7. There is a flush of Buddhist literature thriving in the 
West which attempts to interpret this fire simile in the 
light of the Vedic myth that the extinguished fire 'goes 
into hiding'. Though the Buddha succeeded in 
convincing the Brahmin interlocutors of the 
dependently arisen nature of fire by the reductio-adabsurdum method, these scholars seem to be impervious 
to his arguments. What is worse, misinterpretations 
have even sought refuge in blatant mis-translations of 
sacred texts.
8. The term 'extinction' is anathema to the West in general. 
Perhaps as a euphemism, 'extinguishment' might be 
'passable'. But rather than playing with the 'fire-simile' it 
is better to accept the obvious conclusions, willy nilly.
9. Sn v.225.

27
10. 'upādāna paccayā bhavo' – S II 1. passim.
11. Sn v.226.
12. A III 202 Baddaji Sutta.
13. A I 224.
14. M I 140 Alagaddåpama Sutta.
15. S II 114 Naëakaëāpiya Sutta.
16. D I 223 Kevaóóa Sutta, M I 329 Brahmanimantanika 
Sutta.
17. Ud 80, M III 219.
18. S II 73 Loko Sutta.
19. S I 61, A II 49 Rohitassa Sutta.
20. S IV 98 Kāmaguna Sutta.
21. Ud 80.
22. D II 131.
23. S IV 67.
24. S I 27.
25. A V 358.

By the same author
1.     Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought - (1971) 
2. Samyutta Nikàya - An anthology, Part. II Wheel No. 183/185 - (1972) 
                -do-    D.G.M.B. edition - (2009)
3. Ideal Solitude-Wheel No. 188 - (1973)
   -do-    D.G.M.B. edition - (2010) 
4. The Magic of the Mind - (1974)
          -do-    D.G.M.B. edition - (2007)
5. Towards Calm and Insight - (1991)
   -do-    D.G.M.B. edition - (1998)
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom - Volume-1 - (2003)
7. Seeing Through - (1999)
8. Towards A Better World- (2000)
9. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled – Vol. I    -  (2003)
10. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled – Vol. II   -  (2005)
11. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled – Vol. III  -  (2005)
12. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled – Vol. IV  -  (2006)
13. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled – Vol. V    -  (2007)
14. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled – Vol. V1   -  (2010)
01' ksjfka ksùu  m<uq fj¿u 11000
02' ksjfka ksùu            fojk fj¿u 8000
03' ksjfka ksùu  f;jk fj¿u 5000
04' ksjfka ksùu  isjqjk fj¿u 6000
05' ksjfka ksùu  miajk fj¿u 5000
06' ksjfka ksùu  ihjk fj¿u 3500
07' ksjfka ksùu^mqia;ld, uqøKh&m%:u Nd.h   ^1-6fj¿ï&  500
08' ksjfka ksùu  i;ajk fj¿u 3000
09' ksjfka ksùu  wgjk fj¿u 3000
10' ksjfka ksùu  kjjk fj¿u 5000
11' ksjfka ksùu  oijk fj¿u 5000
12' ksjfka ksùu  tfldf<diajk fj¿u 3000
13' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    m<uq fj¿u 13000
14' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    fojk fj¿u 12000
15' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    f;jk fj¿u             10000
16' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    isjqjk fj¿u 7000
17' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    miajk fj¿u 6000
18' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    ihjk fj¿u 4000
19' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd    i;ajk fj¿u 4000
20' ~ys;l uysu~  m<uq fj¿u 8000
21' ~ys;l uysu~  fojk fj¿u 5000
22'    W;a;Í;r yqfol,dj  9000
23' úoiqka Wmfoia 8000
24' p,k Ñ;%h 3000
25' Èh iq<sh 6000
26.      Towards A Better World  6000
27.      Seeing Through  3000
28.      Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume I  5000
29.      Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume II  3000
30.      Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume III  3000
31.      Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume IV  5000
32.      Nibbana - The Mind Stilled Volume V  2000
33. Nibbàna - The Mind Stilled  Volume V1     2000
34.      The Magic of the Mind 2000
35.      Towards Calm and Insight 2000
36.      Samyutta Nikaya An Anthology                        2000
37.      Ideal  Solitude 2000
Books Published by D.G.M.B No. of
Copies 
1' W;a;Í;r yqfol,dj - ^uq,a uqøKh&oïila~ wxl 172$173 - ^1990&
-tu- ^kj uqøKh&" Ou_ .%J: uqøK Ndrh ^2001&  
2' úoiqka Wmfoia - ^1997&
3' ksjfka ksùu -  m<uq  fj¿u  ^1997&
4' ksjfka ksùu -  fojk fj¿u  ^1998&
5' ksjfka ksùu -  f;jk fj¿u  ^1998&
6' ksjfka ksùu -  isjqjk fj¿u  ^1998
7' ksjfka ksùu -  miajk fj¿u  ^1999&
8' ksjfka ksùu -  ihjk fj¿u  ^1999&
9' ksjfka ksùu -  i;ajk fj¿u  ^1999&
10' ksjfka ksùu -  wgjk fj¿u  ^2000&
11' ksjfka ksùu -  kjjk fj¿u  ^2001&
12' ksjfka ksùu -  oijk fj¿u   ^2002&
13' ksjfka ksùu -  tfldf<diajk fj¿u ^2004&
14' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 1- fj¿u - ^1999&
15' ys;l uysu - 1 - ^1999&
16' ksjfka ksùu - mqia;ld, uqøKh - m%:uNd.h - ^1-6 fj¿ï&^2000&
17' ys; ;ekSu - ^2000&
18' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 2 fj¿u - ^2000&
19' meje;au yd keje;au - ^2000&
20' we;s yeá oelau - ^2001&
21' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 3 fj¿u - ^2001&
22' Èú l;f¾ ie|E w÷r - ^2001&
23' lh wkqj .sh isysh - ^2001&
24' ud-msh Wjegk - ^2002&
25' m%;sm;a;s mQcdj - ^2003& 
26' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 4 fj¿u - ^2003&
27' wìkslauk - ^2003& 
28' ys;luysu - 2 - ^2003&
29' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 5 fj¿u ^2005&
30' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 6 fj¿u ^2006&
31' myka lKqj Ou_ foaYkd - 7 fj¿u ^2009&
32' nqÿ iuh mqoa.,hd yd iudch  ^2009&
* Buddhist Publication Society, P.O.Box 61, Kandy.
 fn!oaO .%J: m%ldYk iñ;sh" ;e'fm' 61" uykqjr'
All enquiries regarding participation in the Dhammadana should be addressed to:
Mr.G.T.Bandara
Tel: 011- 2 592747 , 2 592748, 2508173  Fax : 2 580564