Title: The Threefold Refuge: tisarana
URL: https://accesstoinsight.org/ptf/tisarana.html
Word Count: 705

[Section: A refuge supreme]
They go to many a refuge, to mountains and forests, to park and tree shrines: people threatened with danger. That's not the secure refuge, not the supreme refuge, that's not the refuge, having gone to which, you gain release from all suffering & stress . But when, having gone to the Buddha , Dhamma , & Sangha for refuge, you see with right discernment the four noble truths — stress , the cause of stress , the transcending of stress , & the noble eightfold path , the way to the stilling of stress: that's the secure refuge, that, the supreme refuge, that is the refuge, having gone to which, you gain release from all suffering & stress.
[Section: The Triple Gem] (tiratana)
"Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy and rightly self-awakened, consummate in knowledge & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the world, unexcelled as a trainer for those people fit to be tamed, the Teacher of divine & human beings, awakened, blessed...
"The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One, to be seen here & now, timeless, inviting verification, pertinent, to be realized by the wise for themselves...
"The Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples who have practiced well... who have practiced straight-forwardly... who have practiced methodically... who have practiced masterfully — in other words, the four types [of noble disciples] when taken as pairs, the eight when taken as individual types — they are the Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples: worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of respect, the incomparable field of merit for the world."
[Section: The Pali formula for taking refuge]
(These verses are usually recited prior to taking on the Five Precepts .)
Buddham saranam gacchami I go to the Buddha for refuge. Dhammam saranam gacchami I go to the Dhamma for refuge. Sangham saranam gacchami I go to the Sangha for refuge. Dutiyampi Buddham saranam gacchami For a second time, I go to the Buddha for refuge. Dutiyampi Dhammam saranam gacchami For a second time, I go to the Dhamma for refuge. Dutiyampi Sangham saranam gacchami For a second time, I go to the Sangha for refuge. Tatiyampi Buddham saranam gacchami For a third time, I go to the Buddha for refuge. Tatiyampi Dhammam saranam gacchami For a third time, I go to the Dhamma for refuge. Tatiyampi Sangham saranam gacchami For a third time, I go to the Sangha for refuge.
[Section: Rewards of merit]
"There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones has gone to the Buddha for refuge. This is the first reward of merit, reward of skillfulness, nourishment of happiness, celestial, resulting in happiness, leading to heaven, leading to what is desirable, pleasurable, & appealing; to welfare & to happiness.
"Furthermore, the disciple of the noble ones has gone to the Dhamma for refuge. This is the second reward of merit...
"Furthermore, the disciple of the noble ones has gone to the Sangha for refuge. This is the third reward of merit..."
[Section: A refuge from pain]
If you're afraid of pain, if you dislike pain, go to the Awakened One for refuge, go to the Dhamma & Sangha. Take on the precepts : That will lead to your liberation .
[Section: A householder's declaration]
When the Exalted One had spoken thus, Sigala, the young householder, said as follows:
"Excellent, Lord, excellent! It is as if, Lord, a man were to set upright that which was overturned, or were to reveal that which was hidden, or were to point out the way to one who had gone astray, or were to hold a lamp amidst the darkness, so that those who have eyes may see. Even so, has the doctrine been explained in various ways by the Exalted One.
"I take refuge, Lord, in the Buddha , the Dhamma , and the Sangha . May the Exalted One receive me as a lay follower; as one who has taken refuge from this very day to life's end."
Refuge: An Introduction to the Buddha, Dhamma & Sangha , by Thanissaro Bhikkhu (1996)
What is the Triple Gem? (Ajaan Lee)
A Chanting Guide: Pali Passages with English Translations (Dhammayut Order in the USA)