Title: Seeing Through Rev 0 3
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Seeing-Through-Rev-0_3.pdf
Word Count: 10405

i 
 
 
 
 
SEEING THROUGH 
- A Guide to Insight Meditation - 
 
 
 
by 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
Published by 
Kaṭukurunde Ñānananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2016

ii 
 
Published strictly for free distribution. 
 
First Impression – 1999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All Rights Reserved 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited.  Permission to reprint 
could be obtained by writing to K.N.S.S.B. Dhamma books & 
sermons are available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
 
ISBN 978-955-1255-23-7 
 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
K.N.S.S.B,  
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  Karandana, Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Phone: 0114870333

iii 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
Dhamma books may be obtained from: 
1.  Mr. Sunil Wijesinghe – 39/10, St. Rita’s Road, Mt. Lavinia.  
2.  Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
3.  Mr. Chandana Wijeratne 
23/79A, 1st  Lane, Dharmapala Place, Thalawathugoda. 
4.  Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
5.  Mr. S.A. Lionel 
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
6.  Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – 15, Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
7.  Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 ‘Saman’, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
8.  Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
 Jayamanne Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
9.  Prof. K.M. Wijeratne, Faculty of Dental Sciences,  
 University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.  
10.  Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
11.  Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
 Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.  
12.  Mrs. Nera Wijesundara 
 Ilukpitiya Ayurvedic Clinic, Ilukpitiya, Gatahatta. 
13.  Mr. D.C.A. Nissanka de Silva – 91A, Woodward Road, Galle. 
 
 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What we See – 
so often blocks our vision – 
if we fail to ‘see through'

v 
 
PREFACE 
(To the First Edition) 
 Insight meditation paves the way to that penetrative 
wisdom which delivers the mind from bondage to Saṁsāra. This 
bondage often baffles the thinker because there is a 'catch' in the 
tools he has to take up to break it. Percepts are subtly elusive and 
concepts are tacitly delusive. So the insight worker has to forge 
his own tools to break this bondage, going the Buddha's Middle 
Way. 
 The present sermon, based on a verse from the 'Section on 
the Wise' in the Dhammapada, might drop some helpful hints for 
the insight meditator climbing the steep path of meditative 
attention – alone, apart, untiring. The original sermon in Sinhala 
was cassetted at the reque st of Venerable Navagamuve 
Sugunasāra Thera during my stay at Meetirigala Nissarana 
Vanaya. It touches upon the progressive stages in Insight 
Meditation an d the last four of the 16 steps  in Ānāpānasati 
meditation, while drawing upon the implications of the  
Dhammapada verse. 
 This sermon has now been published in Sinhala under the 
title 'Vidasun Upades' at the instance of Mr. U. Mapa, the Public 
Trustee, under the auspices of the 'Bhikkhu Kasyapa' Trust' in 
memory of the late Venerable Kassapa Thera of Vajir ārāma, 
Bambalapitiya. 
 Our thanks are due to Mr. & Mrs. S.D.E. Gaminitilake for 
giving technical advice and to Ms. Sumie Horiuchi for her 
assistance in preparing the manuscript for print. 
– Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
Pothgulgala Araṇya 
Pahan Kaṇuwa, Kandegedara, Devalegama  
Sri Lanka  
July 1999

vi 
 
PREFACE 
(To the Second Edition) 
 “Seeing through” carries with it the implication that there 
is a deception to be seen through. The Buddha has comp ared 
consciousness to a magic show. In order to overcome the spell of 
delusion created by the magic show, one has to get an insight into 
its tricks. Consciousness has to be comprehended by wisdom 
which is capable of penetrating through the facade. 
 Wisdom is not an upstart in the scheme of mental training. 
It is already pres ent incipiently in ‘ manasikāra' or attention —a 
leading memb er of the ‘name' group in ‘name –and–form' 
(nāmarūpa). But  in complicity with the other members of the 
‘name – group’ (i.e., feeling, perception, intention and contact), it 
keeps the whole show going in its misguided service to the 
magician. In that capacity, it is nick – named ‘ ayoniso – 
manasikāra' or ‘non-radical attention'. It only helps to conceal the 
magician’s tricks and perpetuate ignorance and delusion. 
 It required the genius of a Buddh a to win over this 
powerful agent of the magician and persuade him to expose the 
tricks. It assume d its new role under the title ‘ yoniso – 
manasikāra’ (‘radical-attention’.)  
 Instead of cleverly manipulating the dark veil of 
ignorance, now it took upon it self the honest task of exposing the 
tricks. It thus became the main ally of the insight meditator in his 
attempt to break through into Wisdom and Release. 
 Until the Buddha discovered this Middle Way, all 
attempts at a breakthrough met with failure due to  the intricate 
mutual relationship between consciousness and ‘name – and – 
form’. Some pitted the body against the mind (self – indulgence) 
while others pitted the mind against the body (self –

vii 
 
mortification). Yet others, like Descartes, went on doubting 
everything until they returned to the false premis e with which 
they started off. ‘I think: therefore I-am’. 
The insight meditator has to avoid all these extremes. 
With patience and perseverance he has to  nurture the spark of 
radical-attention until it grows into the light of wisdom. 
 *    *    * 
We are thankful to Mr. S. D. E. Gaminitillake for giving 
technical advice in getting up this Second Edition. 
–Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
Pothgulgala Aranya  
Pahan Kanuwa  
Kandegedara  
Devalegama  
SriLanka  
January 2001

viii 
 
About the K.N.S.S.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be 
offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -
thirsty world.  
 Accordingly, K.N.S.S.B. has taken upo n itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net and the social networking si te 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough. Those wishing to participate 
in this multifaceted Dhammadāna may note the account number 
of our Trust given below.  
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya (K.N.S.S.B) 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  
Karandana 
Sri Lanka. 
 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Acc. No. 007060000241, 
Sampath Bank, SWIFT: BSAMLKLX 
Branch Code: 070 
Branch: R.G. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo – 07,  
Sri Lanka.

1 
 
Seeing Through 
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Yesaṁ sambodhi aṅgesu – sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ 
Ādāna paṭinissagge – anupādāya ye ratā 
Khīṇāsavā jutimantā – te loke parinibbutā’  
This is the last verse of  the 'Section on the Wise' 
(Paṇḍitavagga) in the Dhammapada. According to the 
Dhammapada commentary, this verse, as well as the two 
preceding ones, were preached by the Buddha at Sāvatthi to five 
hundred visiting monks so that they may attain to the Fruits of the 
Path ( maggaphala) by understanding them. An examination of 
the key -words of this  verse, would reveal some very important 
facts for our subjects of meditation. 
 The meaning of this verse, simply stated, would  be 
something like this: ‘ Yesaṁ, sambodhi aṅgesu – sammā cittaṁ 
subhāvitaṁ’ – Whose mind is well developed in the Factors of 
Enlightenment, and moreover – 
 ‘Ādāna paṭinissagge – anupādāya ye ratā ’ – who delight 
in taking up and giving up without grasping. 
 The word -order would be: ‘anupādāya ādāna 
paṭinissagge ratā  – not grasping they del ight in taking up and 
giving up’, ‘anupādāya’ means ‘not grasping’. 
‘Khīṇāsavā jutīmantā – te loke parinibbutā ’ – those 
radiant cankerless (or influx-free) ones are extinguished or grown 
cool in this very world, here and now. 
This is the genera l meaning of the verse. ‘ Yesaṁ 
sambodhi aṅgesu – sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ ’. At the very 
outset, it is mentio ned that  one's mind has reached a certain 
developed stage in meditative attention. That is to say, his mind

2 
 
has developed in the Factors of Enlightenment. The seven Factors 
of Enlightenment are mentioned among the 37 Requisites of 
Enlightenment as a certain developed stage in Satipaṭṭhāna 
meditation. Firstly, the four Foundations of Mindfulness (i.e., the 
four satipaṭṭhāna) and then the four Right Endeavours 
(sammappadhāna), and then the four Paths to Success 
(iddhipāda), and then the five Faculties ( pañcaindriya) and the 
five Powers (pañcabala). 
When these are systematically developed, the Factors of 
Enlightenment are also thereby developed in the meditator. Even 
in the classification of the Requisites of Enlightenment, the 
Buddha follows a certain order. There is a certain procedure in 
enumerating these Requisites of Enlightenment. It does not mean 
that one has to develop the first category first and then after a 
time the next category and so on. But still there is a certain order 
in the development – an ascending order, one may say. 
One's mind is well developed in the Factors of 
Enlightenment when one reaches a stage at which those factors 
are lined up in a direct order. There is a certain lining up in  one's 
mind. These factors are ‘ sati’ (mindfulness), dhamma-vicaya 
(investigation of mind -objects), viriya (energy), pīti (joy), 
passaddhi (calm or tranquillity), samādhi (concentration), and 
upekkhā (equanimity). These are the seven Factors of 
Enlightenment. 
Out of these seven, the first is sati – mindfulness. In 
enumerating these seven also, we see a certain order, a system. It 
is when mindfulness is purified that one comes to see the mind -
objects clearly, which is called ‘ dhammavicaya’ or investigation 
of mind -objects. That is to say, one sees to a certain extent, the 
mind-objects as they are. Then the mind is awake. 
The mind awakens when one sees mind -objects clearly. 
Thereby one is able to recognize the good and bad, the skilful and

3 
 
the unskilful so that one can do what is necessary with those 
mental states. That is to say, the skilful ones have to be developed 
and the unskilful ones have to be abandoned. The knowledge of 
the means of do ing this, is available through ‘ dhammavicaya’ or 
the investigation of mind -objects and that as we stated earlier, is 
made available through mindfulness. With the understanding 
acquired through ‘ dhammavicaya’ one puts forth energy  – right 
endeavour – to develop the skilful and to abandon the unskilful 
states. This, therefore, is the third Factor of Enlightenment – the 
application of energy or ‘ viriya’. Thus, we have sati, dhammavicaya and viriya. 
As one puts forth energy, ther e arises joy, for, it is said: 
‘āraddhaviriyassa uppajjati pīti nirāmisā ’1 – To one who has 
started up effort or energy, there arises a kind of spiritual joy 
which has nothing to do with the material. Thus one attains a 
certain amount of joy out of the very fact that one puts forth the 
right endeavour. The meditator, well knowing that this joy is not 
the end of his endeavour, subdues it and attains to a  calm o r 
tranquillity which is called ‘passaddhi’. 
Through that calm or tranquillity, which is both physical 
and mental, he attains to a certain state of bliss which brings in its 
train, concentration. Once concentration is attained, there is 
nothing more to struggle for, and so the meditator makes use of 
equanimity to stabilize his gains. The purpose of equanimity is to 
preserve the concentration one has attained. Also, this 
equanimity, as the culmination of the development of these 
Factors of Enlightenment, i.e., as the last of the seven factors, is 
nearer wisdom. The word ‘ sambojjhaṅga’ means ‘factor of 
enlightenment’ ( sambodhi + aṅga) and when the word 
‘sambodhi’ is taken into consideration, it gives the idea of 
understanding or knowledge. It does not mean Buddhahood 
alone, but even arahanthood. So the lining up of these Factors of 
                                                             
1. Sila Sutta, Bojjhaṁga Sarimyutta, S.N.V.68 (P.T.S)

4 
 
Enlightenment is for the purpose of understanding or knowledge. 
The factor that is nearest to understanding is equanimity. It is 
when one has reached an equanimous state of mind that one can 
see things as they are. And in order to see things as they are, one 
has to have concentration or one-pointedness. That also is already 
mentioned, i. e., ‘ samādhi’. It is for the attainment of this 
concentration that the preceding factors beginning with 
mindfulness are made use of. 
When analysed thus, we see that there is a certain system 
– an order – in the enumeration of these Factors of 
Enlightenment. There is also another way of analysing them. That 
is to say, at the very start, one finds it difficult to develop these 
Factors of Enlightenment as in the case of the five faculties, 
namely, ‘saddhā’, ‘viriya’, ‘sati’, ‘samādhi’ and ‘ paññā’ – faith, 
energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. When analysing 
these five faculties also, one sees a certain order. There is a 
certain balancing necessary in their development. One has to 
balance faith with wisdom and energy with concentration. In that 
context, mindfulness stands in the middle and fulfills the purpose. 
Its function is to balance the two sets – faith and wisdom, energy 
and concentration. Now in this context, mindfulness comes to the 
forefront. It is the leader. Even as the leader, mindfulness ful fills 
a very important function. That, again, is the question of 
balancing. It marshals the other factors into a perfect line -up. Just 
as in the case of the faculties mindfulness stands in the middle 
and orders the other faculties, here too it comes to the  forefront 
and marshals those factors that are behind it. The three factors, 
dhammavicaya, viriya and pīti have a tendency to lean towards 
restlessness. They are on the side of restlessness. When they 
happen to lean too much to that side, mindfulness order s them to 
straighten up. Then there are three others which have a tendency 
to lean towards laziness, inertia or inactivity. Those three  factors 
are passaddhi, samādhi, upekkhā – tranquillity, concentration and

5 
 
equanimity. When they are leaning too much to that side, then 
also mindfulness orders them to straighten up. 
Thus among the Factors of Enlightenment also, 
mindfulness fulfills the function proper to it. It is when all these 
are fully lined-up with this type of training, that one can say one's 
mind has  attained a developed stage in the Enlightenment 
Factors. 
At this developed stage of the Factors of Enlightenment in 
perfect line -up, when one looks at mindfulness one can directly 
see equanimity. The other factors are not so prominent because 
they have already fulfilled their respective functions. Now, at  this 
stage, when one applies mindfulness, equanimity is present there 
immediately. One can see that together with mindfulness there is 
also that one -pointedness characteristic of concentration. And in 
that one -pointed state there is also equanimity present. So  there 
are these two factors – ‘upekkhā’ and ‘ ekaggatā’. When one 
directs these two factors, one can understand the nature of things. 
Directing these two factors is what is called meditative 
attention, mental -noting or noticing (‘manasikāra’). Though the 
same term ‘mental -noting’ or ‘ manasikāra’ is use d throughout 
the instructions on  insight meditation, there is a need to redefine 
the term as one progresses in one's meditation. At the outset this 
mental noting is rather gross. One has to start from where one  
stands. So, the usual instructions in Insight Meditation would 
imply a mode of attending that goes slightly deeper than the way 
of attending in the world. As implied by the basic i nstruction on 
sense-restraint, ‘ na nimittaggāh ī nānubyañjanaggāhī ’, one does 
not grasp at a sign or its details in what is seen, heard and so 
forth. Instead, one summarily dismisses the visual obje ct after 
mentally noting it as ‘form’, ‘form’ . Also, in the case of sound, 
one just notes it as ‘sound’ , ‘sound’, without going into details. 
This is the mode of mentalnoting recommended at the very 
outset.

6 
 
But in this mode of mental noting there are certain gross 
elements. One becomes aware of these as one progresses in 
insight meditation. One becomes aware that in  this type of 
mental-noting as ‘form’, ‘form’ or ‘sound’, ‘sound’ , one 
presupposes an object. That is to say, these things get object -
status by the very fact of mental -attention. Of course, in order to 
attend there has to be an object. But as one goes deeper in insight 
meditation, one realizes that an object by definition is what one 
grasps (ārammaṇa) – what one hangs on to (ālambana). 
Wherever there is grasping, there is ignorance present. 
Grasping is something that leads to the perpetuation of ignorance. 
But as the phrase   ‘anupubba  sikkhā,  anupubba  kiriyā, 
anupubba  paṭipadā’2 implies, there is a gradual training, a 
gradual mode of action, a gradual path in this meditative attention 
as well. So it is by stages that one arrives at this realization. At 
the preliminary stage, one avoids the usual mode of attention in 
the world such as ‘woman’, ‘woman’, ‘man’, ‘man’ in the case of 
a visual object, thus dispensing with those details which lead to 
various unskilful states of mind and attends to those visual 
objects in such a way as not to encourage those unskilful mental 
states. So one is content with attending to those visual or auditory 
objects as ‘form’ or ‘sound’. 
However, as one proceeds in Insight Meditation, one 
comes to reflect that in this mode of attention, there is present a 
certain illusion – a wrong notion one has been cherishing 
throughout ‘ saṁsāra’. That is, the concept of two ends and a 
middle. Whe n one notes a visual object as ‘a form’ and an 
auditory object as ‘a sound’ , there is a kind of bifurcation 
between the eye and form, the ear and the sound. So thereby one 
is perpetuating the illusion, the wrong notion, of two ends. 
Wherever there are the two ends, there is also the middle. In 
short, this way of mental  noting leaves room for a subject -object 
                                                             
2. Gaṇakamoggallāna Sutta, M.N. lll. I

7 
 
relationship. There is the meditator on one side, whoever it may 
be, and there is the object that comes to his mind; and he attends 
to it as an object, even though he may not go into its details. Now 
the meditator has to break through this barrier as well. He has to 
break this bondage. Why? 
In the case of  ‘saññā’ or percep tion, there are the six 
kinds of percepts – rūpa saññā, sadda-saññā, gandhasaññā, rasa 
saññā, phoṭṭhabba saññā , dhamma saññā  (i.e., the percepts of 
form, sound, smell, taste, touch and idea). These are the six 
objects of the senses. The Buddha has compared the aggregate of 
perception to a mirage. Now, if p erception is a mirage, what is 
‘rūpa-saññā’ or a visual percept? That als o must be a mirage. 
What about ‘ sadda saññā’? What about the auditory percept or 
what strikes the ear? That too must be a mirage. Though it is not 
something that one sees with the eye, it has the nature of a  
mirage. 
To take as real what is of a mirage -nature, is a delusion. It 
is something that leads to a delusion. It is an illusion that leads to 
a delusion. In order to understand deeply this mirage -nature in 
sensory perception, there is a need for a more refined way of 
mental attending. So the meditator, i nstead of attending to  these 
objects as ‘form’, ‘form’ or ‘sound’, ‘sound’ , moves a step 
further and notes them as ‘seeing’ or ‘hearing’. Now he attends to 
these sense-percepts even more briefly, not al lowing the mind to 
go far – as ‘seeing -seeing’, ‘hearing -hearing’, ‘ feeling-feeling’, 
‘thinking-thinking’. 
In short, the attempt  here, is to escape the net of ‘ saññā’ 
or perception and to limit oneself to the bare awareness. To stop 
short just at the awareness. This is an attempt to  escape the net of 
language, the net of logic and also to be free from the duality of 
the two ends which involves a middle. Everywhere one is 
confronted with a subject -object relationship. There is one who

8 
 
grasps and something to be grasped. There is a see r and an object 
seen. But this way of attending leaves room for delusion. 
 Now, if perception is a mirage, in order to get at this 
mirage nature, one has to be co ntent with attending simply as 
‘seeing, seeing’. One way or the other it is just a seeing or j ust a 
hearing. Thereby he stops short at the bare awareness. He stops 
short at the bare seeing, bare hearing, bare feeling and bare 
thinking. He does not grant it an object status. He does not 
cognize it as an object existing in the world. He does not give  it a 
name. The purpose of this method of mental noting or attending, 
is the eradication of the conceit ‘AM’, which the meditator has to 
accomplish so as to attain release. The conceit ‘AM’ is ‘ asmimāna’. 
This existence or ‘ bhava’ is actually a way of measuring. 
Existence involves measuring. In order to measure, one has to 
have two pegs and this subject -object relationship fulfills this 
requirement. There is one who grasps and an object grasped. It i s 
after driving these two pegs ‘ down-to-earth’, so to say, that one 
starts measuring what is called ‘ existence’ or ‘ bhava’. So, it is 
between these two pegs that ‘existence’ exists. 
In order to eradicate or uproot these pegs, one has to do 
away with this duality or the dichotomy as well as the middle. As 
already mentioned, wherever there are two ends, there is a 
middle. The attempt now is to eliminate all these. The meditator 
who is poised to accomplish this task, is the one referred to in the 
first two lines of the verse in question. 
‘Yesaṁ sambodhi aṅgesu 
sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ’ 
‘whose mind is well developed i n the Factors of 
Enlightenment’ The next two lines have a deeper significance.

9 
 
‘ādānapaṭinissagge 
anupādāya ye ratā’ 
‘who take delight in taking up an d giving up, without 
grasping’ ‘ ādāna’ means 'taking up' and ‘ paṭinissagga’ means 
giving-up or relinquishing. So ‘ādāna’ and ‘paṭinissagga’ make a 
couple – ‘taking up and giving up ’. But then we have 
‘anupādāya’ also – ‘not grasping’. 
‘Ye an upādāya ādāna pasinissagge ratā ’ is the word -
order. They, who without grasping, delight in taking up and 
giving up. 
Here we have something suggestive of what we said 
above about the two -ends and the middle. The representatives of 
the two ends would be ‘ ādāna’ and ‘ paṭinissagga’ – ‘taking up’ 
and ‘giving up’ . Between these two we have a holding on or a 
grasping. The word  for holding on or grasping is ‘ upādāna’ and 
‘upādāya’ is its absolutive form. Of cours e we do not have here 
the word ‘ upādāya’. Here we have ‘ anupādāya’, the negative – 
not grasping'. Any  way, here are the  two-ends and the middle - 
only the middle is negated here. The usual order, however, is  
ādāna – upādāna – paṭinissagga, taking up – holding on and 
giving up. What comes in the middle is upādāna. 
This is the middle – the holding on or grasping. Now in 
this context, the most important term seems  to be ‘ anupādāya’. 
The most significant term is ‘not -grasping’. It is because of this 
‘not-grasping’ that one takes delight only in the  taking up and the 
giving up – ‘ādānapaṭinissagga’. 
In the case of Insight Meditation, there is a possibility of 
delighting only in taking up and giving up, when there is no 
grasping in the middle, Where there is no ‘ upādāna’ or grasping, 
there is only ‘ ādāna’ and ‘ paṭinissagga’. One may note th e 
special significance of the prefix ‘upa’ in this particular context.

10 
 
Let us try to understand this with the help of an 
illustration. Suppose we go to a well. We go to a well for a drink 
or for a wash or to bring some water. What do we do there? 
First, we draw water. Then keeping the bucket near us, we 
either drink from it or have a wash or may be we pour the water 
into some vessel to bring it along with us. After all that, if there is 
still some water left, we throw it away. This is what we do with 
the water we draw from the well. 
That is, when we want to make use of the water. So the 
procedure here is: ‘ ādāna’ – we draw water – ‘upādāna’ – we 
keep the bucket of water beside us, or hold on to it – and then we 
throw away whatever is left over – ‘paṭinissagga’. This is what  
we normally do when we are making use of the water we draw 
from a well. 
Supposing we want to empty out the well. We want the 
well emptied. What do we do then? We lower the bucket into the 
well, draw water and throw it away. We draw water and throw it 
away. There is only a taking up and a giving up. We do it very 
speedily. There is no holding on. We need not meddle with the 
bucket so much. We are not thinking of making any special use 
of the water. Instead, we are now keen on seeing the well empty. 
Our purpose is to see the well empty – to see the emptiness of the 
well. 
‘Siñca bhikkhu imaṁ nāvaṁ – sittā te lahumessati’  
‘Empty this boat, O monk! Emptied, it will go lightly with 
you’ 
This is an advice given by the Buddha in the section on 
the Monk (Bhikkhu-vagga) in the Dhammapada. In keeping with 
this advice, here too the meditator has to do some emptying. It is 
this process of emptying t hat is signified by the lines, ‘ ādāna 
paṭinissagge-anupādāya ye ratā’.

11 
 
Now, let us leave aside this illustration and take up 
another that is more relevant to our meditation subject and has 
far-reaching implications – Ānāpānasati. 
Ānāpānasati: ‘ āna’ means breathing in; ‘ apāna’ means 
breathing out. Breathing in and breathing out. This is what we do 
everyday. We breathe in and out. 
Between these two there is something rather 
imperceptible, something that is overlooked. But that is the very 
thing which perpetuates saṁsāra. Why do we breathe in? We 
breathe in to maintain this exi stence. That is to maintain craving 
and ignorance – to perpetuate this saṁsāra. We breathe in to 
preserve this body from destruction a nd death. There is grasping 
or ‘ upādāna’ as an imperceptible gasping for breath. In short 
there is both ‘gasping’ as well as grasping. Beneath it lies craving 
and ignoran ce. There is supposed to be an ‘I’  behind this 
breathing – a breather. 
Breath is the most elementary requirement of all beings 
who are breathers. There is not simply a breathing in. There is a 
holding on to the breath or a grasping. The effort, here, is to hold 
on to the breath and to make use of it to do other work. Take, for 
instance, the case of a person who is going to lift a weight. Why 
does he draw in a deep breath before lifting the weight? It is to 
infuse new life into his b ody. Breathing in means infusing  new 
life into the body. 
It is after holding on to the breath that one sets about 
doing the work one has to do. Within thi s very grasping lies the 
ego – ‘my ability’, ‘my strength’, ‘I can do’  and all that sort of 
thing. 
So, one takes in a breath and holds on to it, but he has to 
let go of it as well. This letting go happens out of sheer necessity 
– per force. To let go o f the breath that way, we call ‘breathing

12 
 
out’. We breathe -in with some special pu rpose in mind – to 
preserve our life. If it is possible to hold on to the breath for ever, 
for this purpose, so much the better, but we can't. Since  we 
cannot do it, we have to let go of the breath after a while, whether 
we like it or not. 
So then here  too we seem to have a case of ‘ ādāna’ and 
‘paṭinissaga’ – a taking up and a letting-go, at least on the face of 
it. There is a stage in ‘ānāpānasati’ at which this insight emerges. 
If we analyze the last four of the 16 steps in ānāpānasati 
meditation taught by the Buddha, we can understand to some 
extent the way of emergence of this insight. These last four have 
to do with the contemplation of mind -objects – 
‘dhammānupassanā’. 
They are:  
Aniccānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati 
Aniccānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati 
Virāgānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati  
Virāgānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati 
Nirodhānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati  
Nirodhānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati 
Paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati  
Paṭinissaggānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati 
Contemplating impermanence, I shall breathe in, so he trains 
Contemplating impermanence, I shall breathe out, so he trains 
Contemplating detachment, I shall breathe in, so he trains 
Contemplating detachment, I shall breathe out, so he trains 
Contemplating cessation, I shall breathe in, so he trains 
Contemplating cessation, I shall breathe out, so he trains 
Contemplating relinquishment, I shall breathe in, so he trains 
Contemplating relinquishment , I shall breathe out, so he 
trains.

13 
 
It seems, then that this is a training. What is the purpose 
of this training? The purpose is to get an insight into 
impermanence. Here too one can see some order, a gradual 
procedure. One breathes in seeing impermanence and one 
breathes out also seeing imp ermanence. Thus the meditator 
understands the impermanence of the entire process. For him, this 
breathing is an object lesson in understanding or gaining an 
insight into impermanence. This is a training. This meditator is 
now taking in a breath not for the  purpose of keeping himself 
alive, not for the purpose of continuing in saṁsāra, but just to 
learn a lesson from it, to develop his insight through it. He is 
making use of his meditation subject for the purpose of 
understanding a law of nature – impermanence. He sees 
impermanence in the in-breath as well as in the out-breath. 
What is this impermanence?  Summed up in two words, it 
is ‘udaya’ and ‘vaya’ – arising and passing away. This appears as 
the first bud from which grows the tree of insight in to 
impermanence. To the extent one's understanding of the process 
of arising and passing away deepens, to that extent the law of 
impermanence becomes clear to him. In a meditator who has 
developed the Factors of Enlightenment and other requisites of 
satipaṭṭhāna meditation, by the time he reaches the last four 
stages in the practice of Ānāpānasati, the insight into  
impermanence is already there to a certain extent. He is well 
aware of the process of arising and passing away. 
As this contemplation of impermanence deepens, as he 
sees the incessant process of arising and passing away all the 
more rapidly, the latter aspect, namely the aspect of passing 
away, becomes more prominent to him. Just as in the case of one 
trying to look at a mark in a rapidly turning wheel, the meditator 
becomes more aware of the falling aspect. The rising aspect 
becomes less prominent. It is the process of passing away, the 
process of destruction, that is more striking to him now.

14 
 
This gives rise to detachment and dispassion. One takes in 
a breath with cr aving which is on the side of ‘arising’ – 
‘samudaya’. In breathing -in, one is dwelling on the arising 
aspect, breathing -out is the c essation aspect. These are all 
‘preparations’ – saṅkhāras. Craving is t he regenerator who is 
responsible for all these preparations. These preparations are the 
result of lust, desire or craving. 
Now, when the rapid process of destruction and breaking 
up becomes more prominent, dispassion sets in. One sees this as a 
trouble. O ne is repelled by it, not attracted. The result of this 
dispassion is the weakening  of craving, the regenerator – ‘taṇhā 
ponobhavikā’. As craving thins out, the fact of cessation becomes 
all the more clear, because it is this very craving that has been 
concealing it all the time. 
Why do we say that craving is concealing the fact of 
cessation? Because craving is on the si de of ‘arising.’ As soon as 
a cessation occurs, craving as the regenerator prompts a re -
arising. As the phrase ‘ taṇhā ponobhavikā nandirāgasahagatā 
tatratatrābhinandinī’3 implies, craving as the regenerator is 
always out to make for re-becoming. It is accompanied by delight 
and lust, and it delights now -here-now-there. Because of its very 
nature of taking delight now  here-now there, craving says, ‘Don't 
worry about the breath that is gone, catch hold of another brea th. 
Take hold of another breath’ . It tempts and prompts. But when 
dispassion sets in, this tendency to tempt and prompt becomes 
less and less. It is reduced, with the resul t, that the cessation 
aspect becomes more prominent – and with it, the passing away, 
the breaking-up, the destruction. That way, one comes to see the 
cessation of mind-objects also and that is nirodhānupassanā – the 
contemplation of cessation. 
                                                             
3. Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, S.N. V. 421

15 
 
So here too we see some order and sequence. From the 
contemplation of impermanence to the contemplation of 
detachment and from the contemplation of detachment to the 
contemplation of cessation. Now when one sees this process of 
cessation more clearly, one understands how vain and useless all 
these attempts are. Even the process of breathing now appears to 
him as a set of vain attempts. With a deep awareness of this 
vanity, he now breathes in, simp ly to breathe out, to let go – 
‘paṭinissaggānupassī’. This is the contemp lation of 
relinquishment which is the sixteenth and last step in 
Ānāpānasati meditation. 
The insight developed through Ānāpānasati reaches its 
climax here. The phenomenon of breathing has now become an 
object-lesson in understanding the emptiness and not-self nature 
of existence. ‘ Paṭinissaggānupassī assasissāmī’ – Contemplating 
relinquishment I shall breathe in, even while breathing -in, one is 
contemplating the idea of giving up. One is not going to grasp it 
and make use of it. Similarly, ‘ Paṭinissaggānupassī 
passasissāmī’. Needless to say then, while breathing out too, he is 
contemplating the idea of giving up. So we can now revert to our 
simile of the well. Only, in this context, it is not a case of drawing 
water but a drawing in of breath. 
One draws in a breath just to let go of it. Here is simply a 
drawing in and a letting go. One has no idea of holding on to the 
breath, to do something with it.  One is simply aware of it as a 
certain natural phenomenon. There is no ‘I’  who holds on to the 
breath. Breathing is simply a natural process connected with this 
bodily frame. 
By now, the meditator has passed through the stages of 
insight connected with the seeing of breaking -up, fear and peril. 
With the maturity of these insight knowledges, the medita tor is 
now well poised to let go in order to be free. Breathing, as an 
illustration of the natural law of arising and passing away, has

16 
 
now contributed to a deepening of insight i nto the three 
characteristics, ‘ anicca’’dukkha’ and ‘ anattā’ – impermanence, 
suffering and not-self. 
Out of the two ends and the middle we earlier spoke 
about, the  middle signified by ‘ upādāya’ (grasping), has 
disappeared. So we are left with simply the two ends. It is the 
middle that  justifies the discrimination b etween two ends. Now 
that the significance of the middle is lost, the two ends also lose 
their justification. Now the entire pro cess of breathing is 
understood as a circular process. There is simply a process of 
breathing in an d a breathing out. There is n o ‘one’ that breathes. 
This, in fact, is the realization of the not -self nature. What has 
happened is that a  disgust or a disenchantment – ‘nibbidā’ – has 
been aroused by the insight knowledges relating to destruction, 
fear and peril ( bhanga, bhaya, ādinava), with the result craving 
has lost its sanction. When craving, the regenerator, g oes out of 
action, there is no ‘upādāna’. There is no grip to grasp. 
So breathing is now understood simply as a bodily 
preparation ( kāyasaṅkhāra), not as an activit y impelled and 
propelled by an ‘I’ . This way, one reaches a depth of insight that 
is helpful in doing away with the ‘ āsavas’ or influxes which are 
the net -result of one's saṁsāric habits. The word ‘ āsava’ 
connotes both fermentation and intoxication. ‘ Āsavas’ are, 
therefore, habits and habitual tendencies which we have stored up 
in the past and which seek now to influence and infiltrate into our 
everyday life. Deeply ingrained in all these saṁsāric habits, is a 
tendency to grasp and hold on. One grasps and hol ds on to 
sensuality, to views, to rites and rituals and to the assertion of a 
self. 
All these are modes of habitual grasping. It is the release 
from this habitual grasping that brings about the extinction of the 
influxes. The three influxes are, ‘ kāmāsavā’, ‘ bhavāsavā’ and 
‘avijjāsavā’, i.e., the influxes relating to sensua lity, existence and

17 
 
ignorance. ‘ Khīṇāsava’ is the term for the arahant who has  
extinguished these influxes. The arahants have reached that state 
by giving up grasping and that is why we sometimes come across 
the phr ase, ‘anupādāya cittassa vimokkho ’ – ‘the mind's release 
by not grasping’. What it means is the freedom of the mind from 
the tendency to grasp. So, when upādāna which is in the middle 
is done away with, the two ends also  lose their significance. But 
all this happens through understanding. That is, the understanding 
of the two ends and the middle. In short, it boils down to the 
understanding that the so-called object is merely a mirage. That is 
to say, what one has so far taken as the object, what one has so 
far conceived as an object, is, in fact, simply a mirage. 
All the delusion in the world is traceable to the il lusion 
that is in perception – ‘saññā’. It is because of ‘saññā’ perception 
that knots and grips occur, so mu ch so that one who is free from  
‘saññā’ is free from knots and grips also. That is why it is said in 
the Māgandiya Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta. 
‘Saññāvirattassa na santi ganthā 
Paññāvimuttassa na santi mohā’ 
‘To one detached from perception there are no knots and 
to one released through wisdom there are no delusions.’ 
So the purpose of this training in insight is that release from 
perception. Until full detachment with regard to perception sets 
in, knotting will go on. A sort of disgust or disenchantment has to 
occur for detachment to set in. With the gradual refinement of the 
mode of mental noting, one is able to eliminate these  knots 
brought about by perception. As mentioned above, one has to 
stop short at the bare awareness of seeing, hearing, feeling a nd so 
forth. Thereby one does not take seriously those two pegs 
between which perception occurs. One avoids thinking in  terms 
of subject and object – ‘There is that form there, and here am I’ ; 
‘There is that sound there, and here am I’ . Avoiding that way of

18 
 
thinking, one understands experience simply as a process of 
seeing and hearing. But there  is something far more subtle which 
leads one towards perception and that is, contact or ‘ phassa’. The 
arising of contact is an extremely subtle  phenomenon. What is 
generally understood as contact is the striking together of two 
things. So, the notion of duality is already implicit there. But this 
of course is the worldly way of understanding the phenomenon of 
contact. That is why the Buddha also sometimes gives the 
illustration of the striking together of two pieces of wood as a 
simile for the phenomenon of contact. To contact or to strike  
together there has to be two. The presence of two  things is 
already presupposed. 
There is, however, an import ant sutta in Majjhima Nikāya 
which gives us a deeper insight into this phenomenon  of contact. 
It is the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta. There we read: 
‘Cakkhuñca pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppaj jati cakkhuviññā ṇaṁ, 
tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso, phassa paccayā vedanā.....’ 
‘Dependent on  eye and forms, there arises eye -
consciousness. The coming together of the three is contact, 
dependent on contact is feeling ....’ and so forth. It is the first few 
words that convey something extremely deep. 
‘Cakkhuñca pa ṭicca r ūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṁ. 
Here we have the two words ‘ paṭicca’ and ‘ uppajjati’ which 
remind us of the term ‘ paṭiccasamuppāda.’ ‘ Paṭicca’ means 
‘dependent on’ or ‘ because of ’, what is implied here is that 
consciousness is not something existing in itself or by itself . It is 
not something abstract. It always arises dependent on something 
or other, because of something or other. ‘ Paṭicca’ conveys the 
idea of relationship or relativity. 
For instance, eye -consciousness is a relationship between 
the eye, the internal base, and forms, the external base. Here,

19 
 
then, we alre ady have an instance of ‘ paṭicca samuppāda’ – the 
Law of Dependent Arising. 
Consciousness has been compared to a conjuror 's trick – 
to a magic -show. One has to get an insight into the back -stage 
workings of this magic -show. There are the six dependently 
arisen consciousnesses with mind -consciousness as the sixth. In 
the phrase quoted above, the emphasi s should be placed on t he 
word ‘ paṭicca.’ "Cakkhuñca paticca rūpe ca uppajjati 
cakkhuviññānaṁ”. Eye consciousness arises dependent on  eye 
and form and not independently. 
Apparently, here again, we are faced with the question of 
two things, but then let us take a peep into the backstage 
workings of  consciousness. What is called ‘consciousness’  is a 
form of discrimination. In fact, consciousness itself is the very 
discrimination between an internal base and an external base – 
eye and forms, ear and sounds and so on. 
But the irony of the situation is this. The very 
discrimination implies the ignoring of the relationship. That is 
why the birth of consciousness is in itself the birth of ignorance. 
Given this ignorance, there is the possibility of counting the three 
factors – eye, forms and eye -consciousness. This, then, is the 
triad – the three that are coming together to bring about contact. 
‘Tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso’. This is the most basic reckoning 
– ‘phassa paññatti ’ which implies the counting as a three. This 
might well appear as an extremely subtle problem for the 
logician. It is because of eye and forms that eye -consciousness 
has arisen. But once eye -consciousness has arisen, there is the 
tendency to forget – to ig nore – the relationship and to make a 
reckoning in which the third factor – the ‘tertium-quid’ – is that 
very discrimination, ‘eye-consciousness’. In other words, there is 
an implicit ignorance of the fact that consciousness is 
dependently-arisen. Once thi s reckoning of the three as eye,

20 
 
forms, and eye -consciousness is taken s eriously, the stage is set 
for ‘contact’ – ‘tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso’: ‘The coming-together of 
the three is contact.’ 
In fact it is not simply a coming -together; it is a going -
together as  well. It is a concurrence. So long as the three go 
together in ignorance, there is contact. There is a pos sibility of a 
situation called ‘ contact’. Earlier, we were talking about two 
things to define ‘contact’. But here we seem to have three things. 
But t here is no contradiction. What is meant is that there is an 
ignorance of the fact that eye -consciousness which forms the 
third is arisen dependent on the other two. 
When eye becomes self conscious, it separates itself from 
forms, and these are the two ends . With these two ends as pegs, a 
measuring goes on which we call percepts, concepts and 
knowledge. But in this so-called knowledge, the duality is already 
implicit. There is a dichotomy betwe en an ‘internal’ and an 
‘external’– between a subject and an object. That is why there is a 
need for a more refined way of mental -noting in order to get rid 
of this delusion. 
Now let us take the case of a mirage. When a deer sees a 
mirage at a distance, it does not know. It is ignorant of the fact 
that it is a mirage. T hirsty as it is, it imagines the mirage to be 
water. Its vision is biased and unclear. It lacks the wisdom to 
understand the nature of the phenomenon which we call 'a 
mirage'. It perceives and conceives water in the mirage. In the 
language of the deer, the mirage would be called ‘water’. 
Just as in th e world people call each other ‘man’ or 
‘woman’, so the deer would call the mirage ‘water’.  If we are to 
take seriously the duality and say: ‘ the form is out there and I am 
here, the sound is out there and I am here’, we will be in a similar 
position. So actually what we have here is just a bit of bare 
experience. That too  comes about by giving recognition to the

21 
 
two ends – the internal base and the external base. By recognizing 
them, by separating them, by disc riminating between them, there 
arises a certain measuring. So the concept of two things striking 
together also follows as a matter of course. Given two things, 
there is a possibility of a con tact between them. And this is 
‘contact’ as the world understands  it. Given this contact, there 
arise dependent on it, feeling,  perception and all the rest of it. It 
goes as far as thinking and logic. 
Now, this is the delusion. This is the ignorance. What, 
then, is the insight that helps one to unravel this state of affairs? It 
is the understanding of the conditioned nature of consciousness – 
that consciousness arises dependent on conditions. Even that 
insight emerges through a refined way of attending. That is, by 
accelerating the mental noting in such a way as not to g et caught 
in the net of perception or saññā. In other words, to stop short at 
bare awareness. It is by such a technique that one can get an 
insight into the back stage workings of consciousness. For 
instance, the insight that the eye -consciousness arises d ependent 
on eye and forms and that the very discrimination between the 
two ends is eye -consciousnsess, which is the middle. This story 
of the two ends and the middle is beautifully presented in the 
Pārāyaṇa Sutta found in the Section of the Sixes in the Aṅguttara 
Nikāya. What forms the nucleus of that sutta is the following 
verse quoted from the Pārāyaṇa Vagga of the Sutta Nipāta: 
‘Yo ubhante viditvāna – majjhe mantā na lippati,  
 Taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti – so'dha sibbanimaccagā’ 
This verse preached by the Buddha in reply to a question 
put by Brahmin Tissa Metteyya, is quoted here for comment. In a 
sort of a ‘seminar’ on the significance of this verse, six monks put 
forward their individual opinions thereby drawing out the deeper 
implications of the verse in question. The meaning of the verse, 
asit stands, would be something like this:

22 
 
 ‘Yo ubhante viditvāna’ – He who having understood both 
ends,  
‘Majjhe mantā na lippati ’ – Does not get attached to the 
middle through wisdom.  
‘Taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti’ – Him I call a great man  
‘So idha sibbaniṁ accagā’ – It is he who has bypassed or 
escaped the seamstress in this world. 
‘Sibbanī’ or ‘seamstress’  is a term for craving. The 
function of craving is conceived here as a process of stitching or 
weaving. The underlying idea is the accumulation of knots. It is 
craving that is responsible for the knotty nature of this existence . 
The two ends and the middle re ferred to in this verse are just the 
things necessary for making a knot. The significance of the two 
ends and the middle has been variously interpreted in this sutta. 
According to one interpretation that came up at this sympos ium, 
the one -end means the six internal bases and the second end 
means the six external bases and the middle is consciousness. 
By consciousness is meant the six kinds of sense -
consciousness. So according to this interpretation too, we find 
that consciousne ss becomes the middle as a result of reckoning 
the sense and its object as two ends. It is as if two pegs have been 
driven as eye and forms for the measuring that is implicit in 
sense-perception. 
The arising of this basic discrimination is called th e 
arising of the sense -bases – ‘āyatanuppāda’. And the insight into 
this basic discrimination is called the seeing of the arising of 
sense-bases. In the Soṇa Sutta, among the Sixes of the Aṅguttara 
Nikāya, we find the following significant verse: 
‘Taṇhakkhayādhimuttassa  
Asammohañca cetaso  
Disvā āyatanuppādaṁ  
Sammā cittaṁ vimuccati’

23 
 
‘In one who is intent upon the destruction of craving and 
the non -delusion of the mind, on seeing the arising of sense -
bases, the mind is well released’. 
One may well infer from this verse that it is by the not -
seeing of the arising of the bases that one remains bound – that 
the mind remains bound to saṁsāra. As we mentioned above, so 
long as there is no proper understanding of the two -ends, a 
middle creeps in. So long as one grasps eye and forms as the two 
ends, eye-consciousness comes in. That is because what is called 
eye-consciousness is the very discrimination of eye and form as 
two things. Now, in the case o f the mirage, the deer thinks: ‘ I am 
here, the water is out there ’. It is with this presumption that the 
deer runs towards the mirage. But from the very outset, this 
discrimination, this consciousness of water, is wrong. Therefore 
the deer keeps on running after the mirage. It is a vain pursuit. 
The more it approaches the more its object recedes. This is the 
nature of a mirage. But what impels the deer in its pursuit is its 
eye-consciousness. This consciousness acts like  two pegs. So the 
deer thinks: “here is my eye and there is that water. If only I can 
go there, I can see that real water and drink it”. 
Similarly, when we grasp eye and forms as the two ends, 
we have driven the two pegs down to the earth, as it were. We 
have taken eye and forms as real. That very discrimination is eye -
consciousness. 
The best revelation of this state of affairs comes when one 
has accelerated one's speed of mental -noting to such an extent 
that when a thought comes to one's  mind, one  summarily 
dismisses it as a mere thinking without being carried away by it. 
Thereby one does not allow that thought to crystallize itself as an 
object. Normally, an object is something that one clings to or 
hangs on to. The mind which has been in the habit of clinging 
throughout saṁsāra, always seeks to hang on to something or the 
other, however frail it may be. That is because of the craving for

24 
 
existence. Just as a man falling down a precipice would hang on 
even to the frail straw for fear of the fall, the e ver-new 
regenerator, craving – ‘taṇhā ponobhavikā ’ – prompts one to 
hang on to this that or the other. But the crux of the problem lies 
where the mind meets its object. 
Mind has the habit of hanging on to its object. Even when 
the five external senses do not grasp their respective objects, 
mind would grasp the thought as its object. O ne tends to think: 
“Here am I, the thinker, and this is my mind -object”. So long as 
this bifurcation, this duality, is there, there will also be a place for 
mind-consciousness. In the magic -show of consciousness, mind -
consciousness is the subtlest trick of all. Now in the verse quoted 
above, it is said that the mind is well released on seeing the 
arising of bases. How does this come about? When the meditator 
attends to the objects of the six senses rapidly and in  a more 
refined w ay, without clinging to them, summarily dismissing 
them, in the course of his meditative attention – all of a sudden – 
he discovers the mind -object as soon as it strikes the mind. The 
relativity involved in the process of sense -contact is thereby 
understood and the delusion regarding the magic -show of 
consciousness is dispelled. Strange as it may appear, this very 
insight into the dependent arising of sense bases has di smantled 
those very sense-bases as-it were.  
Of course, the process of cessation  was going on all the 
time. But due to the regene rator  – craving – which had a 
partiality for the arising aspect, the fact of cessation was not seen. 
As it is said in Dvayatānupassanā Sutta of the Sutta Nipāta: 
‘Ye ca rūpūpagā sattā  
Ye ca arūpaṭṭhāyino  
Nirodhaṁ appajānantā   
Āgantāro punabbhavaṁ’

25 
 
‘Those beings who approach realms of form and those 
that are in formless realms, not understanding well the fact of 
cessation, come again and again to existence’. 
What is meant is that impelled by craving, beings are 
always keen on ever -new arisings to the neglect of the fact of 
cessation. As soon as a thi ng breaks up, craving prompts: “ Don't 
worry about this thing that is lost. Take hold of that thing out 
there”. This renewing process goes on so rapidly in the mind, that 
the process of mental-noting is something like a battle with Māra. 
One has to speed up the process of mental -noting in such a way 
as to eliminate the possibilities of  attachment and clinging. In 
fact, it would be at a totally unexpected moment that the releasing 
insight breaks forth. But once that insight dawns, one understands 
for the first time the delusion one has been in, all this time. 
Consciousness arises depend ent on conditions. There is no ‘I’  in 
it. This way, one sees the law of Paṭiccasamuppāda with the help 
of the six sense -bases. This is t he significance of the phrase: 
‘Cakkhuñca paṭicca r ūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññā ṇaṁ’ quoted 
above. 
Eye-consciousness arises dependent on eye and forms. 
And likewise, mind -consciousness arises dependent on mind and 
mind-objects. So long as this fact is not seen, there is a tendency 
to imagine th ree things in this situation – ‘tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati 
phasso’, ‘ the concurrence of the three is contact ’. This 
concurrence or the going -together is actually a going -together of 
the delusion of the three. So this insight may be called the 
understanding of contact or the understanding of consciousness or 
the understanding of perception. 
In short, it is the understanding of Paṭiccasamuppāda – 
the Dependent Arising. Though it is the illusion of the mirage that 
tempts the deer, what prompts its vain pursuit is a delusion. It is 
when one understands this delusion concerning the sense -bases 
that one attains to the influx -free position of the Arahant – the

26 
 
extinction of influxes. The tendency to grasp and cling which 
leads to grips and knots wears off. That is why it was said:  
‘Saññāvirattssa na santi ganthā ’ – ‘to one detached from sense -
perception there are no knots’. This is the release from ‘Saññā’ or 
perception. It was also said: ‘ paññāvimuttassa na santi mohā’ – 
‘to one released through wisdom, there are no delusions ’. It is in 
the light of wisdom that one discovers the secret of 
consciousness. 
‘Viññāṇaṁ pariññeyyaṁ, paññā bhāvetabbā’ 4  
‘consciousness is to be comprehended and wisdom is to 
be developed’. 
 It is by the development of wisdom that one comes to 
understand the true state of affairs with regard to consciousness. 
It is something like taking a peep into the backstage workings of 
a magic -show. Wi sdom is something penetrative (‘ nibbedhikā 
paññā’). In fact, the culmination of all endeavours is the 
development of wi sdom. Wisdom is the crest -gem. ‘ Paññā 
narānaṁ ratanaṁ’ – ‘Wisdom is the jewel of mankind ’.5  It is 
only through wisdom that one can understand the delusion 
involved in consciousness. In the last analysis, the murk of 
delusion, the darkness of ignorance, is dispelled only  by the 
radiance of wisdom. 
 The Buddha has declared that there are four radiances in 
the world – the radiance of the moon, the radiance of the sun, the 
radiance of fire and l astly the radiance of wisdom – 
‘paññappabhā’. 6 He proclaimed that out of these four, the last, 
the radiance of wisdom is the highest. It is the highest because the 
darkness of ignorance is dispelled only by it. The influx -free 
arahant’s mind is radiant with that ra diance of wisdom. So it is 
                                                             
4. Mahāvedalla Sutta, M.N. I 293(P.T.S) 
5. Ajarasa Sutta, S.N. I 36 (P.T.S) 
6. Ābhā Sutta, A.N. Il 139f'(P.T.S)

27 
 
said ‘khīṇāsavā jutimantā’. The fermenting influxes which  make 
for intoxication are destroyed and with the insight into the nature 
of consciousness through wisdom, his mind is radiant. Now, all 
this shows that to see ‘Paṭiccasamuppāda’ is to be free from it. In 
this Law of Dependent Arising, there are two aspects – arising 
(samudaya) and cessation ( nirodha). Out of these two aspects, if 
one has seen the  arising aspect, then and there, one has already 
got an insight into the fact of cessation. One understands that 
whatever is of a nature to arise is also of  a nature to ceas e. ‘Yaṁ 
kiñci samudayadhammaṁ, sabbantaṁ nirodhadhammaṁ’. 
What prevents th is insight is that grasping or ‘ upādāna’. 
Generally in the world, very few are keen on emptying the well. 
The majority simply draw water to make use of it. But there is no 
end to this making use of the water. Only when one decides upon 
emptying the well, will one be drawing water just to throw it 
away without grasping. This is the position of those who are keen 
on seeing the emptiness of the world, and it is they that are fully 
appeased in the world.  The word ‘ parinibbutā’ in this context 
does not mean that the arahants have passed away. They live in 
the world fully appeased, having extinguished the fires of lust, 
hate and delusion.  
The word ‘ upādāna’ has two senses – ‘grasping’ as well 
as ‘ fuel that ca tches fire’ . In fact, the totality of existence is a 
raging fire kept up by the fuel of ‘ upādāna’, ‘ Bhavanirodho 
nibbānaṁ’. The realization of the cessation of existence is at the 
same time, the extinction of that raging fire which brings an 
appeasement. Therefore the Arahants are those that dwell fully 
appeased in the world, ha ving extinguished those fires.

28 
 
‘Yesaṁ sambodhi aṅ gesu – sammā cittaṁ subhāvitaṁ  
Ādānapaṭinissagge – anupādāya ye ratā  
Khīṇāsavā jutīmantā – te loke parinibbutā’

29 
 
By The Same Author 
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought   
2. Saṁyutta Nikaya – An Anthology  
3. Ideal Solitude  
4. The Magic of the Mind  
5. Towards Calm and Insight   
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume I  
7. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume II  
8. Seeing Through  
9. Towards A Better World  
10. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume I  
11. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume II  
12. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume III  
13. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume IV  
14. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume V  
15. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VI  
16. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VII 
17. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Library Edition  
18. Nibbāna and The Fire Simile  
19. A Majestic Tree of Merit  
20. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective  
21. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume I  
22. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume II  
23. Walk to Nibbāna   
24. Deliverance of the Heart through Universal Love 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla, Karandana 
Phone: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net

30 
 
කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
1. උත්තරීතර හුදකලාව  
2. පින් රුකකක මහිම       
3. විදසුන් උපකදස්  
4. නිවකන් නිවීම –  පළුමු කවළම   
5. නිවකන් නිවීම – කදවන කවළම  
6. නිවකන් නිවීම –  කතවන කවළම   
7. නිවකන් නිවීම –  සිවුවන කවළම   
8. නිවකන් නිවීම –  පස්වන කවළම   
9. නිවකන් නිවීම –  සළුවන කවළම   
10. නිවකන් නිවීම –  සත්වන කවළම   
11. නිවකන් නිවීම –  මළුවන කවළම   
12. නිවකන් නිවීම –  නවවන කවළම   
13. නිවකන් නිවීම –  දසවන කවළම   
14. නිවකන් නිවීම –  මකකාකළුාස්වන කවළම   
15. නිවකන් නිවීම – පුස්තකාල මුද්‍රණයළු  පරථමම ාායළු 1 -6 වෙළුම්)   
16. නිවකන් නිවීම – පුස්තකාල මුද්‍රණයළු  1 -   වෙළුම්) 
17. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා –   කවළම   
18. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 2 කවළම  
19. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 3 කවළම  
20. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 4 කවළම  
21. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 5 කවළම  
22. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 6 කවළම  
23. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 7 කවළම  
24. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 8 කවළම  
25. පහන් කණයුව ධමම කද්නනා – 9 කවළම  
26. හිතක මහිම –    
27. හිතක මහිම – 2  
28. හිතක මහිම – 3  
29. හිත තුනීම  
30. පුවුත්ම හා නුවුත්ම  
31. ඇති හුටි දැක්ම  
32. දිවි කතකේ සුඳෑ මඳූර  
33. කළු මනුව යිළු සිහිළු  
34. මා-පිළු උවුළුන

31 
 
35. පරතිපත්ති පජාාව  
36. චලන චිතරළු  
37. දිළු සුළුිළු  
38. මබිනික්මන  
39. බුදු සමළු පුද්යලළුා හා සමාාළු  
40. මනකස් මාළුාව  
41. ාාවනා මායගළු   
42. සසුන් පිළුිකවත  
43. පිළුිකවතින් පිළුිකවතළු  
44. තිසරණය මහිම  
45. කකළු් කතාව  
46. කමත් සිකත් විමුක්තිළු  
47. පටිච්ච සමුප්පාද ධමමළු – 1 කවළම  
48. පටිච්ච සමුප්පාද ධමමළු – 2 කවළම  
49. පටිච්ච සමුප්පාද ධමමළු – 3 කවළම  
50. පටිච්ච සමුප්පාද ධමමළු – 4 කවළම  
51. සක්මකන් නිවන  
52. තකපෝ යුණය මහිම  
53. කමම චකරකළුන් ධමම චකරළුළු  
54. පුරණි කබෞද්ධ චින්තාකේ සංකල්පළු සහ ළුථමාථමමළු 
 
නුවත මුද්‍රණයළු කරවීම පිළුිබඳ විමසීම් 
කළුුකුරුන්කද් ඤාණයනන්‍ද සදහම් කසනසුන  
කිරිල්ලෙලෙත්ත, දම්මුල්ල, කරඳන  
 
දුරකථමනළු: 0777127454  
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net