Title: From Topsy-turvydom 36kaf
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/from_topsy_turvydom_to_wisdom.pdf
Word Count: 10028

ii
Long is the night to the wakeful
Long is the league to him who is weary
Long is sansara to the foolish
Who know not the truth sublime.
- Dhammapada. v. 60
From
Topsy-turvydom
to
Wisdom
(V olume 1)
An anthology of writings by
Bhikkhu K .      anananda.
Published by:
Dharma Grantha Mudrana Bh~~~~~raya
Sri Lanka

YYYYYN
ISBN 955-1255-00-3

iii iv
Dhamma is priceless !Dhamma is priceless !Dhamma is priceless !Dhamma is priceless !Dhamma is priceless !
Strictly for free distribution
Published strictly for free distribution
All Rights Reserved
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for sale,
profit or material gain is prohibited. However, permission to print for
free distribution as a gift of Dhamma is hereby granted and no
further permission need be obtained .
This book is available for free download at
www.seeingthroughthenet.net
Printed by:
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd
17/2, Pangiriwatta Road, Gangodawila, Nugegoda.
Tel: 011-4870333
Cover designed by:
Chamith Hettiarachchi
of  Lanka on line (Pvt) Ltd.
Fist Impression - 1998
Second Reprint - 2003
Third Reprint - 2005
Fourth Reprint - 2008
Copies of this book may be obtained from :
1. Pothgulgala Aranyaya
'Pahan Kanuwa'
Kandegedara,
Devalegama.
2. Royal Institute
191, Havelock Road,
Colombo 05.
3. Mr. D. T. Weragala
422, Welipara,
Thalawatugoda.
4. Mr. Anura Rupasinghe
No. 27, Colombo Street, Kandy.
5. Mrs. Hema Rupasinghe
No. 26, Havelock Road, Galle.
6. The Department of Public Trustee
No. 02, Bullers Road,
Colombo 07.
Printed by
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd.
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila,
Nugegoda.
Tel : 4870333

v vi
About the AuthorAbout the AuthorAbout the AuthorAbout the AuthorAbout the Author
Bhikkhu K. Y~nananda is a Buddhist monk of Sri Lanka, presently
residing in a forest hermitage in Devalegama. Before his ordination, he
was an assistant lecturer in Pali at the University of Peradeniya, Sri
Lanka. After entering the Buddhist Order in 1967 he has resided mostly
in remote hermitages. He is the author of the world renowned book
'Magic of the Mind' in which he compares the illusory nature of consciousness to a magic show. Some of his other publications are "Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought", "Ideal Solitude", "Samyutta
Nikaya Anthology Part II" and Towards Calm and Insight.
'Sabbad~~~~~nam Dhammad~~~~~nam jin~~~~~ti'
'The gift of Dhamma excels all other gifts'
About the D. G. M. B. ...............................
Rare is the birth of a Buddha in this world. So rare too, is the opportunity to listen to his Dhamma. This conviction has inspired many a devoted
Buddhist to cherish the Dhamma as something extremely precious.
The Buddha has declared that salutary friendship (Kaly
~na-mittat~) is
almost synonymous with his dispensation. The gift-of-Dhamma is the link
that moulds the bond of this friendship. Dhamma deserves no price-tag
precisely because it is price-less.
It is in this spirit that the D.G.M.B. launched its Dhamma-d
~na movement is 1997. Many a parched traveller on the desert path has had a
refreshing drink of the nectar of Dhamma free of charge ever since.
Many an enthusiastic benevolent heart seized the opportunity to participate in a genuine act of Dhammad
~na.
Should we always go for things that sport a price-tag? Is everything
that comes free to us, necessarily worthless? What about the air and the
sunshine?
It is in point of merit that the gift of-Dhamma excels all other gifts.
Dhamma is the nectar that quenches the insatiate sams
~ric thirst of beings. The gift of Dhamma is therefore of far greater merit than an ordinary gift of food or drink. For the magnanimous-Dhammad
~na is for ever
an unfailing source of altruistic joy.
All enquiries regarding participation in this Dhammad~na should be
addressed to:-
Mr. G .T. Bandara
The Settlor, D.G.M.B.,
Royal Institute, 191, Havelock Road,
Colombo - 05.
Fax : 2592749 , 2580564
. .
.

vii viii
Contents
Preface ix
List of abbreviations x
1. Sight seeing - From Views to Vision 1
2. How to be Level-headed 2
3. The Deserted Village 3
4. Reflect rightly on the reflection 4
5. The Salt Crystal 5
6. Mother and Child 6
7. The Six-based World 8
8. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom 9
9. Let-goism 10
10. Mechanics of Mind control 11
11. The Mirror 12
12. Intention goes a long way 16
13. The Peerless Healer 18
14. At your fingertips 20
15. Purity leads to Clarity 22
16. The Miracle of Instruction 24
17. Listen to the beat of the Ear-drum 25
18. The Three Eyes 26
19. Learning to Un-learn 27
20. Breathe as if every breath were your last ...... 28
21. Cow and Post 29
22. The Egg shell 30
23. The Skinless-Cow 31
24. Sharpening the Razor 32
25. The Lotus 34
26. The Elephant-look 35
27. What you grasp-that you are 36
28. The Conquest of Self 37
29. Watch the scenes on the eye-screen 38
30. Put the world within inverted commas 39
31. Be a Well-wisher to the World 40

PrefacePrefacePrefacePrefacePreface
(to the first edition)
This is a collection of short essays written by me for the Dhamma
Web on the Internet - 'Beyond the Net'. I am glad that it now comes
out as a book to be accessible even to those beyond the Internet.
The essays comprising this volume were written at the instance
of  Mrs. Y . Sirimane for 'Beyond the Net' - the website on Theravada
Buddhism set up under the auspices of  B. P . De Silva Holdings
(Pte) Ltd. of  Singapore.  I am thankful to her for the initiative
taken and for her dedication to the true spirit of  Dhammad
~na in
bringing out this volume.
May all those who had their share in the burden of offering
this gift of  Dhamma to the world, share in the accruing merits! May they attain the bliss of Nibb ~~~~~na!
Bhikkhu K. Ñ~nananda
    (April - 1998)
Pothgulgala Aranya
Pahan Kanuwa,
Kandegedara,
Devalegama.
Sri Lanka.
LisLisLisLisList of Abbrt of Abbrt of Abbrt of Abbrt of Abbr eviaeviaeviaeviaevia tionstionstionstionstions
D.N. D¦¦¦¦¦gha Nik ~~~~~ya
M.N. Majjhima Nik ~~~~~ya
S.N. Samyutta Nik ~~~~~ya
A.N. Anguttara Nik ~~~~~ya
Dhp. Dhammapada
Sn. Sutta Nip ~~~~~ta
P .T .S. Pali Text Society
ix x
PrefacePrefacePrefacePrefacePreface
(to the fourth reprint)
This reprint has been sponsored by a small group of Dhamma
enthusiasts who wish to remain anonymous. May the merits of  this
Dhammad
~na conduce to their well-being and progress on the Path
to Nibb~na!
Bhikkhu K. Ñ~nananda
    (April 2008)
.
.

1 2

Sight - seeing - From Views to Vision
The sight-seer sitting on the crag is taking in a view of the landscape around him. His eyes are on the distant hills, dimly visible
through the mist. Above him, an overhanging creeper is waving in
the morning breeze. At one quiet moment, it comes to rest just in
front of him. His view shifts from the distant scene to the dew -
drop at the tip of  the creeper. All is quiet and still.
The ruddy dawn breaks in through the mist. A ray of  the rising
sun alights on the dew-drop and the sight seer adjusts his perspective suitably. The dew-drop gets transformed into a spectrum
and a view gets transformed into a vision.
Before the advent of the Buddha, the seers were concentrating on as many as 62 views, but none of them saw the 'sight'. It
was just above them - so near and yet so far. They never thought
that it could be in the dew-drop of  their Name - and - Form, too
bland and uninviting to arrest their attention. But once their gaze
got fixed on it in the correct perspective to catch the ray of the
dawning Buddha Sun, they saw the 'sight' - a vision, in contrast
to views.

How to be Level-headed
To walk the Buddha's Middle Path, one has to be level headed.
Avoidance of  extremes is the very essence of  this practice. Avoiding clear -cut extreme standpoints does not necessarily mean vacillation. Rather, it is an effective means for being steady.
One illustration of this principle can be seen in the Buddha's
teachings on the five controlling faculties included among the 37
Requisites of  Enlightenment. The five faculties are - faith, energy,
mindfulness, concentration and wisdom.
Faith and wisdom form a pair representing emotion and intellect. Energy and concentration form another pair signifying effort and relaxation. To be level - headed one has to balance each
of these two pairs. But, where is the scale? It is right there in the
middle.
Mindfulness is the scale. It is in itself a controlling faculty of
which there cannot be too much - for one cannot be too levelheaded.

3 4

The Deserted Village
The Path to Deliverance lies through the development of
the perception of 'not- self'. Generally, we attribute a self to each
of our sense-bases - 'I see', 'I hear'; 'I smell': 'I taste'; 'I touch'; 'I
think'. Knock at any of 'My' sense-doors, and 'I' answer. How
can one 'knock out'  the 'I'?
The Buddha compares every one of the six sense-bases to a
deserted village. The universal law of impermanence expels all
dwellers from the village. Sense objects come and go but they
seem to stay for a while just to be able to answer the knock at
the door.
"Hello! Who is there?"
"Ah! It's ME!"
Now, who is actually there? Is it 'Me'?
No. It is only the ECHO of  your knock at the door!
Listen: '....... Rooted in interest, friends, are all things; born of
attention are all things; arising, from contact, are all things ......' -
A.N. V 106f. (P.T.S.)

Reflect rightly on the reflection
A dog is crossing a stream over a plank. Half way through, it
looks into the water and sees another dog there. It wags its tail
and the other responds. It snarls and the other reacts. It looks
away to ignore, but when it looks again the water-dog is still
there looking on.
The view of an existing self is also due to such an unwise attention. "I think, therefore, I am" is the resulting wrong conclusion.
Neither narcissistic love, nor masochistic hate, can solve the problem. Ignoring with a cynical sneer, is to evade the problem. Therefore one has to thrash-down this problem of the elusive self-image
to the basic confrontation between consciousness and name -
and - form.
The self-image cannot be 'wished' away, because there is 'self'
even in that wish. So one has to see through the delusion with
penetrative insight.
Right attention, mindfulness, and full - awareness are the
unfailing aids to the development of this saving insight.

5 6

The Salt-Crystal
A salt crystal dissolved into a small vessel of water, makes the
water salty. The same crystal dissolved into the river Ganges is unable to render its waters saline.
This is a simile brought up by the Buddha to highlight the value
of  a good life in minimising the effects of  bad karma.
Like the small vessel with a little water, is the mean person who
is undeveloped in virtue, concentration and wisdom. An evil deed
done by him can easily take him to hell.
Like the river Ganges is that great man who is well developed in
virtue, concentration and wisdom. The same evil deed done by him
per chance, shows some effect here and now but leaves no residue
whatsoever for a hereafter.
"It is this fact" says the Buddha, "which renders the Holy Life
meaningful and makes an effective ending of all suffering, a possibility".
This is the blessing of a good life.

Mother and Child
The birth of a child, is, at the same time, the birth of a mother
into the world.
Child is the symbol of a mother. That love for the child, that
tenderness of the heart which characterises a mother, is so significant that it is often associated with the change of red-blood
into milk.
"Mett
~" - usually rendered by that cross-bred term loving kindness, is the universal love for which the mother's love for her child
is the unit. The Buddha speaking about mett
~ says for instance,
"Just as a mother would protect her only child even at the risk of
her own life, so should one develop a boundless heart towards
all beings".
A mother is not only born with the child she brings forth, she
also grows up with the child she brings up. Her growth is in terms of
the other three Divine Abidings or Brahma Vih
~ra- compassion,
sympathetic joy and equanimity. In bringing up her child, sometimes a mother has to be stern and tactful. Her soft tender love
matures into a compassionate sternness, when the child is passing through the unruly boyhood and reckless adolescence. But
that hardness of her heart melts at the correct moment, like
butter.
The child has now reached manhood. He can stand on his
own feet with enviable self-confidence. The mother also grows

7 8
up with sympathetic joy enjoying the fruits of  her labours. Her complacence, like curd, is serene and has nothing meddlesome about it.
The bringing forth and the bringing-up is over. The time comes
now to let go - of the attachments and involvements regarding
the child. But for that separation too, the mother, now mature
in her experience, is fully prepared with equanimity. Like a pot
of ghee, she is not easily upset.
Universal love, compassion, sympathetic-joy and equanimity are
the four Divine Abidings a mother practises in a limited sense in
the course of her motherly care for the child. Charity begins at
home. These four are homely virtues in the first instance, to be
remembered like milk, butter, curd and ghee. The four Divine
Abidings are to be developed, however, in a boundless measure
until one's heart is fully released in them. A mother bears testimony to the practicability and the reciprocal value of these
Divine Abidings which hold the prospects of spiritual growth,
peace and harmony for the society at large.

The Six-based World
The world in all its astounding vastness takes off from the
six sense-bases; the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body
and the mind.
The baffling complexity of the world's network of communications serves only to link up eye and forms, ear and sound, nose and
smells, tongue and tastes, body and tangibles, mind and ideas. All
the interminable problems of  the world arising out of  sense-contact
are traceable to the eighteen elements at its base:
eye - form - eye-consciousness
ear - sound - ear-consciousness
nose - smell - nose-consciousness
tongue - taste - tongue-consciousness
body - tangible - body-consciousness
mind - idea - mind-consciousness
The Buddha puts across to us this deep truth in just four simple
lines.
The world has arisen in the six.
The world has commune in the six.
Holding on to these very six.
The world finds itself in a fix.
"The World" - S.N.I. 41 (P.T.S.)

9 10

From Topsy - turvydom to Wisdom
The Buddha pointed out that there are four pervert notions
deeply ingrained in all beings. They are:-
1. Seeing permanence in the impermanent
2. Seeing pleasure in what is unpleasurable
3. Seeing beauty in what is repulsive
4. Seeing self in what is not - self
These perversions prevail at three levels: in one's perceptions, in
one's thoughts, and in one's views. The mirage-like perception implants the seed of  these illusions and delusions. Thoughts nurture
them and views strengthen them. The final outcome is a wrong
perspective on life which keeps one in bondage to samsaric suffering.
This is the topsy-turvydom that the world finds itself  in. In order
to correct this lop-sided view of the world, the Buddha had to recommend four trained perceptions as contemplations.
1. The perception of  Impermanence
2. The perception of the Unpleasurable
3. The perception of the Repulsive
4. The perception of Not-self.
These trained perceptions require a high degree of clarity and
a depth of vision for their devlopment. When systematically developed they lead one from this topsy-turvydom to wisdom
which assures the freedom from bondage to samsaric suffering.

Let - goism
All what is transient and impermanent arise only to pass
away. They come only to go away. But we invite them, entertain them, and insist on them to stay with us. When our hopes
are shattered, we grieve and lament.
To be able to accept the reality of the situation, we have to
attune ourselves to the rhythm of nature. "Whatever is of a nature to arise, all that is of a nature to cease". Things come our
way only in transit; and so we have to let them go. It is our hold
on them that brings stress and distress.
One has to practise 'let-goism', as a detached oserver of an
inevitable law of nature. Then 'things' fade away into the nature
of things. The realization will finally dawn that these "things"
are of our own creation - or rather the creation of our ignorance
and craving. This insight into the interplay of mental phenomena brings home the truth that 'I' is only a view and 'am' is only
a conceit, which bolster up an imagined Self as 'I-am'.

11 12

Mechanics of Mind Control
To dam a swiftly flowing stream, a fourfold effort is required.
It has to be a dynamic effort to:-
Retard and block the on-rush of water.
Remove the in-flowing water getting collected at the site
Lay the foundation for the dam.
Reinforce and stabilize it by steadily building up the dam.
The swiftly flowing thought stream also calls for a fourfold
effort if it is to be dammed. We have to:-
Restrain and check the influx of unwholesome thoughts.
Abandon unwholesome thoughts already arisen.
Arouse wholesome thoughts not yet arisen.
Stabilize and develop wholesome thoughts already arisen.
The effort, in each case, has to be an all-out one. It has to pick
up intensity in keeping with the seriousness of the task. For the
fourfold effort of restraint, abandonment, development and stabilizing, one has to arouse an interest, make an exertion, put
forth energy, make up one's mind and give of one's best in endeavour.
This is the Right Effort that matures into Right Mindfulness
and Right Concentration to complete the Noble Eightfold Path
leading to Wisdom and Deliverance.
'Whatever streams are there in the world Ajita,so said the Lord.
Mindfulness keeps them in check.
This, I say, is restraint of streams
By wisdom 'tis that they are dammed'. - Sn.v.1035

The Mirror
The mirror is something that reflects. Now this is a matter for
some reflection. When the mirror reflects, one has to reflect on
the mirror. One can reflect wisely or unwisely on the mirror.
When one looks into the mirror and it reflects, one has to be
fully aware that it is merely a reflection. Otherwise there will be
delusion and unwise reflection.
The Greek youth Narcissus had never looked into a mirror.
He never knew how handsome he was. One day he saw the
reflection of his own face in a shady pond as he bent down to
wash his face. He fell in love with the image, imagining it to be a
nymph. He stretched his arms to embrace but the image disappeared through the ripples. He tried again and again but it was all
in vain. Day after day he came to the pond and tried and tried
and tried until he pined away and embraced Death.
Now this is the proverbial tragedy of self-love, born of unwise
reflection. Sometimes we see a little bird pecking again and again
at our dusty window panes. It is imagining a mate there, but all
its attempts to get at the mate, end up in a stalemate.
What that little bird does from outside, we have been doing
throughout our samsaric existence, from inside our little house
with its six dusty windows - the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue,
the body and the mind. We look out on the world from our little
house through these six windows. Everytime we look, we seem
to see a self. "Lust is the real dust, not the common dust" - says
the Buddha, and this is the dust on our window-panes. This dust

13 14
together with the murk of ignorance around, acts like mercury on
the reverse of a mirror so we can't see through. Like the shady pond
of Narcissus our window-panes reflect our own prejudices - 'I', 'ME'
and 'MINE'.
The cumulative effect of all our efforts in samsara to look out
on the world through our dusty windows, is the five grasping
groups-form, feeling, perception, preparations and consciousness.
Grasping or holding on to these five groups, one unwisely
reflects, hoping to sort out the identity of the self, with the question 'Who am I?' One does not realize that one is simply begging
the question. So one comes back again and again to the same
question in the form of repeated birth in its three dimensions of
decay, disease and death.
The Arahant, the Venerable Punna Mant
~niputta takes up the
simile of the mirror to expose the fallacy of such questions as
'WHO AM I'? He explains to Venerable 
}nanda that 'AM' is a
conceit born of the very dependence in holding on to the five
groups.
'Owing to dependence, friend 
}nanda, comes the conceit 'AM'
- not without dependence. Depending on what, comes the
conceit 'AM'?  Depending on form, on feeling, on perception,
on preparations, on consciousness. Just as, friend, 
}nanda, a
young woman or young man fond of self adornment, in gazing
at the image of her or his face in a clean spotless mirror or in a
bowl of clear water, does so, depending on something, and not
without depending, even so, friend, 
}nanda, depending on form
comes the conceit AM, not otherwise. Depending on feeling, on
perception, on preparations, on consciousness, comes the
conceit AM, not otherwise"
'
}nanda' - S.N. III 105 (P .T.S)
The emphatic assertion, 'not without dependence," is a pointer
to those who raise such fallacious questions as "Who Am I?" .
They are not aware of the mirror they are looking into.
This obsession with self is so powerful, that it easily impels
one to transgress the moral laws prevailing in the universe. Unwise reflection prompts one to seek one's own selfish ends by
hook or by crook. The inevitable result is suffering brought
about as moral retribution by the law of kamma or karma. Wise
reflection is therefore essential for ethical perfection. The Buddha once instructed the little novice R
~hula on the simple criterion of wise reflection in one's bodily verbal and mental action,
making use of the mirror-simile.
"What do you think R
~hula? What is the purpose of a mirror?"
"For the purpose of reflection, Venerable Sir"
"Even so, R
~hula, after repeated reflection you should do an
action with the body; after repeated reflection you should do an
action by speech after repeated reflection, you should do an action by mind."
"Rahula whenever you wish to do an action with the body,
you should reflect upon that same bodily action -'Would this
action that I wish to do with the body, lead to my own affliction
or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both? Is it an
unskillful bodily action with painful consequences, with painful
results?' Upon reflection if you know that it is such an action
then you should definitely not do such an action with the body.
But if you know upon reflection that it would not lead to your
. .

15 16
own affliction  or to the affliction of others or to the affliction of
both, that it is a skillful bodily action with pleasant consequences,
with pleasant results, then you may do such an action with the
body".
The Buddha advises that this form of reflection should also
be done while doing an action and even after the action is done.
While doing an action if the reflection reveals those negative aspects, the action should be suspended then and there. After the
action is done, if the reflection reveals the negative aspects, confession and restraint for the future must be undertaken.
The same procedure is to be followed in the case of verbal and
mental action. This detailed programme of repeated reflection is
obviously meant for narrowing down the margin of error and for
checking self-deception. With small beginnings as from the little
novice R
~hula it can go a long way and this is precisely the final
assurance of the Buddha.
"R~hula, whatever recluses and brahmins in the past purified
their bodily action, their verbal action and their mental action,
all did so by repeatedly reflecting thus. Whatever recluses and
brahmins in the future will purify their bodily action, their verbal action, their mental action, all will do so by repeatedly reflecting thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present are
purifying their bodily action, their verbal action and their mental action, all are doing so by repeatedly reflecting thus. Therefore R
~hula, you should train thus: "We will purify our bodily
action, our verbal action and our mental action by repeatedly
reflecting upon them.
Ambalatthika R
~hulov~da Sutta M.N.I. 415 f  (P .T.S.)

Intention goes a long way
"Oh! I'm sorry. Honestly, I had no intention" - so we
apologize when something goes wrong. If the other is convinced
that we are not responsible, we stand a good chance of being
excused, unless there is a trace of negligence or irresponsibility
on our part.
"Intention, monks, I say, is action. Intending, one does action by
body, speech and mind" - so says the Buddha. The word "action" here stands for that morally responsible action called
'Karma'. This declaration shows the far - reaching implications
of the word "intention" in regard to the question of moral responsibility. Body, speech, and mind are the three doors of action for which we could be held responsible. To be a good doorkeeper, one has to know what the door-knob is. Intention is the
door-knob.
The Buddha's teachings on 'karma' reveal the immense importance attached to our duties as door-keepers. The dimensions of
karma are so deep, and its results so far-reaching, that the Buddha cautions us again and again to guard our three doors of action. Quite a lot of circumspection is required before we turn
the door-knob.
As a ready-reckoner for this circumspection, the Buddha draws
our attention to the mainsprings of all karma. Greed, hate and
delusion are the three mainsprings of all evil or unskillful action.
..

17 18
Non-greed, non-hate and non-delusion are the three mainsprings of
all good or skillful action. In broad outline, this shows the gamut of
all what is evil and good. So, before one turns the door-knob one
has to weigh pros and cons with this ready-reckoner, whether to
allow or not, action to issue out of  the three doors.
The result of action is called 'vip
~ka', which is the ripening of
karma in time and space. It is an unfailing law of nature. Action
born of greed, hate and delusion ripens wherever one is reborn
in samsara, into a bitter fruit of suffering. Action, born of nongreed, non hatred and non-delusion leads one towards the very
removal of greed, hate and delusion. That way lies freedom from
samsara and supreme bliss of Nibb
~na.

The Peerless Healer
True to the art of healing, the Four Noble Truths are presented in a way that inspires the confidence of those who wish
to be healthy. The Noble Truths of suffering, its arising, its cessation and the path leading to its cessation, follow the pattern of
a doctor's presentation of the nature of a disease, its cause, the
cure and the treatment.
The Buddha himself claimed to be the incomparable physician -  cum - surgeon (anuttaro bhisakko sallakatto). True to his
claims as a physician he recommended a course of medicine that
is prophylactic, therapeutic as well as cathartic.
"Sila", or virtue has the prophylactic quality of prevention of
disease by its 'keep-fit' program of  living up to the precepts. The
thought of  abstinence from evil, acts as an energizing factor. It creates the necessary antibodies against the mental viruses rampant in
the society at large.
"Sam
~dhi" or concentration expels the drainers of mental energy-the five mental hindrances of sensuality, ill-will, sloth and
torpor, restlessness and worry and doubting. From 'dis-ease' it
leads to 'ease' both of body and mind.
"Pa
ZZ~", or wisdom has the curative effect of a purgative. It
purges the mind of the cankers or influxes of sensuality, becoming and ignorance. Like a herbal decoction of eight ingredients
administered in four doses, it brings health to those who aspire

19 20
to that supreme health of Nibbana in four stags of saint-hood - the
Stream-winner, the Once - Returner, the Non-returner and the
Arahant.
As the peerless surgeon, the Buddha wielded his forceps of
mindfulness and his scalpel of wisdom to locate and extract the
thorn of craving embedded deep in the hearts of beings. In his
discourse to Sunakkhatta in the Majjhima Nikaya, the Buddha
even recommends a period of convalescence to the patient to get
over the germs of ignorance left by the poisonous thorn of craving - true, again, to the art of healing.

At your fingertips
Some seers of ancient India held that it is impossible to understand consciousness itself, because it is with consciousness
that we get to know everything else. They thought that it is like
trying to touch one's finger-tip with the same finger-tip.
The Buddha understood their difficulty when he compared consciousness to a magical illusion or m
~y~. But he pointed out a
way out of it. Instead of taking seriously the worldly notions of
'I' and 'mine', he analyzed experience in terms of an interdependence between 'consciousness' on the one hand and 'name and
form' on the other.
Now what is this 'Name' and 'Form'. Venerable S
~riputta,
the Chief Disciple of the Buddha explains it for us. "Feeling, Perception, Intention, Contact, Attention - these O! friends, are called
'Name'. The four great primaries and Form dependent on them,
these O! friends are called Form."
Feeling, Perception, Intention, Contact and Attention, are collectively, called 'Name' because they are the primaries of all what
is named. The four great elements of solidity, liquidity, heat and
motion, represented by earth, water, fire and air are the primaries of all what has to do with 'Form'.
Between Name and Form themselves, there is a reciprocal relationship. It is with Name that one understands Form and it is
Form that gives a content to Name. Name is such that it conjures up a Form and Form is such that it calls forth a Name.

21 22
But we have to get more acquainted with the five representatives of  Name. Let us have them at our fingertips. In fact one can
even count them on one's fingers. Feeling is the little finger - small
but mischievous. Perception is the ring-finger, both popular and
notorious. Intention is the - middle finger, prominent and intrusive. Contact is the fore-finger - fussy and busy all the time -
Attention is the thumb - standing apart, but approachable to the
rest.
Now out of the whole lot, who is going to be our witness of the
back-stage workings of  the magic-show of  consciousness. Attention, of course. He is the most competent. When there are no witnesses to prove a case of murder or theft, sometimes judges give
'free pardon' to one of  the alleged culprits under the oath "You have
to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth."
So it is in this case of the tragic drama of consciousness. Though
himself culpable, attention is dependable as a witness, provided
he does his duty as Right Attention.
Now attention will gradually disclose what feeling felt, what
perception perceived, what intention intended, what contact contacted and last but not least, what attention attended to.
This is why all insight meditators single out attention for preferential treatment when they want to get the full inside story of
the tragic drama of consciousness.

Purity leads to Clarity
For clarity of  vision, the mind has to be cleansed of  the five
mental hindrances.
They are -    1. sensual lust,     2. ill-will,      3. sloth and torpor,
4. restlessness and worry,    5. doubt.
Freedom from these hindrances is basic for all levels of concentration and insight. Therefore one who wishes to attain the
calm of concentration and the clarity of insight, has to go on
purifying the mind from these hindrances.
In order to illustrate to the Brahmin Sang
~rava, how these
hindrances impair calm and clarity of the mind, the Buddha once
used the simile of a bowl of water.
If one wishes to use a bowl of water as a mirror to see one's
face in it, the water in the bowl has to be clear enough to reflect
it. when some colour like red, yellow, blue or brown has already
been mixed into the water, it will lack the clarity to mirror the
face. Even so lust is a colouring agent in the case of the mind.
When the water in a bowl is boiling and bubbling, it can hardly
reflect one's face in it. The fire of ill-will keeps the mind boiling,
hindering its reflective capacity.
A bowl of  water covered with moss will never serve as a mirror.
A mind inert and drowsy with sloth and torpor cannot reflect
properly.

23 24
If a bowl of water is shaken by the wind so that the water is
rippling, disturbed and unsteady, it will not be possible to see
clearly one's face in it. Restlessness and worry affect the mind in
a similar way.
A bowl of muddy water placed in a dark corner lacks the property of reflection. A mind in the grip of doubt and wavering is
likewise muddled and murky. It lacks the property of proper
reflection.
When the mind is free from these five hindrances, memory
mindfulness, concentration, calm and insight come in unhindered. One sees things as they are in the mirror of the mind.

The Miracle of  Instruction
A lay-disciple called Kevaddha, a resident of N ~land~, repeatedly requested the Buddha to assign  a monk for the conversion of
the people of N ~land~ by showing miracles. The Buddha firmly
refused the request. He pointed out that there are three kinds of
miracles1. The miracle of  performing psychic feats
2. The miracle of mind-reading
3. The miracle of  instruction.
Out of these three, he did not encourage the first two, because they are common even to ordinary magic-workers. It is
the miracle of instruction that he sanctioned to his monks because it is peculiar and more convincing. This miracle of instruction he sums up in just three pairs of short injunctions.
1. Think thus - do not think thus
2. Attend thus- do not attend thus
3. Give up this - live up to this.
The Do's and the Don'ts here, cover the entire range of ethial
training in Buddhism leading to the perfection of morality, concentration and wisdom.
. .

17
Listen to the beat of  the Ear-drum
The most fascinating of all musical instruments is the
eardrum. But we rarely take time off to listen to the beat of the
ear-drum. Next to the eye, the ear is the biggest source of distraction in our lives. Every time we sit down to enjoy a spell of quietude, we are dragged by the ear and forced to listen to many
things that distract us.
Instead of searching for an ear-plug in such a situation, we
could, for a change, listen to the beat of the ear-drum. But how?
The beat of the ear-durm is usally drowned by the chatter of the
mind about the sounds. Whether it is euphony or cacophony,
mind grabs a talking-point, and there we are - praising and
cursing.
If we switch off the mind's commentary, we can listen to the
beat of the ear-drum. It strikes only three notes- 'COME' -'STAY'
and 'GO' . The more we listen to it the deeper we go into the
three notes. The conflict between euphony and cacophony is
no longer there to distract us. We are now listening to the rhythm
of nature, attuning ourselves to Reality. That way lies Peace
Sublime.

The Three Eyes
According to the Buddha, there are three eyes in the world. They
are:-
1. The fleshly eye
2. The divine eye
3. The wisdom eye.
The fleshly eye one gets by birth, has a very limited range of
vision. It is mostly addicted to surface-seeing and its claims to vision are rather superficial.
The divine eye aroused by developing higher levels of concentration goes beyond those limits.It enables one to see even
hells and heavens and events happening outside the normal range
of vision. Still, it cannot claim to be the perfect vision.
It is the wisdom-eye developed through insight meditation that
is supreme in the world. It gives a perfect vision of the world in
its true perspectives of impermanence and conditionality. The
hidden law of Dependent Arising is revealed to that penetrative
dustless stainless eye of truth with a certitude that prompts the
exclamation:-
'Whatever is of a nature to arise, all that is of a nature to cease'.
25 26

19
Learning to Un-learn
"Suchness" is a term for the nature of things as-they-are. To
see things as-they-are is so very difficult because of the great mass
of details that beclouds our vision. The purpose of insight is to
penetrate into this suchness with the help of a simple program
like:-
'In the seen, there will be to you just the seen: in the heard, just
the heard: in the smelt, just the smelt: in the tasted,just the tasted;
in the touched, just the touched; in the thought, just the thought.'
That way, sense-objects simply become object - lessons for
understanding the event called seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling,
touching, and thinking.
When that event is understood, one comes to know that there
is nothing substantial, that everything is circumstantial. that   every
specific event is such and not otherwise.
The Buddha compared perception to a mirage. Throughout
Samsara, for countless aeons we have been running after this
mirage, in search of something substantial. All what we got was
steess and distress. So the Buddha asks us to 'STOP' and cleanse
our vision to see the mirage for what it is.

Breathe as if every breath were your last -
then you will never be breathless
Reflection on Death is a meditation-subject leading to the bliss
of Nibb~na called 'The Deathless.' According to the Buddha the
most effective way of developing this meditation, is to bring it in
line with the rhythm of our breath. He says that the one who is
keenly aware that death can occur between two breaths, is
steadily approaching the deathless state. How can that be?
Death is the last thing we wish to think about, and when we
think about it at last, we are too late. Very often, when it knocks
at our door we are fully unprepared to receive it. The result is
utter confusion and terror. We are breathless and we have to
depart with a heavy heart.
But if on the other hand we become as familiar with death as
with our breath and hear its unavoidable approach as with the
tick-tock of our clock, we will be better prepared to receive it.
And when the time comes to depart, we leave with a lighter burden and a lighter heart.
27 28

21
Cow and Post
A cow tethered to a post with a rope, is grazing near a field. At
first, it is not well aware of its proper range. So from time to time it
tries to reach out to the luscious corn is the nearby field. But then
the rope at its neck reminds it of its tether, with the warning - 'keepoff.' Pulled back by the rope at every unmindful attempt to outreach, the cow at last comes to know the ambit of  its tether. Then it
goes on grazing peacefully in its proper pasture unhampered. Once
it has had its fill, it comes to rest near the post and starts chewing its
honest cud with closed eyes.
Even like the cow, the meditator is tethered to the post of his
meditation-subject with the rope of mindfulness. In the early
stages of his practice, he is not fully aware of his proper range.
He may sometimes forget all about the fact that he is a
meditator.He may do things which defeat his purpose, which
are not conducive to his progress, which fall outside the scope of
his meditation subject and which lead to a deluded state of mind.
Worldly temptations are so alluring that the rope of mindfulness
will have a hard time warning, 'keep-off'!
However, by dint of effort, the meditator grows wiser as to
his proper range and learns to be fully aware of his 'post' and the
'rope' at all times. Then he is feeding himself in his proper field
and having had his fill he comes to sit peacefully with his eyes
closed to chew his honest cud.

The Egg shell
A chick is called a 'twice born'. First it is born in to the shell
and then it is born into the world - out of the shell. After the
period of incubation, a chick breaks through the egg-shell, prodding with its beak or nails.
The Buddha calls himself the first chick in the world to burst
through the egg-shell of ignorance. He had a long period of  incubation-six years of rigorous asceticism. Matured by that austere heat, he prodded the egg-shell of ignorance that enveloped
him, with the 'three signs' - impermanence suffering and not-self.
He burst out of it to see the world as-it-is. It was not a sight but
an insight.
He had aroused a dustless stainless eye-of-truth- the Dhammaeye that transcends the world. 'The world is blind' - says the
Buddha, because the worlding is encompassed by ignorance.
Insight meditation helps one to break through that thick eggshell of ignaornce. Passing through a series of insight knowledges
one attains the supra-mundane state of a "Stream-winner" . It is
equivalent to a birth into the lineage of the Noble Ones. Already
in this first stage of sainthood the prospect of possible births in
this endlessly agonizing samsara is reduced to seven. Encouraged
by this immense initial relief, the stream-winner courses along
the stream of Dhamma, progressively reducing the prospects of
possible births to become a 'Once-returner', a 'Non-returner' -
and finally - an Arahant who puts an end to all births and deaths.
With this attainment of ambrosial Deathlessness, the turmoil of
Samsara subsides into the tranquillity of Nibb ~na. A whirlpool
disappers into the sea.
29 30

23
The Skinless Cow
'Seeing is believing - but touch is the real thing'
When we can't believe our eyes we ascertain by means of touch.
A blind man is forced to depend on touch out of  sheer necessity.
Touch is so fascinating that it keeps the world enslaved to it. The
Buddha has declared that out of the five senses, the sense of touch
is the most infatuating. He says that those beings who are spell -
bound by touch, are fully in bondage.
Touch is also regarded as one of the four nutriments which
sustain beings, and the other three are: material food, willing of
mind and consciousness. The Buddha gives a 'touching'  simile
to make us ponder deeply on the nature of touch - the simile of
the skinless cow.
If a skinless cow should stand leaning against a wall, the creatures that live on the wall would bite her, If she leans against a
tree, the creatures that live on the tree would bite her. Wherever
she stands, her skinless body would be the target of pricks and
bites.
The skinless cow has to suffer because she has a wound as big
as her body. We need not consider ourselves more fortunate
than that cow simply because we have a bandage on the wound
- the skin!

Sharpening the Razor
There is a special technique in sharpening a razor on a whetstone. One must hold the razor in such a way that there is some
flexibility at one's wrist. The razor-blade is held between the thumb
and the fore-finger as if one is ready to throw it away at any time. If
the grip is tight and the wrist is tense, any attempt to sharpen will
only make the razor-edge blunt.
So, holding the razor in that 'let-go' fashion, one sharpens it
on the oiled surface of the whetstone to the rhythm:
up  -  up  -  up
down  -  down  -  down
up  -  down
up  -  down
This dynamic up and down process is the most decisive. phase of
the sharpening. At this stage, a wrong grasp of the blade would have
made it blunt.
Now the same technique has to be followed in sharpening the razor
of one's insight on the whetstones of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness-the contemplations of body, feeling mind and mind-objects. One
must not grasp or cling to any of these foundations but develop a 'let -
go' attitute towards them. Setting up mindfulness on some aspect or
other of one's body, for instance, (say, breathing), one sweeps one's full
awarenness over it, to sharpen the razor edge of insight into impermanence. The rhythm is the same.
31 32

rising - rising - rising
falling - falling - falling
rising - falling
rising - falling
Here too, the last dynamic phase of contemplating both rise and fall,
is decisive. It sharpens one's penetrative insight into impermanence, leading to disenchantment, dispassion, detachment and deliverance.

The Lotus
The lotus symbolizes the Buddhist ideal of transcendence of
the world. The lotus petal and the lotus leaf both have a striking
quality of  aloofness. They do not get smeared or stained by the water and mud around them. When, for instance, a drop of water falls
on a lotus leaf, it receives it as a 'drop' until it rolls away and drops
with a pearly grace.
The released mind has a similar quality of aloofness towards the
sensory data that normally tend to smear and stain it. It receives the
data 'as-they-are'  with a full awareness that insulates against
shocks. It follows the dictum:
'In the seen, just the seen
In the heard, just the heard
In the smelt, just the smelt
In the tasted, just the tasted
In the touched, just the touched
In the thought, just the thought.
The mind is not swept away by them. It remains uninfluenced
by the signs and significances of the sensory data which infiltrate
and condition the undeveloped worldly mind. With an equanimity born of a penetrative insight into the law of impermanence, it
sees the sense data as such and 'not-otherwise'.
The distance, then, between the worldly and the transcendental, is the same distance between the lotus leaf and the drop of
water on it. So near-and yet-so far!
33 34

26
The Elephant-look
Once a hunter had the rare opportunity of seeing a fight
between a lion and an elephant. The lion, the acclaimed King of
Beasts, was trying hard to get at the elephant's head. But the elephant kept on leaping around at a terrific speed always facing
the lion fairly and squarely. The lion could not catch the elephant
unawares because it never turned its neck. At last the elephant
gored the lion with its tusks and trampled it to death.
What decided victory in this battle was the peculiarity in the
elephant's neck. Every time the lion tried to approach it from a
side, the elephant answered with a full-bodied response. The
steadiness of its neck stood it in good stead.
As an interesting side-light, it may be mentioned that in a certain Canonical figure of the Buddha as an elephant, his neck is
compared to the quality of MINDFULNESS. (A.N.IV 107).
Turning the whole body when looking back, is said to be a mark
of the Buddhas. It is called 'The Elephant-look'.

What you grasp-that you are
The Buddha tells us that existence is dependent on grasping. The socalled 'being" asserts his existence on the basis of his five groups of Grasping - form, feeling, perception, preparations and consciousness. The very
tenacity of his grasping on each of these five groups gives him a notion of
something compact, which he thinks justifies his assertion. So he identifies
himself  with one or the other of these five groups in four ways, whenever
the question of  his self  identity arises. He might say for instance, "form is
my self or my self  has form, or form is in my self, or my self  is in form".
Altogether there are twenty such possible assertions. The Buddha declares
that all possible theories of self in the world are traceable to one or the
other of these 20 modes of assertion.
The tragedy however, is that everyone of these 5 groups is disintegrating. There is nothing permanent or substantial in them, to be prided on as
self. They betray the trust one puts on them as 'I and Mine'. In the face of
change and disintegration the very existence of the self is threatened. This is
the dreadful predicament of  the self-oriented being.
The Buddha's solution to this chronic feeling of  insecurity, is the development of  the perception of  impermanence. Taking a more realistic view
of  the five groups as impermanent, made-up, dependently arisen, and of  a
nature to waste away, pass away, fade away, and cease, one has to go on
attending to their rise-and-fall with mindfulness and full-awareness. The
perception of the compact will gradually give way to the perception of the
heap. In one's contemplation of  the rise and fall, one will discern not only
the breakers of  the ocean of  impermanence but also the waves, the ripples
and the vibrations. This leads to disenchantment. One turns away from
one's deeply ingrained samsaric habit of grasping, holding and clinging on
to the five fleeting groups which promise no security. Giving up the attachment to the five groups, one sees as the only security, the clinging free
deliverance of the mind - the sublime peace of Nibb
~na.
35 36

28
The Conquest of Self
The ideal of conquest has always kindled man's imagination.
There is a warrior in every one of  us. All too often we take up the
challenge that comes from outside - to conquer our fellowmen,
wealth, earth and even space. We think we can be victorious that
way. But the Buddha on the other hand, reminds us of  a challenge
tht comes from within - a challenge we have been too timid to
take up. According to him, "Though one conquers thousands
and thousands of men in the battle-field, yet he is the noblest
victor who conquers himself".
For this conquest of  self, one has to battle with the forces of  evil
within - the hordes of  M
~ra - the Evil - One - as they are called. To
awaken the warrior in man and to turn him towards this conquest,
the Buddha uttered a stirring battle-cry, "Get set, go forth, and fight
the inward battle in the Buddha's dispensation. Crush the forces of
M
~ra even like an elephant a house of  reeds."
Inspired by this battle cry, even robbers, murderers and prostitutes gave up their bloody and shady avocations to put on the
saffron armour with a shaven head and go forth for the conquest
of self. Many a battle has been fought and won at the weakest
point in one's fortress.  So they left behind their degradations to
march out for inward conquest on the Noble Eight-fold Path
with its correct stress on the 'Right': Right View, Right Thought,
Right Speech, Right Action, Right Living, Right Effort, Right
Mindfulness and Right  Concentration. They emerged victorious, winning the ambrosial bliss of Nibb
~na.

Watch the scenes on the eye - screen
Walking through an art gallery, we sometimes get lost in the
appreciation of  a painting done on a huge canvas. The setting is so
natural and the figures so realistic that for a while we project ourselves into the picture. But as soon as we become aware of its framework, we realize that after all it is something unreal.
Throughout our lives,we are walking through an art gallery. On
the vast canvas of the world around us, there are the objects and
beings so realistic and life-like that we live fully immersed and
involved in them. The mysterious four elements - earth, water,
fire, air - with colour and form to deceive us, keep the panorama
on the move, so we are spellbound.
Insight into Name and Form helps us to throw off the spell
produced by sight. Contemplation of the four elements within
and without us forming the warp and woof of the world-canvas,
gives flashes of insight into the unreality of the 3-dimensional
world we live in. This is the 'form' aspect of the picture. Feeling,
perception, intention, contact and attention with which we are
enthralled by the panorama, constitute the "name" aspect of the
picture. Practising full awareness with regard to them we become
detached observers of our framed-up world.
Being aware of this framework of name-and-form, we can
watch the scenes on the eye-screen as they come, stay, and go
away as if we are watching a movie - unmoved .
Just see a world with all its gods
Fancying a self where there is none
Enmeshed in name and form it holdsThe conceit - Ah! 'tis a real one.'
                     - Dvayat~nupassan~ Sutta, Sn
37 38

30
Put the world within inverted commas
The purpose of insight meditation is to arouse that clarity of
vision which enables one to see things as they are. It requires
uninvolved detached observation free from biases and prejudices.
One's involvement with the world is so subtle that it cannot be seen
and eliminated by means of any demonstrative apparatus. It can
only be done through insight and wisdom.
The way to insight lies through the Four Foundations of Mindfulness outlined in the Satipatth
~na Sutta. The setting up of mindfulness implied by the term 'satipatth ~na', is an objective approach to understand the subjective in one's experience. The
'search needle' of mindfulness has to come down right on the
present moment so that one can be fully aware of it. Full awareness that goes hand in hand with mindfulness acts as a searchlight revealing the subjective in one's experience. Attachments,
aversions and delusions could then be seen for what they are.
While mindfulness stands guard at the six sense-doors, fullawareness attends to the impinging sense-objects, noting them
mentally. This method of mental noting opens an avenue of detached observation leading to deeper levels of insight. The world
arising at the six sense-bases is put within inverted commas. With
serene equanimity one stands apart and sees its rise and fall.
'Transient indeed are preparations
Their nature it is, to rise and fall
They arise only to pass away
Their calming down is Bliss Supreme'.
-Mah
~ Parinibb~na S.D.N.

Be a Well - wisher to the World
We are surrounded by three fences. There is one fence between us and those dear to us, another between them and those
neutral to us and a third separating those neutral from our enemies.
A fence is generally regarded as a source of protection. But it can
be a source of fear as well, because where there is a 'fence' there
is both 'defence' and offence'. To be surrounded by three fences
can even be taken as an imprisonment.
As a matter of fact, it is an imprisonment of the heart. That
magnanimous capacity of our hearts to feel for others, to wish
for others, remains imprisoned. We remain selfish, stingy, mean
and resentful. What if we let go of the fences one by one, with
the help of mett
~ or loving-kindness? It will be a blissful experience of the deliverance of the heart. There will then be neither
defence nor offence. In that large - heartedness, there will be a
recogniton of the truth that all beings wish for happiness. Then
one's heart can throb for others and feel for others in sympathy
with their wish for happiness. Like a beacon it will beam the
radiant message of 'mett
~' in all directions: 'May all beings be
well and happy - be well and happy - be happy, happy, happy!'
39 40
..
..

Books Published by D.G.M.B. No. of
Copies
01. Nivane Niveema V olume One 11000
02. Nivane Niveema V olume Two 8000
03. Nivane Niveema V olume Three 5000
04. Nivane Niveema V olume Four 6000
05. Nivane Niveema V olume Five 5000
06. Nivane Niveema V olume Six 3500
07. Nivane Niveema ^Lib Ed& Part One ^1-6V olume& 500
08. Nivane Niveema V olume Seven 6000
09. Nivane Niveema V olume Eight 6000
10. Nivane Niveema V olume Nine 3000
11. Nivane Niveema V olume Ten 3000
12. Nivane Niveema V olume Eleven 3000
13. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume One 9000
14. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Two 8000
15. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Three 6000
16. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Four 3000
17. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Five 3000
18. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshan ~ V olume Six 4000
19. Hitaka Mahima ~ V olume One 6000
20. ~Hitaka Mahima~ V olume Two 6000
21. Uttareetara Hudekalawa 8000
22. Vidasun Upades 9000
23. Chalana Chitraya 3000
24. Towards A Better World 3000
25. Seeing Through 3000
26. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume I 3000
27. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume II 3000
28. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume III 3000
29. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume IV 1000
30. Nibb ~na - The Mind Stilled V olume V 2000
31. The Magic of the Mind 2000
By the same author
*1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought - (1971)
*2. Samyutta Nikàya - An anthology, Part. II Wheel No. 183/185 -(1972)
*3. Ideal Solitude-Wheel No. 188 - (1973)
*4. The Magic of the Mind - (1974)
*5. Uttaritara Hudekalawa - Damsak No. 172/173 - (1990)
-do- (New edition)  D.G.M.B. - (2001)
6. Vidasun Upades - (1996)
7. Nivane Niveema - (1997-2004)  D.G.M.B.(All 11 Volumes issued)
8. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom - Volume-1 - (1998)
(Essays written for Beyond the Net)-
Website : http://www.beyondthenet.net
9. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà  Vol I - (1999) (D.G.M.B.)
10. Seeing Through - (1999)
11. Hitaka Mahima -1 - (1999)
12. Nivane Niveema - Library Edition-Part I - (2000)
13. Hita Thanima - (2000)
14. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà  Vol. II
15. Towards A Better World-Translation of Lo-Wada Sangarawa- (2000)
16. Pavatma Hà Navatma - (2001)
17. Athi Hati Dakma - (2001)
18. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà Vol. III - (2002)
19. Kaya Anuwa Giya Sihiya - (2001)
20. Divi Katare Sanda Andura - (2001)
21. Mà-Piya Uvatana - (2002)
22. Prathipatti Påjàwa - (2003)
23. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled  Vol. I - (2003)
24. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà  Vol. IV - (2003)
25. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà  Vol. V - (2005)
26. Pahan Kanuwa Dharma Deshanà  Vol. VI - (2006)
27. Abinikmana - (2003)
28. Hitaka Mahima  II - (2003)
29. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled  Vol. II - (2004)
30. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled  Vol. III - (2005)
31. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled  Vol. IV - (2006)
32. Nibbàna-The Mind Stilled  Vol. V - (2007)
33. The Magic of the Mind (2007)
* Buddhist Publication Society, P.O.Box 61, Kandy
   fn!oaO .%ka: m%ldYk iñ;sh" ;e'fm' 61" uykqjr
.