Title: The Law of Dependent Arising
URL: https://seeingthroughthenet.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/The-Miracle-of-Contact_Rev-0_6.pdf
Word Count: 10008

i 
 
The Miracle of Contact 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
 
 
 
Published by 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Sri Lanka 
2016

ii 
 
Published strictly for free distribution. 
First Impression – 2016 
 
 
 
 
All Rights Reserved 
Any reproduction in whole or in part, including translations, for 
sale, profit or material gain is prohibited.  Permission to reprint 
could be obtained by writing to K.N.S.S.B. Dhamma books & 
sermons are available for free download at 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
ISBN 978-955-3962-35-5 
 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  Karandana, Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
 
Printed by 
Quality Printers (Pvt) Ltd. 
17/2, Pangiriwatta Rd, Gangodawila, Nugegoda. 
Phone: 0114870333

iii 
 
Dhamma is Priceless! 
Strictly for free distribution 
Dhamma books may be obtained from: 
1.  Mr. Sunil Wijesinghe – 39/10, St. Rita’s Road, Mt. Lavinia.  
2.  Mrs. Hemamala Jayasinghe 
29/8, Pangiriwatta Mawatha, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 
3.  Mr. Chandana Wijeratne 
23/79A, 1st  Lane, Dharmapala Place, Thalawathugoda. 
4.  Mr. Stanley Sooriyarachchi – 25, Main Street, Devalegama. 
5.  Mr. S.A. Lionel 
 140/19, Ruhunusiri Udyanaya, Hakmana Road, Matara. 
6.  Mrs. Sirima Wijerathne – 15, Elapatha, Rathnapura. 
7.  Mr. A.G. Sarath Chandraratne 
 ‘Saman’, Arawula Junction, Kandalama Road, Dambulla. 
8.  Mr. J.A.D. Jayamanne 
 Jayamanne Estate, Labuyaya, Kurunegala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 
9.  Prof. K.M. Wijeratne, Faculty of Dental Sciences,  
 University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.  
10.  Ayur. Dr. P. Weerasinghe 
 Bandara Bulankulama, Lankarama Road, Anuradhapura. 
11.  Mrs. R.A. Chandi Ranasinghe 
 Studio ‘Chaya’, Hospital Junction, Polonnaruwa.  
12.  Mrs. Nera Wijesundara 
 Ilukpitiya Ayurvedic Clinic, Ilukpitiya, Gatahatta. 
13.  Mr. D.C.A. Nissanka de Silva – 91A, Woodward Road, Galle. 
14.  Mr. Piyadasa Samarakone 
 Suduwalipalassa, Kirinda, Tissamaharamaya. 
 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough

iv 
 
About the K.N.S.S.B. 
 It is the express wish of Venerable Bhikkhu Ka ṭukurunde 
Ñāṇananda that all his Dhamma Books and recorded sermons be 
offered as a pure gift of Dhamma free of charge to the Dhamma -
thirsty world.  
 Accordingly, K.N.S.S.B. has taken upon itself the duties 
of publication and distribution of books written by the venerable 
author as well as the recording and distribution of his sermons on 
C.D.s, in addition to maintaining the website, 
www.seeingthroughthenet.net and the social networking site 
www.facebook.com/seeingthrough. Those wishing to participate 
in this multifaceted Dhammadāna may note the account number 
of our Trust given below.  
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
(K.N.S.S.B) 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla,  
Karandana 
Sri Lanka. 
Phone: 0777127454 
email: knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net 
K.N.S.S.B. 
Acc. No. 007060000241, 
Sampath Bank, SWIFT: BSAMLKLX 
Branch Code: 070 
Branch: R.G. Senanayake Mawatha, Colombo – 07,  
Sri Lanka.

v 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Introduction   vi 
Abbreviations  vii 
The Miracle of Contact   1

vi 
 
Introduction 
 The series of 20 sermons on ‘ Paṭicca Samuppāda’ which 
I delivered at Pothgulgala Āra ṇya in Devalegama seems to have 
had an appeal to those who listened to th e sermons, or read them 
when the series came out in 4 volumes. Although the translation 
of the first ten sermons have already appeared (‘The L aw of 
Dependent Arising’ – The S ecret of Bondage and Release – 
volumes I & II), due to failing health I have not been able to 
translate them all myself. So I delegated the task to someone who 
is competent and the last two volum es will be issued in due 
course. 
 However I have translated the 15 th sermon on ‘Contact’ 
(phassa) because of its pivotal significance and the special way of 
presentation. Hence I thought of giving it priority by bringing it 
out as a separate booklet titled: ‘The Miracle of Contact’. Even to 
those who are disinclined to go through the entire series, it is 
hoped that this booklet would at least give a foretaste of the depth 
of the Law of Dependent Arising and its practical value to our 
lives.  
Bhikkhu K. Ñāṇananda 
Sanghopasthāna Suwa Sevana 
Kirillawala Watta 
Dammulla, Karandana 
Sri Lanka 
(B.E. 2559) March 2016

vii 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 Pali Texts: 
 (References are to page numbers in P.T.S. Editions) 
D.  Dīgha Nikāya 
M.  Majjhima Nikāya 
S.  Saṁyutta Nikāya 
A.  Anguttara Nikāya 
Dhp.  Dhammapada 
Sn.  Sutta Nipāta 
Thag. Theragāthā

The Miracle of Contact 
  (Pahan Kanuwa Sermon – No. 197) 
‘Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa’ 
‘Homage be! To the Fortunate One – the Worthy, Fully Enlightened!’ 
Tesaṁ phassaparetānaṁ 
 bhavasotānusārinaṁ 
 kummaggapaṭipannānaṁ 
 ārā saṁyojanakkhayo 
 Ye ca phassaṁ pariññāya 
 aññāya upasame ratā 
 te ve phassābhisamayā 
 nicchātā parinibbutā 1  
   – Dvayatānupassanā S. Sn. 
  
To them that are fully given to contact 
And are swept by the current of becoming 
To them that tread the wrong path 
Destruction of fetters is far away. 
But they that fully understand contact 
And with full comprehension are attached to appeasement  
It is they that by the understanding of contact 
Are hungerless and fully appeased. 
Dear Listeners,  
 The Dhamma that the Teacher of the Three Worlds, the 
fully Enlightened Fortunate One placed before the world is one 
that goes against the current. That Dhamma which flows against 
the pervert and narrow current of becoming is the massive body 
of water called ‘ Dhammasota’ that takes one towards the 
cessation of becoming. The worldlings caught up in the current of 
becoming go on revolving in this Sa ṁsāric whirlpool. The Noble

Miracle of Contact 

Disciple who has fa llen into the Dhamma current reaches 
Nibbāna which is called the cessation of becoming. The turning 
point between these two is contact. 
 Therefore we have chosen as the topic of this 15 th sermon, 
two verses on contact found in the  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta of 
the Sutta Nipāta . Since we used as the topics of a number of 
earlier sermons, verses from this Dvayatānupassanā Sutta, you 
all might remember the style of preaching followed by the 
Buddha in that discourse. Introducing various items of Dhamma 
which incline to two sides and distinguishing their arising aspect 
and the cessation aspect is the style of preaching in this discourse. 
Now the two aspects of contact the Buddha first of all introduces 
to the congregation of monks with this statement in prose.  
 “If there are those who ask whether there could be another 
mode of contemplating the dualities, they should be told: ‘There 
is.’ How could there be? ‘Whatever suffering that arises, all that 
is due to contact.’ This is one mode of contemplation. With the 
remainderless cessation of contact, there is no arising of 
suffering. This is the second mode of contemplation.” Having 
made this declaration, the Buddha goes on to state the benefits of 
practicing this contemplation of dualities. “If a monk dwells 
diligently and ardently combatting defilements in accordance 
with this contemplation, one of two fruits could be expected of 
him; Either full comprehension here and now or if there is any 
residual clinging, non-returnership. 
 It is after this declaration that the B uddha uttered those 
two verses. 
“Tesaṁ phassaparetānaṁ 
 bhavasotānusārinaṁ 
 kummaggapaṭipannānaṁ 
 ārā saṁyojanakkhayo

Miracle of Contact 

 Ye ca phassaṁ pariññāya 
 aññāya upasame ratā 
 te ve phassābhisamayā 
 nicchātā parinibbutā” 
 “For them who are fully enslaved to contact and moving 
along with the current of becoming, who are on the wrong path 
the cutting off of the bonds of becoming namely the destruction 
of fetters, is far away. But they that have comprehended contact 
and take delight in the appeasement through knowledge born of 
realization, verily it is they by their higher understanding of 
contact are hungerless and fully appeased.” 
 I hope to give a special sermon today based on these two 
verses because this happens to be a significant day marking the 
end of the rains -retreat of the Sangha on which they hold the 
Vinaya act called Pavāraṇā – namely the Full Moon day ending 
the rains-retreat. Due to other reasons too I thought of presenting 
this sermon at a more practical level – though other sermons also 
are meditation topics. So let me request you all from this point 
onwards to listen atten tively to what is being said from word to 
word and sentence to sentence. Speaking about contact, First of 
all I must mention something I had already brought out with 
reference to the very first discourse in the Dīgha Nikāya – namely 
Brahmajāla Sutta  – that is to say, the fact that the Buddha 
dismissed all the 62 wrong views listed there with a very brief 
phrase. 
 Now, what is that significant phrase? ‘ Tadapi phassa 
paccayā’2 – ‘That too is due to contact.’ Similarly towards the 
end of that discourse, the Bu ddha declares a statement like this 
with reference to the recluses and Brahmins who proclaim those 
views: 
 ‘sabbe te chahi phassāyatanehi phussa phussa 
paṭisaṁvedenti’

Miracle of Contact 

 ‘They all go on experiencing through the six sense -
spheres by contacting again and again.’ 
 Then the consequences of it are also mentioned. Because 
of that feeling they get craving, and due to craving, grasping, due 
to grasping, becoming, due to becoming, birth and due to birth, 
decay and death and all the rest of suffering. What does it mea n? 
As stated in the first verse all recluses and Brahmins who took up 
those sixty -two views are enslaved by contact, caught up in the 
current of becoming and fallen on the wrong track. Therefore 
they have not attained freedom from the fetters of becoming. 
Finally the Buddha proclaims what sort of Dhamma he preaches. 
About the monk who has attained arahanthood in this 
dispensation, it is said that he is one who has reached full 
appeasement by five kinds of understanding about the six sense -
spheres. What are they? As we mentioned in a previous sermon, 
the understanding of the arising, going down, satisfaction, misery 
and stepping -out in regard to the six sense -spheres – that is to 
say, samudaya, atthagama, assāda, ādīnava and nissaraṇa. This 
is the distinctive  quality of this dispensation in regard to contact. 
From here onwards we shall take up a number of discourses to 
clarify further the phenomenon of contact. Now you had better 
take this as a pilgrimage – a pilgrimage to Nibbāna. With that 
idea uppermost in your minds please try to listen attentively to 
this sermon during this hour. 
 I need not mention this in particular for you know well 
enough about the twelve linked formula of Dependent Arising. In 
that formula beginning with ‘ avijjā paccayā sa ṅkhārā’ –  
‘dependent on ignorance, preparations’  – this is how contact 
comes to be mentioned: ‘….. saḷāyatana paccayā phasso, phassa 
paccayā vedanā’ – ‘dependent on the six sense -spheres, contact, 
dependent on contact, feeling.’ But the deepest philosophy of 
contact is presented to us with the utmost clarity by the 
Madhupiṇḍika (‘Honey ball’) Sutta which is rich in its flavour of 
meaning like a ball of honey. On previous occasions we have

Miracle of Contact 

discussed in full this Madhupiṇḍika Sutta 3 of the Majjhima 
Nikāya. If we are to bring up what is relevant to this context, the 
venerable arahant Mahā Kaccāna who was placed foremost 
among those disciples who are capable of expounding at length 
what is preached in brief is seen explaining a brief utterance of 
the Buddha at  the request of the company of monks. This 
sentence occurs in that explanation: 
 “….cakkhuñcāvuso, pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhu -
viññāṇaṁ, tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso” 
 This statement presents a very profound philosophy. 
 ‘cakkhuñcāvuso, pa ṭicca rūpe ca uppaj jati cakkhu -
viññāṇaṁ’ 
 ‘Dependent on eye and forms arises eye-consciousness.’ 
 Then comes the phrase: 
 ‘tiṇṇaṁ saṅgati phasso’ 
 ‘The concurrence of the three is contact.’ 
 If you reflect on this deeply, you will discover an 
extremely knotty point – a subtl e one at that. Now remember, 
here the two words ‘ paṭicca’ and ‘ uppajjati’ came up. This is a 
clear indication that the Law of Dependent Arising is concerned 
with the arising of consciousness. Because of eye and forms 
arises eye-consciousness. But once it arises, worldlings, because 
of their delusion, because of their ignorance, count them as three. 
It is not really justifiable to count these as three. Why? It is 
because of the eye and forms that consciousness arose. We have 
explained what eye-consciousness is. The nature of consciousness 
is the very discriminating as two things. Until consciousness 
arises there is no idea of eye and form as two things. It is when

Miracle of Contact 

consciousness arises that one gets the idea: ‘This is my eye and 
there is that form.’ 
 That is why we say that the gap – the interstice – between 
the two is consciousness. But due to non -understanding one 
counts eye, forms and consciousness as three. It is when one 
imagines them as three, that contact arises. From there onwards it 
is all delusion. That is why we call contact the turning point. Now 
that regarding contact we spoke of two things and a gap, let us 
now turn to a powerful discourse we had discussed on various 
occasions – namely the Majjhe Sutt a 4 among the ‘Sixes’ of 
Anguttara Nikāya . First of all let me mention the introductory 
story for those who do not know about it. When the Buddha was 
dwelling at Isipatana in Benares, a group of Elder monks 
gathered in the assembly hall after the alms -round and initiated a 
Dhamma discussion – in modern parlance it may be called a 
symposium. What was the point at issue? A question to this effect 
came up in the Dhamma discussion. The Fortunate One has 
preached in the Metteyya Pañha of Pārāyaṇa the following verse:  
 Yo ubhante viditvāna 
 majjhe mantā na lippati 
 taṁ brūmi mahāpurisoti 
 sodha sibbanimaccagā 
 Having taken up this verse, they extracted four questions 
as the subject  for their  symposium. What are they? Let me first 
explain the meaning of the verse. ‘ yo ubhante viditvāna ’ – ‘He 
who, having un derstood both ends’, ‘ majjhe mantā na lippati ’ – 
‘does not get attached to the middle with wisdom’, ‘ taṁ brūmi 
mahāpurisoti’ the Buddha is saying: ‘Him I call a great man’ – 
Why? ‘ sodha sibbanimaccagā ’ – ‘Because he has bypassed the 
seamstress in this world.’ 
 So out of this cryptic verse four points are elicited as 
questions: ‘What is the one end mentioned in this verse? What is

Miracle of Contact 

the second end? What is the middle? Who is the seamstress? To 
these four questions , six Elder monks put forward six 
interpretations. They seem to be wonderful meditation topics. Let 
me bring up only  what is relevant to the context . Relating to the 
question of sense -spheres the interpretation given by the fifth 
Elder monk is this: ‘One end is the six internal sense -spheres, 
namely eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind. The second end is 
the six external sense -spheres – forms, sounds, smells, tastes, 
touches, ideas. The middle is consciousness and the seamstress is 
craving. Talking about seamstress, nowadays there could be 
skilled seam stress in the garment industry. But  this seamstress 
can beat them all because she has three special qualifications, 
namely: ‘ ponobhavikā’ – she puts the stitch for the next birth. 
‘nandirāgasahagatā’ – she has delight and attachment and 
‘tatratatrābhinandinī’ – she delights now  here now there. It is 
that seamstress who puts the knot between the two ends ignoring 
the middle. Consciousness which is in the middle has arisen 
because of those two. But ignoring that fact the seamstress 
craving puts the stitch to those two ends. For instance it stitches 
up eye and forms. 
 The story of stitching up eye and forms, we have 
mentioned on various occasions. If we are to give a simile, one 
that is easily understood is the mirage. In short the Buddha has 
compared the entire aggregate of perception to a mirage. When 
we say ‘mirage’ we have in mind only the eye and forms. But the 
comparison of the entire aggregate of perception to a mirage is a 
very deep dictum. However in this context, for simplicity’s sake , 
let us take the question of eye and forms. Most of you know what 
a mirage is, but let us briefly remind ourselves about it. There is a  
Sanskrit word for the mirage – namely ‘ mṛgatṛsṇikā’ which 
means a sight that arouses craving and thirst in a deer. At times 
when there is a drought there is an appearance in the distance 
which resembles flowing water. The deer imagines water in it. 
What is its stance? ‘I am here and water is there. I am here and 
water is there.’ Though it tells itself ‘I am here and water  is there’

Miracle of Contact 

with every step it takes it is taking its eye with it. Still it goes on 
telling: ‘I am here, water is there.’ What it imagines to be water 
also recedes. 
 Now that is the nature of the mirage. It is an endless 
pursuit. The mirage is deceptive. Wh at perpetuates that deception 
is the magic -like delusion in eye -consciousness. The deer keeps 
running unaware of the gap mentioned above. It is ignorant of the 
intervening space. Due to that delusion the deer runs and gets 
wearied. The Buddha has pointed o ut that not only the deer but 
the entire world of  living beings is deluded like it by this mirage 
of perception. It is this seamstress craving who is playing this 
subtle trick. It is said that this seamstress puts the knot. How can 
one get free from these  knots. A clue to that release is found in 
this verse itself. ‘Yo ubhante viditvāna – majjhe mantā na lippat’, 
‘mantā’ means wisdom. You might say: ‘But we don’t have 
wisdom. It is something that dawns on arahants automatically.’ 
You must not say so. The seed of wisdom is there in every one of 
us. It is ‘yonisomanasikāra’– radical attention. 
 ‘Yonisomanasikāra’ is a very powerful word in this 
dispensation – particularly for insight meditators. But 
unfortunately we have to mention that in the commentaries we  do 
not get a clear explanation of it. It is explained as ‘ upāya 
manasikāra’ (skillful attention) and ‘ patha manasikāra ’ 
(attention according to the path). We call it ‘wise attention’ for 
convenience’s sake. But there is a great depth in it. ‘ Yoni’ means 
the place of origin – the matrix. Therefore ‘ yonisomanasikāra’ 
means ‘attention by way of the place of origin’. Already you can 
guess what the place of origin is. It is contact ( phassa) that we 
called the turning-point. That is why in the Brahmajāla Sutta we 
found the dictum: ‘ tadapi phassa paccayā ’ (‘That too is 
dependent on contact’). It seems for some reason or other that 
fact has not come to light so far. Contact is what seems to be the 
place of origin. So attending by way of the place of origin is 
yonisomanasikāra.

Miracle of Contact 

 From here onwards we have to give various similes. There 
is a game called ‘table -tennis’. Well, let us call to mind this 
game. What we call the Ping -Pong ball and the two rackets are 
the paraphernalia required. There is a short net in the middle of 
the T.T table. What is the procedure in this game? The ball that 
the player on the other side spins with his racket has to be 
returned to the other side by the player on this side before it falls 
to the ground. Now for easy comprehension of our simile let us 
call the player on the opposite side Māra. The player on this side 
is the meditator. Take it as a table tennis game between Māra and 
the meditator. There is no ‘racketeer’ like Māra. Just call to mind 
the nuances of the term ‘racket’ in the society. We have co me all 
this way in Saṁsāra because we got caught in Māra’s racket. 
Now we are going to beat Māra. Even to beat him, the meditator 
has to take up the racket. What does the incompetent or unskillful 
player do? When the player on the other side sends the ball to this 
side he lets it bump off and with difficulty returns it bending his 
body this way and that way. He cannot go on like that. He will be 
the loser before long. On the other hand the competent one keeps 
standing straight and returns the ball to the other side as soon as it 
touches his side of the table. He does not allow it to bump off. 
You had better take this ‘bumping off’ itself as a simile for 
‘papañca’ – conceptual proliferation. In the context of the 
Dhamma, this ‘bumping off’ is comparable to papañca. Not to 
give way to ‘ papañca’ is attending then and there without 
allowing thoughts to bump off. What is the ‘then and there’? The 
point of contact – ‘phassa’. So attending then and there to the 
point of contact is like returning the ball to the other side as soon 
as it touches this side. You have to do it with extreme rapidity. It 
is one who does it very rapidly that in the end beats Māra. Māra 
will have to throw away his racket.  
 Let us take up another simile. It is not a game but a fight. 
We are now going back to the age of sword -fights. Not only in 
Sri Lanka but in countries like England they used the sword both 
for offence and defense. They had a sword hu ng on the belt.

Miracle of Contact 

When two such persons fall out, one challenges the other to come 
for a fight and draws the sword from the scabbard. Sometimes the 
fight would go on as a duelling. With no shield to protect oneself, 
a parry and thrust would go on with the sword. Just think about it. 
How rapidly should one wield the sword in order to be the 
winner. One has to be prepared to ward off every blow of the 
opponent. We gave both these similes to show how rapidly one 
has to go on attending. Whether it is the racket o r the sword, one 
has to accelerate attention to the utmost. Since we gave the simile 
of the table -tennis game as a practical illustration, let us assume 
that Māra is sending a ‘form -ball’. As soon as the ‘form -ball’ 
comes, without allowing it to ‘bump off’  into ‘ papañca’, one 
should turn it to the opposite side. How does one do it? What is 
the racket used on this Buddha side? ‘ anicca, anicca ’ – 
‘impermanent, impermanent.’  Māra may send the ball again. But 
with this ‘anicca’ racket we turn it to the other s ide. We gave this 
simile to acquaint you with ‘ aniccānupassanā’ – ‘contemplation 
of impermanence.’ 
  On an earlier occasion too we mentioned in passing a 
very powerful sermon on the contemplation of impermanence. In 
the Saḷāyatana Vagga of the Saṁyutta Nik āya there are two 
discourses with the same title ‘ Dvayaṁ’. Last time we discussed 
one of them. Now what is relevant to the present context is the 
second ‘ Dvayaṁ’ Sutta. 5 This is how the Buddha begins that 
discourse: “ Dvayaṁ bhikkhave pa ṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti.” 
‘Monks, depending on a dyad consciousness arises.’ “ Kathañca 
bhikkhave dvayaṁ paṭicca viññā ṇaṁ sambhoti.” ‘How, monks, 
does consciousness arise depending on a dyad?’ “ Cakkhuñca  
paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññā ṇaṁ.” ‘Depending on eye 
and fo rms arises eye consciousness.’ Then comes a series of 
significant words. “ Cakkhuṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmi aññathābhāvī, 
rūpā anicca  vipariṇāmino aññathābhāvino .” ‘Eye is 
impermanent, changing and turning otherwise. Forms are 
impermanent, changing and turning ot herwise.’ Then it is said: 
“Itthetaṁ dvayaṁ calañceva vay añca anicca ṁ vipariṇāmī

Miracle of Contact 

aññathābhāvī.” ‘Thus this dyad is unstable, liable to pass away, 
impermanent changing and turning otherwise.’ That is not all. 
“Cakkhuviññāṇaṁ aniccaṁ vipariṇāmī aññathābhāvī.” ‘Eye 
consciousness is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise.’ 
“Yopi hetu yopi paccayo cakkhuviññā ṇassa uppādāy a…….” 
‘Whatever condition there is for the arising of eye -consciousness, 
that too is impermanent.’ Then the Buddha poses a question to 
the monks: “Monks, how can something that arises due to a 
condition that is impermanent, be permanent?” If the conditions 
are impermanent, how can eye -consciousness arisen depending 
on them be permanent? There are three terms used to denote the 
collocation of these three factors: “ tiṇṇaṁ dhammānaṁ saṅgati 
sannipāto samavāyo ” – The concurrence, assemblage, 
togetherness – that is what is called ‘contact’. Then comes the 
statement: “ Cakkhusamphassopi anicco vipari ṇāmī 
aññathābhāvī.” ‘Eye contact too is impermanent , changing, 
becoming otherwise.’ Then again the question is posed: How can 
eye contact arisen due to impermanent conditions be permanent? 
Now comes a significant declaration: “ Phuṭṭho bhikkhave, vedeti, 
phuṭṭho sañjānāti, phuṭṭho ceteti.” ‘contacted, monks , one feels, 
contacted one perceives, contacted one intends.’ Keep in mind, 
then: The origin and matrix of feeling, perception and intention is 
contact itself. It is not without reason that we stated that 
‘yonisomanasikāra’ or radical attention is attendin g mentally to 
the point of touch. In conclusion it is said that all these things are 
unstable, passing away, impermanent and changing otherwise: 
“itthetepi dhammā calā ceva v ayā ca aniccā vipari ṇāmino 
aññathābhāvino.” 
 This is the wonderful presentation of the contemplation of 
impermanence by the Buddha. With that background you can 
now understand that whether it is the racket or the sword, what 
matters is the speed of directing attention. It is at the moment one 
has accelerated the speed of attention to the utmost, that one can 
understand the secret of that mirage. We have now said enough 
about the eye. There are six. So then, let us turn our attention to

Miracle of Contact 

the ear. I hope to explain that too with similes. Let me mention 
first of all that I have to hark back to the Majjhe Sutta , when 
speaking about every sense sphere. According to the exposition in 
the Majjhe Sutta, this is what is stated about the ear. Ear is one 
end, sound is the second end and ear consciousness is in the  
middle. The seamstress as usual is craving. What does this 
seamstress do? She puts the stitch on ear and sound ignoring ear -
consciousness. In this case too accelerating attention is what is 
helpful. I would like to give a simile to illustrate the accelera tion 
of attention. It may be a little unconventional. 
 As you know, there is an insect like a beetle, about two 
inches in size living on the trees which we call ‘ Rähäyyā’(Eng. 
‘cicada’) That creature starts a music around 4 o’clock in the 
afternoon. When o ne ‘rähäyyā’ gives the start, others join in the 
chorus. It is an extremely rough music irritating the ear. If you 
bear with me I shall imitate it: 
 ‘R-R-R…………R-R-R-R-R………..R-R’ 
 Sometimes I wonder whether it is called ‘Rähäyyā’ 
because it teaches us how t o roll our ‘R’s. Of course I do not 
know the etymology of the word. Rähäyyā’s music is a big 
disturbance to our meditation for calm and serenity (i.e. 
‘Samatha’) because it digs into the ear. But it reminds us that 
there is something called the ‘ear -drum’. The most wonderful 
musical instrument in the world is the ear -drum. Rähäyyā 
reminds us of the fact that we have an ear -drum. Though it is our 
‘enemy’ in ‘samatha’, we can make it our ‘friend’ in ‘ vipassanā’ 
(Insight-meditation) if we use radical attention  with mindfulness 
(sati) and full awareness (‘ sampajañña’). Between two ‘R’s 
(R….R) there is Nibbāna, if one focusses one’s attention there. 
Only if you get caught in the ‘knot’ of the seamstress craving that 
it becomes a rough and irritating music. At las t you will realize 
that it is only a concatenation of ‘R’s. According to the 
terminology of insight meditation, we may say, one can leave

Miracle of Contact 

behind the ‘perception of the compact’ ( ghanasaññā) and arouse 
the perception of the heap ( rāsisaññā) if one directs o ne’s 
attention then and there with mindfulness and full awareness. So 
after all, rähäyyā is an insect that gives us a meditation -topic for 
Nibbāna, though apparently it is a disturbance to calm.  
 I must confess, I forgot to mention one thing when 
speaking about the eye. All the similes I gave about the eye are 
gross when compared with the simile given by the Buddha in the 
Indriyabhāvanā Sutta . 6 It is the last discourse in the Majjhima 
Nikāya. It is a wonderful discourse which the Buddha addressed 
to Venerable Ānanda. We may say, that the quintessence of that 
discourse is the supreme and incomparable development of sense 
faculties ( anuttarā indriyabhāvanā ). It is illustrated with a 
number of similes. The simile that the Buddha had given there 
with refe rence to the eye beats all our similes regarding the 
acceleration of attention. The simile is: as quickly as a man with 
vision opens his eyes and closes them and closes the eyes and 
opens them, one should exercise radical attention with regard to 
forms com ing before the eyes. So for the eyes, the Buddha has 
aptly given a simile based on the eye. 
 When it comes to the ear, he gives a simile about the ear 
itself. Just as a strong man snaps his fingers with perfect ease so 
quickly, should one attend to a sound . By the way, the snapping 
of the fingers is often taken as an indication of a moment (khaṇa). 
The Buddha says that on hearing a sound a monk might be 
pleased or displeased or have a mingling of both but that he 
should immediately get rid of them and bring  his mind to rest in 
equanimity. 
 Then we come to the nose. There too, if we go back to the 
Majjhe Sutta, nose is one end, smell is the second end and nose 
consciousness is in the middle. The seamstress craving ignores 
the middle and puts the stitch. When we smell something, we

Miracle of Contact 

actually take in the air bearing the odour. If it is a pleasant smell 
we take it in with attachment. Air is the bearer of smell. 
 There is a story in the Sagāthaka Vagga of the Saṁyutta 
Nikāya 7 regarding attachment to fragrant smells. In the Kosala 
country a forest dwelling monk was living in a hut in the jungle. 
One day on returning from his alms -round he went down into a 
pond and eagerly smelt a lotus flower. A forest deity saw it and 
accused him as a thief of fragrance. The monk in defense said: 
“How can you call me a thief of fragrance? I didn’t pluck the 
flower or take it away.” But the deity said: “You are here 
purifying your mind. So, even a slight fault appears as a serious 
one.” The monk  confessed his guilt and thanked the deity for 
pointing it out. So, it seems even intentionally smelling a flower 
is a defilement. The delusion of the mirage is perpetuated in 
doing so. One imagines that the fragrance is in the flower. 8 
 In regard to the t ongue ‘Majjhe Sutta’ says: tongue is one 
end taste is the other end and tongue -consciousness is in the 
middle.’ When it comes to tasty things it may be ice -cream or a 
piece of instant chicken. What happens as soon as one sees the 
ice-cream or the piece of chicken? Saliva flows into the tongue. 
Saliva is the bearer of taste just as air is the bearer of smell. 
Saliva gets ready to receive the taste. So, one greedily gulps 
down the tasty thing. The craving for taste is so powerful that the 
Buddha has recommend ed the meditations on elements and 
loathsomeness to combat it. He declares that one who is greedy 
will never awaken his heart (to Nibbāna). ‘Rasataṇhāya gadhito 
hadayaṁ nāvabujjhati.” 9 
 Sometimes he gives a simile that makes one shudder when 
reflecting on it. In the Nālaka Sutta  of Sutta Nipāta when 
describing the path of practice befitting a muni (sage), he 
mentions it in brief: ‘ Khuradhārūpamo bhava.’10 – ‘Be one who 
has the simile of t he razor-edge in mind.’ The simile about the 
razor-edge given by the Buddha is as follows: A razor -blade is

Miracle of Contact 

smeared with honey. To one who is greedy the razor -blade is 
given to lick. Can he do it without cutting his tongue? That is a 
simile which arouses f right in the greedy. Taste is such a subtle 
craving. Why does the Buddha give us such a frightful simile? 
Because he has conquered the craving for taste. Even the other 
arahants cite the example of the Buddha. “ Rasapaṭisaṁvedī kho 
pana so bhava ṁ Gotamo āhā raṁ āhāreti no ca rasarāgapaṭisaṁvedī.” 11 The Brahmin youth Uttara once observed: 
“Experiencing taste that Venerable Gotama partakes of food but 
he is not one who experiences an attachment to taste.” The taste -
buds of the Buddha are as acute as ours. They  do not go inactive 
with the attainment of Buddhahood. But he has no attachment to 
taste. Nowadays people cannot understand this wonderful fact. 
This means that there is Nibbāna even at the tip of the tongue. A 
meditator can realize this to some extent while taking food with 
mindfulness and full awareness. So after all, the taste is neither in 
the tongue nor in the ‘instant -chicken’. It is only at the ‘ instant’ 
the tongue and the  instant-chicken come together that the flavour 
becomes active. Now that we have spoken of saliva, just see how 
aptly the Buddha has given a simile for it. When speaking about 
the eye, he gave a simile that befits the eye and in speaking about 
the ear, one that befits the ear. Now see how apt the simile about 
the tongue is. Just as a strong man with the greatest ease gathers a 
bit of saliva at the tip of the tongue and spews it out, so quickly 
should a monk, as soon as the attachment to taste has arisen, fr ee 
his mind from likes and dislikes and bring it to rest in equanimity.   
 Let us now take up the question of body and tangibles. In 
this connection too the  Majjhe Sutta says that the body is the one 
end, the tangible is the second end and body -consciousness the 
middle. There too it is precisely due to body and the tangible that 
body-consciousness arises. But the seamstress craving stitches up 
the two. You had better remember all these similes. That is why I 
cautioned you to listen attentively. It is here t hat what we actually 
call ‘contact’(phassa) comes. That is why the Buddha called it a 
‘nutriment’ ( āhāra). He pointed out that there are four kinds of

Miracle of Contact 

nutriments (cattāro āhārā 12) which sustain beings. The first is the 
gross or subtle food taken in morsels  (kabaliṅkāra āhāra ). The 
second is contact (phassa). The third is intentional thinking going 
on in the mind ( manosañcetanā). The fourth is consciousness 
(viññāṇaṁ). It leads to a very deep dhamma disquisition. But 
there too the simile the Buddha has given  for contact is one that 
makes one shudder. It is found in the ‘ Puttamaṁsa Sutta ’. 
Without relating the whole story we shall give only the simile. 
There the Buddha uses the term ‘ niccammā gāvī’ – literally ‘the 
cow that has been skinned.’ But we have to un derstand by it not a 
cow that is fully skinned to death – only that in some parts of its 
body skin has come off. The Buddha is here speaking about such 
a cow. He says that if that cow stands near a wall, creatures in the 
wall would eat the flesh. If it sta nds near a tree, creatures in the 
tree would eat into the wound. If it goes down into water, 
creatures living in the water would eat into its body. If it stands in 
an open space, birds would peck at its wounds. Wherever that 
cow stands, creatures there wou ld eat into it. Just ponder over the 
depth of this simile. How do we experience the pleasure of bodily 
contact? What is next to contact is feeling. You had better reflect 
on this statement: There is a difference between the feeling 
experienced with the skin and the feeling experienced without the 
skin. Suppose we have an open wound. Let alone other soft 
things, a velvet cloth is extremely soft to the touch. When a 
velvet cloth touches the wound, do we get a pleasurable feeling? 
What has happened now? 
 Let u s add a post -script to this simile. The Buddha has 
compared the entire body to a wound . 13 If the whole body is a 
‘wound’, what could be the skin?  The skin is the ‘ba ndage’ on it. 
It is to decorate this ba ndage that worldlings, especially females, 
are spend ing so much. To ‘paint’ the bandage and make it 
fashionable females in particular take a lot of pains. W hen a tiny 
scratch occurs the pleasure of touch is gone. I need not give you 
instances. Just reflect on the difference between the feeling with

Miracle of Contact 

the skin and without the skin. So the simile of ‘ niccammā gāvī’ 
(skinned cow) given by the Buddha is extremely profound. 
 Let us now revert to the simile given by the Buddha with 
reference to the feeling of touch in the Indriyabhāvanā Sutta. It 
concerns the reaction to the feeling of touch. He even gives a 
formula to show how quickly a monk should dispel a liking or a 
dislike or a mixture of both on experiencing a touch sensation. He 
gives an insightful formula to be used in bringing the min d to rest 
in equanimity. A monk should reflect: ‘Here is a liking, a 
disliking or both arisen in me. But that is something prepared, 
gross and dependently arisen. This is peaceful, this is excellent, 
namely equanimity (…. tañca kho  saṅkhataṁ oḷārikaṁ paṭiccasamuppannaṁ. Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ paṇītaṁ yadidaṁ  upekkhā’). 
In fact, that principle is applied to every sense faculty. With 
reference to the body this is the simile given in the 
Indriyabhāvanā Sutta  to illustrate the rapidity of bringing one’s 
mind to ‘ upekkhā’ or equanimity: ‘As quickly as a strong man 
would stretch his bent arm or bend his outstretched arm.’ This 
simile often occurs in the Buddhist scriptures with reference to 
the speed with which one who has  psychic powers ‘disappears’ 
from one place and appears at another place. So in speaking about 
the body, the Buddha has taken a simile from the body itself. 
 Now we come to the mind. It is with the idea of saving 
time for dealing with the mind that I dealt with the other senses in 
brief. Mind is the k nottiest point in the stitch of the seamstress 
craving. It is the last ‘trump’ of Māra. That is where all beings in 
the world including the scientist and the philosopher has got 
stuck. There too, to begin with, let us take up the ‘two ends’ of 
the Majjhe Sutta. Mind is one end. The other end is mind -objects 
(dhammā). One who puts the knot between them is the seamstress 
craving. We have to explain a very deep point in this connection. 
Let us hark back to the term ‘ manasikāra’. In the Pāli language 
the etymology of the word is: ‘ manasi’ is in the locative case – 
that means ‘in the mind’ and ‘kāra’ is ‘doing’. So ‘manasikāra’ is

Miracle of Contact 

suggestive of some ‘doing’ in the mind. That ‘doing’ in the mind 
inadvertently we direct towards some object. That is a very deep 
point. Now that we have mentioned the word ‘manasikāra’ let us 
bring in another discourse we came across earlier too. We have 
already discussed it. When I mention its title those of you who 
had listened to it earlier would easily understand – namely 
Kimmūlaka Sutta. 14 That also is a very wonderful discourse. 
 The Buddha asks the monks: “How, monks, would you 
reply if wandering ascetics of other sects raise a set of questions 
like this?” the monks confess: “We do not know how to reply. 
Would the Fortunate One h imself tell us the answers.” What is 
noteworthy is that the Buddha himself presents the set of 
questions. That indicates how important and how deep the 
questions are. Now the Buddha repeats the set of questions and 
says: “If they question you, you had bett er give these answers.” 
We have discussed that discourse earlier. So in this context we 
shall take up only the first three questions that are relevant. 
“Kimmūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā ?” “What, friends, is the root 
of all things?” “ kiṁ sambhavā sabbe dhammā ?” “What is the 
coming up of all things?” “ kiṁ samudayā sabbe dhammā ?” 
“What is the arising of all things?” The answer to the first 
question is: “ Chandamūlakā āvuso sabbe dhammā. ” “Interest, 
friends, is the root of all things.” We defined ‘ chanda’ as the 
lightest shade of craving. In fact it is so light that it is hardly 
recognizable. According to the traditional way of explanation 
“craving is bad but the desire for the skillful ( Kusalacchanda) is 
alright.” But even that has to be given up. That is why it is said in 
the Dhamma “ Chandaṁ nissāya chanda ṁ pajahatha” 
“Depending on desire give up desire.” It is a wonderful Middle 
Path. In the final reckoning even that has to be abandoned. The 
desire for the skillful is good. One cannot do without it. The 
desire for calm and insight must be there. But there comes a time 
to give it up as well.

Miracle of Contact 

 That shows the fact that ‘ chanda’ which we rendered by 
‘interest’ is the root of all things. Just think why a problem comes 
to our mind as if from nowhere. It is ‘interest’ howe ver subtle it 
may be. But it comes up. What finds or discovers it is attention – 
‘manasikāra sambhavā ’. It arises from ‘contact’ – ‘phassa 
samudayā’. I do not know much about the computer but as far as 
I can see, all the above three are found in the computer. We spoke 
of ‘ chanda’ (interest), ‘ manasikāra’ (attention) and ‘ phassa’ 
(contact). Out of these, ‘chanda’ is the ‘mouse’. As you know, 
the mouse works unseen – stealthily. One cannot even see it 
working. When the mouse is active what happens? The ‘curso r’ 
starts running. That is attention. So ‘interest’ is the ‘root’ – the 
‘mouse’, which works stealthily. What does it do stealthily? It 
sets the ‘cursor’ working. What does the cursor aim at? The 
‘menu’ – that is phassa – ‘contact’. It is from there onward s that 
one ‘enjoys’ what is ‘dished up’ by the computer. We gave this 
analysis to make the explanation as practical as possible. 
 So then it seems ‘interest’ is the root of all things. Until 
the Buddha pointed it out, the world was unaware of it. Every 
time we conclude a deep disquisition by citing two simple verses 
which everyone knows. Let us recall them – at least the relevant 
portion. ‘ Manopubbaṅgamā dhammā – manoseṭṭhā mano -
mayā’. 15 All this time the commentarial tradition had interpreted 
it differently. As we pointed out in explaining the line 
‘manopubbaṅgamā dhammā’, out of the two ‘ mano’ (mind) and 
‘dhammā’ (mind-objects) on either side, mind comes first as the 
‘forerunner’ ( manopubbaṅgamā). ‘ Manoseṭṭhā’ – the mind -
objects have mind as their chief. Not only that,  ‘manomayā’ – the 
mind-objects are ‘mind -made’. That is why there is that word 
with its peculiar etymology: ‘ manasikāra’ ( lit. doing -within-the 
mind) i.e. attention. We were not aware that an object of the mind 
is of mind’s own making. So then it seems that all this gimmick is 
carried on with something made by the mind itself. Just see how 
subtle the knotty stitch of the seamstress craving is. It is by 
accelerating the speed  of attention as in the table -tennis game,

Miracle of Contact 

that one can catch up with it. The secret of attention (manasikāra) 
is discovered by accelerating ‘radical -attention’ ( yonisomanasikāra). That is to say by attending promptly – then and 
there. This is something almost ‘unimaginable’.  
 There comes a time when the place of origin of a thought 
comes to light. There is in fact a couple of lines of a verse in a 
certain discourse which even the  commentaries do not explain 
correctly: ‘ Disvā āyatanuppāda ṁ – sammā citta ṁ vimuccati.’ 16 
‘Having seen the arising of sense -spheres – the mind is well 
released.’ What is meant by saying that if at any time one sees the 
arising of the sense -spheres, the min d is emancipated? The 
arising of the sense -spheres occurs at a speed hardly discernible. 
With extreme rapidity, the ‘give -and-take’ process goes on 
between the mind and the mind -object. Everyone thinks that the 
mind-object stands before the mind, for one c an argue: ‘How can 
we think without an object?’ But from the etymology of the term 
‘manasi-kāra’, one can understand that the mind -object itself is 
mind-made. That is why we say ‘ manomayā’. At whatever 
occasion one comes to understand it, the magic -show of  
consciousness gets exposed. It is this magician – this juggler – 
who creates this confusion. What we find in this magic -show is 
the mind and its object which is of its own making. In the final 
reckoning it amounts to the same problem of the deer and the 
mirage. Only when one accelerates radical attention to the 
utmost, one comes to understand it as it is. 
 We need not give a simile of our own. Any simile we can 
give falls far below the mark when compared to the simile given 
by the Buddha with reference to the mind. “Suppose, monks, a 
man lets fall two or three drops of water into an iron -cauldron 
heated all day long. The dropping of those water -drops is slow 
but their drying up and evaporation is instantaneous.” Just try to 
visualize it. You let two or three drops of water to fall from above 
into an intensely heated iron -cauldron. If you watch the drops as 
they fall, you fail to see them drying up.

Miracle of Contact 

 In this simile we seem to get a hint to what is happening 
between mind and mind -object. But even that if a meditator 
realizes by accelerating radical attention, he has seen the arising 
of sense-spheres – how the two come together and consciousness 
arises. To see the arising of consciousness is to see the Law of 
Dependent Arising: “ Cakkhuñca  paṭicca rūpe ca upp ajjati 
cakkhuviññāṇaṁ.” Note the significance of the two words: 
‘paṭicca uppajjati’ – Depending on eye and forms arises eye 
consciousness. The Buddha has preached that consciousness is a 
magic show. That is why it is said: ‘ majjhe mantā na lippati ’. 
Gets not attached at the middle with wisdom. ‘ Yo ubhante 
viditvāna’ – ‘He who having understood both ends.’ Why does 
one who understands both ends has no attachment to the middle? 
Because he has wisdom. He has discovered the magic of 
consciousness. We have so o ften said that if one sees the interior 
of a magic show the magic is no more for him. It happens at the 
above mentioned occasion. It is then that radical attention or 
‘yoniso manasikāra’ which we called the ‘seed’ of wisdom bears 
its fruit as wisdom itself . In that wisdom, consciousness has no 
place. That is why it is said ‘ paññā bhāvetabhā viññā ṇaṁ 
pariññeyyaṁ’17 – ‘wisdom has to be developed, consciousness 
has to be comprehended.’ In order to comprehend consciousness 
wisdom has to be developed. At the pea k of the development of 
wisdom, the secret of consciousness is exposed. It is exposed at 
the above mentioned moment. The arising of sense -spheres is 
seen then and there. Along with the seeing of the arising of sensespheres, their cessation becomes obvious , since whatever that has 
arisen has to cease. That is the realization of cessation ( nirodha). 
Then, there is that peaceful and excellent Nibbāna as expressed in 
the memorable formula, beginning with ‘ Etaṁ santaṁ etaṁ 
paṇītaṁ’ (This is peaceful, this is excellent.) etc. 
 The question now comes up about the object of the mind – 
dhamma. We said that a meditator cannot do without it. There is a 
very important discourse which is relevant to the discussion of 
that point – namely, Alagaddūpama Sutta.18 In that di scourse the

Miracle of Contact 

Buddha has given the simile of the raft. He declares: 
“Kullūpamaṁ vo bhikkhave dhammaṁ desissāsi.” “Monks, I will 
preach to you a Dhamma which is comparable to a raft.” A man 
going on a long journey comes across a great expanse of water. 
There is no ferry boat or bridge. Since there is no other 
alternative he collects some branches from here and there, binds 
them together with creepers and improvises a raft. With its help 
and making an effort with his hands and feet, he gets across to the 
farther shore. Once he gets to the other shore, he no longer needs 
the raft. So he sets it adrift in the water. Drawing the  moral from 
this parable the Buddha says: “ Kullūpamo mayā  bhikkhave 
dhammo desito nitthara ṇatthāya, no gaha ṇatthāya.” “I have 
preached the Dhamma with the simile of the raft just for crossing 
over, not for grasping.” In the same connection he says: If one 
has understood this simile, even those things that have to do with 
Dhamma have to be given up. What to say of things on the side 
of Adhamma – that is those contrary to the Dhamma.  
 If I may allude to another simile for you to understand this 
moral in brief, I have already discussed the simile of the seven 
relay-chariots in the Rathavinīta Sutta.19 It is a simile resembling 
the modern relay-race. King Pasenadi of Kosala has some urgent 
business in Sāketa and seven relay-chariots are arranged for him. 
Because horses get tired the king dismounts from the first relay - 
chariot and mounts the second rela y-chariot. Likewise from the 
second to the third and from the third to the fourth and so on and 
finally arrives at Sāketa by the seventh chariot. It is after getting 
down from the seventh chariot that he settles his business. The 
simile given is an illustr ation of the sequence of the seven 
purifications. The purification of virtue is purposeful as far as 
purification of the mind, purification of the mind is purposeful as 
far as purification of view and in this way seven purifications are 
mentioned. The seve nth is purification by knowledge and vision 
but even that has to be given up because perfect Nibbāna is 
without clinging (anupādā parinibbāna). This is very wonderful.

Miracle of Contact 

In no other religious system you find anything like this. Giving 
up itself is Nibbāna. 
 It is to explain this that we used two terms in our sermons 
and books, namely ‘pragmatic’ and ‘relative’. Because it is 
pragmatic we make use of it, because it is relative we give it up. 
Now I am going to give you a new simile of a type you had never 
heard before. As you know, there are relay -races. In this race I 
am going to describe, there are two teams – Māra team and the 
Buddha team. We are not concerned with the participants of the 
Māra team. In the Buddha -team there are four runners. In a relay 
race they make use of a baton to be carried and passed on. The 
baton has to reach the winning -post for a team to win. Runner  
No 1. starts running. He runs in self -sacrificing spirit. He runs 
with all his efforts, panting all the way. On reaching the second 
runner he successfully hands over the baton to him but himself 
falls dead. His partner does not look back to see whether his 
friend is dead and runs in the same spirit putting forth his best 
efforts. He runs and runs panting and passes the baton to the third 
and falls dead. The third in the same spirit and with the same 
vigour runs and passes the baton to the fourth but falls dead. The 
fourth likewise runs in the same spirit with all his might to rea ch 
the winning-post. There he hands over the baton to the judge and 
himself falls dead. Who gets the prize? Who won the race? Is the 
‘baton’ the winner? There is no one to receive the      
prize. Take it that Nibbāna too is something like that. Everyone 
seems to have the problem of ‘self’ and ‘not -self’ (‘ attā’ and 
‘anattā’). Who attains Nibbāna? The Buddha has said in 
repudiation: “These Brahmins are leveling at me a false charge of 
preaching annihilation.” 20 We are also accused of it because of 
our sermon s highlighting the Buddha -word. But this is how the 
Buddha answers the charge of preaching annihilation: “Formerly, 
as well as now I point out only suffering and the cessation of 
suffering”. “ Dukkhameva uppajjamāna ṁ uppajjati dukkha ṁ 
nirujjhamānaṁ nirujjhanti.” 21 “What arises is only suffering and 
what ceases is only suffering.” There is no question of persons at

Miracle of Contact 

all. If so there is nothing to lament. Those who lament it are 
doing so because of ignorance. 
 Well then, if you all have come with me in this 
pilgrimage, the destination is the mind. But of course one can 
reach it through any of the six senses. That is why we said that 
there is Nibbāna even at the tip of the tongue, provided the 
meditator properly directs radical attention. Some ancient 
episodes can be true up to a point though there are exaggerations 
in the commentaries. It is said that in the past in such sacred cities 
like Anuradhapura and Mihintale there is no seat in the 
monasteries seated on which some monk had not attained 
arahanthood while part aking of porridge at dawn by reflecting 
wisely on food. By practicing it regularly as soon as one 
discovers the secret at the tip of the tongue, one directly comes to 
the mind. Finally on e arrives at the mind. Whatever is amassed 
through other senses at last boils down to mind and mind -objects. 
That is where insight reaches its peak . If one discovers that secret 
the magic -show of consciousness is exposed then and there. 
Wisdom is perfected and the journey ends. The Buddha team has 
won, and the Māra team has lost. 
 Now that, dear listeners, you have listened attentiv ely to 
what we have said, try to bring victory to the Buddha team. Don’t 
think that you go somewhere on attaining arahanthood. Don’t 
expect a ‘Simple Simon’ (‘ Siyadoris’) Nibbāna. Try to boost up 
the Buddha team taking the cue from those dead runners. So that 
is the illustration for the Four S upramundane Paths and Four 
Fruits. Try to recognize the four runners. I wish to wind up n ow. 
Out of all sermons given so far this is probably the most practical. 
Please make the best use of this sermon.  May the merits of 
listening to  this sermon conduce to your attainment of Nibbāna 
here and now! Whatever beings there be, from the lowest hell to 
the highest Brahma world  wishing to rejoice in this sermon, may 
they, with the help of this sermon with its meditation topics, 
attain the highest aim – the Deathless Nibbāna!

Miracle of Contact 

Notes 
1. Sn. p.143  Dvayatānupassanā Sutta 
2. D. I 42,43  Brahmajāla Sutta 
3. M. I 108 Madhupiṇḍika Sutta 
4. A. III 399 Majjhe Sutta 
5. S. IV 68 Dutiya Dvayaṁ Sutta 
6. M. III 298 Indriyabhāvanā Sutta 
7. S. I 204 Padumapuppa Sutta 
8. The simile given in the Indriyabhāvanā Sutta: 
  “Just as Ānanda, drops of water roll over from the 
slightly tilted lotus petal, they do not stick to it, so quickly 
and easily a liking, a disliking or both liking and disliking 
arisen ceases and equanimity is established in one, this  
Ānanda, is called the supreme development of sense -
faculties in this Noble One’s discipline re garding smells 
sensed by the nose.”  
(Note the association of smell with the lotus.)    
9. Thag. V 733 Pārāsariya Theragāthā 
10. Sn. p.138  Nālaka Sutta 
11. M. II 138 Brahmāyu Sutta; S. IV 164 Koṭṭhika Sutta 
12. S. II 11 Āhāra Sutta; S. II 97 Puttamaṁsa Sutta 
13. S. IV 83 Uddaka Sutta 
14. A. IV 338 Kimmūlaka Sutta 
15. Dhp. Yamaka Vagga – vv. 1,2 
16. A. III 378 Soṇa Sutta 
17. M. I 293 Mahā Vedalla Sutta 
18. M. I 135 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
19. M. I 145 Rathavinīta Sutta 
20. M. I 140 Alagaddūpama Sutta 
21. S. II 16 Kaccāyanagotta Sutta

By The Same Author 
1. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought   
2. Saṁyutta Nikāya – An Anthology  
3. Ideal Solitude  
4. The Magic of the Mind  
5. Towards Calm and Insight   
6. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume I  
7. From Topsy-turvydom to Wisdom, Volume II  
8. Seeing Through  
9. Towards A Better World  
10. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume I  
11. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume II  
12. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume III  
13. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume IV  
14. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume V  
15. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VI  
16. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Volume VII 
17. Nibbāna – The Mind Stilled, Library Edition  
18. Nibbāna and The Fire Simile  
19. A Majestic Tree of Merit  
20. The End of the World in Buddhist Perspective  
21. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume I  
22. The Law of Dependent Arising, Volume II  
23. Walk to Nibbāna   
24. Deliverance of the Heart through Universal Love 
All enquiries should be addressed to: 
Kaṭukurunde Ñāṇananda Sadaham Senasun Bhāraya 
Kirillawala Watta, Dammulla, Karandana 
Phone: 0777127454 
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net

කතු හිමියන්ග ් සිිංහල කෘති 
සැ.යු.: මෙෙ කෘති මලේඛනය සරලත්‍වයට ෙුලේතැන දුනේ අංක 
අනුපිළිමෙලකේ සහිතෙ සකසේවී ඇති බෙතේ , මලේඛනමයේ 
අගහරිමයේ එන කෘති මබොමහෝ දුරට ගැඹුරැ විය හැකි බෙතේ, 
පොඨකයිනේ දැනුෙතේ කිරීම් ෙශමයනේ සඳහනේ කරනු 
කැෙැතේමතමි. 
- සම්පොදක  
1. තිසරණ ෙහිෙ  
2. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 1 
3. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 2 
4. හිතක ෙහිෙ – 3 
5. දිවි කතමේ සැඳෑ අඳූර 
6. කය අනුෙ ගිය සිහිය 
7. හිත තැනීෙ 
8. පිනේ රැමකක ෙහිෙ 
9. අබිනිකේෙන 
10. පිළිමෙතිනේ පිළිමෙතට 
11. කමයේ කතොෙ 
12. ෙො-පිය උෙැටන 
13. පරතිපතේති පජාොෙ 
14. පැෙැතේෙ හො නැෙැතේෙ 
15. කෙම කකරමයනේ රෙම කකරයට 
16. මෙතේ සිමතේ විෙුකේතිය 
17. ඇති හැටි දැකේෙ 
18. තමපෝ ගුණ ෙහිෙ 
19. සකේෙමනේ නිෙන 
20. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 1 මෙළුෙ 
21. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 2 මෙළුෙ  
22. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 3 මෙළුෙ  
23. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 4 මෙළුෙ  
24. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 5 මෙළුෙ  
25. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 6 මෙළුෙ  
26. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 7 මෙළුෙ  
27. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 8 මෙළුෙ  
28. පහනේ කණුෙ රෙම මදේශනො – 9 මෙළුෙ

29. විදසුනේ උපමදසේ 
30. භොෙනො ෙොගගය 
31. උතේතරීතර හුදකලොෙ 
32. සසුනේ පිළිමෙත 
33. කලන චිතරය 
34. දිය සුළිය 
35. බුදු සෙය පුදේගලයො හො සෙොාය 
36. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  පළෙු මෙළුෙ   
37. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ – මදෙන මෙළුෙ  
38. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  මතෙන මෙළුෙ   
39. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සිෙුෙන මෙළුෙ   
40. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  පසේෙන මෙළුෙ   
41. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සයෙන මෙළුෙ   
42. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  සතේෙන මෙළුෙ   
43. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  අටෙන මෙළුෙ   
44. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  නෙෙන මෙළුෙ   
45. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  දසෙන මෙළුෙ   
46. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ –  එමකොමළොසේෙන මෙළුෙ    
47. නිෙමනේ නිවීෙ – පුසේතකොල ෙුද්‍රණය 11-11 වෙළුම්) 
48. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 1 මෙළුෙ  
49. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 2 මෙළුෙ  
50. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 3 මෙළුෙ  
51. පටිකක සෙුපපොද රෙමය – 4 මෙළුෙ 
52. ෙනමසේ ෙොයොෙ 
53. පැරණි මබෞදර චිනේතොමේ සංකලේපය සහ යථොථමය 
 
නැෙත ෙුද්‍රණය කරවීෙ පිළිබඳ විෙසීම් 
කටුකුරැනේමදේ ඤාණනන්‍ද සදහම් මසනසුන  
කිරිලේලෙලෙතේත, දම්ෙුලේල, කරඳන  
 
දුරකථනය: 0777127454  
knssb@seeingthroughthenet.net