## Sharing And Inclusion

Keynote Awareness is generous. Include everything in it.

This section may help to extend the meanings and in- sights of your meditation practice to a wider range of impressions and activities. The main theme is not to block this mental stream, but to meet it steadily. Allow awareness to transform snags, triggers and assumptions.

Some of the following will be a review and summary of the previous exercises. Central to this is the view that comes with understanding the three characteristics: that what comes into awareness is transitory, inconclusive and not a true statement of oneself or another. With this insight-knowing we’re not hanging onto, hunting for, defending or asserting some state; there is a free and stable knowing. All our practices encourage us to return to this knowing.

When insight-knowing is not completely ripened, the three characteristics are not properly integrated. That is, although changeability means that things arise and pass, there can be an unwillingness to allow impressions and thoughts to arise; they disturb us and threaten our confidence. On the other hand, ‘passing away’ can feel barren rather than easeful. The characteristic of unsatisfactoriness can cause us to dismiss or respond unwillingly to what arises.

Finally the characteristic of ‘not-self’ can be held in a way that blocks open awareness and understanding of the various self-impressions that arise. In these ways, the flowering of awareness is limited by attachment to views, and to the idea that there is or needs to be a self who is beyond these characteristics.

To encourage a full flowering, it should be recollected that the ground of insight-knowledge allows the mind to be spacious and the heart to be peaceful and unrestricted by fear, doubt or ill-will. Unrestricted, the heart operates in terms of empathy and goodwill. The consequent union of groundedness, spaciousness and empathy is the sensed balance that we can return to time and time again in our ongoing lives.

❖ As always, begin with grounding the mind in the here and now of the body, and in the heart of goodwill. Beginning in this way, we’re not coming from a memory or a teaching of insight, but from its practical foundation. Remember to include the entire body and the space it is sitting in. Right here, above, below, in front and behind, there is a space that is unobstructed and free from intrusion. Throughout the following process, return to this awareness when it feels right to do so. This might be: if you’re feeling overwhelmed and unable to be spacious around mental content; if you’re losing specific awareness and becoming spaced-out; or if you can’t get the hang of the following instructions.

❖ Bring awareness to mental content, so that you can sense what is arising in the mind right now, both as specifically present and felt, and also as an aspect of the flow of mind. Get the details but get out of the drama that this one is the big one, the impossible one, or the one that only you have. Allow what arises to arise, and sensing how it is affecting you, be the light that rests on its flowing water. Let it ‘speak’ and present its feeling, impression and activity, along with its pang, wobbles and surges. Extend awareness to that process as if you are helping someone who is unsteady to get to their feet.

❖ Extend awareness to the points where you feel stuck in what arises. Notice the impression of self that is created: that I am responsible for this stuckness and clinging; that I shouldn’t feel this way; that she or he is like this, and so on. Whoever that self seems to be, meet that impression with an open awareness. Feel the energy of that in the body. Stay with it, but not in it: get grounded. Widen the span of awareness to include awareness itself: be spacious. Soften the agitation and pressure that the mind is experiencing. Can you reveal and release stress rather than let it gather around what arises?

❖ Bring clear goodwill to these stuck places, without trying to overwhelm them with benevolence or to change them. Extend that non-interfering empathy through the body and the mind. Can you include the images of what you, he, they are or should be, and whatever isn’t enough? Notice: ‘It’s like this, now.’ Can you allow the wave of that difficulty to pass through you? Acknowledge the openness at the end of the process, and sustain that through the next wave. If your mind tries to cling to the openness, or claim it as ‘me’, acknowledge the feel of that. Try to extend grounded spacious awareness to that clinging as to anything else that arises.

❖ Conclude the session with inviting impressions of others, near and far, alive or dead, liked or disliked, into the mind. Invite and welcome them to be as they are. Allow yourself to be affected, and also to welcome that. Let these affects pass through and notice what state you eventually settle in.