## Preface

The setting for the talks from which this book arose is the Ukiah Valley in Mendocino County, an exquisitely beautiful rural area of Northern California – home to orchards and wineries; logging, fishing and tourist industries; Buddhist and Christian communities; back-to-the-land collectives and hardcore red-neck establishments. As some would say, it lies on the cusp between capuccino- and cowboy-lands. This area is home to Abhayagiri Monastery, where Ajahn Amaro lived for over a decade, and to Yoga Mendocino, a non-profit yoga center that seeks to help our varied populus embody a heart-felt wisdom and bring mindfulness directly into all aspects of our twenty-first-century lives. Throughout his years at Abhayagiri, Ajahn Amaro taught classes at Yoga Mendocino and willingly considered an extraordinary variety of topics at our request.

The series of talks that form the basis for this book came out of a growing concern that I and others were feeling about our perilous ecological future and how to bring our Buddhist practice directly into our activism and community – as Ajahn Amaro would say, to cultivate an ‘unentangled engagement’. Mendocino County is an area of tremendous environmental and political enquiry; many members of our group are actively involved in environmental education and eco-projects, such as the local ballot initiative that made Mendocino County the first GMO-free county in the world! But there are times when people become overwhelmed by the task in hand and wonder whether their spiritual practices actually become an escape from the global realities that are facing us. Likewise, Ajahn Amaro once recalled several Buddhists who said they just ‘didn’t want to even go there’ when asked about how the ecological situation affected or was embraced in their teachings.

At the time Ajahn Amaro spoke at Yoga Mendocino, the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was a great tragedy that many were holding in their hearts. It was into this atmosphere of grief and doubt that I proposed he speak about our relationship to this extraordinary blue-green, spinning planet. A small group of us first met with Ajahn Amaro to plan for such a class series – ironically enough in the local Starbucks! Later on, in discussions with my partner, Berni, a very pragmatic and land-based apple farmer, we came up with the idea to center each talk around one of the ‘Four Elements’ and in this way celebrate the Earth. It seemed the perfect fit, since Yoga

Mendocino’s co-founder, Maggie Norton, and I both explore the elements in our teaching and see this as one place where the practices of yoga and Buddhism intertwine magically.

When he arrived to begin the classes, Ajahn Amaro surprised and delighted us all by explaining his added intention to bring the ‘Four Foundations of Mindfulness’ into his talks. For four weeks over ninety people crammed into a space designed to hold a maximum of fifty. Discussions buzzed on the Internet mid-week, and questions were fired back to Ajahn Amaro in and out of session. Our center became a veritable eco-hub, learning how the truths the Buddha taught over 2,500 years ago remain so relevant to a world spinning out of control and lacking in elemental kindness.

The buzz continues to this day. His talks have been part of our programs, teacher trainings, and distance learning courses. They have been shared on the web from the Yukon to Costa Rica to Cuba, and beyond. Each time I listen to them again, I smile with gratitude for Ajahn Amaro and his gentle good humour and wisdom, his generosity to our little bit of the earth – our Yoga Mendocino community – and to the bigger globe. I also bow to our yoga center and the people who keep this little oasis, like so many others, alive in these critical times to share such important reflections.

May our blue-green spinning planet be loved more dearly and touched by our kindness and engagement, as we are inspired by these words of our dear teacher.

Mary Paffard Yoga Mendocino, Ukiah, California November 2012