## Quotations

The Shūrangama Sūtra

“I began with a practice based on the enlightened nature of hearing. First I redirected my hearing inward in order to enter the current of the sages. Then external sounds disappeared. With the direction of my hearing reversed and with sounds stilled, both sounds and silence cease to arise. So it was that, as I gradually progressed, what I heard and my awareness of what I heard came to an end. Even when that state of mind in which everything had come to an end disappeared, I did not rest. My awareness and the objects of my awareness were emptied, and when that process of emptying my awareness was wholly complete, then even that emptying and what had been emptied vanished. Coming into being and ceasing to be themselves ceased to be. Then the ultimate stillness was revealed.”

“All of a sudden I transcended the worlds of ordinary beings, and I also transcended the worlds of beings who have transcended the ordinary worlds. Everything in the ten directions was fully illuminated, and I gained two remarkable powers. First, my mind ascended to unite with the fundamental, wondrous, enlightened mind of all Buddhas in all ten directions, and my power of compassion became the same as theirs. Second, my mind descended to unite with all beings of the six destinies in all ten directions such that I felt their sorrows and their prayerful yearnings as my own.” [ pp 234-5 ]

“I now respectfully say this to the World-Honored One – The One who came to be a Buddha in this Sahā world In order to transmit to us the true, essential teaching Meant for this place – I say that purity is found through hearing. All those who wish to gain samādhi’s mastery Will surely find that hearing is the way to enter.” [ p 253 ]

“Great Assembly! Ānanda! Halt the puppet show Of your distorted hearing! Merely turn your hearing round To listen to your genuine true nature, Which is the destination of the Path that is supreme. This is the genuine way to break through to enlightenment.” [ p 256 ]

Excerpted from: ‘The Shūrangama Sūtra’ Newly translated from the Chinese by the Shūrangama Sūtra Translation Committee of the Buddhist Text Translation Society

The Chāndogya Upanishad

Now, the light that shines higher than this heaven, on the backs of all, on the backs of everything, in the highest worlds, than which there are no higher – truly that is the same as the light which is here within a person. There is this hearing of it – when one closes one’s ears and hears a sound, a roar, as of a fire blazing. [ ChU 3.13.7 8 ]

Quoted in ‘Mind Like Fire Unbound’ Ch. 1 Ven. Thanissaro Bhikkhu, trans.

The Dharma Bums

The silence is so intense that you can hear your own blood roar in your ears but louder than that by far is the mysterious roar which I always identify with the roaring of the diamond of wisdom, the mysterious roar of silence itself, which is a great Shhhh reminding you of something you’ve seemed to have forgotten in the stress of your days since birth.

I wished I could explain it to those I loved, to my mother, to Japhy, but there just weren’t any words to describe the nothingness and purity of it. “Is there a certain and definite teaching to be given to all living creatures?” was the question probably asked to beetlebrowed snowy Dipankara, and his answer was the roaring silence of the diamond.

‘The Dharma Bums’ Ch. 22 by Jack Kerouac

The Ascent of Mount Carmel ( Subida del Monte Carmelo )

Nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing. And even on the Mountain, nothing. (Nada, nada, nada, nada, nada. Y en el Monte, nada.)

The Ascent of Mount Carmel – The Way of Pure Spirit. by St. John of the Cross