## Frequently Asked Questions

Q: I have not seen this practice of listening to the sound of silence mentioned anywhere in the Suttas or in the traditional commentaries. Where does it come from?

A: At first this was a practice that Ven. Ajahn Sumedho thought he had discovered on his own.

He had lived for eleven years in the forests of Thailand, where you tend to do most of your formal meditation practice at night. Those nights were always filled with a cacophony of insect noise so, ironically, it was only after he had come to live in London in 1977, that he began to notice the inner sound. It was particularly clear during the middle of the night, in the still, snowy weather of the winter and then one day it became enormously loud, even as he walked down the busy street of Haverstock Hill.

It was so strong a presence that he began to experiment with using it as a meditation object, even though he’d never heard of such a thing before, and to his surprise he found it a very useful tool. As he wrote in his Foreword to a recent edition of the book ‘The Law of Attention’ by Edward Salim Michael 2:

“I had discovered this ‘inner sound’ many years before but had never heard or read any reference to this in the Pali Canon. I had developed a meditation practice referring to this background vibration and experienced great benefits in developing mindfulness while letting go of any thoughts. It allowed a perspective of transcendent awareness where one could reflect on the mental states that arise and cease in consciousness.”

He has also spoken often about how the development of this inner listening had a profound effect on his attitude toward his meditation practice. Being newly arrived in a foreign and distinctly non-Buddhist country, and being in a small house in a big and noisy city, he found a strong urge to retreat and get away, back to his beloved forests in Thailand and away from all these crowds of ‘pesky, pestering’ people. But a vividly clear insight eventually dawned that, rather than seeking the physical seclusion of kāyaviveka, he needed to develop the inner seclusion of cittaviveka. Furthermore, he found this newly-discovered practice of inner listening, attending to what he called the sound of silence, ideal for supporting this quality, this approach of finding seclusion within. This insight proved so central to his understanding of how best to work in this new environment that, when they did eventually move out of London, having been given a forest in West Sussex, he named the new monastery ‘Cittaviveka’ – coincidentally resonating with the name of the hamlet, Chithurst, where this new foundation was established.

After he had been using this practice for a few years, exploring its ins and outs and its results for himself, he began to teach it to the fledgling community at Cittaviveka Monastery. He was aware that no reference to such a method was to be found in the Theravadan scriptures, but he felt that since it had such beneficial results, why not use it regardless?

In this light his approach was very similar to that of Ven. Mahasi Sayadaw, who developed his own method of insight meditation back in the 1950’s. A couple of the elements of his ‘Mahasi Method’ have drawn criticism since they are not classical Theravadan meditation methods either – i.e. the practice of verbal ‘noting’, and observing the sensations caused by the breath at the abdomen. However, as Ajahn Sumedho himself found with listening to the sound of silence, if you put these techniques into practice and find that they are a support for establishing mindfulness, isn’t it wiser to put them to use than to neglect them just because they might not be canonical?

The spirit of Buddhist practice is always directed towards using skilful means that will help bring about liberation and the end of all dissatisfaction, all dukkha, so, if it works, then we should consider it a worthy thing.

Q: Has this kind of inner listening been used in other spiritual traditions? It has been called ‘nada yoga’, so it sounds like at least some other religious groups have discovered it.

A: After Ajahn Sumedho started to teach it, people began to mention to him how they had encountered it before, either through their own experimentation or through other groups that they had meditated with. He slowly began to find out that a rich variety of spiritual traditions had used it over the centuries.

One of his early such discoveries was the book mentioned above, by Edward Salim Michael. Again, from his Foreword to the 2010 edition:

“I remember finding this book at the Buddhist Society’s Summer School about twenty-five years ago. It had a photograph of a Buddha image on the cover, and I liked the title [which then was ‘The Way of Inner Vigilance’] – so I started skimming through it. The chapters on Nada Yoga especially intrigued me… [and] I appreciated Edward Salim Michael’s instructions on how to integrate awareness into daily life.”

The origins of Michael’s insights into nada yoga were mostly his own experience, influenced as well by Buddhist and Hindu yogic practices.

A number of years after Ajahn Sumedho encountered ‘The Way of Inner Vigilance’, and had started to incorporate some of the methods contained within it into his own practice and teaching, he met up with another well-developed locus of its use.

He was leading a retreat in California, in 1991, and the venue was a large monastery of the Northern Buddhist Tradition called ‘The City of Ten Thousand Buddhas’. Although the retreat was mostly geared towards the group of 60 lay Buddhists who had gathered from all over the USA for the event, there was a small number of monks and nuns from the host monastery there as well.

About halfway through the retreat Ajahn Sumedho introduced the practice of listening to the sound of silence. A day or so later the newly-appointed abbot of the monastery, Ven. Heng Ch’i, commented to the Ajahn, “You know, I think you have stumbled upon the Shūrangama Samādhi.” Understandably, Ajahn Sumedho was not sure what he was referring to, so the abbot explained.

“In our Chan Buddhist tradition, the key scripture is the Shūrangama Sutra and particularly the meditation teaching found within it. The Sutra describes 25 spiritual practices that different Bodhisattvas present to the Buddha as being the way that they themselves were liberated. The one that the Buddha praises as the most effective is that of Avalokiteshvara, Guan Shi Yin Bodhisattva. It is a meditation based upon hearing. The Chinese of the Sutra can be translated in various ways, so we were never sure exactly what it meant. Guan Yin describes the method thus:

“‘I began with a practice based on the enlightened nature of hearing. First I redirected my hearing inward in order to enter the current of the sages...

“‘By the means that I have described, I entered through the gateway of the ear-faculty and perfected the inner illumination of samādhi. My mind that had once been dependent on perceived objects developed self-mastery and ease. By entering the current of the awakened ones and en­tering samādhi, I became fully awake. This then is the best method.’3

“Shifu [Ven. Master Hsüan Hua, the founding abbot and teacher] would try to explain what this meant by telling us things like:

“‘To listen wisely is to listen inside, not outside. You do not allow your mind to chase after sounds. Earlier in the Sutra, the Buddha spoke of not following the six faculties [eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind] and not being influenced by them. You reverse your hearing to listen to your own true nature. Instead of listening to external sounds, you focus inwardly on your body and mind, you cease to seek outside yourself, and you turn around the light of your attention so that it will shine within yourself.’ 3

“We would ask him what did it mean to ‘reverse your hearing’ and he would say things like, ‘You turn the hearing around to listen to the ear-organ, and of course that’s not the physical ear – understand?!’ But of course we mostly didn’t…

“So now with this method of inner listening that you have been teaching these last few days, it all starts to become a lot clearer – especially phrases like, ‘the current of the awakened ones’ – I finally understand what the practice is that has been so important to our tradition. Thank you for solving the mystery of what those words meant – and thank you for teaching us how to use it!”

As time went by others would come along and describe practices and teachings that employ this same inner sound in a similar way. In recent years the Zen teacher Chozen Bays, of Great Vow Zen Monastery in Oregon, has spoken of how she feels this very sound, and the deep listening to it, are the basis of Hakuin Ekaku’s famous koan: “Two hands clap and there is a sound; (but) what is the sound of one hand?” As she has written:

“This koan, the Sound of One Hand, has become trivialized in the West, but its actual meaning is very profound. The koan is a question that cannot be answered by our usual method – by thinking. It can only be answered by non-thinking. It asks us to undertake deep listening, to listen as we never have before, to listen not only with our ears but with our entire being, our eyes, our skin, our bones and our heart.

“Deep listening requires complete receptivity. This means that nothing is being broadcast. There are no outflows. Deep listening asks us to quiet the body, the mouth and the mind. Our thoughts must be silent. Impossible, you might say. It is not impossible, not when you are listening so carefully that even the sounds of your thoughts are in the way of your listening. This is absorptive listening, complete absorption in sound.”4

Thus, unbeknown to Ajahn Sumedho at the time, despite there being no references to such a practice in the Pali suttas or the classic Southern Buddhist commentaries, such as the Visuddhimagga, it had long been a part of Buddhist tradition after all.

In addition to these forebears in the Buddhist world, the practice of listening to the inner sound plays a significant role in many other spiritual traditions. For example, in the Sant Mat spiritual movement, which originated from the Sikh tradition, the ‘Meditation on the Inner Light and Sound’ includes the practice of listening to the Sound Current, which they call the Shabd, Naam, or the ‘Word manifestation of God’.

Rather than in the Buddhist tradition, where the inner sound is not granted great spiritual significance in and of itself, in this and many other schools it is regarded as being of an intrinsically divine nature.

Variously referred to as the Audible Life Stream, the Inner Sound, or the Sound Current, the Shabd is regarded as the esoteric essence of God which is available to all human beings – this is according to the Shabd Path teachings of Eckankar, Sant Mat and Surat Shabd Yoga.

In the words of this latter tradition, the inner sound is regarded as:

“The Essence of the Absolute Supreme Being, that is, the dynamic force of creative energy that was sent out, as sound vibration, from the Supreme Being into the abyss of space at the dawn of the universe’s manifestation, and that is being sent forth, through the ages, framing all things that constitute and inhabit the universe.”5

Surat Shabda Yoga describes its purpose as the ‘Union of the Soul with the Essence of the Absolute Supreme Being.’ Other expressions for this practice include the Path of Light and Sound, the Journey of Soul, and the Yoga of the Sound Current.

The inner sound has also been developed as a spiritual path or reference point in other traditions. It has been said that it goes by the following names in these various scriptures and philosophical works:

Naad, Akash Bani and Sruti in the Vedas Nada and Udgit in the Upanishads The Music of the Spheres taught by Pythagoras Sraosha by Zoroaster Kalma and Kalam-i-Qadim in the Qur’an Naam, Akhand Kirtan and Sacha Shabd in the Guru Granth Sahib

Q: When I follow your instructions to listen to the sound of silence, it seems a bit like tinnitus – are they related? I’ve always thought of that inner sound as a bit bothersome before; now you encourage me to listen to it, and lo and behold, I’ve come to delight in its presence. What’s going on here?

A: There’s an age-old principle in the building trade that says, when confronted by an unavoidable anomaly in a project you are working on – say, a cantilevered beam that sticks out into a room in an old house or an unbreakable boulder in the middle of a garden – “If you can’t hide it, make a feature of it.”

If we don’t come from a tradition that holds the nada-sound as being an exalted quality and, instead, we’ve been relating to it as an annoying intrusion, I’d suggest that most of us can change our attitude to it in a way analogous to that builders’ aphorism. As you describe it, this is just what you have found to be true. That which was bothersome can become an appreciated presence.

For the vast majority of people the nada-sound does not need to be an irritating or intrusive quality. Indeed, as you have found, even in the space of a few days or hours, with just a small shift in the attitude, that annoying rock that was ruining your lawn can been revisioned as a gladdening and lovely presence.

On one daylong workshop that I was teaching on this theme, a woman told the group that now that she could relate to it as a spiritual support and see that it was really a blessed companion, she was dealing with feelings of rage about all the money she had wasted going to so many specialist doctors about it, to no avail. “I’m really angry!” she laughed, “but I’m so relieved to be free of seeing it as a problem that I think I’ll get over it.”

On this, Chozen Bays has written:

“Many people come to me to complain that when they meditate, they are bothered by a loud ringing or buzzing in their ears. They are distressed, because their doctor has told them they have an incurable disease, tinnitus. When I question them further I find that it is not tinnitus, but that they have begun to hear the sound that is called in Theravada Buddhism, the nada sound. Others have called it the sound of green, the sound of all living things or the sound between sounds. Some composers have said that ‘A’ is the fundamental tone and that when we voice it we are in resonance with the essential sound of all existence. ”4

In a small proportion of people, usually for some organic reason, the inner sound is oppressively or catastrophically loud. In these cases, this kind of practice, inner listening, is unlikely to be helpful as a meditation, since the subjective intensity of the sound makes it unusable as an object to encourage peace and clarity. Similarly if you had emphysema, with painful and unreliable breathing problems, the practice of mindfulness of the breath is unlikely to be a very useful tool for you.

Q: So what actually is it? What causes this sound? Some traditions regard it as a divine presence, but a physiologist might say it’s simply the electrical effect of neural impulses firing within your ears. What is it?

A: As far as the practice I’ve been describing here is concerned, it doesn’t really matter.

One person says, “It’s the Essence of the Absolute Supreme Being” another, “It’s just your nervous system, buzzing away”; Pythagoras might say, “Since the sun, the moon and the planets all produce their own unique hum based on their revolutions, we hear this Music of the Spheres, which is inaudible externally to the human ear,” and a practitioner of hatha yoga, “No, this is the resonance of your vital energy, your prāna, as it is processed through your seven chakras. It’s the audible, felt presence of your psycho-physical energy system.” “It’s the Song of Suchness,” “No! It’s…” One could go on and on.

The point is not to theorize, making fixed judgements to no great effect, but to use the beneficial qualities of this omnipresent, universal vibration to help us wake up, and to be wise and peaceful.

It’s rather like the breath. You can relate to the breath in a simple Western scientific way, as the lungs drawing necessary energy from oxygen in the atmosphere and expelling the waste carbon dioxide, or you can think of the breath as a cosmic, metaphysical quality – the prāna (which is the Sanskrit word for ‘breath’) of the Universe, moving in inexorable cycles. Irrespective of how you cast its significance – as cosmological or mechanical – you can watch the breath and use it to help you concentrate and be mindful.

Nada yoga is comparable and so that is the attitude I always encourage. Regardless of what it ‘actually’ is (if one can meaningfully use that word here) we can put it to use, and the results of that use are real and very tangible.

Q: I’ve heard it said that if you can hear this sound it means you’re enlightened – is this true? A friend of mine went to a very expensive meditation week-end where he learned this method. It might have done him some good but it seemed a bit overstated to me to call that enlightenment. What do you think?

A: I think that this teaching is priceless but not worth paying $5,000 for a week-end! At least that was the price-tag I saw on one such event in the USA, a few years ago.

It is definitely NOT the case that, if you can hear the nada-sound, it means you are enlightened, at least not according to the way the word is used in Buddhist circles. To be enlightened, using the classical Buddhist definitions, means that your heart and mind are irreversibly free of all greed, hatred and delusion, and incapable of selfish attitudes of any kind. Enlightened beings are totally pure-hearted – they will never act out of deceit, violence, dishonesty or sensual indulgence. They abide in a state of unshakeable peace, joy and independence. And they are very unlikely to be charging that kind of price for their teachings.

The nada-sound is a natural quality of experience that can be attended to and, if it is used wisely over an extended period of time, it can be a skilful means to aid genuine liberation.

It is natural for people, when they have had a good experience, to be enthusiastic to share that with others. Thus they might overstate their claims through a misperception.

Equally, having derived much benefit for themselves, people often wish to discover some deeper meaning to the experience, or obtain some validation from outside. In this respect, when people from a Theravadan background have been introduced to this practice of inner listening, they sometimes exclaim things like, “You know the Buddha’s disciples were called the Sāvaka-Sangha – ‘The Community of Hearers’! It must mean that they were the ones who could hear the Inner Sound!” Or with an even more dubious etymological derivation, “You know how the word Sotāpanna [meaning one who has reached the first stage of enlightenment] is always translated as ‘Stream-enterer’. Well, I reckon they’ve got the wrong ‘sota’ – yes, it means ‘stream’ but ‘sota’ also means ‘the ear, the organ of hearing,’ with exactly the same spelling! So what it really means is, ‘One who has realized the Dhamma through the gateway of the ear-faculty.’ So one who is able to listen to the nada-sound is actually a Sotāpanna!”

Wrong again! This is wishful thinking, once more, for this is not what this particular ‘sota’ means, as many other teachings corroborate.6

Furthermore, even if one could make a case for this ‘ear-enterer’ interpretation, it would take a lot more than just hearing the sound of silence to justify calling the experience a sign of having reached the first stage of enlightenment. To be a Sotāpanna means that the heart and mind are completely free of identification with the body and the personality, there is no attachment to, or confusion about, social and religious conventions and, lastly, one who has reached this realization has utterly gone beyond any doubt as to what is the path to liberation and what is not. This depth of awakening is way beyond whatever spiritual blessings might come from simply being able to hear the nada-sound.

In a similar vein I have also heard people make statements like, “It’s the sound of the Unconditioned,” or “It’s the Song of the Deathless,” and I’ve even made a few of these myself:

A song of Suchness clear and bright, The boundless inner peace of light Whose unremitting presence roars Oceanic at its shores. 7

The error comes if we assume that since we can hear the inner sound, we have truly ‘found the Deathless’. Not so. All we can be sure of is that we’ve found a ringing in our ears. Once again, although these might be poetic and inspired utterances, and valid pointers toward the Truth, from the Buddhist perspective this additional presumption of attainment is seriously overestimating the case.

After all, consider those who have thought it was tinnitus and have been treating it as an annoying ailment – they might be very far indeed from any kind of spiritual accomplishment, and what’s more, they didn’t have to pay a lot of money to hear it either.

As mentioned before, at least from a Buddhist perspective, hearing the sound of silence can be a skilful means to aid liberation, but hearing it does not constitute liberation.

The nada-sound has attributes that make it an ideal symbol of the transcendent Dhamma, the Deathless, but it’s crucial to bear in mind that: these qualities are symbols in the sense-realm for that which is intrinsically beyond the sense-realm. If we keep that in mind, it helps us to appreciate its presence, but without causing us to mistake the useful signpost for what it’s like to arrive at the end of our journey.

Q: If I can’t hear it, feel it, see it or anything… what then?

A: Well, as it was said, “Gold is where you find it”, so if you can’t discern this vibration in any mode, then maybe you need to dig somewhere else. That is to say, use a meditation method that is more suited to your characteristics, such as mindfulness of breathing or loving-kindness meditation, or use a mantra.

Before you give up on it though, there are a couple of simple ways you can try that might help you to find it and then develop a capacity to use it. Firstly, just try putting your fingers in your ears. This might seem a bit coarse and obviously not what you’d want to use for a long-term practice, but it can be a good way to establish that initial contact – to exclude all external sounds as completely as possible and then see what remains in the hearing.

Secondly, and this is a bit more involved, when you next have a bath or go to a swimming pool, put your ears under the water and be very still. Once again, turn your attention toward the hearing faculty and just listen. Needless to say, if you are at a noisy public pool this is unlikely to make much of a difference, but if you can try this in the quiet, it can be an illuminating introduction to the inner sound.