## About the Authors

Ajahn Sundara was born in France in 1946. She studied dance in England and in France. In her early thirties, after working for a few years as a dancer and teacher of contemporary dance, she had the opportunity whilst living and studying in England to attend a talk and, later, a retreat led by Ajahn Sumedho.

His teachings and experiences of the monastic way of life in the Forest tradition resonated deeply. Before long this led to a visit to Chithurst Monastery in England, where in 1979 she asked to join the monastic community as one of the first four women novices. In 1983 she was given the Going Forth as a Siladhara (10-precept nun) by Ajahn Sumedho. After spending five years at Chithurst Monastery, she went to live at Amaravati Monastery, where she participated in the establishment of the nuns’ community. From 1995 until 1998 she spent three years deepening her practice, mostly in Thai Forest monasteries. In 2000, after spending a year as the senior incumbent of the nuns community at the Devon vihara, she came to the United States where she was based at Abhayagiri Monastery. She lives at present at Amaravati Monastery.

She is interested in exploring ways of practising, sustaining and integrating Buddhist teachings in Western culture. Since the late 1980’s she has taught and led meditation retreats worldwide.

Ajahn Candasiri was born in Scotland in 1947 and was brought up as a Christian. After university, she trained and worked as an occupational therapist, mainly in the field of mental illness. In 1977, an interest in meditation led her to meet Ajahn Sumedho, shortly after his arrival from Thailand. Inspired by his teachings and example, she began her monastic training at Chithurst as one of the first four Anagārikā.

Within the monastic community she has been actively involved in the evolution of the Nuns’ vinaya training. She has guided many meditation retreats for lay people, and particularly enjoys teaching young people and participating in Christian/Buddhist dialogue.

Ajahn Metta was born 1953 in Germany. She became an Anagārikā in ‘93 at Amaravati and took higher ordination as a Sīladharā in ‘96. During her monastic life she has been involved in many areas of the community. She is one of the group of senior nuns leading the Sīladharā community. For the past few years she has been teaching meditation workshops and retreats. Prior to monastic life she worked as a secretary and office assistant. She is a mother of a grown-up son and was living a family life before entering the monastic path. She has been practising meditation since ‘84 and has experience of living in other spiritual communities in Europe and Thailand (Wat Suan Mokkh).