## Introduction

This collection of nuns’ talks, which were originally offered to the monastic communities and during meditation retreats for lay people, focus on two main themes. The first is obvious but, remarkably, overlooked by many people: our very existence as a physical presence - how that changes and how it ends. The second theme, the Buddha’s teaching, which he referred to as the Four Noble Truths, begins with what is obvious: ‘Life is stressful’, However, having enumerated the causes of this state of affairs, it quickly moves on to the supremely subtle remedy – what the late Ven. Ajahn Chah referred to as ‘letting go’.

We hope, as we reflect on these themes, that our respective approaches and voices will contribute to a cohesive sense of the remarkable legacy of the Buddha himself, and of his disciples over the past 2,500 years. The teachings are timeless; our practice enlivens them. This collection is an indication of what they have meant to each of us, and how that understanding has been passed on to others of our human family. May it serve as a support for all who are interested in meeting life with wisdom, facing up to the challenge of dealing with the inevitable changes that the body undergoes, and responding with compassion to the struggles of our fellow humans.

The talks were given over a span of many years. We would like to express our appreciation for the many people who have helped with transcribing them. We are grateful too to Adam Long, Jayasiri, Donald Murphy, and Anagārikā Nick and others who have been involved with editing the transcribed material, and to Nicholas Halliday who has coordinated the production of this book, giving it a title and incorporating Victoria Roberts’ beautiful photo in the cover design. The Kataññutā Group in Malaysia has sponsored the printing and distribution.

May recollecting the efforts made by each of those who have been involved be a source of joy and insight. May all beings find peace.

Sister Ajahn Candasiri Amaravati, 2013