## 1 The Buddha

Historically, the religion known as Buddhism is traced to the Buddha, the ‘Awakened One’, who is believed to have lived in northern India from 563 to 483 BCE6. The Pali canonical tradition, however, places the teachings of the Buddha far beyond the sphere of one particular figure. The Buddha is quoted as saying that he has ‘found the ancient path, the ancient trail, travelled by the Fully Enlightened Ones of old.’7 The older texts also enumerate and give details of the lives of six previous Buddhas who lived in the distant past, and a future Buddha.8 While there is no comprehensive biography of the Buddha in the Pali Canon, several parts of the Canon quote lengthy autobiographical details of episodes in his life,9 while other biographical fragments are scattered throughout it.

Although it is extremely difficult to separate the early material in the main core of the Pali Canon completely from the later material, it is possible to distinguish some later texts in the fifth collection of the Sutta Piṭaka. Thus the Nidānakathā, the introduction to the Jātaka (a collection of stories of the Buddha’s previous lives), ‘is the earliest attempt in Pali to give a connected life-story of the Buddha.’10 This text, although including very old material, may only date from the 5th century CE.11 It contains biographical details from the distant past lives of the Buddha up to the donation of the Jeta Grove Monastery in the early years of his teaching (J.1-95). It thus summarizes some of the material contained in various parts of the Canon.12 Three suttas in the Sutta-Nipāta13 have been described as ‘precious remnants of that ancient spiritual ballad-poetry’ which are ‘rich in legend-like features and mythical paraphernalia’.14

Worth noting is the difference in style and content between what is recorded in the early canonical texts, and in the later ones and post-canonical texts about the Buddha’s life. The early texts present the Buddha as a wise and sensitive human being engaging in discussion with brahmins and renunciants, teaching, caring for and sometimes rebuking his disciples, wandering for alms-food and, later in life, experiencing the discomforts of ageing and sickness. In contrast, later texts tend to portray him as a supernatural being with exemplary qualities, his life embellished with miraculous occurrences.15 However, it is important to bear in mind that all the texts contain a mixture of historical, supernatural, allegorical and metaphorical material.16 Although some accounts in them may not meet our idea of modern historical validity, that does not mean they are therefore purely fictional, as they may have allegorical meaning. When considering the wonders surrounding the Buddha’s birth and death for example, it may be relevant to consider Joseph Campbell’s important observation on the validity of the ‘close relationship maintained in the Orient between myth, psychology, and metaphysics.’17

A number of different titles are used to refer to the Buddha. He referred to himself as the ‘Tathāgata’, a word of uncertain derivation but meaning either ‘the thus-gone-one’ or ‘the thus-come-one’. His disciples often refer to him as ‘bhagavant’, the Revered One (some translators use Blessed One or Lord), others use ‘Bhante’, Venerable Sir. Some people refer to him by his clan name, Gotama. He is also occasionally referred to as ‘the son of the Sakyans’ or ‘Kinsman of the Sun’.

It may seem strange that the early Buddhist scriptures record very little of the founder’s personal history. Of course, those who live close to such persons are much more concerned with what they actually taught than with the details of their personal lives. In the Buddha’s words, here are some autobiographical details of his life.

### Early Life

1. I was delicate, most delicate, supremely delicate. Lotus ponds were made for me at my father’s house solely for my benefit. Blue lotuses flowered in one, white lotuses in another, red lotuses in a third. I used no sandalwood that was not of Benares. My turban, tunic, lower garments and cloak were all made of Benares cloth. A white sunshade was held over me day and night so that no cold or heat or dust or grit or dew might inconvenience me.

I had three mansions,18 one for the winter, one for the summer and one for the rainy season. In the rainy season mansion I was entertained by minstrels with no men among them. For the four months of the rainy season I never went down to the lower mansion. Though meals of broken rice with lentil soup are given to the servants and retainers in other people’s houses, in my father’s house white rice and meat were given to them.  (A.I,145; adapted from Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, p.9)

This text is a poetic expression of a luxurious lifestyle. Similar phraseology is also used to signify a wealthy lifestyle in reference to two other people, the former Buddha Vipassi (D.II,21), and Yasa, (Vin.I,15) the son of a wealthy merchant of Benares. Although later tradition describes the Buddha as being born into the royal family of a rich kingdom, the Pali Canon suggests that he was the son of the temporary chief of a small aristocratic tribal republic known by the name of Sakya.19 The republic was situated in the foothills of the Himalayas with a capital at Kapilavatthu, and was tributary to the powerful kingdom of Kosala.20

In the Canon the Buddha says he belonged to the warrior/noble class, his clan name was Gotama, his father’s name was Suddhodana and his mother’s name was Māyā (D.II,3ff). His mother died seven days after his birth (M.III,122) and he was nursed by his stepmother Mahāpajāpati (M.III,253). There is mention of the young child being visited by a holy sage who prophesied his spiritual success (Sutta Nipāta 679). Mention is also made of the Buddha’s son Rāhula, whose mother is only identified as ‘Rāhula’s mother’.21

2. Whilst I had such power and good fortune, yet I thought: ‘When an untaught ordinary person, who is subject to ageing, not safe from ageing, sees another who is aged, they are shocked, humiliated and disgusted; for they forget that they also are no exception. But I too am subject to ageing, not safe from ageing, and so it cannot befit me to be shocked, humiliated and disgusted on seeing another who is aged.’ When I considered this, the vanity of youth entirely left me.

I thought: ‘When an untaught ordinary person, who is subject to sickness, not safe from sickness, sees another who is sick, they are shocked, humiliated and disgusted; for they forget that they also are no exception. But I too am subject to sickness, not safe from sickness, and so it cannot befit me to be shocked, humiliated and disgusted on seeing another who is sick.’ When I considered this, the vanity of health entirely left me.

I thought: ‘When an untaught ordinary person, who is subject to death, not safe from death, sees another who is dead, they are shocked, humiliated and disgusted; for they forget that they also are no exception. But I too am subject to death, not safe from death, and so it cannot befit me to be shocked, humiliated and disgusted on seeing another who is dead.’ When I considered this, the vanity of life entirely left me. (A.I,145, adapted from Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, p. 9)

This passage indicates that the Buddha-to-be or ‘Bodhisatta’ was a reflective and sensitive person who was shaken by the realities of the human condition. This was expressed allegorically as the delicate and sheltered Bodhisatta’s direct encounter with an old person, a sick person and a dead person. There is canonical support for this story, as the Buddha mentions this same confrontation occurring to Vipassi, the previous Buddha, and then says that it will also occur to all future Buddhas (D.II,12ff). The images of old age, sickness and death are also known as three of the four Heavenly Messengers. (M.III,179ff)

3. Now I, bhikkhus, before awakening, while I was still an unawakened Bodhisatta, being myself subject to birth, ageing, sickness, death, sorrow and defilement, sought what was likewise subject to birth, ageing, sickness, death, sorrow and defilement. Then I reflected: ‘Why do I, being myself subject to birth, ageing, sickness, death, sorrow and defilement, seek what is likewise subject to birth, ageing, sickness, death, sorrow and defilement? Suppose that I, being myself subject to these things, having seen the peril in them, should seek the unborn, unageing, unailing, deathless, sorrowless, undefiled, incomparable peace from bondage — Nibbāna?’ (M.I,163; abridged).

Sensitive awareness of the frailty of human life frequently leads people to depression, despair or pessimism — unless they discover the possibility of a solution to this human predicament. The solution lies in the spiritual realm, that particular area of human knowledge which deals with life’s ultimate questions. The Bodhisatta became aware that such a solution was possible through turning away from that which is born in order to realize that which is unborn. This attitude was symbolized by his seeing a religious mendicant dedicated to the search for spiritual truth, the fourth Heavenly Messenger (D.II,28).

### Renunciation

4. a) Now I, before awakening, while I was still an unawakened Bodhisatta, reflected: ‘Confined is the household life, a path of dust. Going forth [to homelessness] is wide-open. It is not easy, living in a house, to lead the religious life completely fulfilled and purified, as polished as mother-of-pearl. Suppose I were to shave off my hair and beard, clothe myself in ochre robes and go forth from the home life into homelessness.’ (M.I,240; II,211)

b) Later, while still young, a black-haired boy endowed with august youth, in the beginning of life, although my unwilling mother and father lamented with tearful faces, I shaved off my hair and beard, put on ochre robes and went forth from the home life into homelessness. (M.I,163;240; II,93;212)

In the culture of India during the Buddha’s time, as in Buddhist countries today, it was recognized that a serious spiritual search could best be undertaken by those who had surrendered the responsibilities of the household life in order to devote all their energies to the spiritual journey. His clear insight into the mortal and corruptible nature of human existence compelled the Bodhisatta to sacrifice the comforts of a wealthy social position and the pleasures of a secure family life for the hardships and insecurity of a homeless mendicant life, fully dedicated to the age-old quest for Truth.

5. I, thus gone forth, striving after what is good, searching for the incomparable, excellent path to peace, approached Alāra Kālāma and said to him: ‘Friend Kālāma, I want to live the religious life in this teaching and training.’

This said, bhikkhus, Alāra Kālāma replied: ‘The venerable one may abide here. This teaching is such that an astute person in no long time may enter on and abide in it, realizing himself through higher knowledge just as his own teacher.’ So I, bhikkhus, very soon, very quickly, mastered that teaching.

Then I reflected, bhikkhus: ‘This teaching does not conduce to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to higher knowledge, to awakening or to Nibbāna.’ So not getting sufficient from this teaching, I abandoned and left this teaching. (M.I,163f; 240; II,93;212, abridged)

India in the sixth century BC was already rich in a great variety of spiritual teachings and practices. As was appropriate for a young man seeking the ultimate answers to life’s questions, the Bodhisatta sought out a recognized master to give him instruction. The pupil, however, very soon mastered the teaching but was not satisfied. His spiritual yearning was not yet satiated.

The account continues with his seeking out another teacher, Uddaka Rāmaputta, who taught him a higher meditative attainment.22 The Bodhisatta again quickly mastered this teaching and was again unsatisfied. He then set off on his own spiritual experimentation.

6. I thought: ‘Suppose, with my teeth clenched and my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat down, constrain and crush my mind with my mind?’ Then, as a strong man might seize a weaker by the head or shoulders and beat him down, constrain him and crush him, so with my teeth clenched and my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat down, constrained and crushed my mind with my mind. Sweat ran from my armpits as I did so.

Though tireless energy was aroused in me, and unremitting mindfulness established, yet my body was overwrought and uncalm because I was exhausted by the painful effort. But such painful feelings as arose in me gained no power over my mind.

I thought: ‘Suppose I practise the meditation that is without breathing?’ I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths in my mouth and nose. When I did so, there was a loud sound of winds coming from my ear-holes, as there is a loud sound when a smith’s bellows are blown.

I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths in my mouth and nose and ears. When I did so, violent winds racked my head, as if a strong man were splitting my head open with a sharp sword. And then there were violent pains in my head, as if a strong man were tightening a tough leather strap round my head as a head-band. And then violent winds carved up my belly, as a clever butcher or his apprentice carves up an ox’s belly with a sharp knife. And then there was a violent burning in my belly, as if two strong men had seized a weaker by both arms and were roasting him over a pit of live coals.

And each time, though tireless energy was roused in me and unremitting mindfulness established, yet my body was overwrought and uncalm because I was exhausted by the painful effort. But such feelings as arose in me gained no power over my mind.

(M.I,242ff abridged; II,93; 212; Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, pp.17ff)

Though very diligent in his endeavours to win through to some spiritual truth, the Bodhisatta was still not satisfied. Not having achieved significant results from various meditation practices, he undertook to follow some of the ascetic practices for which India is renowned.

7. a) Such was my asceticism that I went naked, rejecting conventions, licking my hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked ... I clothed myself in hemp, in hemp-mixed cloth, in shrouds, in refuse-rags, in tree bark, in antelope hide, in kusa-grass fabric, in bark fabric, in wood [shavings] fabric, in head-hair wool, in animal wool, in owl’s wings.

I was one who pulled out hair and beard, pursuing the practice of pulling out hair and beard. I was one who stood continuously, rejecting seats. I was one who squatted continuously, devoted to maintaining the squatting position. I was one who used a mattress of spikes; I made a mattress of spikes my bed. I dwelt pursuing the practice of bathing in water for the third time by nightfall ... Such was my asceticism ...

I would go off to some awe-inspiring grove and dwell there — a grove so awe-inspiring that normally it would make a man’s hair stand up if he were not free from lust. I would dwell by night in the open and by day in the grove when those cold wintry nights came during the eight-day interval of frost. I would dwell by day in the open and by night in the grove in the last month of the hot season. And there came to me spontaneously this stanza never heard before:

Chilled by night and scorched by day, Alone in awe-inspiring groves, Naked, no fire to sit beside, The hermit yet pursues his quest.

I would make my bed in a charnel ground with the bones of the dead for a pillow. And cowherd boys came up and spat on me, made water on me, threw dirt at me and poked sticks into my ears. Yet I never knew the arising of an evil mind [thoughts] about them. Such was my abiding in equanimity.(M.I,77ff; Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, TBW 3, pp.249ff)

b) I thought: ‘Suppose I take very little food, say a handful each time, whether it is bean soup or lentil soup or pea soup?’ I did so. And as I did so, my body reached a state of extreme emaciation; my limbs became like the joined segments of vine stems or bamboo stems because of eating so little. My backside became like a camel’s hoof; the projections on my spine stood forth like corded beads; my ribs jutted out as gaunt as the crazy rafters of an old roofless barn; the gleam of my eyes, sunk far down in their sockets, looked like the gleam of water sunk far down in a deep well; my scalp shrivelled and withered as a green gourd shrivels and withers in the wind and sun. If I touched my belly skin, I encountered my backbone too; and if I touched my backbone, I encountered my belly skin too, for my belly skin cleaved to my backbone. If I relieved myself, I fell over on my face then and there. If I tried to ease my body by rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots, fell away from my body as I rubbed because of eating so little. (M.I,242ff; II,93; 212, adapted from Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, p.18.)

Ascetic practices like these were common among the various religious sects which proliferated during the sixth century BC. The Pali word for austerity means ‘heat’. Austerity was a way of developing psychic heat, leading to the possible attaining of special powers. The Bodhisatta tried the whole range of ascetic practices, but found them unsatisfactory for his quest.

An impressive image of the ‘Fasting Buddha’ (technically this is the Bodhisatta as he was not yet awakened), found in the ruins of the ancient Buddhist city of Taxila, north-east Pakistan, is now in the Lahore Museum.

### A New Path

8. I thought: ‘Whatever a samana or brahmana has felt in the past, or will feel in the future, or feels now — painful, racking, piercing feelings due to striving — can equal this but not exceed it. But by this severe austerity I have not attained any superior human condition worthy of the Noble Ones’ knowledge and vision. Might there be another way to awakening?’

I thought of a time when my Sakyan father was working and I was sitting in the cool shade of a rose-apple tree — quite secluded from sensual desires, secluded from unprofitable things, I had entered upon and abided in the First Absorption, which is accompanied by thinking and reflecting, with joy and happiness born of seclusion. I thought: ‘Might that be the way to awakening?’ Then, following up that recollection, there came the recognition that this was the way to awakening.

Then I thought: ‘Why am I afraid of such pleasure? It is pleasure that has nothing to do with sensual desires and unskilful states.’ Then I thought: ‘I am not afraid of such pleasure, for it has nothing to do with sensual desires and unskilful states.’

I thought: ‘It is not possible to attain that pleasure with a body so excessively emaciated. Suppose I ate some solid food — boiled rice and sour milk?’ (M.I,246f, adapted from Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, p.21)

The Bodhisatta had experienced a vast range of spiritual practices, which were traditionally held to be the only means for realizing Truth, but he remained unsatisfied. In his disappointment and disillusionment he sought a different way. Turning away from the path of painful self-mortification, he thought to try the way of ‘non-sensual spiritual pleasure’. This was a unique and controversial move. Five ascetics who had been attending him during his superhuman privations left him in disgust, thinking he had given up the spiritual struggle. Alone and on a new course, the Buddha-to-be renewed his spiritual search.

9. Now when I had taken ample nutriment and had regained strength, aloof from sense pleasures, aloof from unskilful things, I entered upon and dwelt in the First Absorption, which is accompanied by thinking and reflecting, with joy and happiness born of seclusion. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind.

With the allaying of thinking and reflecting I entered upon and dwelt in the Second Absorption, which has the mind internally tranquillized and fixed on one point, free from thinking and reflecting, with joy and happiness born of concentration. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind.

With the fading of joy I dwelt in equanimity; mindful and clearly aware, experiencing in my being that pleasure of which the Noble Ones say: ‘Equanimity and mindfulness is a pleasurable abiding’, I entered upon and dwelt in the Third Absorption. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind.

With the giving up of pleasure and pain, and with the disappearance of former mental ease and dis-ease, I entered upon and dwelt in the Fourth Absorption, which has neither pain nor pleasure and is purified by equanimity and mindfulness. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind. (M.I,247f)

The development of these four stages of increasingly deeper concentration on, and absorption into, the meditation object gives the mind greater strength and power, which can then be used to progress towards the goal of awakening. The Bodhisatta had already developed them previously, but now he was using them as a tool to strengthen the mind rather than as an end in themselves. Having discovered a new path, re-established his resolve and reached an exceptionally refined degree of mental development, he was open to a profound human experience — the experience of awakening.

### Awakening

10. With the mind thus composed, purified, cleansed, unblemished, without defilement, malleable and workable, steady and immovable, I directed my mind to the knowledge and recollection of former existences. I recollected a variety of former abidings23 thus: one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many an age of disintegration, many an age of integration, many an age of disintegration-integration; such was my name, such my lineage, such my appearance, such my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Thence passing away, I arose in another existence where such was my name, such my lineage, such my appearance, such my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my span of life. Thence passing away, I arose here. Thus with characteristics and details I recollected various former abidings.

This was the first knowledge attained by me in the first watch of the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, accordingly as I dwelt vigilant, ardent and resolute. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind.

With the mind thus composed, purified, cleansed, unblemished, without defilement, malleable and workable, steady and immovable, I directed my mind to the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings. With clairvoyant vision, purified and surpassing that of humans, I saw beings passing away and reappearing. I understood that beings are inferior or superior, beautiful or ugly, well-faring or ill-faring according to their actions (kamma). Indeed, those worthy beings who were possessed of bad conduct of body, bad conduct of speech and bad conduct of mind, revilers of Noble Ones, of wrong view, acquiring actions from wrong view, upon the breaking up of the body after death arose in states of privation, an unfavourable destination, in a place of suffering, in purgatory. But those worthy beings who were possessed of good conduct of body, good conduct of speech and good conduct of mind, not revilers of Noble Ones, of right view, acquiring actions due to right view, upon the breaking up of the body after death arose in a favourable destination, a heavenly world.

Thus with clairvoyant vision, purified and surpassing that of humans, I saw beings passing away and reappearing. I understood that beings are inferior or superior, beautiful or ugly, well-faring or ill-faring according to their actions (kamma).

This was the second knowledge attained by me in the second watch of the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose; darkness was destroyed and light arose, accordingly as I dwelt vigilant, ardent and resolute. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind.

With the mind thus composed, purified, cleansed, unblemished, without defilement, malleable and workable, steady and immovable, I directed my mind to the knowledge of the exhaustion of the outflows (asāva).24 I had direct knowledge, as it really is, that: ‘This is dukkha; this is the arising of dukkha; this is the cessation of dukkha; this is the path to the cessation of dukkha’. I had direct knowledge, as it really is, that: ‘These are the outflows; this is the arising of the outflows; this is the cessation of the outflows; this is the path to the cessation of the outflows’. Knowing thus and seeing thus, my mind was freed from the outflow of sense pleasure, the outflow of becoming and the outflow of ignorance. In freedom the knowledge came: ‘There is freedom’; I had direct knowledge: ‘Birth is exhausted, the religious life has been fulfilled, what was to be done is done, there is no more of being thus.’

This was the third knowledge attained by me in the third watch of the night. Ignorance was destroyed and knowledge arose, darkness was destroyed and light arose, accordingly as I dwelt vigilant, ardent and resolute. But such pleasant feeling as arose persisted without gaining power over my mind. (M.I,247ff; cf. M.I,22f;117)

The awakening was an unimaginably extraordinary and momentous experience, both for the Bodhisatta personally and for all humanity. This somewhat prosaic account describes an experience which transcended time, space and self-imposed limitations on reality. Ignorance was completely eradicated and the Bodhisatta awakened to the ineffable, unconditioned Nibbāna. Henceforth he would be known as the Buddha, the Awakened One. A being who had awakened to this unique truth of life was now living in the world.

Needless to say, this experience was hard to explain in words and concepts, but as the Buddha began to teach he expressed it in a variety of ways. One was by way of the Four Noble Truths: dukkha, its origin, its cessation and the path to its cessation, the essential core teaching of all Buddhas (explained in the chapter on Dhamma). Another way that awakening is expressed is as the exhaustion of the ‘outflows’ of selfhood which seek for sense pleasures, further becoming and ignorance. The Awakened One was now liberated from the tyranny of selfhood. The first two of these ‘Three Knowledges’ (tevijjā) were also realized by some of the Buddha’s disciples, although they are not specific requirements for the realization of awakening.

11. Before my awakening, bhikkhus, while I was still an unawakened Bodhisatta, I reflected, ‘What in regard to the world is the gratification, what the danger and what the escape?’

Then I reflected, ‘Whatever happiness and ease arise because of the world, this is the gratification from the world. That the world is impermanent, subject to suffering and its nature is change is the danger from the world. The removal and giving up of desire and lust for the world is the escape from the world.’

. . .

But when I knew directly, as they really are in the world, gratification as gratification, danger as danger, escape as escape, I could claim to have awakened to the incomparable perfect awakening in this world with its celestials, its Evil Ones (Māra) and its Deities (Brahmas), among humanity with its renunciants and priests, its leaders and people. Knowledge and insight arose, ‘Unshakeable is liberation, this is my last birth, there is no more renewed existence.’ (A.I,258f)

Another way in which the awakening is expressed is as fully comprehending the gratification from, the danger of and the escape from the world. This is perhaps a more familiar way of expressing in practice the second and third of the Noble Truths, the origin and cessation of dukkha. Just because there is real gratification in the world, human beings are liable to become entranced by it and forget about the dangers of impermanence.

In other texts this three-way formula is used with reference to a variety of other aspects of the world, for example, the ‘world’ of the senses. It is also stated that the awakening was assisted by the development of mindfulness of breathing and the basis of psychic power, seeing the peril in pleasures, and being proficient in entering and emerging from the concentration absorptions.25

12. So also, bhikkhus, have I seen an ancient path, an ancient road, travelled by the Fully Enlightened Ones of former times. And what, bhikkhus, is that ancient path, that ancient road, travelled by Fully Enlightened Ones of former times? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path, that is: right understanding, right aspiration, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.

This is that ancient path, that ancient road travelled along by Fully Enlightened Ones of former times, and going along it I came to know directly ageing and death, I came to know directly the origin of ageing and death, I came to know directly the cessation of ageing and death, I came to know directly the way leading to the cessation of ageing and death.

Going along it I came to know directly birth ... coming-into-existence ... grasping ... thirst ... feeling ... contact ... the six sense bases ... name and form ... consciousness ... formative activities; and their origin, their cessation and the way leading to their cessation. (S.II,106f)

Several times the Buddha’s experience of awakening is expressed as the understanding of Conditional Causality (explained in Chapter 2). This was really the essential key to the Buddha’s awakening. While other spiritual seekers were looking for the ultimate essence of life, the Buddha awoke to the truth of conditioned processes — that there was no permanent self-entity (attā), but all was not-self (anattā), just physical and mental processes. The culmination of the Bodhisatta’s contemplative inquiry from the very beginning of his spiritual search was formally presented in a twelve-link sequence.26 Having been initially confronted with ageing and death, he had continuously inquired as to their origins, and now he had discovered their origination, which then revealed the way of their cessation and the path for realizing their cessation. This was more generally presented as the Four Noble Truths, with dukkha expressing not only ageing and death, but all forms of unsatisfactoriness or suffering. The causally-conditioned nature of dukkha had now been revealed, and if it was causally-conditioned, it could also be causally-de-conditioned. Liberation from ageing, death and all suffering was now a possibility.

13. So, bhikkhus, being myself subject to birth, ageing, sickness, death, sorrow and defilement — having seen the peril in what is subject to these things — seeking the unborn, unageing, unailing, deathless, sorrowless, undefiled, incomparable peace from bondage, Nibbāna — I realized the unborn, unageing, unailing, deathless, sorrowless, undefiled, incomparable peace from bondage, Nibbāna. Knowledge and insight arose, ‘Unshakeable is liberation, this is my last birth, there is no more renewed existence.’ (M.I,167, abridged)

With the experience of full awakening, the reflection which initiated the Bodhisatta’s six strenuous years of ardent spiritual search and striving (text 3) came to full completion. He had now realized the unshakeable liberation from ‘birth, ageing, sickness, death, sorrow and defilement’, the ‘incomparable peace from bondage, Nibbāna’. The awakening occurred on the full-moon day of May. This is referred to as Vesākha Pūjā and is the most important Buddhist festival day. Since he was now a Buddha, one who makes the path to liberation known to others, this was not the end of the story. However, this Truth was indeed very different from what most people know, and was thus exceptionally hard to articulate.

14. It occurred to me, bhikkhus: ‘This Dhamma which I have found is profound, difficult to see, difficult to understand, peaceful, excellent, beyond logic, subtle, comprehensible only to the wise. But this is a humanity which loves desire, is delighted by desire, delighting in desire. Thus for a humanity which loves desire, is delighted by desire, delighting in desire, this is a subject difficult to comprehend, that is to say, origination by way of causality.27 And indeed this is a subject difficult to comprehend, that is to say, the stilling of all activities, the giving up of all basis of rebirth, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna. And if I were to teach Dhamma and others did not understand me, that would be a weariness and vexation to me.’... As I was reflecting thus, my mind inclined to not bothering, to not teaching Dhamma. (M.I,167f; Vin.I,4f; S.I,136f; cf. D.II,36f)

The truth which the Buddha realized is quite contrary to the usual way of the world, although perhaps some people can imagine it. Rather than having to keep feeding desires continuously, what would it be like if those desires were to cease? Would it not be peaceful, and with so much more time to devote to more meaningful things in life? But trying to teach the majority of people this seemingly incomprehensible teaching might appear futile. However, the celestial being Brahma Sahampati realized the serious consequences of this decision by the Buddha and beseeched him to teach for the sake of ‘beings with little dust in their eyes’.

15. Then I, bhikkhus, having known Brahma’s entreaty, out of compassion for beings, surveyed the world with the eye of an Awakened One. I saw, bhikkhus, as I surveyed the world with the eye of an Awakened One, beings with little defilement, with much defilement, with keen faculties, with dull faculties, with good qualities, with bad qualities, easy to teach, hard to teach, and a few who dwelt seeing the faults and fear in the world beyond.

Just as in a pond of blue lotuses or a pond of red lotuses or a pond of white lotuses, only a few blue, red or white lotuses are born in the water, grow up in the water, do not rise above the water but thrive completely immersed in the water — only a few blue, red or white lotuses are born in the water, grow up in the water, rest on the surface of the water — only a few blue, red or white lotuses are born in the water, grow up in the water, stand up out of the water, untainted by the water. Then I, bhikkhus, addressed Brahma Sahampati in these verses:

Open are the doors to the Deathless,For those who hear, let them show faith;Considering vexation, I inclined not to teach Dhamma,Which is excellent for human beings, Brahma.(M.I,169, abridged)

Thus, recognizing that there were some people in the world who could comprehend this profound teaching, the Buddha overcame his original hesitation and decided to make the path to awakening known. Buddhist tradition recognizes that there are also many Silent Buddhas (Pacceka Buddha), beings who have similarly realized full awakening themselves but do not have the abilities or inclination to teach. Fortunately, Gotama Buddha was not silent.

Celestial beings are recognized in Buddhism as beings of advanced spiritual development; some have reached the higher levels only attainable through refined meditation practice rather than mere virtuous actions. Several of the brahmanical deities, Brahma in this quotation and in other quotations Indra (Sakka, cf. D. sutta 21), have been co-opted into being partial to Buddhism. Metaphorically and psychologically they represent very noble human qualities.

### Teaching

16. The Tathāgata is perfected and fully awakened. Listen, bhikkhus, the Deathless has been attained. I shall instruct you; I shall teach you Dhamma. Following what has been advised, you will soon enter on and abide in, know and experience for yourself that unsurpassed culmination of the religious life for the sake of which a person of good family rightly goes forth from the home life into homelessness. (Vin.I,9)

The Buddha considered who would most likely understand his profound yet subtle teaching. He first remembered his two initial teachers (see text 5 above); however, both of them had already passed away. Next he recalled the five ascetics who had attended upon him during his asceticism, and sought them out in the Deer Park at Sarnath, near present-day Varanasi. To them, on the Full Moon day of July (Āsālha Pūjā), he gave his first teaching, the Setting Rolling of the Wheel of Dhamma Discourse, (see text 46), with immediate results.

17. Then the venerable Aññāta Kondañña, having seen, reached, known and penetrated into Dhamma, having crossed over doubt, without uncertainty, having attained perfect confidence in the Master’s Teaching without depending upon another, said to the Revered One: ‘May I, sir, receive the going forth in the Revered One’s presence. May I receive the acceptance?’ ‘Come, bhikkhu’, the Revered One said, ‘Well-taught is Dhamma. Live the religious life for the complete ending of suffering.’ (Vin.I,12)

The five ascetics, being serious and earnest spiritual seekers, were very receptive to this new teaching, especially coming as it did from the newly-awakened Buddha. One of them, Aññāta Kondañña, awoke to the ‘vision of Dhamma’, realizing the first stage of awakening (stream-entry). This was another momentous event, since it meant that the Dhamma could be realized by others through the Buddha’s teaching. Aññāta Kondañña then asked to become a committed disciple of the Buddha. He thus became the first bhikkhu to enter the Buddhist monastic community (Sangha). He was soon followed by the other four ascetics as they also penetrated to the true meaning of the Buddha’s message.

Four stages of awakening are recognized: stream-entry, once-returning, non-returning and the full awakening of arahantship. They are distinguished by the number of ‘fetters’ which are relinquished or weakened at each stage.28

18. As he was sitting near, the Revered One gave Yasa, the young man of good family, a graduated teaching, that is, on giving, on morality, on heaven; on the disadvantage, the folly, the affliction of sense pleasures and the benefits of renunciation.

When the Revered One knew that Yasa, the young man of good family, was of ready mind, receptive mind, free from obstruction, exultant, gladdened, then he made known the condensed teaching of the Buddhas: dukkha, arising, cessation and path. And just as a clean cloth without stain would properly take dye, even so as Yasa sat there the pure, stainless, vision of Dhamma arose, that is, ‘whatever phenomena arise, all that is subject to cessation’. (Vin.I,15)

While the Buddha was still residing at the Deer Park, he met the son of a wealthy merchant of Varanasi who was overwhelmed with spiritual despair, much as the Buddha himself had been before his renunciation. Yasa thus became the first non-monastic to receive the teaching and fully comprehend it. He too requested the going forth into the Sangha. Meanwhile, Yasa’s father, mother and former wife all received and understood the teaching, becoming the first male (upāsaka) and female (upāsikā) lay disciples. When Yasa’s friends heard about his ordination they also became interested, and upon hearing the Buddha’s teaching were also awakened and asked for acceptance into the Sangha.

19. Wander about, bhikkhus, for the benefit and happiness of the manyfolk, out of compassion for the world, for the welfare, benefit and well-being of human and celestial beings. Let not two of you go by one path. Teach the Dhamma which is beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle and beautiful in the end. Explain the religious life in the spirit and the letter, completely fulfilled and pure. There are beings with little dust in their eyes, who through not hearing Dhamma are wasting away, but who will grow through understanding Dhamma. (Vin.I,21)

When the number of fully-awakened disciples reached sixty, the Buddha exhorted them to wander further afield in order to share the teaching with other suffering beings. The disciples were seemingly so successful that they brought many new followers to the Buddha for ordination. Since this was not always convenient, the Buddha then allowed the other bhikkhus to perform the ordination ceremony themselves, using the Going for Refuge formula.29 Later, when the Sangha was much larger and various incidents occurred, this procedure was changed so that the local Sangha undertook the ordination ceremony as a formal communal ‘Act of the Sangha’ (sanghakamma).

20. Then King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha saw Dhamma, attained Dhamma, found Dhamma, penetrated Dhamma, crossed beyond doubt, put away uncertainty, reached full confidence and was independent of others in the dispensation of the teacher ...

‘Excellent, Venerable Sir! Excellent, Venerable Sir! Just as, Venerable Sir, what was upturned is set upright, what was concealed is revealed, one gone astray is shown the path, a lamp is held up in the darkness for those with eyes to see, the Revered One has made known the Dhamma in various ways. I, Venerable Sir, go to the Revered One for refuge, and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha. Henceforth, let the Revered One receive me as a lay follower for as long as breath lasts.’ (Vin.I,36)

The Buddha travelled to Rājagaha, the capital of the kingdom of Magadha, where he met King Bimbisāra and a large number of citizens. Upon receiving the teaching of the Four Noble Truths, King Bimbisāra and many citizens realised the first level of awakening. The King was the first of a number of local rulers to become disciples of the Buddha. Shortly thereafter he gave the Bamboo Grove as a residence for the Sangha.

King Pasenadi of Kosala and his Queen Mallikā also became disciples. However, though King Pasenadi had many discussions with the Buddha, it is never stated that he attained any level of awakening.30

### The Person

The central figure in the Pali Canon is, of course, the Buddha, who is portrayed in many different ways. As an awakened being he is a multi-faceted person, at once displaying humane compassion and exceptional wisdom, yet also somewhat enigmatic in regard to the nature of his being, and extraordinary in his display of psychic powers. On the one hand he is a lover of quiet and solitude; on the other he is open to discussions with provocative wanderers or disputing brahmins. He is energetic in giving encouraging discourses to his disciples, but does not hesitate to rebuke them forcefully at times for inappropriate conduct or distorted views. In the course of his forty-five years of teaching he met many people and dealt with many situations, not all of them agreeable. Besides the encounters which led to people’s awakening to the Dhamma, he also faced attempts to discredit himself and the Sangha, and even attacks on his life. Below are a few episodes which give a glimpse of his character, with a hint of good-natured humour.

21. Thus have I heard. At one time the Revered One was staying at Sāvatthi, in Jeta’s Grove at Anāthapindika’s Park. And at that time the wanderer Pottapāda was at the debating-hall near the Tinduka tree, in the park of a single hall of Queen Mallikā, staying with a large company of three hundred wanderers.

Then the Revered One dressed in the forenoon, and taking his bowl and robe went to Sāvatthi for alms-round. Then it occurred to him, ‘It is too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthi. What if I approach the debating hall in Queen Mallikā’s park and the wanderer Pottapāda?’ The Revered One then went to the debating hall in Queen Mallikā’s park.

At that time the wanderer Pottapāda was sitting with a large company of wanderers, noisily and loudly speaking various kinds of unedifying talk, such as about kings, robbers, ministers . . .

Then the wanderer Pottapāda saw the Revered One approaching from afar and called his followers to order, saying, ‘Little noise, gentlemen, restrain the noise, gentlemen. The Samana Gotama is coming. He enjoys quiet and praises quiet. If he sees that this company is quiet he may think to visit us.’ At this the wanderers were silent. (D.I,178)

Wherever the Buddha stayed, he would usually go daily into the nearest town or village to collect alms-food. Sometimes he and his disciples would also make visits to the nearby parks where other renunciants stayed during their wanderings through the countryside. Since many of the wanderers were less inclined to meditation, these gathering places or parts of them were usually where discussions of various views and teachings were held. The Buddha and his disciples would invariably be questioned by other renunciants or would question them on their views. This usually provided an occasion for the Buddha to present his teachings or refute those of others.

22. While travelling in Magadha with a large company of bhikkhus, the Buddha stopped at a brahmin village. At that time the head brahmin, Kūtadanta, wished to make a great sacrifice involving the slaughter of several thousand animals. Hearing of the Buddha’s arrival, he thought to ask him how to perform this sacrifice. So the villagers, Brahmin Kūtadanta and several hundred brahmins who had come for the sacrifice went to meet the Buddha. Brahmin Kūtadanta asked the Buddha how to perform the sacrifice. The Buddha responded by telling him a story from the past of King Mahāvijita who, being very wealthy, wished to make a great sacrifice which would be for his benefit and happiness for a long time. So the king consulted his chaplain, who gave him this advice:

‘Your Majesty’s country is beset by thieves, it is ravaged, villages and towns are being destroyed, the country is infested with brigands. If Your Majesty were to tax this region, that would be the wrong thing to do. Suppose Your Majesty were to think, “I will get rid of this plague of robbers by executions and imprisonment, or by confiscation, threats and banishment”, the plague would not be properly ended. Those who survived would later harm Your Majesty’s realm. However, with this plan you can completely eliminate the plague. To those in the kingdom who are engaged in cultivating crops and raising cattle, let Your Majesty distribute grain and fodder; to those in trade, give capital; to those in government service assign proper living wages. Then those people, being intent on their own occupations, will not harm the kingdom. Your Majesty’s revenues will be great, the land will be tranquil and not beset by thieves, and the people, with joy in their hearts, will play with their children, and will dwell in open houses.’

And saying, ‘So be it!’ the king accepted the chaplain’s advice ...

Then King Mahāvijita sent for the chaplain and said: ‘I have got rid of the plague of robbers; following your plan my revenue has grown, the land is tranquil and not beset by thieves, and the people with joy in their hearts play with their children and dwell in open houses.’ (D.I,135f; Maurice Walshe translation, LDB pp.135-6)

In this passage the Buddha expresses his vision of a peaceful and prosperous society. On other occasions, perhaps because he realized the growing influence of kings, he mentions the virtues of the ‘wheel-turning monarch’, a just and righteous king who is guided by Dhamma and offers protection to all in his realm.

The Pali Canon mentions a number of brahmins who came to meet, discuss with, consult or refute the Buddha. Sometimes they had to overcome their class pride, as they would have to show respect to someone who was not a brahmin. However, since many of the brahmins were very learned and respected spiritual values, the conversations were usually respectful and high-minded. In this encounter the Buddha continues the story of how the king performed a sacrifice where no animals were killed, no trees were cut down, no grass was mown and the slaves and workers were well-treated, and it was very successful. Kūtadanta asks the Buddha if there is a more profitable sacrifice, and the Buddha explains his complete path of practice, culminating in awakening. At this Kūtadanta goes for refuge, sets free the animals to be sacrificed, and after a talk by the Buddha on the Four Noble Truths, attains the vision of Dhamma.

There is a tone of playful provocation running through the discourse; why would a brahmin ask a samana about a brahmanical sacrifice? Perhaps so that the Buddha could teach him the ‘best sacrifice’, which would also not involve slaughtering animals.

23. Patācārā, although born into a rich family, eloped with a servant and went to live in a distant village. When the birth of her second child was near she set off to return to her family. However, mid-way a great storm broke, and as the second child was born she asked her husband to make a shelter. While cutting grass he was bitten by a snake and died. In the morning she found him and blamed herself for his death. As she continued on her way, her two children also died. Upon reaching her hometown, she heard that her parents and her brother had died in the storm. Maddened with grief, she wandered around naked, reviled and abused by people. She wandered towards the Jeta Grove where the Buddha was staying, and recognizing her receptiveness, he approached her. People tried to prevent her from going to him, but the Buddha welcomed her and encouraged her to recover her mental composure. He then told her of the universality of death, that relatives were no refuge from death, and that the wise follow the path to Nibbāna. Upon hearing this she realized the first stage of awakening and asked for the going forth. She describes her attainment of Arahantship:

Tending field with plough and whip, sowing seeds in the earth, nourishing wife and children, the young man enjoys wealth.

Why do I, complete in moral conduct, following the teacher’s doctrine, not Nibbāna acquire? I am not indolent or proud.

I washed my feet and watch the water. I see the wash-water flow down the slope.31

Thereupon my mind concentrates, as training a noble horse.

Taking a lamp I entered my dwelling; I considered the couch, then sat on the bed.

Taking the pin, I drew down the wick.

The extinguishing of the lamp — the liberation of the mind!

(Therīgāthā 112-116; introduction summarized from the Commentary to Therīgāthā by Mrs C.A.F. Rhys Davids in her translation ‘Poems of Early Buddhist Nuns’)

A number of women, some of whom, like Patācārā, very quickly realized the teaching, asked to join the community of nuns (bhikkhuni-Sangha). Some, after experiencing severe sorrow and loss, were very receptive to the Buddha’s teaching on suffering. One of the best known examples is the story of Kisā Gotamī. Deranged from grief at the death of her only son, she carried the corpse around, asking people to give her medicine for the child. A wise person directed her to the Buddha staying in the Jeta Grove. When she requested medicine he told her to find a pinch of mustard seed, but it must be from a household where no one had ever died. Elated that she would soon have her medicine, she hurried into Sāvatthi. However, going from house to house, she soon realized that every household had experienced death. Coming to her senses, she took leave of her dead child and returned to the Buddha. When he gave her a short teaching on the inevitability of death she attained stream-entry; then she sought out the bhikkhunis for ordination.

Patācārā was acknowledged by the Buddha as the foremost bhikkhuni proficient in the Vinaya. She must also have been a gifted teacher, as she had many bhikkhuni disciples. One set of verses in the Therīgāthā scripture is given by thirty disciples of Patācārā, and another by 500 of her disciples. The Therīgāthā contains verses by more than seventy awakened bhikkhunis.

24. Thus I heard. At one time the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrel’s Sanctuary. Now at that time there was a leper called Suppabuddha at Rājagaha. He was a pauper and a miserable wretch.

Once when the Blessed One was sitting expounding the Dhamma surrounded by a large gathering of people, the leper saw the great crowd in the distance. He thought, ‘Surely there will be something to eat being distributed there. Suppose I approach that great crowd; perhaps I might get something to eat there?’ He approached the crowd, and he saw the Blessed One sitting expounding the Dhamma, surrounded by a large gathering of people. He thought, ‘There is nothing to eat being distributed here. It is the monk Gotama expounding the Dhamma to an assembly. Suppose I listen to the Dhamma?’ He sat down there at one side, thinking, ‘I shall hear the Dhamma.’ Then the Blessed One surveyed the whole assembly, reading their minds with his mind and wondering who was capable of recognizing the Dhamma. He saw Suppabuddha the leper sitting in the assembly. Then he thought, ‘He is capable of recognizing the Dhamma.’ For the benefit of Suppabuddha the leper he gave progressive instruction on generosity, on virtue and on the heavens, and then on the inadequacy, the vanity and the defilement in sensual pleasures and the blessings in renunciation. When he saw that his mind was ready ... he expounded the teaching peculiar to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path to its cessation ... The spotless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in [Suppabuddha the leper]: all that is subject to arising is subject to cessation. (Udāna 5:3; Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, pp.171-2)

The places where the Buddha and his disciples stayed were outside the towns but close enough for people to visit and listen to the teachings. They were usually quite public, so that anyone was free to come; the teachings were open to all. However, it is very hard to tell from outward appearance who might be ripe for understanding the teachings. The Buddha’s power of mind-reading is often mentioned in the Canon. It was generally believed that anyone who was adept at meditation would be able to attain certain psychic powers, and the Buddha and a number of his disciples were considered to have them.

Unfortunately, shortly after his awakening to the Dhamma, Suppabuddha the leper was killed by a roaming cow. The Buddha was asked and revealed what previous action had led him to being a leper (insulting a previous Silent Buddha) and where he was reborn (in a heaven where he ‘outshines’ the others).

25. At one time the Revered One was staying at Sāvatthi, in Jeta’s Grove at Anāthapindika’s Park. Now at that time the Venerable Nandaka gave a Dhamma discourse in the assembly hall, explaining, rousing, enthusiastic and gladdening. Then the Revered One, emerging from seclusion towards evening, approached the assembly hall. Drawing near the doorway, he stood waiting for the discourse to conclude. When he knew that the discourse had ended, he coughed and knocked at the door, and the bhikkhus opened the door. The Revered One entered the hall and sat down on the prepared seat. Upon sitting down he said to the Venerable Nandaka, ‘Indeed, this was a long Dhamma teaching you addressed to the bhikkhus, my back was aching as I stood outside the door waiting for the Dhamma discourse to finish.’

When he had spoken, the Venerable Nandaka, being embarrassed, said to the Revered One, ‘I knew not that the Revered One was standing outside the door. If I had known I would not have spoken so much.’

Then the Revered One, knowing that Venerable Nandaka was embarrassed, said to him, ‘Well done, well done, Nandaka. It is suitable for young men of good family who have gone forth out of faith from the home life to homelessness to be sitting together in Dhamma discourse. When you come together, Nandaka, there are two options, either talk on Dhamma or the “noble silence.”’32 (A.IV,359)

Although the Buddha is usually presented as the one who gives the teachings, some of the discourses are given by his senior disciples, or sometimes a senior disciple is asked by the bhikkhus to elaborate on or explain a short teaching by the Buddha. Venerable Nandaka was credited by the Buddha with being the foremost teacher of bhikkhunis. In this passage it seems the Buddha was teasing Venerable Nandaka, but then also praised him.

26. On one occasion as the Buddha was wandering around the lodgings, he came upon a bhikkhu sick with dysentery, lying in his own excrements. On finding out that he had no one to attend him, the Buddha said to his attendant-monk, Ānanda:

‘Go, Ānanda, bring water, we will bathe this bhikkhu.’

‘Even so, Venerable Sir’, the Venerable Ānanda assented to the Revered One. When he brought the water, the Revered One poured the water and Venerable Ānanda washed him. Then the Revered One took him by the head and Venerable Ānanda by the feet, and they lifted him up and laid him on a bed.

The Buddha then had the Sangha convened, and questioning them about this bhikkhu, said:

‘You have not, bhikkhus, a mother or a father who attends on you. If you, bhikkhus, do not attend one another, who is there to attend you? Whoever, bhikkhus, would attend me, should attend the sick.’ (Vin.I,301)

The founding of the monastic community gave rise to a great deal of complexity in the life of the Buddha. The Vinaya Piṭaka presents him as adjudicating every detail of monastic life and personally judging each case of misconduct, which entailed questioning the supposed offender and then providing a ruling on the case. The incident mentioned here led to the Buddha’s laying down in detail the formal guidelines on who should attend to whom, how to attend to sick bhikkhus and how sick bhikkhus should make themselves easy to attend to. Such formalizing of the details of monastic living shows that the Sangha had now grown into a large and well-run institution.

27. Thus have I heard. At one time the Revered One was staying at Sāvatthi in the Eastern Park, at Migāra’s mother’s mansion. Now at that time a dearly loved grand-daughter of Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, had died. Then Visākhā, with clothes and hair wet from mourning, went to the Revered One early in the day. Upon paying respects she sat down at one side.

The Revered One enquired, ‘Well, Visākhā, why have you come with wet clothes and wet hair so early in the day?’

‘A dearly loved grand-daughter has died. That is why I have come with wet clothes and wet hair so early in the day.’

‘Would you wish, Visākhā, for as many children and grandchildren as there are people here in Sāvatthi?’

‘Yes, Revered One, I would like as many children and grandchildren as there are people here in Sāvatthi.’

‘But, Visākhā, how many people in Sāvatthi die every day?’

‘Ten people die in Sāvatthi in a day, Venerable Sir. Nine people ... eight people ... seven people ... six people ... five people ... four people ... three people ... two people ... one person dies in Sāvatthi in a day. Sāvatthi is never free from people dying.’

‘What do you think, Visākhā, would you ever be without wet clothes and wet hair?’

‘No, Venerable Sir. Enough of having many children and grandchildren.’ (Udāna 8:8)

Visākhā was the most generous woman supporter of the Sangha. Once when she had served a meal to the Buddha and the bhikkhu Sangha, she requested eight favours. The Buddha responded by saying that he was beyond granting favours. She said that they were allowable things which she wished to offer: rain cloths for the bhikkhus, food for arriving bhikkhus, food for departing bhikkhus, medicine for sick bhikkhus, food for sick bhikkhus, food for bhikkhus attending the sick, a regular supply of drinking porridge and bathing cloths for the bhikkhunis. After she explained the practical benefits for the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis, the Buddha asked her what benefits she saw for herself. She explained that if she thought that someone who was at one of the stages of awakening had received one of her offerings, she would be gladdened, and this would lead to her mind becoming concentrated and to the arising of the Spiritual Faculties, Spiritual Powers and Awakening Factors.33 The Buddha praised her for recognizing these benefits and granted her the eight favours. With so many bhikkhus coming to Savatthi to see the Buddha and then departing, she would feed some 500 bhikkhus each day in her house. The residence where the Buddha was staying at the time of this conversation was also provided by her.

There is a certain irony in this conversation, since Visākhā is said to have had twenty children. They and their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren all had many children, so that before she died at age 120 she had 84,020 living descendants!

28. The brahmin Dona saw the Buddha sitting meditating under a tree.

The brahman went up to him and asked: ‘Sir, will you be a god?’

‘No, brahman.’

‘Sir, will you be a heavenly angel?’

‘No, brahman.’

‘Sir will you be a spirit?’

‘No, brahman.’

‘Sir, will you be a human being?’

‘No, brahman.’

‘Then, sir, what indeed will you be?’

‘Brahman, the taints by means of which, through my not having abandoned them, I might be a god or a heavenly angel or a spirit or a human being have been abandoned by me, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, done away with, and are no more subject to future arising. Just as a blue or red or white lotus is born in water, grows in water and stands up above the water untouched by it, so too I, who was born in the world and grew up in the world, have transcended the world, and I live untouched by the world. Remember me as one who is enlightened.’ (A.II,38f; Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB, pp.187-8; in this translation the alternative spelling ‘brahman’ is used for ‘brahmin’).

As an Awakened One the Buddha was no longer an ordinary human being, since he had abandoned the usual human attachments. Thus it is very hard to define him clearly other than as an Awakened One. On another occasion he said that he was ‘deep, immeasurable, unfathomable like the great ocean’. On a number of occasions various people asked whether he would exist after death or not. This he refused to answer, partly because it was a distracting speculation not conducive to the goal of spiritual practice, but also because the questioner was usually defining the Buddha in his own familiar worldly way, which of course no longer applied.

29. The Revered One stayed at Parileyyaka in the protected jungle thicket beneath an august sal tree. Then as the Revered One was meditating in solitude the reflection arose in his mind, ‘Formerly I was not living easeful, beset with those bhikkhus of Kosambi, makers of disputes, makers of quarrels, makers of contention, makers of contentious talk, makers of legal issues in the Sangha.

Now, living alone, without a companion, I am living happily and easeful, away from those bhikkhus of Kosambi, makers of disputes, makers of quarrels, makers of contention, makers of contentious talk, makers of legal issues in the Sangha.’ (Vin.I,351)

Some years after the Buddha’s awakening, a serious dispute arose between two factions of bhikkhus at Kosambi. Unfortunately, not even the Buddha was able to resolve the dispute and he left Kosambi, staying for some time in a quiet grove before travelling on to Sāvatthi. Eventually, when the lay supporters of Kosambi realized that the Buddha had left town because of the quarrelling bhikkhus, they stopped paying respects or giving them alms-food. The quarrelling bhikkhus then recognized that they must seek out the Buddha to settle their dispute. When they approached Sāvatthi the Buddha told the resident bhikkhus and lay supporters to listen to both sides and support those who were speakers of Dhamma.

It is very fortunate that the preservers of the Vinaya recorded even the difficulties the Sangha endured, as this became the basis for precedents on how to deal with similar issues in future. In relating to this incident the Buddha is quoted as defining separate communities of bhikkhus, the beginning of what later became a great number of different sects.

30. Once when Devadatta was alone in retreat this thought arose in his mind: ‘Who is there whose confidence I can win over and thereby acquire much gain, honour and renown?’ Then he thought, ‘There is this Prince Ajātasattu. He is young, with a glorious future. Suppose I win over his confidence? Much gain, honour and renown will accrue to me if I do so. ...’

Then Prince Ajātasattu felt prodigious confidence in Devadatta owing to his supernormal powers. After that he waited upon him evening and morning with five hundred carriages and five hundred offerings of milk-rice as a gift of food. Devadatta became overwhelmed with gain, honour and renown. Ambition obsessed his mind, and the wish arose in him: ‘I will rule the Sangha of bhikkhus.’ Simultaneously with the thought his supernormal powers vanished. (Vin.II,185 abridged: Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli translation, LoB p.257)

Another unpleasant episode was the saga of Devadatta, the Buddha’s cousin. Through his development of meditation he had attained psychic (supernormal) powers; however, he did not attain the ‘vision of Dhamma’ and so was still unawakened. He became overwhelmed by desire for ‘gain, honour and renown’. This eventually led him to attempt to take control of the Sangha, create a schism in the Sangha and finally attempt to assassinate the Buddha. Fortunately, all these efforts failed. However, the record of this provides a valuable lessen regarding spiritual pride and led to a number of Sangha procedures on how to deal with such issues in future.

### The Last Days

31. a) In the last months of the Buddha’s life, Māra, encouraging him to pass away, reminded him that now there were bhikkhus and disciples, bhikkhunis and female disciples, laymen disciples and laywomen disciples ‘... who are accomplished, trained, skilled, learned, knowers of the Dhamma, trained in conformity with the Dhamma, correctly trained and walking in the path of the Dhamma, who will pass on what they have gained from their Teacher, teach it, declare it, establish it, expound it, analyze it, make it clear; till they shall be able, by means of the Dhamma, to refute false teachings that have arisen and teach the Dhamma of wondrous effect.’ (D.II,105-6; Maurice Walshe translation, LDB, pp.246-7)

b) Responding to questions from the wanderer Vacchagotta, the Buddha said that there were many more than five hundred each of the groups of bhikkhus, bhikkhunis, male celibate lay-followers, female celibate lay-followers, male non-celibate lay-followers and female non-celibate lay-followers who had realized some level of awakening. Vacchagotta replied by saying how complete the religious life under the Buddha was and added:

‘Friend Gotama, just as the River Ganges, flowing towards the ocean, sloping towards the ocean, tending towards the ocean, remains touching the ocean, so this assembly of the good Gotama, of householders and those gone forth, flowing towards Nibbāna, sloping towards Nibbāna, tending towards Nibbāna, remains touching Nibbāna.’ (M.I,494)

The Buddha had been teaching for some forty-five years throughout much of northern India. He had guided many thousands of people to the realization of some stage of awakening, and had established a flourishing bhikkhu Sangha and bhikkhuni Sangha with many devoted lay supporters. Just minutes before his final passing the Buddha asked the 500 bhikkhus present if anyone had any final questions, but all were silent. The Buddha said that this was because the least-attained of them was a stream-enterer who no longer had any doubts.

32. Ānanda, I am now decrepit, old, aged, one who has traversed the span of life, reached the term of eighty. Just as an old cart is made to go on with the help of supports, so too the Tathāgata’s body is made to go on with the help of supports. It is only when the Tathāgata withdraws attention from all signs and, with the cessation of certain feelings, enters the signless concentration, that his body is at ease.

Therefore, Ānanda, you should make yourself your lamp,34 yourself and no other your refuge. You should make the Dhamma your lamp, the Dhamma and no other your lamp. And how does a bhikkhu do that? Herein, bhikkhus, in regard to the body one abides contemplating the body, earnestly, clearly knowing and mindful, having put away desire and disappointment concerning the world. Herein, bhikkhus, in regard to the feelings ... conditions of mind .... phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena, earnestly, clearly knowing and mindful, having put away desire and disappointment concerning the world (see text 59). (D.II,100)

Finally, after living some eighty years, the Buddha’s body reached its limits. Only through the powers of his meditation could he maintain some degree of physical comfort. His emphasis upon taking one’s self as lamp and refuge reinforces the contemplative nature of his teaching — only within oneself can the source of suffering be discovered, and only with the Buddha’s specific path of spiritual practice, as outlined in the Dhamma, can suffering be fully resolved.

33. Then the Revered One said to the bhikkhus, ‘Thus, bhikkhus, I declare to you — it is the nature of all conditioned things to decay; strive on with vigilance.’ These were the Tathāgata’s last words. (D.II,156)

After having taught for some forty-five years, the Buddha summarized his teaching with these simple yet profound words, encouraging his disciples to the very end to practise his teachings with vigilance and due diligence in order to realize true peace. The Bodhisatta was initially moved to pursue the spiritual path through witnessing the perishability of human life, and now the Buddha was experiencing it for himself, but with the utmost well-being and equanimity. The account continues by reporting that the Buddha then entered into successively refined absorptions before entering Parinibbāna (final Nibbāna).