## 2 The Dhamma

Dhamma (Skt: Dharma) is a pre-Buddhist term meaning the nature of things, the truth of reality, the way it is. The Buddha used this term because it was so prevalent and well known, but in explaining it he gave his own interpretation; that is, when he said to people that he would teach them Dhamma, he taught them his own path of practice for the realization of the truth of the way things are. Thus for Buddhists ‘Dhamma’ came to mean specifically the Buddha’s teachings as preserved in the Buddhist scriptures. We can thus say that Buddha-Dhamma is the particular Buddhist path to realizing the universal truth of the way things are. Another common and more mundane meaning of the word ‘dhamma’ is ‘things’, ‘phenomena’ or ‘objects of the mind’.1

### The Right Attitude

34. Then, monks, King Yama2 questions that man, examines him and addresses him concerning the first divine messenger: ‘Didn’t you ever see, my good man, the first divine messenger appearing among humankind?’

And he replies: ‘No, Lord, I did not see him.’

Then King Yama says to him: ‘But, my good man, didn’t you ever see a woman or a man eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old, frail, bent like a roof bracket, crooked, leaning on a stick, going shakily along, ailing, youth and vigour gone, with broken teeth, with gray and scanty hair or bald, wrinkled, with blotched limbs?’

And the man replies: ‘Yes, Lord, I have seen this.’

Then, King Yama says to him: ‘My good man, didn’t it ever occur to you, an intelligent and mature person, “I too am subject to old age and cannot escape it. Let me now do noble deeds by body, speech, and mind”?’

‘No, Lord, I could not do it. I was negligent.’

. . .

When, monks, King Yama has questioned, examined, and addressed him thus concerning the first divine messenger, he again questions, examines, and addresses the man about the second one, saying: ‘Didn’t you ever see, my good man, the second divine messenger appearing among humankind?’

‘No Lord, I did not see him.’

‘But, my good man, didn’t you ever see a woman or a man who was sick and in pain, seriously ill, lying in his own filth, having to be lifted up by some and put to bed by others?’

‘Yes, Lord I have seen this.’

‘My good man, didn’t it ever occur to you, an intelligent and mature person, “I too am subject to illness and cannot escape it. Let me now do noble deeds by body, speech, and mind”?’

‘No, Lord, I could not do it. I was negligent.’

. . .

When, monks, King Yama has questioned, examined, and addressed him thus concerning the second divine messenger, he again questions, examines, and addresses the man about the third one, saying: ‘Didn’t you ever see, my good man, the third divine messenger appearing among humankind?’

‘No Lord, I did not see him.’

‘But, my good man, didn’t you ever see a woman or a man one, two, or three days dead, the corpse swollen, discoloured, and festering?’

‘Yes, Lord I have seen this.’

‘Then my good man, didn’t it ever occur to you, an intelligent and mature person, “I too am subject to death and cannot escape it. Let me now do noble deeds by body, speech, and mind”?’

‘No, Lord, I could not do it. I was negligent.’(A.I,138-40 abridged; Bhikkhu Bodhi translation; IBW p.29)

These three ‘divine messengers’ are the primary existential conundrums which all reflective humans confront at some point in their lives. Who has not asked, ‘What happens when we die?’, or pondered, ‘What is the true purpose of life if it ends in old age and death?’ And of course we soon realize that everyone, rich or poor, famous or obscure, powerful or powerless, all faces the same fate; we are all equal before death. Unfortunately, some people are overwhelmed by these impending experiences and choose to ignore, deny or avoid dealing with them. For others they are a valuable opportunity to look deeper into the purpose and meaning of their lives, and perhaps make some important decisions about the future direction they wish to take. Being stirred (saṁvega) by these inevitable realities and seeking an answer to these issues is where the spiritual journey begins.

However, while some people may be impelled to seek for a spiritual answer when confronted by any of these ‘divine messengers’, their spiritual enthusiasm may wane when they obtain some degree of consolation or relief. Thus the Buddha encouraged serious seekers to reflect often upon these inevitabilities of life (A.III,71). Although the vivid memory of the ‘divine messengers’ may pass away, these facts of life themselves do not.

35. The unstable world is brought to an end; this is the first expounding of Dhamma taught by the Revered One who knows and sees, the Worthy One, the Fully Self-Awakened One. Because of knowing and seeing and hearing this, I went forth from the home-life into homelessness.

The world is without shelter or protection; this is the second expounding of Dhamma ...

The world is not one’s own; one must pass away leaving everything; this is the third expounding of Dhamma ...

The world is deficient, unsatisfied, a slave of craving; this is the fourth expounding of Dhamma taught by the Revered One who knows and sees, the Worthy One, the Fully Self-Awakened One. Because of knowing and seeing and hearing this, I went forth from the home-life into homelessness. (M.II,68ff)

Each person has his or her own reasons for engaging in the spiritual quest. These four reasons were given by one of the Buddha’s early disciples. While we may all appreciate the truth of these statements intellectually, it is often only our deep personal experience of them which challenges our normal view of life. If we reflect upon our life, it may become evident just how much of our behaviour is conditioned by these four facts. How much of our energy goes into seeking stability, protection, self-assurance and security? And how successful in these aims are we really? Only in the spiritual realm can we fully come to know what these qualities are in the ultimate sense.

36. Bhikkhus, all is burning. And what is the all that is burning? The eye is burning, forms are burning, eye-consciousness is burning, eye-contact is burning; also, whatever is felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant that arises with eye-contact for its indispensable condition, that too is burning.

Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust, with the fire of hate, with the fire of delusion; I say it is burning with birth, ageing, death, with sorrow, with lamentation, with pain, with grief, with distress.

The ear is burning, sounds are burning ...

The nose is burning, odours are burning ...

The tongue is burning, flavours are burning ...

The body is burning, tangibles are burning ...

The mind is burning, mind-states are burning, mind-consciousness is burning, mind-contact is burning; also, whatever is felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant that arises with mind-contact for its indispensable condition, that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; I say it is burning with birth, ageing, death, with sorrow, with lamentation, with pain, with grief, with distress. (Vin.I,34-5; S.IV,19-20)

In the course of their lives some people come to realize the limitations of the sensory realm. Initially we may think that we have complete control over sense impressions — we just need to keep away from those to which we are averse and enjoy only those we like. However, sooner or later we come to see how difficult it is to control them. We are continually ‘burned’ by averse impressions. We are ‘burned’ by desirable impressions too, because we can’t get enough of them. Delusion burns us with confusion, doubt and fear.

This quotation is an extract from what is traditionally called the Fire Sermon, the Buddha’s third discourse, delivered for the benefit of one thousand newly-accepted bhikkhus who had formerly been fire-worshipping ascetics. This teaching was so profound that they were all fully awakened upon hearing it.

37. Now I say this, Nigrodha: whatever discerning persons come to me who are honest, open and straightforward — I will instruct them, I will teach them Dhamma. If they practise in accordance with what is taught, in this very life, within seven years, they will enter on and abide in, know and experience for themselves that unsurpassed culmination of the religious life for the sake of which a person of good family rightly goes forth from the home-life into homelessness. Let alone seven years — six years; let alone six years — five years ... a fortnight; let alone a fortnight — in seven days they will know and experience this for themselves. (D.III,55)

The Buddha offers us the possibility of realizing spiritual liberation. This is sometimes referred to as the culmination of the religious life, of which liberation is the ultimate purpose. It must be realized by each one of us for ourselves, through practising the teachings rather than merely studying or worshipping them. Most people require instruction in order to do this, and some leave the security and confines of the home-life in order to dedicate themselves to the fullest extent to achieving liberation.

The Buddha offered teachings not depending upon a person’s class, status or intelligence but to those who showed the important qualities of integrity and earnestness, the fundamental basis for true spiritual endeavour. Integrity is that openness and truthfulness which enable us to see things clearly, while earnestness is that perseverance and commitment which keep us penetrating ever deeper into Truth, in spite of all the obstacles.

Note that the Buddha has tremendous confidence in human beings’ ability to put his teachings into practice and realize the truth of liberation in this very life — whether in seven years or just seven days!

38. a) Nibbāna, though very subtle and fine, is not hard to obtain for one intent upon the goal, who is skilled in mind and of gentle manner, and who practises the moral conduct of the Buddha. (Theragāthā 71)

b) Nibbāna, as taught by the Fully Awakened One, is indeed the highest happiness: the sorrowless, stainless peace, wherein dukkha is dissolved. (Theragāthā 227)

The Buddha’s teaching directs us to Nibbāna, something difficult to describe but within reach of every individual. Out of respect for the lofty heights of spiritual truth, we frequently push that goal beyond the realm of human possibility. But as these quotations from some of the Buddha’s early disciples demonstrate, the very existence of people who have practised and realized the teachings is an emphatic reminder that Nibbāna is realizable by any honest and persevering individual who follows the teachings of the Buddha.

Nibbāna is something exceptionally pleasant and worthwhile, whether it is expressed as ‘the highest happiness’ or as ‘the sorrowless, stainless peace’. It is also where ‘dukkha is dissolved’, that is, where the unsatisfactoriness of life (as mentioned in the first three texts above) ceases or is resolved. And it can be realized in this life — like human happiness, Nibbāna can be experienced here and now.

### The World

39. I say, friend, that where one is not born, does not age or die, or pass from one state to another, or arise again — that ‘world’s end’ is not to be known, seen or reached by travelling. Yet I say that there is no end of dukkha without reaching world’s end. Rather, it is in this fathom-long body, endowed with perception and mind, that I make known the world, the arising of the world, the cessation of the world and the way to the cessation of the world. (S.I,62)

The Buddha was fundamentally a meditator who focused primarily on subjective experience rather than objective reality. Thus while most people understand the world as an external reality, the Buddha understands it through how we perceive and interpret it. This is really the only way in which we can truly come to understand reality, which is actually only a perception and interpretation in our own mind. And, most importantly, it is in our own mind that we can end dukkha. This underscores the importance of mental development or meditation as the means of realizing the truth of ‘the world’.

### Self-Reliance

40. Now look, Kalamas, do not be led by oral sayings or tradition or hearsay; nor by the authority of scriptures; nor by reasoning or inference; nor by reasoned reflection; nor by accepting a view after pondering; nor by possible conformity; nor because we respect this samana.

When, Kalamas, you know yourselves, ‘These things are unskilful, these things are blameworthy, these things are censured by the wise, these things, if undertaken, lead to harm and suffering’; then abandon them.

What do you think, Kalamas, when greed ... aversion ... delusion arises in a person, does it arise to their welfare or harm?

To their harm, Venerable Sir.

...

When, Kalamas, you know yourself, ‘These things are skilful, these things are blameless, these things are praised by the wise, these things, when undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness’; then abide with them.

What do you think, Kalamas, when non-greed ... non-aversion ... non-delusion arises in a person, does it arise to their welfare or harm?

To their welfare, Venerable Sir.3 (A.I,188f)

The Buddha visited the Kalama people, who were experiencing doubt about which visiting religious teachers were speaking truth and which speaking falsehood. He encouraged them to contemplate for themselves what was really skilful or unskilful. Some people may take this to imply a rejection of tradition, texts and teachers. However, what the Buddha is saying is that we should first be guided by teachings, and then carefully consider, reflect upon and investigate them to see if they are indeed beneficial. Spiritual experience is a personal experience. We need to assume a certain responsibility for our spiritual development, and be able to discern clearly what is helpful for us by learning to trust our own inner wisdom and rigorously putting the teachings to the test of experience — are they really beneficial, or do they just sound impressive?

41. Within oneself is peace to be found, not from another will a bhikkhu find peace. For one who is inwardly calmed, nothing is accumulated, how then rejected?

Just as in the centre of the ocean no waves arise, but all is still; so, steadfast and free of lust, on what is there for a bhikkhu to build arrogance? (Sutta Nipāta 919-920)

Spiritual peace is a subjective experience rather than an external reality. It is found by looking within oneself through the development of internalized meditation practices. The development of Calm Meditation (samatha kammathāna) through the use of various concentration exercises can produce a strong temporary feeling of inner quiet. When the mind can be collected upon a meditation object such as the sensation of natural breathing at the nostrils, wandering thoughts are calmed and mental noise is silenced. That mental noise or internal dialogue is mostly obsessive self-reference through either affirmation or denial. The silencing of mental noise is the silencing of this self-reference, with its disturbing pride and desire.

Calm Meditation, however, only provides a temporary experience of quiet. It is through the development of Insight Meditation (vipassanā kammathāna), with an emphasis upon penetrating investigative awareness, that we are able to see the true nature of things clearly, and free ourselves from the very structures and sources of disturbing self-reference. Inner quiet then becomes as stable and natural as the waveless depths of the sea.

42. a) By oneself is wrong done, by oneself is one soiled; by oneself is wrong not done, by oneself is one purified. Purity and impurity depend upon oneself; no one can purify another. (Dhammapada 165)

b) Though one be victorious in battle over a thousand times a thousand people, yet the victory supreme is victory over oneself. (Dhammapada 103)

The source of our suffering lies within ourselves. The basic cause is identification with a self, which is out of harmony with the intrinsic selflessness of the universe. Thus the Buddha’s teaching focuses on internal spiritual practices rather than external religious ceremonies. In our desire to escape from our suffering we try to manipulate the external world, but we always manipulate it in relation to ourselves. Hence we are never able to get beyond ourselves, and we only create more self-centred suffering rather than penetrating to its source. Victory over oneself is the rooting out of the self-centred, self-affirming, self-supportive activities which are the primary source of suffering.

43. a) Truly oneself is one’s own refuge — what other refuge can there be? With oneself well-tamed one acquires a refuge hard to obtain. (Dhammapada 160)

b) You yourself ought to strive: the Buddhas only show the way. Those who enter upon this way and meditate are released from the bonds of Death. (Dhammapada 276)

c) By endeavour, vigilance, restraint and self-control, let the wise make an island for themselves which no flood can overwhelm. (Dhammapada 25)

The Buddha emphasized the need for individual effort and self-reliance. We have little real control over the external world, but we can exercise some degree of control over ourselves, so that is where we must start our practice. ‘Oneself is one’s own refuge’ literally means ‘depend upon yourself’, ‘look to yourself’, ‘have confidence in yourself’. This ‘self’ is the conventional empirical self which can choose to do good or evil, makes decisions and initiates action. We need to assume responsibility for our actions before we can gain control over them. Our suffering is created by our own ignorance. We remedy it through gaining confidence in our own inner wisdom; the Buddha just shows us the right direction. The emphasis on self-reliance is also a reminder not to become overly dependent upon charismatic or impressive teachers. In their presence it may seem that we are progressing spiritually, but unless we do the work ourselves we are only living on borrowed wisdom.

### Noble Friendship

44. Ānanda: ‘Sir, fully half of this religious life is good friendship, good companionship, good association.’

Buddha: ‘Not quite so, Ānanda, not quite so. It is the whole, not the half, of this religious life, this good friendship, good companionship, good association.’4 (S.V,2)

Although self-reliance is an important foundation for spiritual practice, we can also greatly benefit from the support and guidance of a ‘noble’ friend. A noble friend can point us towards the right path, encourage us beyond our own limits and make us aware of those aspects of ourselves of which we are frightened or to which we are blind and resistant. In the Buddha’s teaching, companionship with the noble is formally represented by the religious community (Sangha) of monks and nuns who have fully committed themselves to a life of spiritual practice and often offer guidance from their own experience. Monks, nuns or laypeople who have realized a sufficient degree of insight are known as the ‘Ariyā’ or ‘Savaka Sangha’, the real Refuge of the Sangha and the most noble of friends. They are at least partially awakened, and can be correctly identified only by their wisdom, not their physical appearance. More generally, however, a noble friend is anyone who offers us good advice and wise reflection, so that we can more easily discern a beneficial and skilful path in life.

45. a) If you should find a wise person who, like a revealer of treasure, points out your faults and reproves you, associate with them. Association with such a person is for the better, not the worse. (Dhammapada 76)

b) If, even for a moment, an intelligent person associates with someone wise, he will quickly apprehend the Truth — just as the tongue apprehends the flavour of soup. (Dhammapada 65)

We can never over-estimate the value of associating with someone wise, since we can benefit from their guidance as quickly as the tongue tastes the flavour of soup. Even a short time with a noble friend can help us unravel the confusion in our minds and bring us closer to realizing Truth. A noble friend’s words are far more valuable than treasure, for they help us unburden ourselves from the thoughts and actions that weigh us down and prevent us from realizing peace. Noble friends’ advice may not be to our liking, but if they are really noble friends their words are meant for our benefit, although it may take some time to appreciate this! Often we suffer because we refuse to recognize or acknowledge our own faults or accept that we make mistakes. Others may see this more clearly than we do.

### The Path

46. Bhikkhus, these two extremes should not be practised by one who has gone forth from the home-life into homelessness. What two? There is devotion to indulgence in sense-pleasures, which is low, common, of ordinary people, ignoble and unprofitable; and there is devotion to self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble and unprofitable. Avoiding both these extremes, the Tathāgata has realized the Middle Way, which gives vision, gives knowledge, and leads to peace, to higher knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbāna.

And what is that Middle Way? It is this Noble Eightfold Path, that is, right understanding, right aspiration, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration. This is the Middle Way realized by the Tathāgata, which gives vision, gives knowledge, and leads to peace, to higher knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbāna. (Vin.I,10; S.V,420)

The Buddha’s path is the Middle Path, a path avoiding all extremes in practices, attitudes and views. The two main extremes are self-affirming sensual indulgence and self-denying asceticism. Both of these lead to a reinforcing of self-view, because they are still centred upon the self, holding on to it through either pleasurable sensuality or painful mortification. The Middle Path is a very subtle and refined balance between affirmation and negation. More specifically, it is not just wavering indecision, but a precise path comprising eight factors which must all be nobly right and harmonized. When these eight right factors come together, one’s way of life becomes a noble spiritual path.

47. And what, bhikkhus, is right understanding? Knowledge of dukkha, knowledge of the origin of dukkha, knowledge of the cessation of dukkha, knowledge of the path to the cessation of dukkha; this is called right understanding. (S.V,9)

Right understanding has a number of aspects to it. As the definition says, it is having some initial knowledge of the fact of dukkha in one’s life, and the incentive to do something about it. Basically this means recognizing that human life has its limitations and will be a constant source of suffering if we are not wise to that. Knowledge of the origin of dukkha implies having the insight that dukkha is conditioned by other factors, a preliminary appreciation of conditional causality. Knowledge of the cessation of dukkha means that we have some awareness of the principle of action and result (kamma-vipāka), that beneficial actions will result in the cessation of dukkha. Knowledge of the path means that we have some confidence in spiritual practice which adopts a holistic approach, combining skilful living, meditation and wisdom.

48. And what, bhikkhus, is right aspiration? Aspiration for renunciation, aspiration for non-ill-will, aspiration for harmlessness; this is called, bhikkhus, right aspiration. (S.V,9)

Fundamental to right aspiration is renunciation or the attitude of relinquishment of the supports of selfhood (even spiritual ones). The aspiration to non-ill-will is a reminder that relinquishment is not punishment or self-torture, but an open-hearted giving up of falsehood. Harmlessness is the universal hallmark of truly authentic spiritual practice, which is tolerant and compassionate enough to allow and include all possibilities, even those we may not like.

49. The Revered One, while staying at Rājagaha on Vulture’s Peak, gave abundant Dhamma-talk to the bhikkhus: such is moral conduct, such is meditation, such is wisdom. Meditation, when augmented with moral conduct, gives great fruit and great benefit. Wisdom, when augmented with meditation, gives great fruit and great benefit. The mind, when augmented with wisdom, is completely freed from the outflows of selfhood (āsava), that is, the outflow of sensuality, the outflow of becoming, the outflow of views and the outflow of ignorance. (D.II,81)

The path leading to liberation can be practised and experienced with the help of noble friendship and our own self-motivation. This path is the development of skilful moral conduct, meditation and wisdom. Meditation grounded in harmonious and supportive behaviour bears the fruit of spiritual wisdom — liberation of mind and freedom from suffering. In practice, however, this process occurs in successive harmonized stages. A basis of moral behaviour enables the development of meditation. When we then bring the collectedness and clarity of meditation to bear upon our behaviour, we gain insight into the attitudes and actions which cause suffering. By applying wisdom we can free ourselves from this disturbing behaviour and arrive at a more refined level of collectedness and clarity, which can then reveal more refined levels of disharmonious behaviour. Wisdom arises from seeing these causal patterns of self-inflicted suffering, and wisdom is used to free ourselves from these patterns of ‘outflowings of selfhood’.

### Skilful Conduct

50. a) Skilful conduct (sīla) is the beginning, the foundation and the chief cause of all good things. Thus one should purify skilful conduct.

Skilful conduct is the boundary, the control and the brightening of the mind; and it is the abiding of all the Buddhas. Thus one should purify skilful conduct. (Theragāthā 612-3)

b) Sandalwood, tagara, lotus, jasmine: above all these kinds of fragrance, the fragrance of virtue is by far the best. (Dhammapada 55)

Skilful conduct gives stability and viability to spiritual practice. It is the foundation upon which spiritual practice is built, and grounds that practice in one’s ordinary day-to-day life. Otherwise spiritual practice can too easily become an ancillary habit, an exceptional experience which is seemingly not feasible in normal life, or just a one-off experience which we are unable to reproduce. Skilful conduct also gives the mind control and boundaries as aids to meditation, so that although the mind may be churning out all kinds of crazy and immoral things, our conduct is rooted in harmonious and wholesome actions. Thus we can watch and know the entire range of our selfish expressions, without needing to follow or react to them, or blindly deny or ignore them.

51. Ānanda, skilful conduct gives freedom from remorse as its gain and advantage; freedom from remorse gives delight as its gain and advantage; delight gives joy; joy gives tranquillity; tranquillity gives well-being; well-being gives concentration; concentration gives knowledge and vision of things as they really are; knowledge and vision of things as they really are give disenchantment and dispassion; disenchantment and dispassion give knowledge and vision of freedom as their gain and advantage. So indeed, Ānanda, skilful conduct gradually leads on to the highest. (A.V,2)

Skilful conduct provides a foundation for the causal arising of the successive stages of spiritual development. It is not merely an end in itself, although some people may take the freedom from remorse or purity of being which morality engenders as a state of high spiritual attainment. However, often there is still attachment to that purity, rather than using this worldly state to realize the further qualities of concentration, knowledge and vision of things as they really are, disenchantment and dispassion, culminating in freedom.

52. Renouncing false speech, they abstain from false speech, they speak truth, adhere to truth, are reliable and trustworthy, and do not deceive the world.

Renouncing slanderous speech, they abstain from slander, having heard something here they do not announce it there in order to cause dissension, having heard something there they do not announce it here in order to cause dissension; they reunite those who are divided, a promoter of friendships, rejoicing in concord, devoted to concord, delighting in concord, a speaker of words furthering concord.

Renouncing unkind speech, they abstain from unkind speech, they speak words which are gentle, pleasant to the ear, lovable, agreeable, polite, that are desirable and pleasing to many people.

Renouncing frivolous speech, they abstain from frivolous speech, they speak at the right time, speak what is true, speak what is good, speak on Dhamma and Vinaya; they speak words which are worth treasuring, timely, reasoned, measured and beneficial. (M.I,179-80)

Speech, both our own speech and that of others, has a powerful effect upon our lives. How often have we ‘burned’ with regret over an angry outburst to a loved one? How long have we churned over in our minds some unkind words thrown at us by someone we trusted? Bringing more awareness to our speech can help us to see the effects it is creating in ourselves and in others. Also our speech mirrors our thoughts and moods, for example in the proverbial ‘Freudian slip’, and thus is an opening to our often unconscious mental activity.

In the Buddha’s time speech was the primary means of communication. To relate right speech to modern times, it would be suitable to apply the same standards to ‘right communication’, as the written word has often as much effect as the spoken word, and much communication is now entirely in writing by means of the Internet and other technologies.

53. And what, householder, is accomplishment in virtue?

Herein, householder, the disciple of the Noble Ones abstains from killing living beings, from taking what has not been given, from sexual misconduct, from lying and from intoxicants which cause heedlessness. This is called ‘accomplishment in virtue’. (A.II,66).

These five guidelines for skilful conduct are known formally as the Five Precepts, which are considered to be the normal standard for lay followers. There are, of course, various levels of strictness with which we can train to increasing levels of refinement. Most important, though, is to acknowledge honestly what our conduct is really like. What aspects of our conduct need more awareness and restraint? What causes us to step outside these guidelines? And what are the results? Only by clearly knowing our ‘self’ can we learn to be free of ‘self’.

54. Bhikkhus, these five trades should not be pursued by a lay-follower. What five? Trade in weapons, trade in human beings, trade in flesh, trade in intoxicants and trade in poisons. (A.III,208)

Right livelihood is one of the factors of the Eightfold Path. Since many people spend a fair amount of time earning a livelihood, if this activity is not supportive of spiritual practice, or even of a healthy physical and mental life, then perhaps it is not a good idea to continue it. How does your means of livelihood influence your spiritual practice?

These three aspects of skilful conduct, right speech, right action and right livelihood, are grouped as the category of morality in the Eightfold Path. We develop these qualities by bringing mindfulness and clear knowing to our speech, actions and way of earning a living. Just having these particular right forms of skilful living pointed out to us can be a helpful beginning; however, a considerable degree of self-awareness, honesty and wisdom is required to be able to transform these principles into ways of being. The Pali word for morality, sīla, literally means ‘character’; that is, skilful conduct is integrated into our character. Moreover, only by directly experiencing the beneficial results of skilful living do we gain the supportive confidence to further develop and refine our practice of skilful living.

55. The Buddha addresses Anāthapindika:

Householder, the disciple of the Noble Ones, with wealth acquired by energetic effort, accumulated with the strength of arms and sweat of brow, righteous and righteously gained, does four worthy deeds. What four?

The disciple of the Noble Ones, with wealth acquired by energetic effort, accumulated with the strength of arms and sweat of brow, righteous and righteously gained, makes himself happy and pleased, and maintains himself in proper happiness. He makes his mother and father, his wife and children, his servants and workers, his friends and colleagues happy and pleased, and maintains them in proper happiness. This is the first case of wealth which has gone to a good cause, gone to advantage and been suitably made use of.

Again, householder, the disciple of the Noble Ones, with wealth acquired by energetic effort, accumulated with the strength of arms and sweat of brow, righteous and righteously gained, guards against misfortunes, such as by fire, water, kings, robbers, disagreeable inheritors. In order to defend against misfortune, he makes himself secure. This is the second case of wealth which has gone to a good cause, gone to advantage and been suitably made use of.

Again, householder, the disciple of the Noble Ones, with wealth acquired by energetic effort, accumulated with the strength of arms and sweat of brow, righteous and righteously gained, makes the five-fold offering: to relatives, to guests, to the departed, to rulers, to celestials. This is the third case of wealth which has gone to a good cause, gone to advantage and been suitably made use of.

Again, householder, the disciple of the Noble Ones, with wealth acquired by energetic effort, accumulated with the strength of arms and sweat of brow, righteous and righteously gained, supports those renunciants and brahmins who abstain from pride and negligence, who are established in patience and gentleness, who are taming themselves, calming themselves, attaining Nibbāna — he establishes a beneficial offering which is heavenly, resulting in happiness and leading to heaven. This is the fourth case of wealth which has gone to a good cause, gone to advantage and been suitably made use of. (A.II,65f)

Anāthapindika (lit. ‘feeder of the poor’) was a very wealthy merchant of Sāvatthi and one of the most devoted supporters of the Buddha and Sangha. He offered the Jeta Grove, where the Buddha spent much time, after purchasing it for the exorbitant price of its surface covered in gold coins. The Buddha had a number of wealthy lay supporters, and his message was well received by the growing number of merchants. He thus recognized the benefit of teaching people how to use their wealth skilfully. Some people are quite gifted at obtaining wealth. As long as it does not involve any means of wrong livelihood, that wealth is ‘righteously gained’, but how can it then be used righteously for our own benefit (in moderation) and the benefit of others? Wealth often implies some degree of power or influence, which entails responsibility. Thus the Buddha gives these helpful guidelines for using it so that great benefit may arise.

56. Bhikkhus, if beings knew, as I know, the result of giving and sharing, they would not eat without having given, nor would they allow the stain of meanness to obsess them and take root in their minds. Even if it were their last morsel, their last mouthful, they would not enjoy eating without having shared it, if there was someone to share it with. But, bhikkhus, as beings do not know, as I know, the result of giving and sharing, they eat without having given and the stain of meanness obsesses them and takes root in their minds. (Itivuttaka sutta 26; John D. Ireland translation, TI, p. 18.)

Giving, sharing, generosity are the basis of spiritual practice, in that we are learning to give up, let go, surrender our grasping of selfhood. We all know that it is good to give, but how many of us realize just how profound this practice is as a basis of self-surrender? Without this attitude as a foundation we often pursue spiritual practice with an attaining mind, which is ultimately self-defeating. We end up trying to gain spiritual progress for ourselves, the proverbial ‘spiritual materialism’ syndrome, rather than practising the giving up of selfhood in everyday acts of joyful generosity.

57. a) Health is the greatest possession; contentment is the greatest treasure,5 trustworthy people are the best relations; Nibbāna is the greatest well-being. (Dhammapada 204)

b) And how is a monk contented? Here a monk is satisfied with a robe to protect his body, with alms to satisfy his stomach, and having accepted sufficient, he goes on his way. Just as a bird with wings flies hither and thither, burdened by nothing but its wings, so he is satisfied ... In this way, sire, a monk is contented. (D.I,71; Maurice Walshe translation, LDB, p.101.)

Contentment and simplicity of life-style are universal aids to peace of mind, whether for a monastic or a lay person. The four basic supports for human life are food, clothing, shelter and medicine, and their purpose is to support our spiritual aspiration rather than to become self-satisfying ends in themselves. With few possessions to worry about and contentment with what we have, our life is uncluttered and unencumbered, so that our heart/mind can rise above the mundane concerns of the world as a bird flies aloft when it wishes. We then have more time and energy available for sustained spiritual practice. Everyone needs basic material comforts, but how much is sufficient to provide the fundamental support for seeking the real ‘comfort’ of spiritual liberation?

58. And what, bhikkhus, is right effort? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu generates resolve, endeavours, exerts, supports the mind and strives for the non-arising of unarisen evil, unwholesome states.

He generates resolve, endeavours, exerts, supports the mind and strives for the giving up of arisen evil, unwholesome states.

He generates resolve, endeavours, exerts, supports the mind and strives for the arising of unarisen wholesome states.

He generates resolve, endeavours, exerts, supports the mind and strives for the persistence of arisen wholesome states, for their non-confusion, their further development, abundance, increase and fulfilment.

This, bhikkhus, is called right effort. (S.V,9)

As the Buddha makes clear, right effort is energy directed towards a specific purpose. Some people are capable of generating tremendous energy, but often it does not appear to result in anything significant. This may be due to not having these criteria firmly established, so that in fact we are merely taking two steps forward and three back. We can strive very hard but is it really for something wholesome, or if we have achieved something wholesome, do we try to maintain it? The training of the mind is especially challenging because the power of old habits is so strong. However, with sustained right effort even the most stubborn habits can be changed.

### Right Mindfulness

59. This is, bhikkhus, the direct path for the purification of beings, for the passing beyond sorrow and grief, for the disappearance of suffering and dejection, for reaching the right path, for the realization of Nibbāna, namely the four Attendings with Mindfulness. What are the four?

Herein, bhikkhus, with regard to the body one abides contemplating the body, earnestly, clearly knowing and mindful, having put away desire and disappointment concerning the world.

With regard to feeling tones one abides contemplating feeling tones, earnestly, clearly knowing and mindful, having put away desire and disappointment concerning the world.

With regard to mind one abides contemplating [conditions of] mind, earnestly, clearly knowing and mindful, having put away desire and disappointment concerning the world.

With regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena, earnestly, clearly knowing and mindful, having put away desire and disappointment concerning the world. (M.I,55)6

Living in a more skilful and contented way gives rise to inner confidence and settledness of being. These are stable supports for the development of mindfulness or clear awareness, which facilitates insight (vipassanā) into the nature of reality. The calm that arises from concentration gives temporary inner peace, while the wisdom of seeing reality clearly produces deep and stable peace. It is the calm and clearly aware heart/mind which can penetrate to the true nature of reality. Calmed of its interpreting, judging, elaborating, etc., the heart/mind can focus steady attention on what awareness reveals, and sees more clearly, directly and truthfully.

Contemplating these four expressions of our sense of self means that awareness surveys and delves into them as direct experiences, rather than thinking about, analyzing or merely interpreting them. Only awareness freed of self-interest can become an awareness which is bare, honest, objective and non-judgemental.

60. I ascended to the high terrace of the Attendings of Mindfulness and contemplated the people who were indulging in the notion of individuality which I had previously thought so much about.

When I saw the Way, boarding the ship and not holding to a view of self, I saw the ultimate harbour.

The Buddha removed the ties which for a long time had been latent in me and for a long time had been established in me. He cured me of the ill effects of the poisonous defilements. (Theragāthā 765, 766, 768)

When body, feeling tones, conditions of mind and phenomena are seen directly with clear awareness, insight into their true nature as impermanent, unsatisfactory and impersonal begins to dawn. The illusion of separate individuality is pierced. For example, body is experienced as organic physical processes rather than an object which we think we own and control. Experiencing this in ever greater depth takes us closer to living in harmony with this truth. Then the ties of personal identification with these constantly-changing processes are cut, and the complexities we build upon them cease.

61. Steadfast in body and steadfast in mind —Whether standing, sitting or lying down —Having firmly established mindfulness,One acquires excellence, first and foremost.And having obtained such excellence, one goesUnseen by the King of Death. (Udāna, sutta 5.10)

With practice mindfulness becomes a power in itself, which then infuses our whole way of life. Living with clear awareness brings profound presence of mind, and by living with full presence of mind (mind-full-ness), we are completely awake to the ‘excellence’ of the truth of reality at its deepest level. Fundamentally, this is the realization of ‘not-self’ or the impersonal nature of reality. Abiding in this truth, we see there is no ‘self entity’ which ‘dies’; there are only ‘self-processes’ which naturally arise and pass away.

### Mindfulness of Body 7

62. And how does one, in regard to the body, abide contemplating the body? To this end, one goes into the forest, to the foot of a tree or to an empty hut, sits down cross-legged with body upright and raises mindfulness to the forefront. Just mindful one breathes in, mindful one breathes out. Breathing in long, one knows, ‘I breathe in long’; breathing out long one knows, ‘I breathe out long’. Breathing in short, one knows, ‘I breathe in short’; breathing out short, one knows, ‘I breathe out short’. One trains thus, ‘I shall breathe in ... breathe out experiencing the whole body’. One trains thus, ‘I shall breathe in ... breathe out calming the bodily formation.

Just as, bhikkhus, a skilled turner or his assistant when making a long turn, knows, ‘I make a long turn’; when making a short turn, he knows, ‘I am making a short turn’. Just so, bhikkhus, when breathing in long ...

In this way, in regard to the body one abides contemplating the body internally, or one abides contemplating the body externally, or one abides contemplating the body both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in the body, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in the body, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in the body. Or mindfulness that ‘there is body’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.8 (M.I,56)

The development of mindfulness proceeds from the coarse to the more refined. Body is the first object for developing mindfulness, because it is more stable and substantial, slower to change, longer-lasting and, usually, more honest than the slippery convolutions of the mind.

The most important observable bodily activity is the natural breathing process. Thus the breathing is used as the basic meditation object. Breathing is always present as long as we are alive, and is the most fundamental nutriment for sustaining life. Focusing attention on natural breathing can lead to the development of concentration, while awareness of the subtle changes in breathing patterns conditioned by our changing physical and/or mental states can lead to insight.

63. He who has perfected, well developed, and practised in due order mindfulness of breathing, as taught by the Buddha, illuminates this world like the moon released from a cloud.

Truly my mind is purified, unlimited, well-developed; having penetrated and having been applied, it illuminates all the quarters. (Theragāthā 548-9; K.R. Norman translation, PEBM, p.60.

With mindfulness, the natural and seemingly automatic process of breathing can become a stepping-stone to progressive development of the mind in concentration and awareness. With practice the mind can become lucid and radiant. Through the emphasis of continuous focusing on breathing, the mind develops ever-increasing concentration, while through emphasizing awareness the heart/mind gains increasing insight into impermanence and impersonality, cutting through the problems we create due to ignorance of the true nature of reality.

64. Again bhikkhus, when walking, one knows, ‘I am walking’; when standing, one knows, ‘I am standing’; when sitting, one knows, ‘I am sitting’; when lying down, one knows, ‘I am lying down’; or one knows accordingly however the body is placed.

Again bhikkhus, in going forward or backward, clearly knowing one acts; in looking ahead or around, clearly knowing one acts; in bending or stretching, clearly knowing one acts; in wearing the robes and carrying the bowl, clearly knowing one acts; in attending to the calls of nature, clearly knowing one acts; in eating, drinking, chewing or tasting, clearly knowing one acts; in walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep and waking up, clearly knowing one acts; in speaking or being silent, clearly knowing one acts.

In this way, in regard to the body one abides contemplating the body internally, or one abides contemplating the body externally, or one abides contemplating the body both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in the body, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in the body, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in the body. Or mindfulness that ‘there is body’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness.

One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. (M.I,56-7)

The second exercise for developing mindfulness of the body is to bring attention to all our bodily activities. Most of those activities are so ordinary that they are just blind habits. However, habits are the dwelling-place for our deep-seated sense of self. We act in certain habitual ways because this comforts, satisfies and shelters our sense of self: ‘I’ am known by how ‘I’ act, so we can investigate our actions and observe what aspect of self they are supporting.

The Buddha realized that bringing awareness into the private home of self — the realm of our usual, ordinary habitual activity — is the key to self-knowledge and the door to self-liberation.

65. I am a disciple of the well-farer, travelling in the eight-fold vehicle which is the way. With my dart drawn out, without āsavas, gone to a place of solitude, I rejoice.

For I have seen well-painted puppets or dolls , fastened by strings and sticks, made to dance in various ways.

If these strings and sticks are removed, thrown away, mutilated, scattered, not to be found, broken into pieces, on what there would one fix the mind?

This little body, being of such a kind, does not exist without these phenomena; as it does not exist without these phenomena, on what there would one fix one’s mind? (Therīgāthā 389-92; K.R. Norman translation, PEBN, p. 214.)

Mindfulness of body exposes the body’s puppet-like nature as controlled and directed by self-affirming actions and self-preserving habits. When our usual habits are thrown into disarray, so is our sense of self. It is because we ignore these self-controlled habits that they become a repository for ignorance. We then cloak the world in a veil of preconceptions and expectations, and are unable to see its spontaneous unfolding. Through awareness of our self-contained framework of habits we see that there is nothing to hold onto, nothing to ‘fix the mind’, and we can begin to flow with life more peacefully.

This passage is taken from the verses of one of the awakened bhikkhunis. Accosted by a young man admiring her beauty, she tried with these verses to convince him of this awakened view of the body.

66. Again, bhikkhus, one reviews this body as it is placed or directed in regard to the elemental qualities: there are in this body the elemental qualities of earth, water, fire and air. Thus one abides clearly reflecting upon body.9

In this way, in regard to the body one abides contemplating the body internally, or one abides contemplating the body externally, or one abides contemplating the body both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in the body, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in the body, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in the body. Or mindfulness that ‘there is body’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. (M.I,57)

Another way to reflect upon the nature of body is to see it as the coming together of various elemental qualities. In the Buddha’s time the four basic qualities were represented by earth, water, fire and air. The earth element represents the quality of solidity and firmness. We find it predominating in the hard parts of the body like the nails, teeth and bones. Water has the qualities of fluidity and cohesion. These predominate in the bodily liquids such as saliva, tears, blood, etc. The fire element is heat, but also the quality that causes maturing, ripening and ageing. This quality predominates in the metabolic processes and digestion. The air element has the qualities of upholding, supporting and filling out, and it is instrumental in movement, as in the breath moving in and out of the body.

All physical things are a composite of these four elemental qualities, but because they have different amounts of each quality, there is a tremendous variety in the physical realm. When physical things deteriorate or decay, they simply return to different combinations of these same four elemental qualities. Nothing is lost — it just changes composition.

67. a) Leaving the five hindrances in order to attain rest-from-exertion; taking the doctrine as a mirror, my own knowledge and vision, I considered this whole body inside and out. Both inside and outside the body seemed empty. (Theragāthā 171-2; K. R. Norman translation, PEBM, p. 24.)

b) Knowing the body is like foam; realizing its mirage-like nature, cutting off the flower-tipped sensual realm, one goes unseen by the King of Death. (Dhammapada 46)

When one develops the spiritual exercise of mindfulness of body, one begins to experience the body as it really is, rather than through a cloud of concepts. One sees it as ‘empty’ of an ultimate controller. It is not ‘I’ who digests food, but simply the elemental quality of fire which produces the digestive activity. The body is truly a mysterious process of physical activities over which ‘I’ really have very little control. We also become penetratingly aware of the fragile and ever-changing nature of body as an organic living entity. The four elemental qualities come together for each short lifetime; then they disperse like foam tossed up on the seashore and scattered to the winds.

Since it is the five physical senses which tie us to the body, enchantment with them drops away when they are seen clearly, as it does when we see the fragile, fleeting beauty of flowers. Through deep insight into the nature of body, one passes unseen by death through non-identification with the dying body.

### Mindfulness of Feeling Tones

68. And how does one abide contemplating feeling tones in regard to feeling tones? Here, bhikkhus, when feeling a pleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I feel a pleasant feeling’; when feeling an unpleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I feel an unpleasant feeling’; when feeling a feeling which is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, one knows, ‘I feel a feeling which is neither pleasant nor unpleasant’.

When feeling a sensory pleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I am feeling a sensory pleasant feeling’; when feeling a spiritual pleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I am feeling a spiritual pleasant feeling’; when feeling a sensory unpleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I am feeling a sensory unpleasant feeling’; when feeling a spiritual unpleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I am feeling a spiritual unpleasant feeling’; when feeling a sensory neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I am feeling a sensory neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feeling’; when feeling a spiritual neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feeling, one knows, ‘I am feeling a spiritual neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feeling’.

In this way, in regard to feelings one abides contemplating feelings internally, or one abides contemplating feelings externally, or one abides contemplating feelings both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in feelings, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in feelings, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in feelings. Or mindfulness that ‘there is feeling’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. (M.I,59)10

Feeling (vedanā), in the Buddhist definition, is just the basic affective tone of our experience, most simply as either pleasant, unpleasant or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, distinct from the mental or emotional reactions which it often initiates. Feelings are present whenever there is consciousness, whether we are aware of them or not. Sometimes they may be quite subtle, and other times we are simply not aware of them. In practice there is actually a continuum of feeling tones, which range from the most ecstatically pleasant to ordinarily pleasant, neutral or slightly unpleasant, to excruciatingly unpleasant. Through development of the exercise described here, we become increasingly aware not only of the incredible range of feeling tones and the influence they exert over us, but also of the fragility of these feelings to which we give such importance.

This exercise also specifically advises being aware of feeling tones which arise from both sensory and spiritual sources. Thus one may be able to appreciate the difference in the quality of feelings from these two distinct sources. Spiritual feelings would arise from unselfish acts such as generosity or kindness, as well as from spiritual practices such as patience or meditation.

69. Bhikkhus, when the uninstructed worldling is being contacted by a painful feeling, he sorrows, grieves, and laments; he weeps, beating his breast and becomes distraught. He feels two feelings — a bodily one and a mental one. Suppose they were to strike a man with a dart, and then strike him immediately afterwards with a second dart, so that the man would feel a feeling caused by two darts. So too, when the uninstructed worldling is being contacted by a painful feeling ... he feels two feelings — a bodily one and a mental one.

Being contacted by that same painful feeling, he harbours aversion towards it. When he harbours aversion toward painful feeling, the underlying tendency to aversion towards painful feeling lies behind this. Being contacted by painful feeling, he seeks delight in sensual pleasure. For what reason? Because the uninstructed worldling does not know any escape from painful feeling other than sensual pleasure. When he seeks delight in sensual pleasure, the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling lies behind this. He does not understand as it really is the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of these feelings. When he does not understand these things, the underlying tendency to ignorance in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling lies behind this.

If he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it attached. If he feels a painful feeling, he feels it attached. If he feels a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he feels it attached. This, bhikkhus, is called an uninstructed worldling who is attached to birth, ageing, and death; who is attached to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair; who is attached to suffering, I say. (S.IV,207ff; Bhikkhu Bodhi translation, CDB, p.1264)

Through clearly observing feelings, we also come to understand the intricate realm of emotional reactions. From feeling arises the mental and emotional activity which is the basis for our motivations — desire to have and hold on to pleasant feelings, aversion to and resistance against unpleasant feelings, and ignorance and confusion from neutral feelings. We come to realize how automatic and powerful are the ‘underlying tendencies’ to aversion, lust and ignorance in relation to the feeling tones which arise in the course of sentient life. It is humbling to know just how much our life revolves around the pursuit of pleasant feelings and avoidance of unpleasant feelings, and just how strongly we are attached to this rapidly changing display of fleeting feelings.

70. One who sees that pleasant feeling is unsatisfactory,Who sees that painful feeling is like a stinging dart,Who sees that neutral feeling is impermanent —Truly that one rightly sees and understands feelings.Thus understanding feelings, one is freed of the outflows.

When the body breaks up, one has reached Dhamma, attained the highest knowledge and has gone beyond all ways of definition. (S.IV,207)

Mindfulness of feelings brings a new perspective into focus. Pleasant feelings begin to lose their impelling glamour. They start to appear unsatisfying because of their constantly changing and hence constantly disappointing nature — we can’t stay happy all the time! But that’s not bad; that’s nature, and realizing this enables us to be free from the frantic, obsessive search for elusive pleasure, and find peace.

Understanding the true nature of feelings also allows us to uproot many of the emotional complications in which we entangle our lives — no need to get so excited, they’re only passing feelings. We no longer need to indulge in fear of and hostility towards painful feelings, since they are just passing by. Since most people identify with emotions, freeing ourselves from reactions to feelings means that we transcend all such normal ways of definition.

### Mindfulness of (Conditions of) Mind

71. And how does one in regard to mind abide contemplating [conditions of] mind? Here, bhikkhus, one knows a lustful mind as lustful, a mind without lust as without lust; one knows a mind with hate as a mind with hate, a mind without hate as without hate; one knows a deluded mind as deluded, an undeluded mind as undeluded; one knows a contracted mind as contracted, a distracted mind as distracted; one knows a great mind as great, an insignificant mind as insignificant; one knows an inferior mind as inferior, a superior mind as superior; one knows a concentrated mind as concentrated, an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; one knows a liberated mind as liberated, an unliberated mind as unliberated.

In this way, in regard to the mind one abides contemplating the mind internally, or one abides contemplating the mind externally, or one abides contemplating the mind both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in the mind, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in the mind, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in the mind. Or mindfulness that ‘there is mind’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. (M.I,59)

Mindfulness of conditions of mind broadens the range of awareness much further. From the relatively simple theme of three or six feelings, awareness broadens out to the more varied expression of innumerable mental states, which also include emotions. The sixteen conditions listed here are by no means the only conditions which occur in the mind. We probably already have some experience of the first three pairs from developing awareness of feelings: for example, greed for pleasant feeling, hatred for unpleasant feeling and delusion for neutral feeling. The other five pairs are significant conditions to become aware of, as they are fundamental to the practice of developing the mind for liberation.

Awareness of this mind of ours exposes just how it really works, how these various conditions arise and cease, and what influence, if any, we have over them. We begin to see our mental activity as being merely created by causally-conditioned mental processes. When we take these conditions less personally we are less surprised, concerned or reactive, and can more peacefully just observe the mind and its conditioning as they are. Most importantly, we can learn to work with the mind in a wiser way through knowing its conditioned patterns, rather than struggling against it.

72. Mind precedes all things,Mind is supreme, produced by mind are they.If one should speak or act with mind defiled,Suffering will follow,Just as wheel follows hoof of the pulling ox.Mind precedes all things,Mind is supreme, produced by mind are they.If one should speak or act with mind purified,Well-being will follow,Like a never-departing shadow.11 (Dhammapada 1 – 2)

In Buddhist teachings the mind is actually the continuum of dynamically active mental processes, just as the wind is the continuum of moving air. Unlike the brain, the mind has no fixed form or dimension. As consciousness it precedes things, because without mind we would not know things. Mental and physical phenomena are interdependent. Mind does not make the physical, but it is mind which is the more important, as it can acknowledge and recognize, define and qualify, organize and integrate the physical. And it is the moral quality of mind, defiled or purified, which conditions the affective quality of our experiences.

73. Bhikkhus, I know of no other single thing so conducive to such misery as this undeveloped, unpractised mind. The undeveloped mind is indeed conducive to much misery.

Bhikkhus, I know of no other single thing so conducive to such benefit as this developed, practised mind. The developed mind is indeed conducive to much benefit. (A.I,6)

The mind is the source of both misery and joy, depending on how it has or has not been developed. For most people misery and joy just come and go according to passing circumstances, but the mind developed in tranquillity and mindfulness becomes a natural source of ever-increasing benefit. Thus when suffering does arise, it can be calmly and clearly observed, and even turned into a source of wisdom, rather than spinning us into negative reactions and ever-increasing suffering. Instead of defending ourselves from the effects of an undeveloped mind, it is better to start working at the source by developing the mind.

74. Brightly shining, luminous is this mind, but it is defiled by stains which visit. This the unlearned common-folk do not really understand; thus for them there is no development of the mind.

Brightly shining, luminous is this mind and it is freed of stains which visit. This the learned Noble Disciples really understand; thus for them there is development of the mind. (A.I,10)

One of the Buddha’s profound insights was that the true nature of the minds of all human beings is brightly shining and luminous. This was the basis of his extremely positive outlook on human beings. All the moods to which humans are prone are merely ‘visitors’ which come and go — no emotion, whether negative or positive, is our true nature. Thus we can be free of them. In practice, however, most people identify so strongly with these visiting moods that they are unable to free themselves and experience their own true, luminous nature. Mindfulness of mental states allows us to patiently observe the transient and impersonal coming and going of all moods, so that the luminous host may outshine the transient guests.

75. Just as a solid mass of rock is not moved by the wind, so sights, tastes, sounds, smells and all things to touch, mental objects, pleasant and unpleasant, do not cause a venerable one’s mind, which is steadfast and unfettered, to tremble, and he sees its passing away.

My mind stands like a rock, and does not quiver; unattached to lustful things, it is not shaken amidst the shaking world. My mind is thus developed; whence will pain come to me? (Theragāthā 643, 644, 192; K.R. Norman translation, PEBM, p 69 and p. 26.)

The developed mind is not ‘shaken’ by the ephemeral world of the senses and their feeling tones. It is steadfast in the peace of wisdom and unfettered by subjective interpretations. It is steady like a rock, not through closing off from sense impressions, but by being grounded in the realization of their unstable, ever-passing nature. This well-developed mind is thus free of pain. It is not uncommon for people to experience this state of mind during an intensive meditation retreat. However, it is then usually just temporary, albeit very valuable for showing that the mind can be tamed through practice.

76. There are, Nigrodha, unwholesome things that have not been abandoned, tainted, conducive to rebirth, fearful, productive of painful results in the future, associated with birth, decay and death. It is for the abandonment of these things that I teach Dhamma. If you practise accordingly, these tainted things will be abandoned, and the things that make for purification will develop and grow, and you will all attain to and dwell, in this very life, by your own insight and realization, in the fullness of perfected wisdom. (D.III,57; Maurice Walshe translation, LDB, p. 394.)

Through mindfulness of conditions of mind we discover many surprising things about ourselves. Most specifically, we start to uncover those aspects which we have previously ignored — the so-called ‘unattractive’ expressions of our self which we are too ashamed to acknowledge or too frightened to face. Yet these are precisely the dark shadows of our being to which we need to be ‘enlightened’. First, though, it is necessary simply to observe carefully from a state of calm collectedness; otherwise the self quickly jumps in with judgements and manipulative side-tracks. These things will be abandoned by seeing through their illusory appearances created by our self-affirming habits. Learning to observe self’s theatrics perceptively, without being drawn in by the performance, is the dawning of liberation.

77. When, having kept in check discursive thoughts, sheltered in a cave between the hills, fearless and without impediments he meditates — no greater pleasure than this can be found.

When, abiding in well-being, having destroyed corruptions, impediments and grief — free of obstruction, greed and the dart of craving — with all outflows ended, he meditates — no greater pleasure than this can be found. (Theragāthā 525-6)

The pleasure of a peaceful, unobstructed mind is beyond words. Only those who have experienced it can know this, as some people do through developing spiritual exercises, for example on meditation retreats. The pleasure of the sense-world pales in comparison. The calm, clear mind rises above life’s endless problems because it sees how things really are, rather than problematically struggling to force things into self’s preconceived mould. Everything is still there; we just step out of the tempest of the self’s machinations.

### Mindfulness of Phenomena 12

78. And how, bhikkhus, does one in regard to phenomena abide contemplating phenomena? Here, bhikkhus, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena in respect of the Five Hindrances. How?

Here, if sensual desire is present within, one knows, ‘sensual desire is present within’. If sensual desire is not present within, one knows, ‘sensual desire is not present within’. And one knows how unarisen sensual desire can arise, how arisen sensual desire can be abandoned, and how abandoned sensual desire will not arise in future.

Again, if ill-will is present ... mental sluggishness and lethargy ... restlessness and worry ... doubt is present within, one knows, ‘doubt is present within’. If doubt is not present within, one knows, ‘doubt is not present within’. And one knows how unarisen doubt can arise, how arisen doubt can be abandoned, and how abandoned doubt will not arise in future.

In this way, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena internally, or one abides contemplating phenomena externally, or one abides contemplating phenomena both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in phenomena. Or mindfulness that ‘there are phenomena’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world (M.I,60)

Through attentively observing the wide spectrum of mental conditions arising and ceasing in the mind, we may observe certain recurring patterns. For example, some conditions cloud or distract the mind, while others tend to energize or brighten it. One particular set of conditions is the Five Hindrances, mental phenomena which ‘hinder’ the full development of the mind’s potential.

The meditation process is not always a smooth ride to peace. In practical terms, we begin to see a whole range of selfish expressions which obstruct the natural calm and clarity of the heart/mind. In essence, though, they are really the nourishment or fertilizer for spiritual insight. That is, each of these ‘hindrances’ is an expression of our grasping at selfhood. Rather than simply trying to get rid of them, the way to liberation is to discover how to release our grasping by exploring the causal roots of these self-expressions. Thus hindrances, obstacles, and problems challenge us to look deeper into the sources of self-grasping, in order to release increasingly subtler levels of self-identity. Hopefully, of course, we don’t need to face all these ‘hindrances’ at once. Usually they come up at different times and with varying degrees of intensity. With right effort and perseverance we gradually develop the wisdom to handle such difficulties more skilfully.

79. Again, bhikkhus, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena in respect of the Seven Factors of Awakening. How?

Here, bhikkhus, if the awakening factor of mindfulness is present within, one knows, ‘the awakening factor of mindfulness is present within’. If the awakening factor of mindfulness is not present within, one knows, ‘the awakening factor of mindfulness is not present within’. And one knows how the unarisen awakening factor of mindfulness comes to arise, and how it comes to full development.

Likewise, if the awakening factor of investigation-of-dhamma ... energy ... joy ... tranquillity ... concentration ... equanimity is present within, one knows, ‘the awakening factor of equanimity is present within’. If the awakening factor of equanimity is not present within, one knows, ‘the awakening factor of equanimity is not present within’. And one knows how the unarisen awakening factor of equanimity comes to arise, and how it comes to full development.

In this way, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena internally, or one abides contemplating phenomena externally, or one abides contemplating phenomena both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in phenomena. Or mindfulness that ‘there are phenomena’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.(M.I,61)

Another group of special qualities is the seven factors conducive to realizing awakening. These qualities are not only positive spiritual conditions, but create a balance that is conducive to spiritual endeavour. The three energizing qualities of investigation-of-dhamma, energy and joy must be balanced with the three calming qualities of tranquillity, concentration and equanimity. Energy relates to inspiration, earnestness and perseverance, but can over-charge as restlessness and ambitiousness. Calmness conduces to serenity and peace, but can slip into dullness and apathy. With mindfulness watching over them, energy balances with concentration, joy balances with equanimity, and investigation-of-dhamma balances with tranquillity. The empowered and balanced mind is now receptive to realizing awakening.

80. a) In this, Udayi, one develops the Factors of Awakening based upon seclusion, dispassion, cessation and maturity of relinquishment — which is abundant, made great, boundless and free of ill-will. As one cultivates the Factors of Awakening in this way, craving is relinquished; with the relinquishing of craving, intentional actions (kamma) are relinquished; with the relinquishing of intentional actions, suffering is relinquished.(S.V,86)

b) One whose mind is rightly established in the Factors of Awakening, who, not clinging, is intent upon the giving up of grasping, free of the outflows, a bright light, realizes Nibbāna in this world. (Dhammapada 89)

The development of the Factors of Awakening is synonymous with learning to relinquish those selfish conditions which obscure the bright mind, such as craving, clinging and self-willed actions (kamma). We begin by observing these factors arising quite naturally in our mind, then consciously develop them as skilful mental qualities. Eventually our practice is cultivating the factors until they are boundless, that is, unbounded by the self, beyond being ‘my’ spiritual qualities. The unbounded, brightly shining heart/mind is capable of realizing Nibbāna — awakening here and now.

81. Again, bhikkhus, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena in respect of the Five Groups of Grasping. How?

Herein one knows, ‘such is physical form, such its arising, such its passing away; such is feeling, such its arising, such its passing away; such is perception, such its arising, such its passing away; such are mental activities, such their arising, such their passing away; such is consciousness, such its arising, such its passing away’.

In this way, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena internally, or one abides contemplating phenomena externally, or one abides contemplating phenomena both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in phenomena. Or mindfulness that ‘there are phenomena’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.(M.I,60)

The contemplation of phenomena also includes particular themes which the Buddha taught as helpful for realizing awakening. The theme of the Five Groups of Grasping (pañcupādānakkhandha or khandha for short) is very meaningful, as basically it is these five ‘groups’ or personal attributes that humans grasp as being their self.

Through developing the previous exercises in mindfulness, we probably already have some experience of these aspects of self. The first khandha, physical form, is the body manifesting as the four elemental qualities. Feelings, the second khandha, are the pleasant, unpleasant or neutral feeling tones. Perception is the recognition of sense impressions, with major influence from memory. Mental activities are a variety of functions directed mainly by volition or will towards selfhood, that is, wilful formation of selfhood. This also includes thinking and conceptualizing, as well as mental functions such as attention and mindfulness. Consciousness is just the basic knowing that there are sense impressions (perception cognizes them and activities analyze and interpret them).

Through development of this contemplation it may become clear that what we uncritically take to be ‘my self’ acting is in fact merely one or more of these physical-mental functions arising and passing away. We abide much more peacefully knowing that these are just ever-changing and impersonal functions of body/mind.

82. Physical form is like a lump of foam,Feeling like a water bubble,Perception is like a mirage,Mental activities like a plantain trunk,Consciousness is like an illusion,So expounded the Kinsman of the Sun [the Buddha].However one may reflect,Or rightly examine,It is but empty and void,When one rightly understands. (S.III,142)

In this vivid imagery the Buddha expresses the fundamental illusory and unsubstantial nature of the five groups, which we normally take to be so real and ultimate. It is because we do not investigate clearly that we are ignorant of their true nature. Thus this contemplation is especially valuable for helping us to see through the veil of delusion, in order to live in harmony with these aspects of our being, but without distorted expectations. For example, if we are forgetful, rather than worrying excessively that we are developing some illness, we understand that the perception faculty is not working well, and that all perceptions are impermanent.

83. Again, bhikkhus, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena in terms of the six internal and external sense-spheres. How?

Here one knows the eye, one knows forms, one knows the fetter that arises dependent on both. One also knows how an unarisen fetter can arise, how an arisen fetter can be removed and how an eliminated fetter cannot arise in future.

Here one knows the ear, one knows sounds ... one knows the nose, one knows odours ... one knows the tongue, one knows tastes .... one knows the body, one knows touch ... one knows the mind, one knows mind-objects, one knows the fetter that arises dependent on both. One also knows how an unarisen fetter can arise, how an arisen fetter can be removed and how an eliminated fetter cannot arise in future.

In this way, in regard to phenomena one abides contemplating phenomena internally, or one abides contemplating phenomena externally, or one abides contemplating phenomena both internally and externally. One abides contemplating the nature of arising in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of passing away in phenomena, or one abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in phenomena. Or mindfulness that ‘there are phenomena’ is established to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and right mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.(M.I,61)

A very insightful area to bring mindful awareness is the senses, which we use continuously in the course of life. The senses are the means of contacting the objective world, and through them we put together a subjective interpretation of that world, to which we then relate. In the Buddha’s teaching there are six senses, the five physical senses of eye, ear, nose, tongue and body, and the aspect of the mind which functions as a sense organ. The mind, of course, only senses mind-objects, for example, thoughts. These sense impressions may then give rise to other mental activity such as memories or emotions, or sometimes to a ‘fetter’: this means whatever causes the mind to be bound to the sense impression, whether by attraction or repulsion.

Through awareness of this process it is possible to see just how the mind is stimulated by these various impressions, and interesting to note what reaction or fetter this may engender. And then we have some helpful guidelines for investigating the fetter, so that it does not obsess the mind and blind us from seeing clearly.

84. Friends, in dependence upon the eye and form, there is the arising of eye-consciousness, the meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition there is feeling; what one feels, that one perceives; what one perceives, that one thinks about; what one thinks about, that one conceptually proliferates about. With what one conceptually proliferates as source, proliferating perceptions and deliberations13 assail a person in regard to past, present and future forms made conscious through the eye.

Friends, in dependence upon the ear and sound ... the nose and odour ... the tongue and flavours ... the body and tangibles ... mind and mind-object, there is the arising of mind-consciousness, the meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition there is feeling; what one feels, that one perceives; what one perceives, that one thinks about; what one thinks about, that one conceptually proliferates about. With what one conceptually proliferations as source, proliferating perceptions and deliberations assail a person in regard to past, present and future mind-objects made conscious through the mind. (M.I,111f)

Here one of the Buddha’s eminent disciples is explaining a teaching given by the Buddha. He presents the basics of the perceptual process from sense consciousness to feeling, perception, thinking, to conceptual proliferation and perhaps further proliferations, memories, etc. This underscores the importance of developing awareness of the senses, in order to see when and how much we are actually conceptually proliferating about some sense impression. The perceptual process is also the source of many possible distortions of perception,14 so that our thinking and proliferating can be very far from reality. Also, thinking and proliferating tend to follow a habitual pattern which settles into a fixed view. Then whatever the senses contact is interpreted in such a way as to support that view — the ‘I’ll see it when I believe it’ syndrome.

85. On a certain occasion the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable Upasena were staying at Rājagaha in the Cool Grove at the Snake’s Hood Cave. Now a viper had fallen onto Venerable Upasena’s body. Then Venerable Upasena addressed the bhikkhus thus: ‘Come, friends, place my body on a bed and take it outside, before it is scattered here just like a handful of chaff’.

Then the Venerable Sāriputta said to the Venerable Upasena, ‘But we do not see any alteration in the Venerable Upasena’s body or any deterioration in his senses. How is it that the Venerable Upasena says, “Come, friends, place my body on a bed and take it outside, before it is scattered here just like a handful of chaff”?’

‘Indeed, friend Sāriputta, for one who thinks, “I am the eye” or “The eye is mine” ... “I am the tongue” or “The tongue is mine” ... “I am the mind” or “The mind is mine”, there might be alteration of the body or deterioration in the senses. But, friend Sāriputta, it exists not for me that “I am the eye” or “The eye is mine” ... “I am the tongue” or “The tongue is mine” ... “I am the mind” or “The mind is mine”, thus why would there be alteration of the body or deterioration in the senses?’

‘Thus it must be for a long time for the Venerable Upasena that I-making, mine-making and the latent tendency to conceit have been thoroughly uprooted, that it no longer exists for him that “I am the eye” or “The eye is mine” ... “I am the tongue” or “The tongue is mine” ... “I am the mind” or “The mind is mine”.’

Then those bhikkhus placed Venerable Upasena’s body on a bed and took it outside. And then and there the Venerable Upasena’s body was scattered just like a handful of chaff. (S.IV, 40f)

Venerable Upasena had relinquished all identification with the senses as well as the body. Thus his senses and body did not respond in the same way as for someone who still identifies with them. And although this is the response of a fully awakened being, each one of us can respond in new ways to the body when we reduce our identification with it. Our body and the senses mainly react in habitual ways; because of our identification with them, they express our self-identity. How often have we heard people ramble on about their personal ailment as if they would not exist without it?

Try this exercise: rather than deliberately directing the body, relate to it as a sense organ and observe the various sensations which it receives. See if you can allow the body to just receive these sensations, rather than directing the response to them. How does the body respond when left on its own? And, if you notice some noteworthy sensation, see if you can observe what aspect of your self it is expressing.

### Right Concentration

86. Endowed with this body of moral conduct, with this noble restraint of the senses, with this noble mindfulness and clear awareness, and with this noble contentment, he then resorts to a secluded place to sit and sleep. He establishes himself at the foot of a remote tree, in a mountain cave or grotto, a cemetery, a forest, or in the open air on a pile of straw. Then, having returned from the alms-round and taken his meal, he sits down cross-legged, holding his body upright, and raises up mindfulness before him. (D.I,71)

Removing ourselves from our usual familiar environment provides an opportunity to observe our ordinary habits and attachments with greater clarity, since we are not completely enveloped in our automatically self-reactive world. Seclusion (viveka) should not, however, be an end in itself. Problems may appear to cease if we are removed from them, but the source of problems is in our own mind, and that is with us wherever we go. Nevertheless, seclusion can be useful for giving us some reflective space to see more clearly how problems are created by the unwise mind. Seclusion has three aspects: physical seclusion, mental seclusion (through meditation exercises) and seclusion from the basis of rebirth (equivalent to awakening).

87. When the storm-clouds thunder in the sky and the fly-ways of the birds are awash with torrential rains, the bhikkhu who has entered a cave meditates — no greater pleasure than this can be found.

When, on the flower-shrouded bank of a river, bedecked with various woodland plants, he sits joyfully meditating — no greater pleasure than this can be found.

When, at night in a lonely grove, with rain pouring down and the fanged and tusked animals roaring, the bhikkhu who has entered a cave meditates — no greater pleasure than this can be found. (Theragāthā 522-4)

Nature provides ideal places for developing meditation. The natural environment does not assault the senses like the busy urban world, where we are bombarded by an onslaught of competing sense impressions. Natural sights, sounds and scents are soothing and relaxing, and thus are a very beneficial aid to tranquillity of heart/mind. As the mind grows calmer, one gradually becomes aware of the incredible diversity and subtle beauty of the natural world, which can also provide an inviting source of insight into the universal themes of change and impersonality.

88. Giving up worldly desires, he abides with a mind freed from worldly desires, his mind is cleansed of them. Giving up ill-will and hatred ... friendly and compassionate to all living beings, his mind is cleansed of ill-will and hatred. Giving up mental sluggishness and lethargy ... perceiving light, mindful and clearly knowing, his mind is cleansed of mental sluggishness and lethargy. Giving up restlessness and worry ... with an inwardly calm heart, his mind is cleansed of restlessness and worry. Giving up doubt, he abides having overcome doubt, without uncertainty as to wholesome things, his mind is cleansed of doubt.

...

When he sees that these five hindrances have been given up, delight arises, greatly delighted, joy arises, joyful, his body is calmed, with a calm body he feels happiness, with happiness his mind is concentrated.

Being thus aloof from sensuality, aloof from unskilful conditions, he enters and abides in the first absorption, which is accompanied by thinking and reflection, and with joy and happiness born of seclusion. And with this joy and happiness born of seclusion, he fills, suffuses, overflows and pervades his entire body so that there is no part which is not untouched by this joy and happiness born of seclusion ...

Again, with the cessation of thinking and reflection, he enters and abides in the second absorption, inwardly tranquillized, one-pointed, without thinking and reflection, and with joy and happiness born of concentration. And with this joy and happiness born of concentration, he fills, suffuses, overflows and pervades his entire body so that there is no part which is not untouched by this joy and happiness born of concentration ...

Again, with the fading out of joy he abides with equanimity, mindful and clearly comprehending, experiencing bodily pleasure; he enters and abides in the third absorption, of which the noble ones say, ‘Being equanimous and mindful is a pleasurable abiding’. And with this [bodily] pleasure without joy, he fills, suffuses, overflows and pervades his entire body so that there is no part which is not untouched by this [bodily] pleasure without joy ...

Again, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of ease and dis-ease, he enters and abides in the fourth absorption, which is neither painful nor pleasant, with mindfulness purified by equanimity. And he sits suffusing his body with the mind purified and cleansed, so that there is no part which is not untouched by this purified and cleansed mind. (D.I,71f)

The initial emphasis in Calm Meditation is to focus attention on a meditation object. Through continuously focusing (and not giving special attention to the usual distractions), the mind gradually becomes more settled on, centred on and unified with the meditation object, and in consequence more tranquil. With some degree of perseverance (how long depends upon individual character and one’s earnestness), most people can experience a quietening down of the usual incessant internal dialogue. And for a few people, strong concentration supported by gladness, delight and joy can induce a state of deep focused absorption called jhāna, which can be refined in these four successive degrees.

### The Four Divine Abidings

Cultivation of the Divine Abidings (friendliness, compassion, empathetic joy and equanimity) is one of the ways to connect with the spiritual heart and in the process create a more emotionally integrated spiritual life. An integrated heart/mind deepens and enriches meditation experience, pervading all levels of our being. We begin by expressing these qualities towards ourselves until they overflow into the world around us. These four ‘Abidings’ are not just noble ideals to live up to, but experiences to be embodied so that we become their living personification. They are called ‘divine’ because experiencing them fully is an exalted, godlike experience. They are four of the traditional forty meditation subjects, friendliness being the second most widely practised subject after mindfulness of breathing.

89. a) Here one, with mind of friendliness, continuously pervades one direction, then the second, the third and the fourth; so above, below, across, in all directions, everywhere, throughout the whole world with mind of friendliness — abundant, made great, boundless, free of hate and ill-will. (D.III,223)

b) Not by hatred does hatred ever cease —only through non-hate does it cease.This is an eternal principle. (Dhammapada 5)

The development of friendliness (mettā), sometimes translated as ‘loving-kindness’, progresses through various stages in much the same way as an evolving friendship gradually deepens. The practice starts with learning to be more friendly towards those aspects of ourselves to which we are averse or resistant. This doesn’t mean that we have to like them, but at least we can be less negative and more hospitable towards them. Initially this may mean relating to experiences which are unpleasant with an attitude of non-contention or peaceful co-existence. We can then progress to a more non-reactive receptiveness, and with continued development we can actively befriend the so-called unpleasant experiences, which alters the definitions of what is pleasant and unpleasant — if we are more friendly to disagreeable experiences, they are not so disagreeable anymore.

Judging some personal trait as bad or wrong and then turning it into an object of aversion or rejection is just another conditioned self-activity, albeit sometimes reinforced by society. Similarly to developing a deep friendship, the practice of mettā allows us to be less judgemental of apparent faults, and at the same time to come closer to the seemingly unpleasant aspects of ourselves and see them more clearly for what they are — just self-defined tendencies. Through befriending the negativity in our own minds, we can more naturally respond with friendliness to the negativity we experience in others. With continued practice we can develop an expansive attitude of non-judgemental openness or ‘unconditional love’ towards ourselves and all beings.

90. Here one, with mind of compassion, continuously pervades one direction, then the second, the third and the fourth; so above, below, across, in all directions, everywhere, throughout the whole world with mind of compassion — abundant, made great, boundless, free of hate and ill-will. (D.III, 223)

Compassion starts with ourselves. The word literally means ‘suffering with’. Thus we learn to be more open and receptive to our own suffering. Often compassion is merely pity, an unkind value judgement: ‘noble me being so sensitive as to feel sorry for miserable you’. However, when we have genuinely experienced our own suffering, we can touch another’s suffering as our own — we are together in suffering. The barriers between human beings dissolve and we are united in our common human suffering. It is no longer ‘your’ suffering or ‘my’ suffering, but ‘human’ suffering, expressing itself through different people at different times.

91. Here one, with mind of empathetic joy, continuously pervades one direction, then the second, the third and the fourth; so above, below, across, in all directions, everywhere, throughout the whole world with mind of empathetic joy — abundant, made great, boundless, free of hate and ill-will. (D.III, 223)

Empathetic joy means rejoicing wholeheartedly in the good fortune and well-being of ourselves and others. We begin by allowing ourselves to fully appreciate the joy and happiness which are natural aspects of the human experience, rather than feeling guilty about feeling good or envying others’ well-being. This is not simply indulging in pleasant feelings in order to escape from pain, but rather a recognition and appreciation of the pleasant feelings, happiness and well-being that arise in the course of human existence and give life its special wonder.

In practical terms, empathetic joy helps to counter the emotions of envy and jealousy. Through heartfelt appreciation of other people’s well-being, we can rejoice in and share that well-being, just as if it was our own — indeed, now it is.

92. Here one, with mind of equanimity, continuously pervades one direction, then the second, the third and the fourth; so above, below, across, in all directions, everywhere, throughout the whole world with mind of equanimity — abundant, made great, boundless, free of hate and ill-will. (D.III, 223)

Equanimity or even-mindedness is the most refined of the Divine Abidings. While the other three are active involvement with certain experiences, equanimity is being involved with, but not activated by, joy or pain. Unless the other Divine Abidings have been thoroughly developed beforehand, indifference may be mistaken for equanimity. Indifference, though, is a turning away or shutting down of involvement, whereas equanimity is open and sensitive, yet calm and settled receptiveness to the entirety of experience.

Equanimity arises as a result of comprehending the principle of ethical causality. Though at one level some experiences are indeed tragic, painful or disagreeable, at another level they are occurring in accordance with the principle of ethical causality. Thus we can abide in equanimity, bearing with the unpleasant feelings and possibly able to transform them into the powerful spiritual insight of impersonality.

93. When I went forth from the house to the houseless state, I was not aware of having any ignoble hate-ridden intention.

But I have been aware of love, infinite, well-developed, practised in due order, as taught by the Buddha.

I am a friend to all, comrade to all, sympathetic to all beings, and I develop a mind full of love, always delighting in non-harming. (Theragāthā 645, 647, 648; K.R. Norman translation, PEBM, p. 70.)

Here one of the Buddha’s awakened disciples expresses his loving attitude towards all beings. An intention of non-harming is one of the aspects of right aspiration in the Noble Eightfold Path, and thus is a fundamental attribute of spiritual practice. The development of ‘love, infinite’ (mettā) to an advanced degree gives rise to the exceptional experience that every living being is one’s friend; that one has no enemies.

94. And what kind of concentration meditation, bhikkhus, if developed and made abundant, conduces to the destruction of the outflows?

Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides observing the rise and fall of the five groups of grasping, 'This is physical form, this is the arising of physical form, this is the passing away of physical form; this is feeling. ... perception ... mental activities ... ; this is consciousness, this is the arising of consciousness, this is the passing away of consciousness.

This, bhikkhus, is concentration meditation, developed and made abundant which conduces to the destruction of the outflows. (A.II,45)

Concentration is not only developed so as to experience exceptionally pleasant states of mind; its main purpose is to provide a mental state conducive to being able to contemplate the nature of reality, in order to awaken to the truth of things. Contemplating the five groups of grasping was one of the subjects for developing mindfulness. Now, with increased concentration, awareness can penetrate very deeply into their true nature as continually arising and ceasing. A truly profound insight into this truth can result in the ‘destruction of the outflows’, which is the equivalent of full awakening. This is the coming together of Calm and Insight Meditation, strong concentration together with deep mindful insight into reality.

### Themes for Insight Meditation

When we have some experience of right mindfulness and right concentration, the development of meditation is the wise weaving together of Calm and Insight Meditation. With increased awareness of the Factors of Awakening we can readily observe what degree of tranquillity or concentration there is in the mind. Is the mind tranquil enough, or is it being distracted by various hindrances or spun off into conceptual proliferation? Perhaps it is beneficial to develop the concentration exercises of Calm Meditation for some time. If the mind does seem to be tranquil, clear and alert, then perhaps it is beneficial to develop increased awareness of some of the Attendings with Mindfulness. Alternatively, some of the following themes may be helpful for increasing awareness of the Three Characteristics or other relevant topics leading to a deepening of wisdom.

95. All conditioned things are impermanent:All conditioned things are unsatisfactory;All things are not-self.When, with full realization, one understands this,One turns away from suffering —This is the path to purity. (Dhammapada 277-9)

Insight Meditation (vipassanā) is the direct realization of the true nature of reality. It is a powerfully transforming vision of things as they really are, free from the distorting influence of our self-centred perceptions. It exposes the truth of things as summarized by the Three Characteristics of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality. These three characteristics of reality are experienced directly as a result of developing Insight Meditation, and are also themes to be thoroughly investigated in order to uproot ignorance from every corner of our life. The more deeply we are able to experience the truth of these fundamental characteristics, the more radically our being re-aligns with the profound peace of things as they really are.

### Impermanence

96. Impermanent, alas, are all conditioned things;Their nature is to arise and pass.They come into existence, then they cease.Their allaying, their calming, is peace. (S.II,192)

Intellectually we all know that things are always changing, but habitually we act to try to hold on to them. The nature of everything is to arise and pass; however, the truth of impermanence goes against virtually everything we want to believe. How often must we see change before we really comprehend it? Clearly and directly seeing the truth of impermanence allows us to relax. We no longer need to squander our energies in railing against the inevitability of change. We realize that the natural ceasing of things is actually extraordinarily calming and ineffably peaceful.

97. It would be better for an untaught, ordinary person to regard this body — formed of the four elemental qualities — as self, rather than the mind. Why? Because this body is seen to last for a year, two years, three years ... a hundred years or more. But that which is called ‘thought’ or ‘mind’ or ‘consciousness’ arises as one thing and ceases as something else, by day or by night. It is just like a monkey swinging through the forest grabbing a branch, letting it go and grabbing another. (S.II,94)

The Buddha challenges us to think in a different way. Most of us would be willing to accept that the body is not our true self, since we can observe its constant changes. But how many of us would be willing to say the same about our mind or consciousness? Because the mind moves so fast it appears to have a stable continuity to it, just as we see a constant flow of water as a stream. Through the development of Calm Meditation the mental processes slow down, so that we can observe the monkey-mind grabbing a thought, letting it go and grabbing another, following its own wild nature. This understanding gives us the possibility of freeing ourselves from that thought-grabbing tendency and being able to peacefully observe and know the natural flow of mental processes.

98. Just as in summer when the sky is clear and without cloud, the sun, ascending into the heavens, expels all darkness and shines forth bright and brilliant, even so the awareness of impermanence, if developed and practised, exhausts all desire for sensuality, exhausts all desire for material form, exhausts all desire for becoming, exhausts all ignorance and removes all ‘I am’ conceit. (S.III,156)

Insight into impermanence, blazing forth like the summer sun, can have a profound effect upon our lives. As a living experience, the truth of impermanence bursts forth as awareness of uncertainty, instability, unreliability, undependability, insecurity. This realization completely undermines the basis for so much of our activity, the endless seeking of security from the ever-changing world. When we see that we are really chasing phantoms, we stop: we stop chasing the phantom of sensuality, the phantom of material form, the phantom of further becoming. When we see clearly that there is no ‘thing’ we can really identify with as ours, this wisdom uproots the concept of a permanent ‘I’.

99. Observing the impermanence, the changing nature, the fading and the ending of physical form, of feelings, of perceptions, of mental activities and of consciousness, one knows: ‘Now as well as formerly, physical form, feelings, perceptions, mental activities and consciousness are impermanent, unsatisfactory and subject to change’. So seeing in this way — as it really is, by perfect realization — one abandons sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and distress. Leaving these, one is untroubled; untroubled, one abides in well-being; abiding in well-being, one is called ‘truly calmed’. (S.III,43)

As an aid to insightful investigation, the Buddha gave the reflection that human beings are composed of five particular components: physical body, feelings, perceptions, mental activities and consciousness — the five groups of grasping (text 81). Instead of trying to penetrate the truth of the way things are through the subjectively prejudiced view of ‘myself’, ‘my body’, ‘my mind’, etc., we can objectively investigate the nature of the five groups. With less of a personal investment in seeing what we want to see, we are able to see the way things are much more honestly and accurately. Clear and honest seeing gives us irrefutable insight into the constant instability of these aspects of our apparently stable self. This in turn frees us from the grief and suffering caused by our frustrated attempts to cling to the illusion of a stable self — we understand how useless this really is, and so can abide in untroubled, truly calmed well-being.

100. While seated in my hut, spiritual anxiety arose in me — ‘I have followed the wrong path! I have come under the power of craving!

My life is insignificant, old age and sickness are crushing it. There is no time to be negligent before this body is destroyed.’

Contemplating the rising and passing away of the aspects of a human being (khandha) as they really are — with liberated mind I rose to my feet. The Buddha’s teaching has been accomplished. (Therīgāthā 94-6)

One of the Buddha’s nun disciples was deeply stirred by the perception of creeping old age and sickness. It is often only when we are confronted with a life crisis that our spiritual awareness can be awakened. If our mind is trained in contemplation, perhaps we can turn this crisis into a liberating experience of insight into ultimate truth. This can happen very suddenly!

101. So transient is everything, bhikkhus; so unstable is everything, bhikkhus; so uncomforting is everything, bhikkhus; so much so that it is suitable for you to be disenchanted with all conditioned things, to be dispassionate towards them, to be liberated from them. (S.II,191)

Through clearly seeing the ultimate truth of impermanence, we can become disenchanted with our frantic and illusory search for security in things which are constantly changing; we turn away — and are liberated. We awaken to the continuously emerging wonder of life, flowing with its ups and downs and rejoicing in its ever-joyful mystery. It is not that life changes — change is life.

Although most of us are frightened of change and resist it because we do not know what it will bring, the freedom and joy resulting from opening to the truth of change far surpass the false comfort of holding on to hopes and dreams of security. Change is life. Change is the wonder of life.

### Dukkha

Dukkha is one of the universal characteristics of all conditioned things. The word has a variety of meanings depending on the context, and is thus hard to translate by any one English word. Its particularized meanings, i.e., pain, suffering, dis-ease, discontent, etc., are in effect symptomatic expressions of its universal meaning, i.e., unsatisfactoriness, incompleteness, imperfection, etc.

102. a) Now, as formerly, I just point out dukkha and its cessation. (M.I,251)

b) Bhikkhus, develop concentration. Concentrated, a bhikkhu clearly knows things as they really are. And what does he clearly know as they really are?

‘This is dukkha’, he clearly knows as it really is. ‘This is the origin of dukkha’, he clearly knows as it really is. ‘This is the cessation of dukkha’, he clearly knows as it really is. ‘This is the path to the cessation of dukkha’, he clearly knows as it really is. (S.V,414)

At its most succinct, the Buddha’s teaching is concerned with fully realizing the nature of dukkha and experiencing its cessation in Nibbāna. That is, through fully comprehending the imperfection of human existence, we are liberated from the anguish of wanting life to be other than the way it actually is. For some people it is a great relief to acknowledge dukkha. Suddenly they can open to vast areas of life which they previously ignored or denied, since any recognition of suffering is often taken as a failure. But if we are blind to this fundamental reality of life, how can we understand what life is really about?

Sometimes this aspect of the Buddha’s teaching, formally called the Four Noble Truths, is expressed in the form of a doctor’s diagnosis: observing the symptoms of dukkha, determining its cause, indicating its cure by removal of the cause and prescribing a method of treatment as the remedy. Thus we need to recognize the real nature of dukkha honestly in order to determine its cause, and then to undertake a course of spiritual treatment in order to facilitate the removal of the cause. In this way we can arrive at the cure of ultimate well-being by realizing the truth of dukkha and its cessation.

103. a) There are three kinds of dukkha: dukkha as pain, dukkha as inherent in conditions and dukkha due to change. (S.V,56; D.III,216)

b) And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of dukkha? Birth is dukkha, ageing is dukkha, death is dukkha; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and distress are dukkha; association with the disliked is dukkha; separation from the liked is dukkha; not getting what one wants is dukkha; in short, the five groups of grasping are dukkha. (D.II,305)

Dukkha manifests in many ways. Most of us know the painful dukkha of such things as ageing, death, sorrow, distress, etc. Some of us recognize the dukkha caused by change, for example, separation from what we like or meeting what we dislike. Few of us realize, however, that, dukkha is inherent as incompleteness in all that is conditioned or constructed, including the very source of our sense of self, the five khandhas. We fail to see that we are really just a collection of ever-changing, causally-conditioned processes, and this is always incomplete and unsatisfying.

104. And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the origin of dukkha? It is that thirst which gives rise to again-becoming, connected with delight and lust, finding delight in this here and that there; that is, thirst for sense pleasures, thirst for existence and thirst for non-existence. And where, bhikkhus, does this thirst arise and settle? Wherever in the world there is anything which is agreeable and pleasant, there this thirst arises and settles. (D.II,308)

Thirst, or ‘craving’ as it is sometimes translated, is a very powerful force, and as such it is designated as the chief cause of dukkha, but it is not the first or only cause. It is only the most active force in a continuum of causally-connected factors. Thus thirst arises from what is ‘agreeable and pleasant’ or, most usually, from feelings. A pleasant feeling arises and we develop a thirst for it, but then it changes and we experience the dukkha of disappointment. Ultimately this comes down to our grasping at a permanent self. Just as our body is sustained by its thirst for nutriment, so the sense of a permanent self is sustained through the activity of three kinds of thirst: thirst for sense pleasures, thirst for existence and thirst for non-existence.

105. a) And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the cessation of dukkha? It is that complete fading and cessation of this thirst, its relinquishing, giving up, release and renouncing. (D.II,310)

b) Bhikkhus, when one abides contemplating the danger in things that can be grasped, thirst ceases. (S.II, 85)

Once we recognize the truth of dukkha, we can rejoice in the fact that it can cease when its origin in thirst is given up. In practice this may not be quite as easy as it first appears, as that thirst is intrinsic to selfhood. We cannot get rid of thirst directly (as that would be thirst for non-existence), but we are released from its power through clearly seeing the danger or detrimental effects of its feeding the self-process. Thus we clearly understand that feelings arise, but they do not need to trigger thirst; they are merely transient feelings.

106. And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the path leading to the cessation of dukkha? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path, that is: right understanding, right aspiration, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration. (D.II,313)

The Buddha outlined a definite path of spiritual practice which we can follow to achieve the cessation of dukkha. This path comprises eight factors, beginning with right understanding, which means clearly understanding the Four Noble Truths of dukkha, its origin, its cessation and the path. With the support of morality and meditation this understanding can become ever deeper, so that we can speak of experiential wisdom. Of course, it takes some degree of courage and tenacity to penetrate the shell of resistance we have created around dukkha. However, as these eight factors develop together they provide the tools to pierce this shell, and realization dawns: resisting is grasping; without holding there is only dukkha naturally arising and passing away, and no one who suffers.

107. a) I say that dukkha ripens as either confusion or search. (A.III,416)

b) Just as, when rain pours down upon a hilltop, the water runs with the slope filling the clefts, the gullies and the creeks; these, being filled, fill the streams ... the rivers ... the great ocean. In the same way ignorance is a condition for formative activities, formative activities are a condition for consciousness ... dukkha is a condition for trust, trust is a condition for gladness, gladness is a condition for joy, joy is a condition for tranquillity, tranquillity is a condition for happiness ... for concentration … for knowledge and vision of things as they really are … disenchantment ... dispassion ... liberation, and liberation is a condition for knowledge of the ending of the outflows of selfhood. (S.II,32)

Dukkha is the stimulus for spiritual practice because it shakes us out of our complacency. Whether we realize it or not, most of our time is spent in an astonishing variety of ways of trying to evade dukkha, and most people usually wander through life reasonably comfortably in this way until they are tripped up by suffering. However, when dukkha invades our life, we have to face it in order to find a solution, and for discerning people the only real solution is a spiritual one. Thus they come to have trust in a spiritual teaching, which gives rise to many further positive qualities such as gladness, joy, tranquillity and happiness. These become a basis for Calm and Insight Meditation, which bear the fruit of letting go and liberation. Thus the seed of dukkha can bear the fruit of liberation.

### Impersonality

108. Bhikkhus, physical form is not-self. If, bhikkhus, physical form were self, it would not lead to affliction, and it could be obtained of physical form that ‘my physical form may be like this; my physical form may not be like this’. But because physical form is not-self, it leads to affliction, and one cannot obtain of physical form that ‘my physical form may be like this; my physical form may not be like this’.

Feelings are not-self ... perceptions are not-self ... mental activities are not-self ... consciousness is not-self. If consciousness were self, it would not lead to affliction, and it could be obtained of consciousness that ‘my consciousness may be like this; my consciousness may not be like this’. But because consciousness is not-self, it leads to affliction, and one cannot obtain of consciousness that ‘my consciousness may be like this; my consciousness may not be like this’. (S.III,66f)

We all know (to some degree) that our body-mind does not always do what we want. However, do we ever follow this investigation far enough to find out who is really in control? From carefully observing body-mind, a clearer insight into their true nature gradually begins to dawn. While there is certainly an abiding ‘sense of self’ to which we can relate and refer, on closer investigation we see that the continuity of an abiding selfhood is more assumption than fact. And while we do have some degree of control over certain aspects of body and mind, when we look at the bigger picture we also see numerous areas where body-mind just follow their own agendas. For example, we can force the body to eat, but we are not able to control how food is digested. Or, while we can call to mind a certain memory, we often cannot control the successive associations which it triggers off. So if body-mind is really ‘my self’, why can’t I always control ‘my self’?

109. ‘What do you think, bhikkhus, is physical form permanent or impermanent?’

‘Impermanent, venerable sir.’

‘Is what is impermanent painful or pleasant?’

‘Painful, venerable sir.’

‘Is what is impermanent, painful and subject to change suitable to be regarded as: “This is mine, this I am, this is my self”?’

‘No, venerable sir.’

‘Are feelings ... perceptions ... mental activities ... consciousness permanent or impermanent?’

‘Impermanent, venerable sir.’

‘Is what is impermanent painful or pleasant?’

‘Painful, venerable sir.’

‘Is what is impermanent, painful and subject to change suitable to be regarded as: “This is mine, this I am, this is my self”?’

‘No, venerable sir.’

‘Therefore, bhikkhus, any form ... feeling ... perceptions ... activities ... consciousness whatsoever, whether past, future or present, internal or external, coarse or subtle, base or excellent, distant or near, all should be seen as it truly is by right understanding as: “This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self”.’ (S.III,67f)

To most people a self is something inherently stable and pleasant. Yet here the Buddha points out that what we normally take to be our self (the five groups of body and mind) is not actually so stable, completely satisfying or comfortable as it appears. So is it sensible to regard these ephemeral, disappointing things as our real self? It would be more reasonable to see them as they really are, and not be disappointed or frustrated when they do not live up to our expectations.

110. The wandering ascetic Vacchagotta visited the Revered One. ‘How is it, master Gotama, does self exist?’ When this was said the Revered One was silent. ‘But then, master Gotama, does self not exist?’ For a second time the Revered One was silent. Then the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta got up from his seat and went away. Now, not long after he had gone, the Venerable Ānanda asked the Revered One, ‘How is it, sir, that when the Revered One was asked a question by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta, he did not answer?’

‘If, Ānanda, when asked by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta, “Does self exist?”, I had replied, “Self exists”, would that have been in conformity with the understanding that all things are not-self? If, when asked by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta, “Does self not exist?”, I had replied, “Self does not exist”, then, Ānanda, the bewildered Vacchagotta would be even more bewildered, thinking: “Formerly, I surely had a self, but now I have not!”’ (S.IV,400ff.)

The understanding of impersonality or not-self is quite a subtle insight, and approaching it only with rational thought can be very confusing. The Buddha never said, ‘There is no self’. This would be holding to a fixed ultimate position which would be out of harmony with most people’s conventional understanding of selfhood; that is, a self ‘exists’ to the degree to which we grasp or identify with aspects of our being. Rather, the Buddha offers the meditative reflection that, ‘All things are not-self’; that is, he advises to look again and see clearly. Thus he emphasized the practice of meditation in order to calm conceptual thought and arrive at a direct realization of this truth. Through carefully observing body-mind with open inquiry, one can awaken directly to the truth of impersonality. Rather than only observing the areas of experience which seem to be under our control, we allow a non-judgemental awareness, free of assumptions, expectations and preconceptions, to reveal the true nature of experience as it really is. Impersonality is one of the fundamental characteristics of all phenomena. All we need to do is wake up to its reality.

111. ‘I am’ is an imagining; ‘I am this’ is an imagining; ‘I will be’ is an imagining. When the sage has gone beyond all imaginings, he is called ‘at peace’. The sage at peace is not born, does not age, is not agitated, is not obstructed. He has nothing of which to be born. Not being born, how could he age? Not ageing, how could he die? Not dying, how could he be agitated? Not being agitated, how could he be obstructed? (M.III,246; abridged)

Most people usually assume that there is a permanent abiding entity called the ‘self’ or ‘soul’. Not only have we been conditioned to believe in it, and not only does all our socialization support it, but in Buddhist language we are also born with a ‘latent tendency to conceit’ or selfhood. However, the Buddha understood that this belief is actually just ‘an imagining’, since it is really an unconfirmed assumption, based on an unclear awareness of the true nature of reality. The reflection on not-self encourages us to look more clearly at this imagined assumption, so that through direct seeing we can be freed from this illusion and abide at peace with the truth of not-self. No more false imaginings (of a permanently-abiding self) are born, and therefore there is no more imagined ‘I’ to face ageing or death.

112. ‘“Empty world, empty world” is said, sir. In what respect is it said “empty world”?’ ‘It is because of being empty of a permanent-abiding self, or of the nature of a permanent-abiding self, that it is said “empty world”’. (S.IV,54)

Most of us usually relate to the world from a very personal, subjective position. At its extreme this is seeing the world as we want to see it or are conditioned to see it, rather than as it really is. The ‘real world’ is just as it is, independent of all of our subjective perceptions and interpretations. Waking up to this ‘real world’ is the realization of not-self or impersonality. This may not sound very inspiring, but when the world is empty of a self-entity, it is full of the selfless wonder of the unageing, undying, unconditioned.

### Conditional Causality

113. a) The Awakened One has told the cause of causally-arisen things; and what brings their cessation too. Such is the teaching of the Great Sage. (Vin.I,40)

b) Thus when this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises. When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases. (S.II,28)

The insight which led to the Buddha’s complete awakening was the penetrating realization of the causally conditioned nature of all phenomena (except Nibbāna). While previous sages posited an eternally-abiding entity, the Buddha identified the coming together and dissolution of various psycho-physical processes, which only appear to be constant. This was a profound breakthrough to a completely new way of seeing reality. For those who were ready for it, object-bound human consciousness was now expanded to awareness of process consciousness,

One of the Buddha’s first disciples, Venerable Assaji, expressed the essence of the Buddha’s Teaching in the first short verse above, which resulted in Venerable Sāriputta’s realizing the first stage of awakening.

114. And what, bhikkhus, is conditional causality? With ignorance as condition, formative (mental) activities come to be; with formative activities as condition, consciousness ... name-and-form ... the sixfold sense bases ... contact ... feeling ... thirst ... grasping ... coming-into-existence ... birth ... with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and distress come to be. Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. This, bhikkhus, is called conditional causality.

But with the complete, dispassionate cessation of ignorance comes cessation of formative activities; with the cessation of formative activities, cessation of consciousness ... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering. (S.II,1-2)

The teaching on conditional causality was formally presented by the Buddha in a twelve-linked sequence. This is a detailed explanation of the causal connections which generate human suffering, and also gives the keys to the cessation of suffering. The sequence begins with ignorance as the condition for formative activities, the dispositions or habit patterns produced by the continuity of intentional actions. The formative activities/habit patterns then condition our particular type of consciousness (see text 127a)), which conditions a basis in name-and-form, that is, mental qualities and materiality, and the sixfold sense bases (the five physical senses plus the mind). The sixfold sense bases condition the arising of (sense) contact, which conditions feeling, and if the feeling is strong enough it conditions thirst, grasping, a coming-into-existence and birth of identity, ‘I am’. However, since this subject is in actuality only a constructed phenomenon, it also decays and dies, with the attendant sorrow, lamentation, pain, etc. Although the sequence ends on this rather unpleasant note, the important part is that once this process is understood, we then have the knowledge to uproot it through the arising of wisdom in place of ignorance, or to release it through seeing the danger in grasping. And thus the entire sequence comes to cessation and there is the ending of the ‘whole mass of suffering’.

115. Neither self-made is this puppet,Nor made by another is this misfortune.Dependent on a cause it comes to be;By dissolution of the cause it fades away.Just as a seed sown in a field will sproutDue to touch of earth and damp, these two;Likewise the (personality) groups, elements and senses —Dependent on a cause they come to be;By dissolution of the cause they fade away. (S.I,134)

This exceptional insight provides a completely new way to view phenomena which we are able to see for ourselves. Although it removes the concept of a creator, it still leaves creation as a complex causally-conditioned reality. We have the possibility to influence this creation through clearly understanding the fundamental causal principles to which we are all subject. Thus through wise insight we can become the creators of our own reality, liberated from delusion.

116. ‘Venerable sir, who then grasps?’

‘Not a proper question’, the Revered One replied. ‘I do not say “One grasps”. ... Since I do not speak thus, you should ask, “Venerable sir, what is the cause of grasping?”, this is a proper question. For this the proper explanation is: “With thirst as cause, grasping arises; with grasping as cause, coming-into-existence arises... Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.”’ (S.II,14 abridged)

Most people, like the questioner here, naturally assume that there is some ‘one’ who is acting, speaking or thinking. However, this is really a false, not carefully considered assumption. Since the Buddha was fully awakened to conditional causality, where others saw a self, he saw causal processes. If we are continually distracted by the assumption of a self acting, we fail to investigate any further and are unable to discover the true causal conditions behind the play of experience. Thus we keep acting out our personalized suffering, without realizing any final resolution.

117. Kaccāna, the world usually depends upon the duality of ‘existence’ and ‘non- existence’. But for those who see, with perfect realization, the truth of the arising of the world, there is not for them any ‘non-existence’ in the world. And for those who see, with perfect realization, the truth of the passing away of the world, there is not for them any ‘existence’ in the world.

Kaccāna, this world is mostly blinded by attachment, grasping and adherence. But those who do not obtain or take hold of that attachment and grasping, that obstinacy, adherence and latent tendency, do not take a stand upon ‘my self’.15 They have no doubt or uncertainty that what arises is only dukkha arising, what ceases is only dukkha ceasing, and their knowledge is independent of others. In this way, Kaccāna, there is right view.

‘All exists’ is one extreme; ‘All does not exist’ is the second extreme. Not going to either extreme, the Tathāgata expounds a teaching in the middle: With ignorance as condition, formative activities come to be; with formative activities as condition, consciousness ... Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. (S.II,17, abridged)

The existence view is the belief in eternalism or continued existence after death. The non-existence view is the belief in annihilationism/materialism, or the end of existence at death. Philosophers and ordinary people have debated each of these two views throughout history. But when we are aware of the constantly-changing, conditioning processes underpinning reality, we do not affirm either extreme position. At the source of these views is the belief in a self which either lives eternally or is annihilated at death. However, after seeing the continuous arising and passing of phenomena, and especially the causally-conditioned nature of selfhood, such views are without meaning. Who/what lives or dies?

118. Chieftain, for one who truly sees the pure and simple arising of phenomena and the pure and simple continuity of conditioned things, there is no fear. When with wisdom one sees the world as just like grass and wood, not finding any selfishness, one does not grieve with the idea, ‘It is not mine’. (Theragāthā 716-7)

Through the deep realization of conditional causality, we come to a different relationship with life. Since everything is merely impersonal conditioned processes, we do not relate so personally to life anymore. We cannot personally own anything, but neither can we personally lose anything. Thus we no longer fear or grieve loss, and we can be at peace whether we gain or lose.

### Kamma

Kamma is the Pali form of the more familiar Sanskrit word ‘karma’. However, it is most important to understand that in Buddhism kamma/karma means ‘intentional action’. It does not mean ‘fate’, which is a popular definition and one given in modern dictionaries. Rather, kamma is intentional action which most often has the potential to give a result (vipāka). However, this potential result can be modified and even cancelled by further appropriate intentional action. Thus action and result (kamma-vipāka) are dynamically inter-related but not rigidly deterministic.

119. a) By kamma the world goes on, by kamma people go on. Beings are bound by kamma as a wheel is bound to the cart by a linchpin. (Sutta Nipāta 654)

b) Beings are the owners of their kamma, heirs of their kamma, born of their kamma, related to their kamma, supported by their kamma. Whatever kamma they do, for good or for ill, of that they are the heirs. (A.V,288)

Kamma, ‘intentional action’, is something we are doing all the time. It is as inherent in human life as gravity. Thus it is fundamentally important to know what it is and how it works. Essentially the ‘principle of kamma’ is ethical causality, moral cause and effect, action and result. Although we may readily acknowledge that we generate actions, it is also important to recognize the associated results (vipāka). With a continuity of reflective awareness it is possible to know the causal nature of action and result, even if sometimes it is not immediately clear. In practice it may sometimes be more helpful to reflect back from a certain result to uncover the initiating cause. For example, why are we frequently angry? This also helps us to take more responsibility for actions and their results — we are the owners of our actions.

120. a) Of these three kinds of action [by body, speech and mind], divided and differentiated in this way, I say that action of mind is the most blameworthy in the doing of a bad action. Action of body is not the same, and action of speech is not the same. (M.I,373)

b) I am a teacher of action, of the consequences of action and the energy to do. (A.I,287)

c) It is intention (volition) that I call kamma. Having willed, one produces kamma through body, speech and mind. (A.III,415)

The Buddha clearly pointed out the supreme importance of mind in coordinating, initiating and motivating human life. The activity of intention, volition or will, implying choice and initiative, is kamma, the activating force in our life. Indeed, it is often will or volition which we identify as the primary element of our sense of self, since it appears as if ‘I’ can do as ‘I’ will. The problem is that ‘my will’ only chooses to initiate activity which tends to maintain and reinforce this sense of self as controller of ‘my’ world; that is, it is fundamentally a will to reinforce my selfhood. Some people may think they have ‘free will’, but the will is actually far from free of self and all its self-preserving baggage, habit tendencies, social conditioning, etc. However, we do have some degree of ‘free choice’ as to whether to follow old habits or break new ground.

121. There are three sources for the origin of kamma. What three? Greed, aversion and delusion are the sources of the origin of kamma. An action done in greed, aversion or delusion — born of, originating in or arising out of greed, aversion or delusion — is unskilful, blameworthy and its result is painful. It leads to the arising of [further] kamma, not to the cessation of kamma.

That action done in non-greed, non-aversion or non-delusion — born of, originating in or arising out of non-greed, non-aversion or non-delusion — is skilful, not blameworthy and its result is pleasant. It leads to the cessation of kamma, not to the arising of [further] kamma. (A.I,263)

We express ourselves through bodily actions, speech and thought, and our most basic responses are either greed, aversion or delusion, or their opposites. Greed, aversion and delusion are the unskilful origins of kamma because they are self-affirming, self-centred actions: greed is ‘I want’; aversion is ‘I don’t want’; and delusion is ‘I don’t know’. Actions performed in non-greed, non-aversion and non-delusion are self-surrendering, selfless actions, and thus undermine the process of ‘kammic’ will to selfhood. This ultimately frees us from the deluded habit of selfishness, which, since it is out of harmony with the fundamental selfless nature of the universe, continually results in disappointment and suffering.

122. a) Those wanderers and brahmins who say or hold the view that whatever pleasant or unpleasant or neutral feeling a person experiences is the consequence of what was done in the past — they go too far. Therefore, I say they are wrong. Experience of feelings arises from bile, from phlegm, from wind, from the union of bodily humours, from seasonal changes, from stress of circumstances and from chance external happenings,16 as well as from the ripening of kamma. (S.IV,230, abridged)

b) Bhikkhus, if one speaks thus, ‘Just as a person does an action (kamma), just so will it be experienced’; in that case the religious life could not exist and no opportunity would appear for the complete ending of suffering.

But if, bhikkhus, one speaks thus, ‘Just as a person does an action (kamma) that is to be experienced, just so will the result be experienced’; in that case the religious life can exist and the opportunity appears for the complete ending of suffering. (A.I,249f)

If we had to experience the results of all that we have done in the past, we would be prisoners of our past and could never be liberated. It is thus very important to distinguish between kamma and its potential result (vipāka). These are two different things, but are mutually inter-related through the principle of conditioned causality. If we don’t distinguish between them, we make the simplistic assumption that action (kamma) equals result (vipāka), and arrive at Determinism rather than Buddhism. It is also more appropriate to say that intentional actions generate potential results, which can then be influenced by further intentional action. These further actions, if skilful, may even cause the initial result to be completely cancelled out. By understanding our actions and their results, we are able to mould results through the careful cultivation of skilfully related actions. We can thus be the active moulders of our future rather than the victims of our past.

123. a) The results of kamma cannot be known by thought, and so should not be speculated about. Thinking thus, one would come to distraction and distress. (A.II,80)

b) Therefore, Ānanda, do not be the judge of people; do not make assumptions about others. A person is destroyed by making judgements about others. (A.V,140)

Since we are acting continuously, often unconsciously, it is virtually impossible to trace particular results back to specific actions. By trying to do so we would only distract ourselves uselessly with speculations, and make false assumptions about ourselves and other people. At best it is only possible to know the general principles of action-result, which we can observe personally with some continuity of self-awareness and reflection.

Most people are, of course, curious to know why something happened to them, and so they look for some logical answer through thinking. However, it is better to investigate the causal aspect of how something comes to be by mindfully observing our bodily actions, speech and mental habits, and thus come to know directly our own personal action-result patterns.

### Rebirth

Theravada Buddhists use the term ‘rebirth’ rather than ‘reincarnation’. Reincarnation literally means that some permanently-abiding entity transmigrates from life to life or is incarnate again and again. The Buddha referred most specifically to the dynamic process of rebirth (literally, ‘again becoming’), rather than to the continuity of abiding entities characteristic of reincarnation.

124. With the divine eye which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. I understood how beings pass on according to their actions thus: those worthy beings who were ill-conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappeared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in perdition, even in hell; but those worthy beings who were well-conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their view, giving effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappeared in a good destination, even in the heavenly world. (M.I,22f; Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi translation, MLDB, p.106)

The Buddha on the night of his awakening was able to recollect his own previous existences and, as quoted above, the ‘passing away and reappearing’ of other beings according to their views and actions.17 Thus he understood that there are some universal principles related to action and result. That is, bad conduct and wrong views lead to a ‘bad destination’, while good conduct and right views lead heavenward. Other disciples also had these experiences, which it is possible to attain through development of advanced stages of meditation. However, this direct experience of ‘passing away and reappearing’ was not something experienced by every disciple, or even every awakened disciple.

125. And what, Punna, is dark action with dark result? Here someone generates an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive verbal formation, an afflictive mental formation. Having generated an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive verbal formation, an afflictive mental formation, he reappears in an afflictive world. When he has reappeared in an afflictive world, afflictive contacts touch him. Being touched by afflictive contacts, he feels afflictive feelings, extremely painful, as in the case of beings in hell. Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being: one reappears through the actions one has performed. When one has reappeared, contacts touch one. Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions. This is called dark action with dark result.

And what, Punna, is bright action with bright result? Here someone generates an unafflictive bodily formation, an unafflictive verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation. Having generated an unafflictive bodily formation, an unafflictive verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation, he reappears in an unafflictive world. When he has reappeared in an unafflictive world, unafflictive contacts touch him. Being touched by unafflictive contacts, he feels unafflictive feelings, extremely pleasant, as in the case of the Gods of Refulgent Glory. Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being: one reappears through the actions one has performed. When one has reappeared, contacts touch one. Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions. This is called bright action with bright result. (M.I,389f; Bhikkhi Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi translation, MLDB, pp.495f)

Our actions of body, speech and mind are responsible for the kind of world which we inhabit, with its attendant contacts and feelings. Simply expressed, this means that afflictive actions give hellish feelings, unafflictive actions give heavenly feelings. It is most important, however, that we should see these causal relationships directly. Otherwise we are just believing in an abstract principle, without personal experience, without an immediate and relevant connection to our own actions and feelings. Thus when you feel angry, what is your (emotional) world like? When you feel affection towards someone, what is your (emotional) world then?

126. a) Sāriputta, there are these five realms of existence: the hell realm, animal realm, ghost realm, human realm and heavenly realm. I understand these realms of existence, the way and the means to these realms of existence; and I also understand how, at death, when the body breaks up, one is born into them. (M.I,73)

b) Bhikkhus, there is kamma which is to be experienced in hell, in the animal realm, in the ghost realm, in the human realm, in the heavenly realm. This is called kamma’s distinction. (A.III,415)

These realms of existence were directly perceived by the Buddha and some of his disciples. In the Buddha’s teaching materiality and mentality are inter-related, so that it is sometimes hard to determine whether ‘realm’ refers to a particular material place or a particular mental place. It might be more meaningful to reflect upon what experiences you personally associate with hell and the other realms. When our emotions are very strong, it can sometimes seem as if we have been transported to either heaven or hell.

127. a) Bhikkhus, what one intends, and what one plans, and whatever one has a tendency towards, this becomes a basis for the maintenance of consciousness. When there is a basis there is a support for the establishing of consciousness. When consciousness is established and has come to growth, there is the production of future renewed existence. (S.II,65; Bhikkhu Bodhi translation, CDB p.576)

b) Radha, that desire, that lust, that delight in, that thirst, that taking up and grasping, that resolution, inclination and latent tendency in regard to form … feelings … perceptions … activities … consciousness is called the support of coming-into-existence. Their ending is called the ending of the support for coming-into-existence. (S.III,191)

c) Therefore, Ānanda, intentional action (kamma) is the field, consciousness is the seed, thirst is the moisture. For beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by thirst, consciousness is established in a lower realm. Thus in the future there is again-becoming, rebirth. (A.I,223)

These passages present a more ‘psychological’ explanation for the process of coming into a realm of existence. Consciousness is a morally neutral aspect of mind, which is then acted upon, influenced or directed by various types of volition. These can be quite mild, such as a slight tendency, or very strong, such as lust or thirst. One then comes into existence in, or is born into, a corresponding mental/material realm. With clear awareness it is possible to see how this is happening at any particular time in this very life — we are continually being ‘reborn’ into new realms.

### Views

128. The Buddha relates a story of a king who had all the people in his realm who were born blind assembled together and introduced to an elephant. The king then asked them what an elephant was like.

‘Those blind people who had been shown the head of the elephant replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a water jar.” Those blind people who had been shown the ear of the elephant replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a winnowing basket.” Those blind people who had been shown the tusk of the elephant replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a ploughshare.” Those blind people who had been shown the trunk replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a plough-pole.” Those blind people who had been shown the body replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a storeroom.” Those blind people who had been shown the foot replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a post.” Those blind people who had been shown the hindquarters replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a mortar.” Those blind people who had been shown the tail replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a pestle.” Those blind people who had been shown the tuft at the end of the tail replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a broom.” Saying “An elephant is like this, an elephant is not like that! An elephant is not like this, an elephant is like that!”, they fought each other with their fists. And the king was delighted [with the spectacle].’

The Buddha then commented upon the ‘wanderers of other sects’ who held a variety of views and quarrelled amongst themselves. He then spoke the following verse:

‘Some recluses and Brahmins, so called,Are deeply attached to their own views;People who only see one side of thingsEngage in quarrels and disputes.’ (Udāna 6.4, John D. Ireland translation, TU, pp. 93-4)

Throughout history there has always been a great diversity of views and opinions about life. The Buddha realized the futility of disputes and the delusion of holding fixed views, since they are usually due to seeing only a part of the whole picture. Holding views is also one of the supports for affirming selfhood, the greatest delusion of all. To someone who can ‘see the elephant’, all the partial views are incomplete, and so disputing them is a waste of effort. More usefully, we can appreciate each person’s contribution to the picture (often their view says more about themselves than about what they see), and be more tolerant of the great diversity of human perspectives.

129. Even though one recites the scriptures only a little, but lives in accordance with the Teaching — giving up greed, aversion and delusion, rightly knowing, with mind truly freed, not clinging to this or another realm — one thus shares in the religious life. (Dhammapada 20)

The Buddha’s awakening was a direct experience resulting from his development of meditation in order to see things as they really are. Thus while book-learning can be helpful, putting the teachings into practice directly is the most important thing. Also, though we may not recognize it, book-learning is still subject to perceptual self-bias. Giving up the self-supporting tendencies of greed, aversion and delusion usually requires the development of Calm and Insight Meditation, by which the mind becomes truly freed through the realization of selflessness.

130. ‘Vaccha, to resort to the speculative views: the world is eternal or the world is not eternal, the world is finite or the world is infinite, the soul and the body are the same, the soul is one thing and the body another, after death a Tathāgata exists, after death a Tathāgata does not exist, after death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist, after death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist, is to enter the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the agitation of views, the writhing of views, the fetter of views. It is connected with suffering, with vexation, turmoil and distress. It does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calming, to direct knowledge, to awakening or to Nibbāna. I, Vaccha, seeing this danger, do not resort to any of these views.’

‘But does friend Gotama not have any speculative views at all?’

‘Speculative views, Vaccha, have been put away by the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata, Vaccha, has seen18 this: thus is form, thus is form’s arising, thus is form’s disappearance; thus is feeling … perceptions … activities … consciousness, thus is consciousness’s arising, thus is consciousness’s disappearance.

‘Therefore, I say with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, relinquishing of all imaginings, all mental disturbances, all I-making, mine-making and tendencies to conceit, the Tathāgata is liberated without grasping.’ (M.I,485-6 abridged)

Trying to answer any of these particular questions is distracting, as it does not lead to awakening but only to further mental turmoil; any answer is mere speculation which cannot be proved. What we can know are physical form, feelings, perceptions, activities and consciousness, and instead of just speculating, we can clearly investigate these aspects of reality so as to know them directly.

Paradoxically, it is only through realizing awakening that one may intuitively be able to know the answers to some of these questions. The unawakened person seeks answers to them based upon wrong assumptions, that is, an unawakened or ignorant view of what ‘the world’ is. Thus, rather than distract ourselves with mere speculation, it is better to focus our energy on the path to awakening.

131. Once the Buddha was staying in a forest and took up a handful of leaves. He asked the bhikkhus which they thought were more numerous, the leaves in his hand or those in the forest. When they replied that the leaves in the forest were more numerous, the Buddha responded:

Even so, bhikkhus, those things I have known directly are numerous, while those I have taught are few. And why, bhikkhus, have I not taught them? Because they are not beneficial, not relevant to the basis of the spiritual life, and do not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbāna. Therefore I have not taught them.

And what, bhikkhus, have I taught? I have taught, ‘This is dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the origin of dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the cessation of dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of dukkha’. And why, bhikkhus, have I taught this? Because this is beneficial, relevant to the basis of the spiritual life, and leads to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbāna. Therefore I have taught this. (S.V,438)

We have only a limited amount of time and energy, so it is important to focus mainly on what is really useful and necessary for awakening. That which is truly beneficial for realizing awakening is fundamentally quite simple and immediate — the issue of dukkha. If we at least know this intellectually, we may make an effort to investigate dukkha rather than continue to distract ourselves from it. Knowing dukkha, together with the development of skilful behaviour and spiritual exercises, comprises the ‘basis of the spiritual life’.

### Nibbāna

132. a) Nibbāna is the ultimate well-being. (Dhammapada 204)

b) This is peace, this is excellent, that is, the calming of all activities, the relinquishing of all basis (for rebirth), the destruction of thirst, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna. (M.I,436)

Nibbāna, literally ‘going out’ as a flame goes out, although usually expressed negatively, is the ultimate experience for human beings. All human beings strive for well-being, in whatever way they may conceive it. The Buddha realized that only the experience of Nibbāna is true well-being in the ultimate sense, the cessation of this whole mass of suffering (text 114).

133. a) Sāriputta: ‘The ending of greed, aversion and delusion, friend, is called Nibbāna.’ (S.IV,251)

b) Ānanda, one without grasping realizes Nibbāna. (M.II,265)

c) Radha, the end of thirsting is Nibbāna. (S.III,190)

d) If greed, aversion and delusion are given up, one does not plan for one’s own harm, for another’s harm or for the harm of both, and one does not experience any mental anguish or distress. Thus is Nibbāna seen here and now, independent of time, inviting inspection, leading onwards and experienced by the wise for themselves. (A.I,159)

Nibbāna is experienced in a variety of ways. Basically it is the complete uprooting of selfishness, which is experienced as the ‘ending of greed, aversion and delusion’, being ‘without grasping’, the ‘end of thirsting’, without any ‘mental anguish or distress’, etc. Similarly, this means that there are various ways to work towards it, depending upon one’s temperament and abilities. We can even experience it for ourselves here and now, albeit usually just lightly and briefly; however, the practice leads on to deeper and more extensive experiences of liberation as we work through the various expressions of selfhood.

134. a) There is, bhikkhus, a not-born, a not-become, a not-made, a not-constructed ... Since there is a not-born, a not-become, a not-made, a not-constructed, thus there is a leaving behind of the born, become, made, constructed.

...

There is the escape, the peaceful,The beyond-conceptual-thought, the stable,The not-born, the unproduced,The sorrowless, stainless state:The end of painful things,The calming of conditions — bliss. (Itivuttaka sutta 43; abridged)

b) There is, bhikkhus, that sphere where there is neither earth element, water element, fire element nor air element; nor the spheres of infinite space, of infinite consciousness, of nothingness, nor of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; neither this world nor another world, nor both; nor sun and moon. There, bhikkhus, I say there is no coming, no going, no abiding, no passing away, no arising; that is not-established, non-functioning, without foundation. Just this is the end of dukkha. (Udāna, sutta 8.1)

c) As a blazing spark struck from ironGradually fades to an unknown state,So the one who’s truly won release,Crossed the flood of sensuality’s bonds,And reached immovable peace —Goes to a course beyond definition. (Udāna, sutta 8.10)

Nibbāna, the unconditioned, is hard to explain because we are only familiar with the conditioned realm. It is therefore an experience which is beyond the usual definitions of the world. Thus the Buddha frequently referred to it in terms of the negative of what we normally relate to – ‘a not-born, a not-become, a not-made, a not-constructed’. This means that it is also beyond the range of conceptual thought and our usual means of definition. However, it can be known directly by penetrating insight, which is usually facilitated through the development of meditation.

135. Bhikkhus, body is impermanent; what is impermanent is dukkha; what is dukkha is not-self; what is not-self is not mine, is not what I am, is not myself. So should one look upon it as it really is by perfect realization. Thus seeing by perfect realization, the mind is disenchanted and freed from the outflows without grasping. (S.III,45)

While this teaching may be understandable logically, it is only through ‘perfect realization’ that its full import can be wholly comprehended. This realization brings about a radical shift in our understanding of reality. We see through the illusion of blinding selfhood which is persistently trying to maintain the pretence of permanence, satisfaction and self, and thus become disenchanted with all the self-supporting strategies which comprise our life of desperate grasping.

136. Look upon the world as empty, Mogharāja, always being mindful. Remove any view of a permanent-abiding self, and you may pass beyond death. If you view the world like this, the King of Death sees you not. (Sutta Nipāta 119)

Through the increasing development of clear awareness, we can see through the illusory appearance of a permanently abiding self-entity, to the world empty of constant self reference. Then instead of a ‘me’ dying, we understand that there are just physical/mental processes in transition. Of course, this requires ever deepening understanding, and also living in harmony with it. As the saying goes: ‘It is easy to be awakened, it is just hard to stay awakened’. That is, although many people know selflessness intellectually or have had a glimpse of it, often their life-style does not fully embody it and thus they keep feeding selfhood.

137. Herein, Bāhiya, you should train yourself thus: in the seen will be merely what is seen; in the heard will be merely what is heard; in the sensed will be merely what is sensed; in the cognized will be merely what is cognized. In this way you should train yourself, Bāhiya. When, Bāhiya, for you in the seen is merely what is seen ... in the cognized is merely what is cognized, then, Bāhiya, you will not be ‘with that’. When, Bāhiya, you are not ‘with that’, then, Bāhiya, you will not be ‘in that’. When, Bāhiya, you are not ‘in that’, then Bāhiya, you will be neither here nor beyond, nor in between the two. Just this is the end of suffering. (Udāna, sutta 1.10, John D. Ireland translation, TU, p. 20)

This succinct and very profound teaching explains a way of being in which a self-subject does not arise. Text 84 outlines the normal perceptual process: sense organ contacts sense object, giving rise to sense consciousness and feeling. This part of the process is basically functional; that is, it just happens to us. The next parts of the sequence, however, from perception to thinking to conceptual proliferation, are where selfhood is engendered. If we can just be aware of the act of sensing, then there is no self-subject that arises — no ‘you’ and ‘that (sense object)’, no involvement ‘in that’, etc.

As an exercise, try to be more mindfully aware of waking up in the morning. Perhaps you may notice the change from just a general sense-consciousness, i.e., seeing, to the ‘waking up’ of self consciousness, i.e., ‘I am seeing my room’, and then perhaps all the conceptual proliferation which follows.

138. But, bhikkhus, when one does not intend, and one does not plan, and one does not have a tendency towards anything, no basis exists for the maintenance of consciousness. When there is no basis, there is no support for the establishing of consciousness. When consciousness is unestablished and does not come to growth, there is no production of future renewed existence. When there is no production of future renewed existence, future birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease. Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering. (S.II,65-6; Bhikkhu Bodhi translation, CDB, p.576)

Consciousness is a functional activity of the mind, but it is directed by (self-preserving) intentions, plans and tendencies (text 114). However, with the arising of wisdom through seeing how we create the suffering of renewed existence, we stop intending and planning, and relinquish tendencies so that there is no longer any support for consciousness from those things. For example, we are no longer born into our plans (how often do they work out, anyway?) and thus there is no lamentation when they fall apart. Thus if we notice that we are experiencing some form of suffering, we can reflect, ‘What has conditioned this? What has caused me to be born into this new existence?’

In a related context19 the Buddha gave the simile of a house with windows on the east, north and south. When the sun rose the sunbeam settled on the west wall. If there was no west wall it settled on the ground; if there was no ground it settled on water; and if there was no water it would not settle anywhere. Thus if consciousness (the sunbeam) has nowhere to settle, it is not established anywhere.

### Helping

139. It is not possible, Cunda, that someone stuck in the mud could pull out another who is stuck in the mud. But it is possible that someone not stuck in the mud could pull out another who is stuck in the mud. It is not possible that someone untamed, untrained, not completely calmed, could tame, train or completely calm another. But it is possible that someone tamed, trained, completely calmed could tame, train or completely calm another. (M.I,45)

Even if we have the best of intentions to help people, we are not really able to help another if we ourselves are not ‘on firm ground’. The first priority if one wishes to help others is to train oneself thoroughly, so that one not only knows the way of training but is also an experienced example of what one teaches. Some people may therefore conclude that only fully awakened beings should teach. However, people are at various levels of spiritual maturity. As long as one clearly recognizes one’s own level and is careful to respect it, one can still be a much-appreciated guide, ideally out of compassion and not conceit, to those struggling ‘in the mud’.

140. Protecting oneself one protects others; protecting others one protects oneself. And how does one, in protecting oneself, protect others? By the repeated and frequent practice of meditation. And how does one, in protecting others, protect oneself? By patience and forbearance, by a non-violent and harmless life, by loving-kindness and compassion. ‘I shall protect myself’, in that way the Attendings with Mindfulness should be practised; ‘I shall protect others’, in that way the Attendings with Mindfulness should be practised. Protecting oneself, one protects others; protecting others, one protects oneself. (S.V,168)

The Buddha often emphasized the importance of developing one’s own mind, not only for one’s own benefit, but for the benefit of others as well. Many people think that working on oneself is selfish, but it is essentially more selfish to try to change other people when we have not done the work on ourselves. If we are not spiritually developed, we are a possible danger to ourselves and others through not knowing how to control our own mind. Then our ignorance, which often manifests in strong emotional reactions, not only causes harm to ourselves but also affects others, if not directly, then indirectly by occupying our energies and resources. The development of mindfulness thus has multiple benefits for both ourselves and others.

### Buddha-Dhamma

141. Ānanda, it may be that you will think: ‘The Teacher’s instruction has ceased, now we have no teacher!’ It should not be seen like this, Ānanda, for what I have taught and explained to you as Dhamma and discipline will, at my passing, be your teacher. (D.II,154; Maurice Walshe translation, LDB, p. 269-70.)

The Buddha passed away long ago, yet his legacy of the Dhamma and discipline (Vinaya) as recorded in the scriptures and practised by his disciples is still available. Thus we can say that the Buddha is still teaching us. Many people are influenced by the presence of inspiring teachers, but because those teachers are still human, they will eventually pass away. By emphasizing the eternal teaching of the Dhamma, the Buddha is pointing to the essence of spiritual practice — diligently doing the work oneself, which is really what a good teacher encourages too. Focusing on the non-personal Dhamma-Vinaya also bypasses the personality pitfalls into which all too many teachers have stumbled.

142. Who indeed, Vakkali, sees Dhamma, sees me; who sees me, sees Dhamma. Surely, seeing Dhamma, one sees me; seeing me, one sees Dhamma. (S.III,120)

The Buddha was the personification of Dhamma. Someone only really sees (knows) the Buddha when they see (know) Dhamma. Even those who saw the human form of the Buddha did not really ‘see’ him until they had a full realization of Dhamma. Thus although our usual tendency is to look outside for answers, the Buddha is reminding us that the true answer is to be experienced within our own mind which knows Dhamma.

143. The things of which you know — these things lead to dispassion, not to passion; to detachment, not to attachment; to diminution, not to accumulation; to wanting little, not to wanting much; to being easily satisfied, not to being hard to satisfy; to seclusion, not to socializing; to putting forth energy, not to indolence; to frugality, not to luxury — of them you should surely know that they belong to the Teaching, to the Training, to the Teacher’s instruction. (A.IV,280)

This teaching to the Buddha’s step-mother Mahāpajāpati is a succinct summary of the main principles of the spiritual training. To some people the Buddha gave specific and detailed instructions which sometimes became rigid regulations, i.e. the letter of the rule. To others he gave general guidelines which are thus open to interpretation, i.e. the spirit of the rule. Wisdom implies a careful harmonizing of these two principles through one’s own experience leading to a direct realization.

144. And the Lord said: ‘Ānanda, these sāl-trees have burst forth into an abundance of untimely blossoms ... Divine music and song sound from the sky in homage to the Tathāgata. Never before has the Tathāgata been so honoured, revered, esteemed, worshipped and adored. And yet, Ānanda, whatever monk, nun, male or female lay-follower abides practising the Dhamma properly, and perfectly fulfils the Dhamma-way, he or she honours the Tathāgata, reveres and esteems him and pays him the supreme homage. Therefore, Ānanda, ‘We will abide practising the Dhamma properly and perfectly fulfil the Dhamma-way’ — this must be your watchword. (D.II,138; Maurice Walshe translation, LDB, p. 262.)

It is often easier to worship great masters than to practise what they taught. But the Buddha emphatically reminds us that true reverence is the practice of Dhamma, living by the Truth. The Buddha did not live in the world to be worshipped, but to teach the way to liberation, to Nibbāna. If we do not practise what he taught, we are being disrespectful to the Buddha and all his efforts. By practising Dhamma we become ‘Buddha-like’, so that the Buddha lives on in our hearts. And with ‘Buddha-like’ people — people with greater wisdom and compassion — the world will truly be a better place in which to live.

145. What should be done for his disciples out of compassion by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for them, that I have done for you, Ānanda. There are these roots of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Ānanda, do not delay, or else you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you. (M.II,265-6; Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi translation, MLDB, p. 873)

The Buddha was not merely a philosopher, but someone who clearly laid out a direct path of spiritual practice based upon the development of morality, meditation and wisdom. This particular path requires special effort, mainly in solitude, to realize a higher degree of self-knowledge and selfless insight. Out of compassion for human beings, the Buddha encourages us to find the time to develop meditation for our own and others’ welfare.