# CHAPTER 9: A BRIDE OF THE KING   ewildering and bedazzling as the preparations were, Vasabha was determined to stay focused. One slip would be enough to cause disaster; even though she was quick enough to make excuses, there were reasons and there were reasons why she might get something wrong. To use some northern vernacular term, or using the kitchen way of counting by numbering her finger joints, might be something she could get away with, but to pick something up with her left hand, when a kshatriya would never use anything but their right, would bring the edifice of pretence crashing down.  Prince Mahanama was relieved that the palace coffers would not have to provide a dowry which, for a Royal Wedding, could be ruinously expensive. The cost of hosting King Pasenadi and the Kosalan embassy for over a Moon had already drained the resources of himself and many of the noble houses. One aspect he was still concerned about was how to sustain the integrity of the deception over time. A number of nights had passed in fretful sleeplessness, trying to consider who to send with ‘the Princess’ and how secrecy could be maintained in Vasabha’s court, especially if she had the customary crowd of supposed relatives and familiar servants from home around her:– This really is a problem! People talk, and make new friends. How can it all be arranged to prevent the risk of slippage? And how are the Sakyan monks in Savatthi now to be encouraged to accept the invitations they were declining? To his surprise it was in an unguarded moment when, happening to see Vasabha being adjusted in her newest sarong and jeweled kamarband by Kesini, it came to him like a perfectly formed and well-wrapped package. He saw how he could send her with just one reliable servant and yet make it seem like this was a sign of great virtue and faith in the King, and in the security of Vasabha’s prospective new life in Savatthi.  It was the suspicious and supercilious glances that both Lady Jantu and Lady Piya gave Kesini as they helped Vasabha with her accoutrements that had given him the cue. The girl had just one hand, having lost the other in a tragic fire, and moreover she was from Kosambi in Vamsa, to the far south. The high-class women, and even the other servants, tended not to befriend her, this being on the superstitious assumption that she must have done something really evil in a past life to have had her right hand and forearm burned off. The fact she was a foreigner simply made the off-putting quality of this woman more complete.  She had come to Kapilavatthu with an embassy from King Udena, sent to open up more trade opportunities, with her being one of many maids along to serve

67 
CHAPTER 9: A BRIDE OF THE KING   ewildering and bedazzling as the preparations were, Vasabha was determined to stay focused. One slip would be enough to cause disaster; even though she was quick enough to make excuses, there were reasons and there were reasons why she might get something wrong. To use some northern vernacular term, or using the kitchen way of counting by numbering her finger joints, might be something she could get away with, but to pick something up with her left hand, when a kshatriya would never use anything but their right, would bring the edifice of pretence crashing down.  Prince Mahanama was relieved that the palace coffers would not have to provide a dowry which, for a Royal Wedding, could be ruinously expensive. The cost of hosting King Pasenadi and the Kosalan embassy for over a Moon had already drained the resources of himself and many of the noble houses. One aspect he was still concerned about was how to sustain the integrity of the deception over time. A number of nights had passed in fretful sleeplessness, trying to consider who to send with ‘the Princess’ and how secrecy could be maintained in Vasabha’s court, especially if she had the customary crowd of supposed relatives and familiar servants from home around her:– This really is a problem! People talk, and make new friends. How can it all be arranged to prevent the risk of slippage? And how are the Sakyan monks in Savatthi now to be encouraged to accept the invitations they were declining? To his surprise it was in an unguarded moment when, happening to see Vasabha being adjusted in her newest sarong and jeweled kamarband by Kesini, it came to him like a perfectly formed and well-wrapped package. He saw how he could send her with just one reliable servant and yet make it seem like this was a sign of great virtue and faith in the King, and in the security of Vasabha’s prospective new life in Savatthi.  It was the suspicious and supercilious glances that both Lady Jantu and Lady Piya gave Kesini as they helped Vasabha with her accoutrements that had given him the cue. The girl had just one hand, having lost the other in a tragic fire, and moreover she was from Kosambi in Vamsa, to the far south. The high-class women, and even the other servants, tended not to befriend her, this being on the superstitious assumption that she must have done something really evil in a past life to have had her right hand and forearm burned off. The fact she was a foreigner simply made the off-putting quality of this woman more complete.  She had come to Kapilavatthu with an embassy from King Udena, sent to open up more trade opportunities, with her being one of many maids along to serve

68 
the needs of the courtiers and their wives as they travelled. After her belovèd charge Gavinna had passed away she had been at a bit of a loose end in King Udena’s court, and being one-handed didn’t help. The embassy to the north and the chance of a change of scene was like a beacon of possibility and she had jumped at the opportunity. She was a self-reliant person by nature, confident and unflappable in most circumstances, but still (understandably) was reactive in proximity to fire. The memory of Gavinna holding her, as the heat and flames intensified in the burning seraglio in Kosambi’s palace, the tears running down her face from the smoke and the terror of it all, was something that she suspected would be with her all her days. When one of the Kosambi lords had fallen ill in Kapilavatthu, he and his wife had stayed on with Kesini and a few others, as he was too sick to travel by the time the embassy was due to head south again.  Kesini found she was very comfortable in the north and, when his lordship had recovered and the family were preparing to head back to Kosambi, she was quite happy to have had an invitation from Lady Jalini, who was much less superstitious about bad karma than her friends, and who was not so bothered by national pride and the belief that Sakyans and Koliyans were somehow special and sacred.  ‘Please consider joining my household,’ she asked Kesini one day. ‘You are a person of great good qualities, I can see, sprightly and energetic, cheerful, yet you can be assertive when you need to be. And you are conveniently unwed, so your duties would neither be interrupted by children arriving and needing your care, nor by a husband who wished to have your attention. I do not consider your loss of a hand to be a problem,’ she rolled her eyes fractionally as if to comment on the irritating folk-beliefs of her fellow Sakyans. ‘What do you think?’ ‘I will have to ask the master and mistress but I can’t see them objecting,’ she was surprised and delighted at the idea. ‘They’ve got plenty of help for the road to Kosambi and they’ll prob’ly be glad to see the back of me.’ No objections were raised and thus it was that Kesini joined Lady Jalini’s household. She was now the ideal person to help fulfil Mahanama’s plan.   * * *  King Pasenadi had left the practical arrangements concerning the journey back to Savatthi to the various ministers and court advisors. The day before they were due to travel, Prince Mahanama came to see the King and, as best he could, check that all had been agreeable with the Royal Visit and that all the necessities for the procession back to Kosala had been provided.  ‘Splendid, honoured Prince, splendid. It has been a most agreeable sojourn. And I am very pleased indeed with this daughter of yours that you have offered. She’s a fine girl, young, but very poised, I think this will all work marvellously to our mutual benefit.’

69 
Mahanama was relieved to hear this and continued. ‘Sire, as a gesture of our faith in you, and out of respect to the vassal nature of Sakya to Kosala, we would like to commit the Princess Vasabha completely into your hands.’ ‘I thought you were doing that already. Had you been thinking of this as a loan?’ Pasenadi chortled at his own wit. ‘What do you mean by “completely”?’ ‘No Sire,’ Mahanama was now anxious to explain, ‘not a loan or any kind of partial or temporary arrangement – perish the thought! In fact, quite the opposite. We know that often, when a delicately raised princess has to leave her family and move to a new household, commonly never having met or even seen a likeness of her new husband, she will be accompanied by a group of maids and familiar friends, companions she’s grown up with as well as perhaps a cousin or an aunt as well. This is taken to be the best way to alleviate homesickness and to provide a bubble of people, and daily customs and routines, that sustain the taste and textures of home.’ He paused to level his breath for a moment; this was the crucial idea he had to sell. ‘Go on.’ ‘We Sakyans are proud by nature, our womenfolk as much as the men, so we would like to demonstrate our keenness to honour you – and to show our faith in your wisdom and kindness since you are an eminent disciple of the Lord Shakyamuni, my Venerable cousin, the Buddha – by sending Princess Vasabha to you with but a single servant. We will dispense with the need for the Princess to have her own support system in your court as we are completely confident that Your Majesty will provide all the support, spiritual and emotional, as well as material, that she might need.  ‘Just as you magnanimously offered to forgo a dowry for the Princess, we would like to commend her fully into your care. She’s a proud Sakyan and she too is eager to forgo the safety net of family and friends, in order to give herself into the secure embrace of your Royal Protection in as wholehearted a way as possible.’ He finished there and endeavoured to lower his shoulders, breathe out, and relax his drum-tight stomach.  The King looked pensive and took a moment before responding. Despite his efforts to relax, Mahanama’s heart began to race:– Everything depended on this moment – everything! ‘I’m deeply touched,’ the King replied at last. ‘Very touched indeed.’  Mahanama restrained himself from grinning, as he wished to, and managed to confine his rejoicing to a long and steady out-breath:– It was all going to work.   * * *  The grand procession formed at the gates of the palace. Gaily caparisoned horses and elephants, carriages and carts clustered, and were efficiently manoeuvred into formation for the Royal Progress. Final gifts had been exchanged and flowers offered, banners of many hues streamed in the Himalayan winds, billowing and flapping their farewells. The state elephant of Kosala was brought to the centre,

70 
where Prince Mahanama stood with King Pasenadi. The Princess was ushered forth by Princesses Bhatta and Maddarupi. She was radiant, and commanding the attention of all with her remarkable dignity and beauty.  ‘You are stunning, my dear’; the King was aglow with admiration. Mahanama then formally took her hand and placed it in the King’s. ‘I offer her to you, Great King, may she bear you many sons so that the line of Kosala may continue for a hundred generations.’ Loud cheers were raised all round, both from Kosalans and Sakyans alike, and Pasenadi turned to begin the mounting of the elephant – this was going to be harder than usual as he had increased his already substantial girth through all the feasting in Kapilavatthu. After taking one pace he stopped and turned back to Mahanama.  ‘I quite forgot. I’ve been meaning to ask you – who is the Princess’s mother? I never heard that mentioned or, if I did, I failed to register it.’ A bolt of fear shot through both Prince Mahanama and the assembly of his courtiers, wives and concubines. In all the various preparations none of them had given this point any thought. Vasabha too was shocked and reflexively clenched her hands, but to her relief and to that of everyone in the Sakyan Court, in half a blink Princess Maddarupi stepped forward, raised her hands in añjali and, bowing her head respectfully, simply said, ‘Your Majesty.’ She made sure she said no more, not wishing to tell a deliberate lie.  ‘Ah, so you’re the lucky person to be my new mother-in-law. You look younger than me but never mind,’ the King, again highly impressed with his own wit, carried on, ‘We’ll leave it to the pundits to explain how the son can be older than the mother.’ He paused a little and then added, ‘I trust you’re at ease with handing over your precious and beautiful daughter like this. Is it not a pull on the heartstrings to say “farewell”? You might not see her again.’  ‘I count it an honour of the highest order, Your Majesty. I have other daughters and sons who will keep me company, and who have already brought me grandchildren to soothe and warm my heart. I commend Princess Vasabha to you with no regret.’ Maddarupi hoped that the exchange would end there but her heart sank when the King asked directly, ‘Is she your youngest daughter?’ There was no more room to wriggle or to evade, or to be deliberately misunderstood, she had to give a straight and deceiving answer, ‘Yes, Sire, she is my youngest child.’ Mara, the Lord of Lies, watched this scene as it unfolded, as he had been watching and prompting since Queen Mallika had pondered how to draw closer to the Sakyans. A bright idea planted here, a little nudge made there – it did not take much to move the world. He reflected:– Oh, this is good. This is very good. There is going to be havoc.   * * *  Bee was peeved. She could not believe how long it had taken to organize the visit to King Dhatarattha, and all the fuss and palaver involved in the audience itself,

71 
even with a high deva from the Tavatimsa Heaven in their party. ‘And how many colours and how much jewellery can one deva wear?!’ There were so many adornments, let alone the musical accompaniments, that it had been hard to stay focused.  ‘At least the niceties have all been observed and we’re permitted to carry on searching,’ said Ant.  ‘But time!’ Bee objected, ‘time’s passing. Agreed, if Tambaka has been kidnapped by someone in the Bhumma Deva Realm, or here, with the Four Guardian Deities, it’s not so urgent but in the Human Realm time is passing much more quickly; three Rains went by there just when we were trapped by Queen Oghabala in the Underworld. Agreed it was hard to tell anything accurately about time in that domain but still, if we delay too much, and if she’s in the Human Realm, she might be an old woman by the time we find her.’ She didn’t say, ‘If she’s still alive.’ ‘It’s urgent anyway, Bee,’ Maggot quietly stated. ‘She was a tiny baby, my tiny baby, scarcely six Moons old when she was taken. We have to find her soon, whatever age and state, wherever she is.’  They were all still for a moment, taking in Maggot’s aching pain and longing for her lost child, lost in so many ways.  ‘I’m sorry,’ Bee took her hand. ‘I didn’t mean to say it like that.’ Maggot reassured her with a brief smile, squeezed her hand then asked, ‘What now?!’  Muñca spoke up at once, ‘There’s a couple of places in this kingdom where almost every gandharva or apsara passes through at one time or another. They are hubs of communication and meeting – not exactly like a market place or a town square in the Human Realm, but somewhat similar, although most of the communication is through music or dance. I feel those places are the obvious ones to try first.’ ‘Let’s go!’ Bee was eager to get up and moving, the words of Maggot having touched her profoundly.   * * *  The kinnaris, being unfamiliar with this realm, had assumed that the comparisons with ‘town square’ and ‘marketplace’ implied buildings but structures like the King’s palace, and even much more humble abodes, were quite rare. It seemed that apsaras and gandharvas preferred to dwell in sylvan surroundings – forests and glades, floral bowers and by lakes decked with lotus-blossoms and waterlilies. The first such hub was in a park-like open area with glorious bright gardens and tall mysterious trees that rustled musically in the soft winds that ran between their branches. Leaves and trunks were silver and gold and every imaginable shade of green. They could just discern in the far west the distant peaks of the Yugandhara Range that stood at the centre of the four kingdoms of this realm.

72 
‘You kinnaris wait here, with Sergeant Gumbiya; Lady Ninka, please come with us of this realm while we make some enquiries. Your intuitive powers are very keen so you might be able to tell if any of those passing through or abiding here give any sign of lying or dissembling.’ Muñca was very much at home in this realm so they let him lead, for now.  ‘Honoured friends Rhamba and Salassa, Lady Ninka, let us make haste.’ The kinnaris took the opportunity to replenish their food supplies with what pollen they could gather from the celestial flowers. As they searched and collected what they could, they naturally sampled what they accumulated along the way.  ‘This is good stuff,’ Ant and Bee declared simultaneously, discovering that flowers in the higher realms were blessed with many more nutritive and restorative properties than the less exotic blossoms they were used to in the Ghositarama and in the human world generally.  It was a thankfully brief wait before the searchers returned. ‘None of us picked up any hints, unfortunately. All the gandharvas and apsaras we spoke to seemed completely unaware – no word or even a rumour of any human or kinnari babe being carried through and no hint that anyone we spoke to was hiding anything.’ Muñca looked almost mournful in his disappointment. ‘So,’ Bee was already airborne, ‘let’s try the next place.’   * * *  They arrived at a similarly configured park-like grove that was far to the northwest of their first try, this was near to the border with the Yakkha Realm. Muñca guided their arrival to an area at the edge of a thick copse of the great trees, where a large number of gaily-clad gandharvas were making their divine music together on their different instruments. It looked like a good place to begin as there were so many gathered together.  As they reached the ground, Rhamba and Salassa started to approach the assembly of musicians, prepared to interrupt their playing if need be. They had not gone two steps when Maggot called out, ‘WAIT!’ I can smell her! She’s here, or she’s been here recently. It’s her!’ She raced toward the trees and the thick undergrowth beneath them. ‘Tambaka! Tam! Are you here?’ She used all the sounds and phrases that had been the ways she spoke with her baby, the lullabies she sang, in the hope that the babe would recognize her voice. There was no sign of the child.  All of them clambered through the bushes looking for signs until Ant found a little space naturally formed between some of them. ‘I think I can smell something here too.’ Maggot reached her as quickly as she could. The fragrance of her child – so distinctive to her kinnari mother – was strongest here, there was no doubt. Someone must have brought her here, at least it seemed that way.  ‘So what’s this, d’y reckon?’ Gumbiya had been having trouble making space for his bulky body, despite having shrunk down as much as he could. At the edge of the little open space, barely an arm span across, he had spotted a strange colour on

73 
the ground. It was a thick and smooth piece of shell, its convex surface opalescent and shimmering. Maggot reached over and took it from him.  ‘It’s her shell, it’s hers!’ She smiled at Gumbiya gratefully. ‘Thank you! Tam used to like holding this, like a comforting doll or a toy that most babies play with. This was her treasure, she liked to clutch it all the time. Smell it, it’s got her fragrance too.’  ‘What does this mean then?’ Bee wondered. ‘Was it the apsaras or gandharvas who took her?’  Ant was then struck with a bright idea. ‘When we foiled the amatagandha perfume plot, and when Bee gave her evidence at Lord Indra’s court, were any gandharvas or apsaras named?’ ‘No,’ said Bee, ‘I gave them the list of what I saw; the Tavatimsa devas who were the drivers of the whole thing, some nagas, some yakkhas and kumbhandas.’ ‘Were there any gandharvas or apsaras at the trial? Maybe they were cronies of the ones who were caught.’ ‘I really can’t remember. I was at the end of my pollen bag. I think I fainted as soon as my testimony was over.’ ‘Anyway, that doesn’t really matter for now,’ Ant carried on, ‘as I’m thinking that maybe there were some gandharvas or apsaras involved in the plot and they never got caught. Perhaps there has been an agreement to punish us all by stealing Maggot’s baby to wreak revenge on us, that seems most likely to me. Since no gandharvas were known to be involved, they could move around without suspicion; they would not be in the families of those who were punished and imprisoned, so no one would be keeping an eye on them.’ ‘So what does that say about where they might have taken her?’ asked Maggot.  ‘Well, I’m not sure on that; I haven’t got quite that far in my thinking. However,’ Ant was on a roll now, ‘perhaps this was some kind of meeting point that they used and Tambaka was handed over to some others. We’re very near the border of yakkha country,’ she risked a quick glance at Gumby, ‘and if they wanted to hide her away securely, the yakkha community is much more known for its muscle-power and weaponry than the apsaras and gandharvas – no offense meant,’ she glanced at Rhamba, Salassa and Muñca. ‘I still think we should search some more here and ask as many of the folk as we can but I’ve got a strong suspicion that your baby’s been hidden amongst the yakkhas.’ Maggot heard this with a measure of dread as it sounded plausible if not highly likely. Before they made any more moves, though, she wanted to double check.  ‘Ninka, your senses are much more refined than the rest of us. This bush here is the one where the scent is strongest, and here is the piece of shell – can you give me your impression of these? I want to find Tam so badly I don’t fully trust my own senses.’

74 
Ninka took the shell fragment, which was quite thick, and held it up to her nose, inhaling deeply. She said nothing at first and then went to the lower branches of the bush Maggot indicated, bringing the leafy fronds close and sniffing several times. She was silent for a while, looking at Maggot and Ant and around the group – their faces some anxious, some hopeful. She eventually nodded her head, saying, ‘It’s her. There’s no doubt about it.’   * * *  The Royal Progress lasted less than half a Moon and Savatthi was soon reached. It felt like they had been travelling on a golden road, out of the hills. Vasabha’s inner world was one of great excitement and enjoyment mingled with intense concentration and mindfulness of the vast array of new things she had to adapt to. She had certainly had had ‘the essentials’ drilled into her – and she was confident with what she had learned – but every day brought surprises, the first of which had been how to sit in a howdah on elephant-back without lurching from side to side like a rag-doll shaken by an angry child. Still, she had made the whole journey, with Kesini at her side providing quiet prompts, and it had all gone off without an error, as far as she was aware.  Before the wedding, which was due to take place only seven days hence, she was formally introduced to Queen Mallika who was genuinely warm towards her; she in turn brought her only daughter, the Princess Vajiri, forward to meet her.  ‘This is my daughter Vajiri; she is about the same age as you, what, sixteen Rains? I hope the two of you will become good friends. It can be lonely living in a palace, so to have trustworthy and supportive companions is important.’ Vasabha got the sense that the Queen was speaking of her own experience when she had been brought from the garland-makers shop to marry King Pasenadi, some seventeen Rains previously. ‘You are too kind, Your Serene Highness. I’m sure that Princess Vajiri and I will delight in getting to know each other – you are very thoughtful.’  Vajiri was indeed the same age and, it had to be admitted by Vasabha, that the Princess possessed a natural beauty far more refined than hers. She was a doe-eyed, golden-skinned, graceful girl who looked like she had stepped out of an ancient epic – like one of the ones Vasabha had been memorizing, such as Sita, the perfect wife of Rama, or Parvati, the powerful wife of Lord Shiva.  It was a surprise and a delight, once the formalities were over, that she beckoned Vasabha, and Kesini too, to come and sit with her in a small nook that overlooked the gardens. As if to belie her goddess-like beauty, Vajiri turned out to be an easy-going, artless person whose main concern at present was figuring out how not to be married off and sent away from her home.  ‘I’m not the slightest bit interested in marriage, despite the pressure’ and on the word she flared her eyes for dramatic effect, ‘that is being applied to me. I’d much rather stay home and go to the Jetavana and the nuns’ monastery – the

75 
Visakharama – and the Eastern Park Monastery with my mother, and occasionally my father. Who knows how long I’ll be able to get away with it?’ As she heard Princess Vajiri speaking, and recollected how sincerely friendly Queen Mallika had been – and bearing in mind how good Vasabha was at seeing people’s bluffs and pretences – she reflected:– This is looking easier than I thought; these two women, who could easily make my life into a hell realm, seem as sweet as warm ghee mixed with honey. I like it – this whole thing might really work!   * * *  The seven days passed and the grand occasion of the wedding arrived. King Pasenadi had caused the whole city of Savatthi to be decorated and, during the ceremony, he placed Vasabha upon a carefully arranged pile of treasure which he gifted to her and, with the ceremonial sprinkling of lustral waters, he made her his Queen, to rank alongside Queen Mallika. Vasabha was already dear to the King, and belovèd.   ==*==
