# CHAPTER 26: ON THE WESTERN SHORE  ammu, Swami-ji! Here Jammu,’ the village children had crowded around Krishna, this stranger with a weird accent, and who was so black and white. His beard was now long and the colour of fresh snow, his skin had weathered to a wrinkled but still soot-black sheen.  Krishna had emerged from the forest, after having ambled his way through the open stretches but, more often, having clambered through tangled thickets, and had entered this village in the early morn. The journey thus far had taken him several Moons, without the blessing of Dusaka and Tingri’s guidance.  The children excitedly showered him with questions but most of it was lost on Krishna. He was struggling to understand the dialect and there were half a dozen voices chirping at once.  ‘Taxila?’ He questioned, gesticulating to the west, the south and the east. ‘Do you know where I should go to reach Taxila?’ The smallest boy, eager to be heard in the gaggle of voices, spoke up loudly, and with authority, stepping to the front, to declare, ‘Jammu!’ He pointed in all directions with a grubby finger, ‘This all Jammu! Not Taxila,’ he felt proud to have made that clear to this wandering holy man who had just emerged from the forest.  A taller, quiet girl stepped forward from the rear of the group of friends, put her hands on the little one’s shoulders and spoke, in slow and clear words, ‘Taxila, big city, south, not here, River Vitasta – follow Vitasta – to walk, many days. People here, go there,’ she pointed to the ground and the stone-built houses around them layered with wooden timbers, and the smaller wooden shacks. ‘Taxila south, there.’ The sun was now well-risen to their left and she pointed firmly to the downslope of the hill ahead. ‘Thank you!’ Krishna was relieved to have now oriented himself. He then stood and indicated his iron alms-bowl, which he had maintained with great care all these years, and made the universal gesture of pointing to his mouth. The new day had brought with it the old feeling of an empty stomach.  The children immediately understood and he was grabbed by several of them, being invited to homes in a number of different directions. By gesturing with his walking fingers he indicated he would make a circuit of the homes and people could offer something if they wanted to.  His alms-round was not very quiet as the gathering of keyed up youngsters had expanded as word of the agèd and unusual visitor had spread. A few adults had joined them too, one of them apparently being the village headman as he spoke to welcome Krishna and to show him, mostly by gesture and beckoning, the best way to walk around the village pathways.  Krishna found a flat spot to sit and eat, his now-devoted cluster of companions gathering to watch. He had declined the invitation into a house to eat

263 
CHAPTER 26: ON THE WESTERN SHORE  ammu, Swami-ji! Here Jammu,’ the village children had crowded around Krishna, this stranger with a weird accent, and who was so black and white. His beard was now long and the colour of fresh snow, his skin had weathered to a wrinkled but still soot-black sheen.  Krishna had emerged from the forest, after having ambled his way through the open stretches but, more often, having clambered through tangled thickets, and had entered this village in the early morn. The journey thus far had taken him several Moons, without the blessing of Dusaka and Tingri’s guidance.  The children excitedly showered him with questions but most of it was lost on Krishna. He was struggling to understand the dialect and there were half a dozen voices chirping at once.  ‘Taxila?’ He questioned, gesticulating to the west, the south and the east. ‘Do you know where I should go to reach Taxila?’ The smallest boy, eager to be heard in the gaggle of voices, spoke up loudly, and with authority, stepping to the front, to declare, ‘Jammu!’ He pointed in all directions with a grubby finger, ‘This all Jammu! Not Taxila,’ he felt proud to have made that clear to this wandering holy man who had just emerged from the forest.  A taller, quiet girl stepped forward from the rear of the group of friends, put her hands on the little one’s shoulders and spoke, in slow and clear words, ‘Taxila, big city, south, not here, River Vitasta – follow Vitasta – to walk, many days. People here, go there,’ she pointed to the ground and the stone-built houses around them layered with wooden timbers, and the smaller wooden shacks. ‘Taxila south, there.’ The sun was now well-risen to their left and she pointed firmly to the downslope of the hill ahead. ‘Thank you!’ Krishna was relieved to have now oriented himself. He then stood and indicated his iron alms-bowl, which he had maintained with great care all these years, and made the universal gesture of pointing to his mouth. The new day had brought with it the old feeling of an empty stomach.  The children immediately understood and he was grabbed by several of them, being invited to homes in a number of different directions. By gesturing with his walking fingers he indicated he would make a circuit of the homes and people could offer something if they wanted to.  His alms-round was not very quiet as the gathering of keyed up youngsters had expanded as word of the agèd and unusual visitor had spread. A few adults had joined them too, one of them apparently being the village headman as he spoke to welcome Krishna and to show him, mostly by gesture and beckoning, the best way to walk around the village pathways.  Krishna found a flat spot to sit and eat, his now-devoted cluster of companions gathering to watch. He had declined the invitation into a house to eat

264 
since he had not been in a building in thirty Rains and the open air was now home to him. This was also the first cooked food he had eaten in that time – having lived on fruits, nuts and roots in the Himavant – so he thought it wisest not to risk offending the hospitality of a family if his stomach could not cope with the sudden change of diet.  To his relief his body was very happy to receive the delicious repast and he saw his bowl had been emptied at great speed. ‘That went quickly!’ He chuckled to himself. He felt a glow of vitality as the food soaked into his system and he was soon ready for the path again.  The village headman had now been joined by a collection of other elders of the community. Krishna realized that the way they looked at him, and the gestures of respect they made, indicated they saw him as a sage, a holy man of distinction. He regretted he did not have enough of their language to offer any advice or teachings so he decided to simply chant a blessing for them.  The verses came easily to mind – despite being nearly ninety Rains in age by now his memory was still good and he had recited for himself, as well as for Dusaka and Tingri, regularly in their beautiful forest glade.  ‘Bhavatu sabba mangalam, rakkhantu sabba devata…’ he was pleased that his chanting voice was still in passable shape and that the years had not rendered him croaking like an ailing crow.  When he finished the blessing the assembled villagers, he noticed, were mostly looking at him somewhat open mouthed. He wondered what he might have done wrong and why they looked so surprised.  ‘Buddha Bhagavan!’ The headman spoke up. ‘You, Buddha Bhagavan.’ ‘No, me not Buddha! Me bhikkhu, bhikshu.’ He tried a couple of dialects.  The headman made a gesture, stroking his own chin, his hand descending to his navel. ‘You not rishi, you Buddha Bhagavan. We think rishi, Shiva-puja,’ he rubbed his chin and then gave a sweeping indication to Krishna’s by now ragged robes, repaired with woven tree-bark and slender vines.  The motley nature of his clothing had been something he was so used to – having also been shored up and patched with offerings from the occasional forest yogi who had come by and a couple of hiding robbers who offered spare items they had, on receiving blessings and good wishes, as well as encouragement to mend their ways from Dusaka and Krishna – that now he had forgotten how unlike a regular bhikkhu he now looked.  The village elder took the edge of his tatterdemalion outfit, tugged politely and asked, ‘New? We give new cloth?’ This was something that had not crossed Krishna’s mind but, now it was mentioned, he was delighted by the offer. He searched out a part of the patchwork that most closely resembled the ideal ochre colour and asked, ‘Have?’ Three or four of the women came forward and took a close look, then one of them turned to the tall girl who had first spoken with him and gave her a stream of instructions, then called after her as she ran down the dusty pathway.

265 
She returned in a short time with a pile made up of a few lengths of material, some fine some coarse, some small, some large. They presented them to him and asked, ‘You take?’ Krishna was warmed by this great kindness and readily accepted. He sorted through the heap and chose the pieces that could be sewn into the set of three robes he should have. The villagers made stitching gestures that he read as meaning, ‘Can we make robes for you?’ Krishna’s immediate response was, ‘No. I can do that,’ as his feet were now itching to get moving. He suddenly realized that the few fore-arms lengths of thread that he had carefully been hoarding would never be enough to complete such a sewing task when the eldest of the women called the tall girl forward again and she presented a precious offering – three fine needles and a thick spool of good thread – this was riches beyond belief.  Krishna accepted these with great gratitude, seeing full well that these were not wealthy people and that these goods were valuable to them too. He chanted another blessing, his eyes moist with appreciation on account of this flood of human kindness he had received from so many strangers. He then packed his bundle and headed downhill to find the Vitasta River.    * * *  Another of his prized possessions, that he had kept carefully through the rains and the heat and the cold of life in the Himavant, had been his razor. The blade and its sharpening stone had been carefully wrapped and tended as such an item could not be allowed to develop even a speck of rust. Its sheath had had to be replaced a few times but the blade still could be given a keen edge and the handle was firm. Even though he had let his beard grow out and only occasionally chopped the straggles of his head-hair off, the sharp edge was useful in a myriad ways for the everyday tasks of forest life. Now he was keening the blade to renew his appearance as a monastic disciple of the Buddha. The trimming back of the beard and the close shaving took a long time. The icy waters of the stream, which fed the Vitasta River below, did not help the traction of the razor. The lid of his iron alms-bowl, fashioned over many hours in the forest from mango-tree wood, served as a shaving dish, which pleased Krishna greatly. Such a vessel could serve many purposes. Time would tell whether it would crack and fall apart but for now it held the water perfectly; the tree the lid was crafted from had certainly served well in other ways, having given shade and years of delicious fruit, before it fell.  The sun was sinking by the time Krishna was done. His hand felt with pleasure the odd sensation of a bare chin and moustacheless lip. He smiled at the chill he felt from the night air around his face, ‘That beard kept me warm!’ He chuckled to himself as the breezes washed around him. ‘Time for gentler climes.’ The robes took many days to bring into being. He remembered the paddy-field patterns well but a lot of stitches were required for three, full-sized monk’s

266 
robes. He carried the bundle of cloth with him as he progressed along the banks of the great river, doing a bit of sewing each day, adopting the new robes, keeping the old for patches and discarding the unusable, as each was finished – first the sarong, then the upper robe – until at long last the double layered warm outer robe was finished.  ‘Done!’ He cut the last thread with his trusty razor, after knotting it when the fourth corner was complete. ‘I’m a clean-shaven bhikkhu with three robes and a bowl once again. Just in time for Taxila.’     * * *  The city was a jungle of sounds and smells and sights. Even though he had been on the road for several Moons now and had passed through a number of villages, Taxila was another world altogether. It was like Savatthi in size but, in contrast, there seemed to be dozens of languages spoken here and the shapes of people’s faces, the colour of their skins, the clothes people wore, were of an astonishing variety. The presence of the great university drew not only scholars from all quarters of the known world, but also a vast array of service industries that supplied every need – tools for writing and liquids to write with of a type Krishna had never seen before; regional food-stalls for students and their teachers from the far south, from north across the Himalayan mountains, from the distant east and the fabled western regions too; couriers to carry messages; scribes to write letters; cobblers for shoes and sandals in the styles of the far regions as well as clothing shops stocked with things even more varied than what was seen on people in the street.  Krishna was swiftly carried away by it all. His advanced age was quite forgotten as he took it in; and there was the chance to talk again:– People here speak my own language too! In the years he had spent in the forest, apart from his conversations with Dusaka, he could count on one hand the discussions he had had of any length or substance. One or two of the forest rishis had engaged with him while more kept silence as a vow; there was a man who had lost his wits who spoke for hours but none of it had made much sense; one of the robbers who was hiding out was quite the philosopher, as he had heard his father Kamanita had once met, through talks Krishna had had with the other monks who knew him; but all in all he had been starved of conversation for thirty Rains.  The first group of bhikkhus he saw, young lads here to study and learn other languages, he cornered at once in an alcove by the entrance to the University. They were sitting in a huddle and in deep conversation about their classes when Krishna asked if he could join them. They saw he was an Elder of their Order and, learning he was a bhikkhu of nearly seventy Rains, they swiftly rearranged their seats on their mat and offered Krishna a padded rug to sit on.

267 
The group had hardly introduced themselves when Krishna started to speak and the torrent began. The sun had moved noticeably across the sky between the buildings before he even paused for breath. One of the students raised his voice to say, ‘We are studying rhetoric and also grammar so we…’ Krishna did not let him finish his sentence before he was off again, rawgabbiting about subjects he really knew little of. As the sun was falling the young bhikkhus chimed in with more and more excuses, and left one by one, until the last forlorn member of the group managed to pull himself away, saying, ‘We have been here since full noon, Venerable One, it is late and I must go and give my excuses to my teachers for all the classes I have missed.’ He rose up as he said this, leaving Krishna alone.  ‘I think I might have overdone it there – was that really half a day?’ He reflected, although only half-regretfully. It had been great to talk again although he considered, ‘That was fun, but not much use to me – in truth. Time to move on.’     * * *  Krishna felt a pull to go west, not just attracted by the notably delicious food that came from those regions but a murmur in his heart still made itself felt. ‘It was the far west that Gavinna, the sage, came from. If I am to ever find the meaning of her words and to learn of the great mangala she referred to, it’s west I must go. No one I have spoken to in the Sangha has ever offered me much different from the advice Ananda had recited for me all those years ago. It was guidance of great value but…’ The niggle was that he knew the ‘highest blessings’ of the Teacher’s words were not what the agèd visionary had spoken of. He reflected:– Perhaps I will die on the way, perhaps I will make it. I have passed more than one thousand Moons in this life and it feels as though I have some remaining before the last breath, especially with the help of the amulet. So, to the west. Let’s keep going.    * * *  Gandhara Ariana Bactriana Parthia Hyrcania Caspia Alarodia Lydia Ionia Illyriya Dacia Gallia Brittanica

268 
Demetea in south-west Cymru. It was a journey of seventeen Rains. Having crossed deserts and mountain ranges, grassy plains, rivers wide and narrow, having passed through gorges deep and roaring, and cities ablaze with lights, having spent time with skin clad tribes in tents of hazel-rods and finally, having crossed the foam-capped sea, he had arrived in the land of Gavinna and her fathers.     * * *  Contented years passed by in the Monastery of the Eastern Gatehouse. Vasabha lived in an easeful harmony with Kesini and she delighted in getting to know her youthful mother, as well as the deva Ambaka, her erstwhile sister and friend.  Maggot had further developed the ability to visit different realms and when she went with Ambaka to pay a short call to the Heaven of the Thirty-three Gods, in order for Ambaka to visit Ninka and for Maggot to see Ant, despite it being ‘short’ in deva terms, by the time they returned to the Eastern Gatehouse Monastery ten human years had passed, Vasabha had begun to grow a few grey hairs and Kesini had reached seventy Rains. They had a tearful reunion, with Maggot profoundly apologetic for having underestimated the effect of their time in that realm. She had not recollected that one hundred years passes by in the human world for each day and night in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. They had gone for a quick ‘hello’ but, what with the joyful catching up, the time had flown by on the wings of a supanna.  ‘Maybe next time you can take us with you,’ Kesini joked. They all laughed at this at the time but it set Maggot thinking. As usual, Ambaka was not so charged up as Maggot could be so it was the kinnari who had the idea, based on her knowledge of the Master’s teachings and stories about him and his disciples, to try a way of taking the people to visit the upper realms.  ‘If you two, Vasabha, Kesini, enter into samadhi as deeply as you can, I believe the pathway of the gods will open up and we can take you with us, in your etheric bodies, while your flesh bodies sit here in Savatthi. How does that sound?’  ‘It’s worth a try,’ Kesini was always up for a new exploit, even though she was getting elderly by now. ‘Yes! That’s an excellent idea. Let’s give it a go,’ Vasabha too had an adventurous spirit. ‘But won’t our bodies get older while we’re gone? And what should we tell the others here in the monastery? We still have duties, you know.’  ‘I’ve been thinking about that,’ Maggot’s brow was furrowed, ‘I’m new to all this still, true, but I’ve got a feeling that, since you’re half-kinnari, perhaps that will have an effect. You have aged slowly, according to normal human years so far; you are what?’ ‘Fifty-nine Rains since I hatched, I’ve now worked out.’    “However, I think it’s quite possible that having a mother who is likely to live to one thousand sun-turnings in the human realm is going to have some effect.’

269 
‘What about me?’ Kesini chipped in, with a cheeky grin. ‘Can I bypass ageing this way too, if that’s what happens?’  ‘We’ll have to see, won’t we,’ Maggot was quite excited by the idea of this new escapade.  * * *  They decided to try and make a short visit to the Heaven of the Four Great Guardians, where one day and a night was equivalent to only fifty years in the Human Realm. They let the others in the monastery know what they were planning and Sister Uppalavanna, being the Senior Nun of the community, approved their plan. She also explained to the rest of the group that they should not be concerned if the two lay women did not appear for meals or chores, ‘For the next little while.’  Vasabha and Kesini settled themselves in sitting meditation. At first they both had to deal with a little excitement at the prospective journey but once they had relaxed and concentrated on their breath, leaving all concerns aside, they both felt Maggot appearing before them, taking them by the hand, and whisking them upward, or was in inward? It was hard to tell.  The excursion went smoothly, as far as they could reckon. They were as briefly in the heavens as they could effectively make it and still have a bit of a look around. They were able to say a very quick hello to Rhamba and Salassa, who had been informed of the plan by Maggot, as well as to Gumbiya and Bee who were also on a visit there.  They returned after the somewhat breathless hellos and goodbyes, barely one hundredth part of the day had gone by in the heaven of the Guardians but six months had passed in Savatthi.  Vasabha and Kesini emerged from their samadhi. Their mouths were dry and legs a bit weak but otherwise they felt wonderful.  ‘I still look pretty much the same,’ Kesini was staring at her face and grey braid in a metal mirror she had borrowed. ‘It’s hard to tell. Next time, let’s go for longer.’ The next round they tried was not so rushed at the other end. The community of the Eastern Gatehouse Monastery had been pleased to see that the two members of the group were alive and well, and there were many compliments about their skill in meditation. There was thus no resistance to them making a longer ‘session’ since, for their monastic and lay friends these ‘journeys’ seemed merely to consist of the two of them sitting face-to-face without moving for months.  They went back to the same heavenly realm, this time spending three watches of the night there, about one quarter of the celestial day. When they returned to the monastery six Rains had passed by and, whereas Kesini had grown some more grey hairs and looked distinctly older, Vasabha seemed not to have aged a day.  ‘Well that’s interesting,’ Kesini said to Maggot and Vasabha, ‘It won’t take many of these trips and I’ll be done for this life.’ By mutual agreement it was thus

270 
decided that Maggot would take Vasabha on these excursions but Kesini would only go along once in a while, and on very short ones to some of the lower heavens.  Ambaka always went too but she was usually more of a quiet passenger. When they were spending time in the monastery she would often sit or float apart, seemingly absorbed in her inner world and absorbed in her own brightness.  Maggot and Vasabha, and Kesini as well, sometimes found her remote and disconnected from them. This was strange since they had all been through so much together with her in their past lives, especially Kesini and Vasabha, but what was there to say? Ambaka seemed to rejoice in her own goodness and radiance, but she stayed with them all the time so their connection was maintained, despite the fact that she appeared a bit adrift, apart for some reason.  Maggot, Vasabha and Ambaka prepared for another visit, this time to see Ant and Ninka in the Heaven of the Thirty-three and they planned to pick up Bee and Gumbiya along the way. As they took leave of Kesini she, now bent and completely white-haired, joshed with them, ‘Don’t be long! I’m not sure if I’ll be here when you get back.’ This caused them to realize she was joking and not joking, so they took longer in their farewells this time, but assumed Kesini’s famous resilience would see her through.  They went to meet Bee and Gumbiya in the forest of the Ghositarama, in Kosambi, where they had resettled but, to their surprise, Bee waved off the opportunity, ‘Not up for it today,’ was all she said, so Maggot and the others moved on.  ‘What was that about, d’you think?’ She asked Vasabha and Ambaka, ‘Bee is always ready for an adventure, and Gumbiya and Minti both had an odd look about them. Very strange.’ By the time their journey was over, and they had returned to their place at the monastery again, Vasabha opened her eyes in their kuti and, blinking to be sure she was not mistaken, she saw only one sleeping mat there. The place was dusty and close with mould, as if it had not been aired in a long time. Very quickly she realized that, as Kesini had hinted, she had passed on by this time and was no longer there.  She had lived over one hundred Rains, being just one year older than Krishna, and her time had come. Vasabha, Maggot and Ambaka all shed a few tears, regretting that they had not been there when their faithful companion had breathed her last.   * * *  ‘Oof.’ Bee plunked herself down, somewhat indecorously in the large nest she and Gumbiya shared in the Ghositarama forest. Her yakkha partner looked both pleased and terrified, excited and sternly protective all at once. He had shrunk himself down to a human and kinnari size as best he could, and had made that his regular practice these days. He had to be ready, on hand to help, although he had no idea what help he might be able to offer.

271 
‘I can’t believe that Maggot and the others didn’t notice,’ Minti remarked, ‘you were already the size of a house, though I suppose you were sitting down and these flower gauzes of ours can hide a lot. You’re the size of a barn now,’ she added in an obliquely loving, sisterly way. Bee had not wanted a lot of fuss and bother about the birth so they had decided to keep it quiet.  ‘Thank you, Mint, that’s encouraging,’ Bee shot her a look. ‘Urrrgh, I think the first birth is happening very…’ her eyes widened and she lay back against the thick padding of the nest’s edge that Gumbiya had gathered and packed in place for her.  ‘Ghraaaargh! Oooh…’ and there it was, an opalescent egg of spectacular size, its colours shifting and glowing all over the shell.  ‘Wow!’ Minti was in awe. ‘That was inside you? No wonder you were so huge!’ They had been there when Maggot gave birth to Tambaka’s egg and they had learned how to weave a bed of flower-down and petal-film on which to lay it. It had been Bee’s own hands and the delicate fingers of Minti who had gathered all this, the meaty paws of Gumbiya being far too clumsy and imprecise. Minti and Gumbiya gently lifted the egg and placed it on its bed.  Bee pushed herself forward and wrapped her arms around the egg, feeling the heartbeat within. She was in a swoon for a moment, drunk on the joy of new motherhood, when she noticed something.  ‘Hang on a moment, that’s not my heartbeat plus the baby’s. There’s three, mine plus two in the shell. Gumby, we’ve got twins,’ she grinned with great satisfaction. Gumbiya, still feeling a little awkward and not knowing what to do, let his anxieties be swamped by his love for his darling Bee and the pride of new fatherhood.  ‘Well, don’t just stand there like a spare groom at a wedding, bring all the swaddling-down we prepared, and Mint, we’re going to need double-sized to wrap it, so get hunting!   * * *  ‘Did we miss anything?’ Ant and Ninka popped into view just as Dusaka and Tingri ambled up the path.  ‘I was trying to keep this quiet and not have any fuss made,’ Bee grumbled.  ‘Fat chance,’ Ant floated up to the nest to get a closer look. ‘The kinnari rumour-mill is a great wonder in the universe. By the way, where’s Maggot?’ ‘She was on a visit to see you in the Thirty-three, but that was a few Moons ago, by human time.’  ‘We just missed them then. Never mind.’ Ant leant in closer and asked, ‘May I?’ Wishing to touch the shell she politely asked first.  ‘Course,’ Bee replied, holding the egg as well. Ant gently smoothed her hand over the shimmering surface, feeling the warmth and the texture of the colours. It was mysteriously rich in fragrance.

272 
‘Smells more kinnari than yakkha,’ Ant commented.  ‘That’s a big relief, eh?’ Minti smirked.  Gumbiya did feel a little offended at this but discreetly checked his armpits for odour and realized Minti’s jibe was quite fair, after all.  Dusaka had appeared by now as well; he drew close, Tingri in hand. He held her up to the nest so she could get a good look. She sniffed and emitted an appreciative rumble from her chest. She heartily approved and admired the beauty of these new-born beings, still in their shell.  ‘It’s a double yolker,’ Minti helpfully informed them all. ‘Twins are on the way but we don’t know how many Moons there will be until hatching…’ she trailed off, realizing she was speaking for Bee and Gumbiya, who were actually the parents, and that they could explain things for themselves.  ‘We tried to find another kinnari-yakkha couple to get some tips,’ Bee began.  ‘But there ain’t bin such in ’undreds, or fousands of sun-turnin’s, not in these parts any road,’ Gumbiya joined in.  ‘It will be a full five Moons until the hatching, I reckon,’ said Dusaka. ‘You can hear the heartbeats already but the babes will take their time to develop.’ His advice came from a place of experience, as far as everyone was concerned, so they took it as fact that in five Moons the hatching would happen and the new twins would appear.   * * *  Dusaka and Tingri met the three elderly villagers at the edge of the forest. He greeted them as old acquaintances. The leader of the group was stooped and she walked with the aid of a staff, there was a grey-haired man beside her and a similar woman on the other.  They approached Dusaka and bowed respectfully, each of them wearing a slightly puzzled expression.  ‘Greetings,’ Dusaka smiled warmly through his beard, ‘it has been close to a thousand Moons since we last met.’ The three nodded in agreement.  ‘Yes, we remember, but how are you still the same age? You look now just as you did when we were all small children.’ The man spoke up, ‘She would carry me on her shoulders, as I was the smallest.’  ‘My name is Dinka,’ the leader said, ‘and this is Loni, she doesn’t say much these days.’ As if to deliberately belie her friend, Loni then spoke, ‘We smelled a fragrance; it wafted through the village. We remembered. It was not the same but we knew, we thought what it must be. So we came. And here you are too. Are we right? Is there another deva-egg that has been birthed in this forest?’ These were more words than Loni had uttered in half a year, which underscored the rare nature of what was happening.

273 
‘You’re quite correct,’ said Dusaka, which Tingri confirmed with a bark. ‘Another egg has just been birthed.’ Dinka looked at the ground. ‘We know that you invited us to give blessings to the last egg. There are only three of us left alive now and,’ she breathed deeply, half-concealing a sob, ‘now I do not know if we deserve to be able to see and touch this new arrival. You see… we…’ She found it hard to continue.  Loni picked it up. ‘We took a bribe and we lied, sir. That’s the long and the short of it.’ Dinka gathered her strength, ‘It was you we lied to, Venerable Sir, I told you we saw the baby being carried away, off into the trees by invisible beings. That was not true. It was a group of fine ladies, dressed in foreign clothes and with strange accents. They found the babe all alone in the nest and took it to be abandoned – or at least they hoped it was. They saw us, picking up sticks like we usually did each day, and one of the ladies, she beckons me over and shows me a gold kahapana – I never seen gold in a coin before – and she says, “We think this baby has been abandoned here so we are going to take her and look after her. Just in case there is a mother or a father who comes back for her, just in case, I will give you this gold if you promise to tell them you saw the child being carried away by yakkhas or by some invisible creature. Are you good at telling stories? And can you keep a promise?” She held up the coin in front of me.  ‘They looked like posh people and they were holding the baby proper, like they knew what to do, and that they really liked her and wanted her. I were dazzled by the coin, and proud of how I could tell a good story to keep out of trouble, so I took the coin and kept my promise and lied. I have always felt bad. We never heard what come of the little one. Where she was took. Nothin’…’ Her words petered out, looking at the ground she leant on her staff, waiting for a sharp reprimand from Dusaka.  Tingri barked, more at her human companion than at the three elderly villagers, as if to say, ‘Go on, say to them what you should!’ ‘More than eighty Rains have passed since that day. Even though it was an unskilful thing to have done we all make mistakes. The fact that you have “always felt bad about it” is, I’d say, a good thing. It’s painful to bring to mind but that’s a good pain. It shows you really have a pure heart, but one that got dazzled one day when you were young. How old were you then?” ‘’Bout eight Rains, I s’pose.’  ‘Tingri, did you ever hear of an eight-year-old child who never made a mistake?’ She yipped and snuffled repeatedly, which they all realized was her way of laughing uproariously.  ‘See, we all make mistakes. You’ll be pleased to hear that, even though the babe was not given the best life up in the north when she was young, later on, for twenty Rains, she was the Queen of Kosala, married to the great King Pasenadi; after that she went to live a simple life in a monastery and, even better, she got reunited both with her father and her mother. It took a long time, relatively, but she is very

274 
content and happy these days, and her mother, the kinnari who you could not see, lives with her. So, all’s well that ends well, eh? You can forgive yourselves now; please forgive yourselves. I hold no grudge at all that you lied to me and, by the way you can tell a good story because you did fool me at the time.’ Tingri concurred with a sniff.  ‘Now, would you like to meet and bless the new egg?’  * * *  ‘Look, stranger, the great ocean lies over yonder,’ the ancient druidess led Krishna, even longer in years than her, along the path from the village of stone and wattle-walled crofts with their thick thatched roofs. His feet had carried him thus far and he was less than half a league from the western shore – the end of the known world as people spoke of it. Here the language was of the Gaels and the Celts, some of which he had picked up in his wandering in Gallia, but they had their own language here as well which was deeply musical and filled with soft throaty rasps and sonorous vowel-sounds. This he had learnt none of yet, except for pigyn hendaid, which apparently meant ‘Great-grandfather Magpie’, which was the name by which the villagers had addressed him on the previous day, when he had arrived here, on account of the blackness of his skin and the whiteness of his bristles.  Their feet trod the well-worn path to the clifftop, behind them walked a couple of the youngsters from the humble hamlet, entrusted with looking out for these two holy people. It was easy for a wind to pick up, blowing in from the sea, that could catch a billowing robe and carry such stick-thin old-folk over the edge in a finger-snap.  When he had first arrived in the area he had been mistaken for a rich lord since his alms-bowl of iron – now with him for over fifty Rains – was an item of great rarity and numerous smiths in the towns and villages alike were eager to handle it, admiring the craftsmanship of the seams and the burnt, protective coating.  Bronze and copper, tin and gold and silver bowls were familiar but this hard dark iron was more tricky to work, for the smiths in these parts at least. They were impressed.  Krishna had learnt how to explain that he was in fact a monk, of an order in the far east, a samana, a shaman, a wanderer, he found at least one of these terms would stick, and then he would explain, as best he could, that where he came from, far away – usually holding out a hand to indicate his dark skin – this metal was commonly used, and crafted in this way, and was not a luxurious possession. He had also learnt how to say it could not be bartered for. He was sure his days were numbered now, he had lived one hundred and six Rains, he reckoned, but he would still need to eat for the foreseeable future and he needed his alms-bowl for that.  The path led to the edge of the cliff. The roaring waters of the ocean, spreading to the endless horizon, raced to the rocky beach below, wave after wave – Krishna was transfixed.

275 
Next to him the druidess raised her voice to compete with the rush of the sea. ‘The light leaps for us here,’ she pointed out the coruscating sparkles that filled the surface of the waters on this clear blue afternoon, a pathway to the sun scored out in restless patterns of light and wave.  ‘Stand stable here,’ she firmed her stance in the sharp breeze that had the tang of sea-scent, her youthful attendant drawing to her side, fearful she might receive a sudden tug:– The holy woman would stand dangerously close to the edge.  ‘Stand, and silent be, so that, through the channels of your ears, may wander like a river, the swaying sound of the sea: SWN Y MOR, SWN Y MOR.’  She was no longer speaking the dialect they had been using and this sounded like her own tongue. Krishna’s eyes grew wide, open to the wind and the infinite vista of the ocean. What she had just said sounded like ‘Sûn úh mōhr.’ ‘What did…? What were those words you just spoke?’ He turned and gazed at the mage, her long grey hair whipping wildly in the squalls. He was transfixed and unsure if his ears had deceived him.  She broke the set of her glance and met his startled look. Still keeping her voice raised, against the wind and the racing tide, ‘This is how we say that in our own tongue.’ ‘Say what?!’ Krishna was speaking loudly too.  ‘“The sound of the sea”, that’s what those words mean: “SWN Y MOR” – “SWN”, which sounds like “soon” means “sound”; “y” pronounced “úh” is “of”, “mor” is “the sea”. We hold the sound to be a sacred quality. It is the primal sound, the sound of the place and matter we are all fashioned from; or so in my faith we hold as true.’  Here, at that small field’s ending, where the grey rock dropped to the water’s edge. A great light dawned in Krishna’s heart.  ‘She was speaking her own language! Why did I never think of that?!’ The druidess was lost at what he meant. Krishna was now back eighty-eight Rains, in Kosambi. ‘She lapsed from our common speech into her own tongue. Dusaka pulled that mind-bending game for so many years that I never asked him, or the Master – I would always forget and then even forget I had forgotten – I needed to find out here, I suppose, to have pondered and explored for myself for fifty Rains or more; what is really the source of happiness, peace and protection – the protection from death itself.’  ‘I fear you ramble, Holy One, are you well? Are you cold? Do you wish to return to the village?’ Krishna was reeling, ‘What, oh, yes. I am very well, very well indeed! We can return to the village. You welcomed me warmly yesterday, may I stay for a while longer?’   * * *

276 
Krishna was taken into the hearts of the local people, his appearance was so strange but his habits so peaceful and respectful, it did not matter at all to the community that they could not understand much of his descriptions of his faith and its tenets.  ‘Do good, refrain from harm, purify your heart,’ was his favourite summary and which most of the folk could understand. He even learnt to say it in the local language, instructed by his sagely friend the druidess.  He would walk to the cliffs each day and sit, letting the sound of the crashing waves upon the rocks, and the curl of the wind in his ears, fill his heart. At night he would mostly sit alone and endeavour to recall all that Gavinna had said on that fateful day. He was over one hundred Rains in age but his memory was not gone yet. He revisited the room in his mind, imagined the wounded sage lying there. ‘She said… she said… she said, “The best way to evade the King of Death, to blindfold Mara, to defeat him… is to remember… Listen: Swn y mor.”  ‘That’s what she said, I remember!’ He said out loud, although he was the only one in his wattle-walled hut. ‘Then, then what?...?’ He searched again, bringing her red-gold and white hair to mind, her burns, the blurred blue inkings on her skin. ‘The sages of the north…,’ retrieving the memories was like digging out a deeply wedged-in splinter. ‘The sages of the north say “Merely turn your hearing round to listen to your genuine true nature, which is the destination of the Path that is supreme. This is a genuine way to break through to enlightenment, this will…’ He searched in vain, despite having memorized and repeated this many times in his early years in robes, ‘This will… this will… this will lead you to the Eternal, the Deathless, to the Other Shore.’  Yes! That was the message:– Now, what on earth did it mean, ‘Turn your hearing round to listen to your true nature’? And what did that have to do with the sound of the sea?   * * *  The seasons moved on and the spring, with its yellow, blue, purple, red and varicoloured blossoms, moved rapidly to the summer and then the autumn when most of the leaves fell in these northern regions.  The villagers worked hard to store food for the winter, tasks which Krishna helped with to the best of his ability and within the bounds of his discipline. Soon the snows came, at first with a harsh wind from the north, then late in the evening the village became eerily quiet. The snowy blasts had ceased and the air was still once more; the world was muffled beneath its thick white rug. Krishna sat awake while the village slept.  It was very peaceful but he was energized at the same time. ‘So quiet,’ he said to himself, then noticed that there was a sound – the swaying sound of the sea – but here in his little hut and in his head – it was an inner sound and he realized he had heard it before in rare moments, wandering through the channels of his ears, no, not

277 
through his ears, inside his ears. ‘“Swn y mor” the sound of the sea is what we hear inside, when there is silence outside. I had completely forgotten what Gavinna said about listening – all I could think of was that stupid “Sooner! More!” idea.’ ‘Turn your hearing round, to listen,’ he was now understanding it, ‘to your genuine true nature.’ He sat, opening his heart to the presence of the ringing silence, the roaring energetic peacefulness within. The more he listened the brighter his mind became and he saw that with this listening there was a happiness, a peace and a letting go of fixation on the sights, sounds, feelings, colours and activities of everything around him and the thoughts within him. It made his mind alert and heedful.  The words of the Master, which he had uttered about Samavati, after the torching of the seraglio, ‘The mindful never die.’ Krishna realized, ‘If the heart no longer clings to the unstable and impermanent, it awakens to its true nature which is unborn, undying, the Deathless. If we stop attaching to what we are not, then what remains is revealed, and it is what we truly are. This is the Dharma. The mind, the heart is Dharma, not a person.’  Krishna sat through the night, letting this realization soak through his being. The great mangala, the protection guaranteed to guard against death was, after all, this inner sound. He had heard it before. When the Master gave an inspiring talk it was even louder than the crickets of the forest night, at other times too, when the world went quiet; so it had been with him all the time but he never knew.  ‘What a fool! Again!’ The centenarian Krishna was laughing at his own dim-wittedness once more. ‘I had the great mangala within me all the time and I never knew, like a diamond someone had sewn into your clothes that you carry around, a precious gem, but you have no idea that you own it.’ He smiled broadly, alone in his hut in the snow, wrapped in sheepskins and woollen blankets. ‘So all I have to do is keep listening to this inner sound, the great mangala, and the King of Death will not find me.’ It was too good to be true. He lay down to rest, his heart aglow. It was too good to be true. As this train of thought resolved itself in Krishna’s mind Mara was listening in:–  ‘Living beings,’ he mused, ‘are so gullible.’ This was one of his favourite saws; his heart too was aglow but with malign intent.   * * * Vasabha was glad to hear that dear Kesini had been given a proper funeral and that the Elders of their monastery had attended and carried out the ceremonies with full pomp. She had been a friend to all and a fine example over the more than forty Rains that they had lived there. Since she had passed on Vasabha made more and more journeys with Maggot and Ambaka, visiting different realms and meeting old friends where they could. Maggot’s skills were increasing so they were able to reach higher and higher realms of the devas. This meant, back at the monastery, people had become used to Vasabha’s absences of many years and they knew her physical appearance belied her actual age. After some of their journeys, even though the intention might have

278 
been not to linger too long, sometimes twenty or thirty Rains went by in the human world. Young girls who had become novices when Vasabha had arrived, aged less than forty, were now bent and wrinkled while Vasabha still looked in her sixties. She was well-known for this strange attribute and was treated with great love and respect, and awe by many on account of it.  ‘Half-kinnari, you know,’ was the whispered refrain whenever the subject came up.    * * *  ‘There’s someone I’d very much like to see again, but we’ll need to make it very brief indeed, Maggot said to Vasabha one day.  ‘Who’s that?’ ‘Khujjuttara. Long ago the Master said she had reappeared in the Aviha Brahma Realm. Do you think we would be able to visit her there?’ To Maggot’s surprise it was the often passive Ambaka who chimed in at this suggestion.  ‘I don’t think that would be a good idea, considering the way time passes for us when we make these visits.’ She was not used to speaking up these days but this was an important thing to get across. ‘I’m slowly getting used to deva life and how things work. For some people, like the Master and a few others, they can go up to the Brahma Realms and then come back with not much time having passed in the Human Realm, as when the Master visited the brahma god Baka. It doesn’t work that way for us less liberated beings, exactly why, I don’t know.  ‘I have heard that one day and one night in the Realm of Brahma is 8,640,000,000 human years, so, even to be there for a finger-snap would mean that everything dear Vasabha knows and loves in this human world, including her own body, will have turned to dust by the time we got back. Please let us not do this; one second there would be one hundred thousand years here in the human world – it’s not a good idea.’ Ambaka was speaking with more passion and assertion than she had about anything for a long time. Both Maggot and Vasabha were taken aback, fully heeded her words, and were slightly chilled by the mistake they had nearly made.  ‘Thank you!’ Vasabha reached out and embraced her former sister. ‘It’s you looking after me now – bless you!’ She leaned into the hug, filled with the heart-warmth of Ambaka’s golden radiance.   * * *  At that very moment, relatively speaking, the being who had been Khujjuttara was in a state of transformation. Her life in the human world had come to an end and she was now in the process of spontaneously appearing in the Aviha Brahma Realm. After her last breath there had been no sense of time passing – or indeed any of the usual reference points of being located anywhere, or there being a centre to

279 
the experience of knowing the present reality – and all sense of ownership, or any kind of thingness, was gone. There was nothing to relinquish as the heart realized that no thing had ever been present that could have been owned in the first place. There was peace, freedom and total ease. As she manifested in this new realm, it was with the realization that there was no spiritual work left to do; ‘what had to be done had been done’. As the Master had said, she had ‘realized enlightenment in the interval’, in the intermediary state between one life and another. She was fully awake, in all ways.  She looked around, surveying the landscape that stretched infinitely before above, below and all around her. She rolled her shoulders, out of long habit, but the feelings that arose were utterly new to her – she was comfortable! She looked down and took in the shape of her brahma-body. She held out her new, radiant and elegant hands before her, turning them with amused wonderment; she straightened her posture and a deep, bright flow of peace and joy arose in her heart.  ‘Ooh, no back pain… and look, look at all this.’  ==*== -*-*- -*-

280 
Notes & References PART I  Chapter 1: The Hell of Molten Copper  1)  p4:– poured the molten metal down her gullet: The ‘Hell of Molten Copper’ is mentioned by the Bodhisattva Ksitigarbha in his list of many types of hell, in Ch. 5 of The Fundamental Vows of Bodhisattva Ksitigarbha. The act of having molten copper poured down one’s throat is quoted in ‘Hinayāna Doctrinal Cosmology’ in the book The Imagery of the Cosmological Buddha by Angela Falco Howard, p9. Even King Yama, the ‘judge of the dead’, is said to be subject to such tortures: ‘[A] huge cauldron full of molten copper follows the king wherever he goes … A giant hell warden grabs the king and fastens him down with hot irons; the king’s mouth is kept open with a hook and molten copper is poured down his throat,’ (ibid. pp9-10).   2) ibid:– her body had been made quite whole again: The immediate regrowth of "esh after it has been cut o# or destroyed by some other means in the hell realms is a fairly common occurrence; for example in the Sīlakatta Hell (the 9th Auxilary Hell Realm), are those who have killed %sh and sold them in a market, ‘The yama guardians then stab them with lances and harpoons, cut them with butchers’ knives and %llet them so that their "esh can be lined up for sale… After that, their bodies come back together, just as they had been before. And all of this happens over and over again.’ From Three Worlds According to King Ruang, p76.   3) p6:– It was the Buddha: In classical Buddhist iconography of the Six Realms, there is a Buddha depicted as appearing in each Realm, with an appropriate skilful means in hand, e.g. a vina in the Deva Realm, a bottle of nectar in the Hungry Ghost Realm, etc.   4) p7:– She was disappearing: An account of the Buddha Gotama’s spiritual career begins with a similar act of self-sacri%ce, long before his life as the brahmin Sumedha and making the Bodhisattva vow with the Buddha Dipankara, ‘four incalculable periods and a hundred thousand kalpas ago.’  The Sūtra On the Wise and the Foolish, Story No. 63. Thus I have heard: One time, the Buddha was in the Jetavana Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park, in the country of Śrāvastī. At that time, the monks had completed their summer retreat and went to visit the Buddha, paying their respects and inquiring about his well-being. The Buddha, with a compassionate heart, comforted them and asked, ‘Have you stayed in peace without suffering?’ His heart was full of tender compassion, showing deep concern and empathy.

281 
Seeing this, Ānanda said to the Buddha, ‘World-Honoured One, your compassion and special care are truly profound. Is this compassion extended to those far or near?’ The Buddha replied, ‘If you wish to know, I will tell you. Long ago, beyond measure, in countless aeons, there were two criminals in hell, being driven by the guards to pull an iron cart. Their skin was stripped off and made into yokes for the cart, and they were beaten with iron rods, forced to run without rest, east and west. ‘One of them was weak, and as the guards pushed him, he would fall to the ground, get up, and continue, completely exhausted, near death. His companion, seeing his suffering, gave rise to compassion and pity for him. He pleaded with the guard, “Please allow me to pull the cart alone in his place!” ‘The guard, in anger, struck him with the rod, and he died instantly, being reborn in the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven. ‘Ānanda, you should know that the one who showed compassion in hell was me. At that time, while enduring punishment in hell, I first gave rise to this compassionate heart. From then until today, I have never abandoned compassion for all beings, and that is why I joyfully practice and extend compassion to everyone.’ At that time, Ānanda, hearing the Buddha’s words, was filled with joy and followed the teaching.  The Sūtra on the Wise and Foolish [賢愚経]	(Chin Hsien-yü-ching)  is a sūtra that was translated into Chinese in 445 CE by Hui-chüeh and others. It contains sixty-two Buddhist tales, or sixty-nine in a separate extant edition. According to A Collection of Records Concerning the Tripitaka, the catalogue of the Buddhist canon compiled by Seng-yu (445–518), the bhikshu T’an-hsüeh, Wei-te, and six other monks went westward from north-western China to Khotan on the southern edge of the Taklamakan Desert to seek Buddhist scriptures. They happened upon a great Buddhist ceremony that was held once every five years at a monastery. There they heard the learned monks expound the Buddhist scriptures and rules of monastic discipline in the language of Khotan. T’an-hsüeh and the others translated and recorded the lectures in Chinese. Later they returned from Khotan and, upon reaching the region of Turfan, compiled the lectures given by the monks in Khotan as a single sūtra, which is known as The Sūtra on the Wise and the Foolish.  It was translated from Chinese into Mongolian and into Tibetan, and it is included in the Tibetan Kangyur.  It was translated from the Tibetan to French, in 1842, by Philippe-Édouard Foucaux; into German, by Isaak Jakob Schmidt in 1843; and it was translated from the Mongolian into English by Stanley Frye, in 1981.
