# CHAPTER 18: KRISHNA’S CHANGE OF HEART   anthic instead of bright, the whites of Krishna’s eyes matched his heart which now felt sallow and wan. He had indeed been greatly cheered by the astonishing surprise that Queen Vasabha was not only his long-lost half-kinnari daughter but also that she had been Tamba, Queen Magandiya and the killer of Amba, in the near past. Nevertheless, a layer further down, he felt lost and confused, heartsick and filled with doubts about his spiritual life. ‘Wrong, wrong, wrong… how could I get it so wrong, and for so many years?’ He was sitting under his kuti with Dusaka and Tingri. It was early morning and the day was warming up. Dusaka leant against the charpai with Tingri on his lap, dappled sunlight occasionally glinting on his bone earrings or on one of the amulets and malas tangled about his neck. His gammy leg was half-propped on his walking staff as he had settled himself in for another lengthy session of hearing Krishna’s woes.  ‘First I thought that Gavinna’s advice meant ‘live life to the full – enjoy everything’ and I made good friends with Udayin and Surama, Arittha and the Group of Six – those were good times, or at least I took them to be so then. Then,’ Krishna had well-warmed to his subject by now, ‘as you know.’ ‘I do,’ Dusaka rather pointlessly responded.  ‘As you know I saw the negative side of all that and the Master himself gave me really good advice – made me see that the idea of a “hidden teaching”, a special tantra for the advanced, was not what he had ever had in mind. I really got that!’ ‘Tremendous,’ Dusaka chimed in, with the tone of voice being more languid than excited; Tingri offered a snort which Krishna took to mean, ‘And how many years was it before you figured that out?’ Embarrassedly, he carried on, ‘Anyway, you know I’m a slow learner.’ ‘Indubitably.’ ‘But I do learn and I took the Master’s words to heart: “OK! Tighten up!” I thought, “That’s the way”. So I turned around my understanding of what Gavinna had said and decided to follow the path of austerity instead. I knew Devadatta and Maha-Kassapa were both famous for their personal standards of renunciation – despite Devadatta having received great amounts of royal patronage in the past – but since Maha-Kassapa was away in foreign parts, and since Devadatta was close by, I went to him for guidance.

159 
CHAPTER 18: KRISHNA’S CHANGE OF HEART   anthic instead of bright, the whites of Krishna’s eyes matched his heart which now felt sallow and wan. He had indeed been greatly cheered by the astonishing surprise that Queen Vasabha was not only his long-lost half-kinnari daughter but also that she had been Tamba, Queen Magandiya and the killer of Amba, in the near past. Nevertheless, a layer further down, he felt lost and confused, heartsick and filled with doubts about his spiritual life. ‘Wrong, wrong, wrong… how could I get it so wrong, and for so many years?’ He was sitting under his kuti with Dusaka and Tingri. It was early morning and the day was warming up. Dusaka leant against the charpai with Tingri on his lap, dappled sunlight occasionally glinting on his bone earrings or on one of the amulets and malas tangled about his neck. His gammy leg was half-propped on his walking staff as he had settled himself in for another lengthy session of hearing Krishna’s woes.  ‘First I thought that Gavinna’s advice meant ‘live life to the full – enjoy everything’ and I made good friends with Udayin and Surama, Arittha and the Group of Six – those were good times, or at least I took them to be so then. Then,’ Krishna had well-warmed to his subject by now, ‘as you know.’ ‘I do,’ Dusaka rather pointlessly responded.  ‘As you know I saw the negative side of all that and the Master himself gave me really good advice – made me see that the idea of a “hidden teaching”, a special tantra for the advanced, was not what he had ever had in mind. I really got that!’ ‘Tremendous,’ Dusaka chimed in, with the tone of voice being more languid than excited; Tingri offered a snort which Krishna took to mean, ‘And how many years was it before you figured that out?’ Embarrassedly, he carried on, ‘Anyway, you know I’m a slow learner.’ ‘Indubitably.’ ‘But I do learn and I took the Master’s words to heart: “OK! Tighten up!” I thought, “That’s the way”. So I turned around my understanding of what Gavinna had said and decided to follow the path of austerity instead. I knew Devadatta and Maha-Kassapa were both famous for their personal standards of renunciation – despite Devadatta having received great amounts of royal patronage in the past – but since Maha-Kassapa was away in foreign parts, and since Devadatta was close by, I went to him for guidance.

160 
‘You didn’t think to ask around and see what the general impression was of his views and ways?’ Dusaka narrowed his eyes which got lost in wrinkles for a moment.  ‘To be honest,’ Krishna winced at the acknowledgement, ‘it never crossed my mind. I have a tendency to be credulous and naïve.’ ‘To be sure.’ ‘So then I get myself into this terrible mess that ends up with Matanga – my own unknown daughter – dying, before I could even appreciate who she really was and make a proper bond of father to daughter with her. I thought Devadatta’s reforms were a great way to get things back on track, both for the Sangha and for me.’ Dusaka’s pronouncedly shaggy eyebrows both rose at this, ‘Didn’t you realize, didn’t it ever occur to you that Devadatta only raised those points in order to split the Sangha? That’s why he did it. It was not out of any altruistic or spiritual intention. He made those proposals knowing that “people admire self-denial” and, more importantly, he was pretty sure that the Master would reject all of them. The rejection was what he wanted. If the Master had agreed to those changes his plan would not have worked.’ One eyebrow lowered whilst the other, over his right eye, remained raised.  ‘And he has not dropped those five suggestions either. He wriggled out of getting the blame for your daughter’s death, so now just wait and see what he does to keep sowing seeds of dissention and division.  ‘By the way,’ Dusaka gave a wry smile, I would say you needed to get back on track but the Sangha itself was and is in fine shape. Like a shady politician, Devadatta and his cronies kept promoting the big lie of “the problem of the Master getting old” – by saying it enough times they were hoping it would be taken as an acknowledged fact. However – look closely – is it really the case that the Master’s light is dimming? Yes, he has a back that pains him most of the time, but how is his mind? How stress-free is his manner? How easily does he handle thorny issues in the community?’  A light was dawning in Krishna’s mind, a realization of the degree to which he had been hoodwinked. It was sobering, embarrassing and relieving all at the same time.  He still, nevertheless, had the biggest of his doubts and debilitating frustrations to deal with. Underneath the sadness of having lost Matanga, and the joy of finding Vasabha, who was Tambaka, he was now at a loss for the direction of his spiritual life. ‘So, if it’s not the “Way of Indulgence” seeking happiness by sating the senses; and it’s not the “Way of Suppression” seeking happiness by negating and annihilating all desires, what did Gavinna mean?’ Dusaka smiled warmly as Tingri clambered off his lap and came to snuffle Krishna’s hand instead. ‘The words she spoke certainly were describing the superior mangala. Although it seems as though you were not listening closely enough at the time. Twenty-seven Rains have passed since she gave the prophecy to you but, if

161 
your mind grows less obstructed, and less prone to believing in deceptions, then things might still become clear to you.’ ‘Couldn’t you just tell me?!’ Krishna whimpered.  ‘Now where would be the fun in that?’ He compassionately grinned.  Krishna lingered expectantly hoping, almost certainly vainly, that Dusaka would shake his head, say, ‘Alright, let me spell it out for you,’ and then his troubles would be over. Even as this thought formed another took shape, saying, ‘Ha ha – very likely!’ ‘So what are the obstructions that are preventing me from recollecting and understanding clearly?’ ‘You want a list?’ Dusaka was apparently serious. ‘Alright – the general headings, as far as I can tell, are: sense-desire, grudges and ill-will, views and opinions, believing in your doubts, the conceit of identity – that you’re “this” or “that” – and its partner, the desire for defined being, lastly, and generally, ignorance – not being awake to the way things are. That about covers it.’ Krishna felt more drained and despondent at hearing such a catalogue of his painfully familiar mind-states. Dusaka saw his eyes dimming, becoming more jaundiced than ever, and his posture slumping. Tingri climbed onto Krishna’s lap and began, affectionately, to chew his fingers.  ‘The main problem, at the heart of all these, is that we so easily believe our desires, our hatreds, our opinions, our doubts, and our impressions of who we are and who we want to be. If we can stop believing in the lies the mind tells – “If I get this it will make me happy”, “This isn’t an opinion, it’s a fact” – if we can recognize the lie, the mind is well on its way to happiness and freedom.’ The voice in which Dusaka spoke this had a different tone to the jokey, wry comments he had mostly been dropping up until now – his words were heartfelt, kindly and serious.  ‘Do you want to hear about the first lie that was ever told?’ It was a rhetorical question as Dusaka was already moving his body into its ‘leaning on my staff and reciting a tale’ posture.  Krishna straightened up and Tingri perked her ears.    * * *  ‘Sing devas! Weep and learn this Gatha’s words, True they tell of the lie, the very first,  That burst upon the world, the awful stain That led the way, all untruth in its train.  *  * * ‘Upon a time, in the First Age, a king Once lived, Mahasammata was his name.  His span of life an Incalculable Aeon long – in lives past such was the norm.

162 
 ‘He was the founder of the House; his sons –  Nine generations – cascaded down to Apacara, King of Ceti, his home  Fair Sotthivati, wide-famed noble town.   ‘The King was blessed with powers, awesome strengths, Four were these: the first being he could walk Aloft, pass through the air as if on earth; Second, four deva guardians, blades unsheathed  ‘Warded him, each standing in their quarter; Third, the sweet scent of sandalwood his body Exuded at all times; the fourth, his mouth  Diffused the fragrance divine of lotus.   ‘How did the lie, the first, then come about?  The tale is complex so take careful heed.  When Apacara was a prince the royal priest Was named Kapila. He had a brother,  ‘A younger lad, friend of Apacara,  Blessed with the name of Korakalamba. One day the Prince gave promise that, when king,  His playmate Koraka would be the Priest.  ‘The old king died and Apacara then Ascended the throne of ancient Ceti.  The Royal Priest, Kapila, did not choose To step aside but then – oh, blighted day! –   ‘He gave up his post, took the pilgrim’s staff And, retiring to the forest, instead of brother,  He named his son as his successor. The  Brother Koraka was thus passed over.  ‘The King, Apacara, was not informed.  He found this out talking with Koraka,  “Are you not the Royal Priest, now Kapila’s To the forest gone?” “Nay Sire,” he replied,   ‘“He made his son the Priest; I’m set aside” “I won’t have that! The post was long promised

163 
To you.” “But Sire, how can you make that so? It is impossible, O King, for me  ‘To go against my elder brother’s choice.” “I see no block that can’t be moved, I will  From my Royal Seat, simply declare that You are the elder and that your brother  ‘Is the younger.” “But, Sire, how can you make  What is not the case into what is true?” “I shall tell a lie,” the proud king proclaimed.  Koraka knew not what this word should mean.  ‘He hedged, “When will you do this, O Great King?”  “On the seventh day from this I’ll pronounce This lie of mine unto the city folk.” Word spread like wildfire, though full many asked,  ‘“What kind of thing’s a ‘lie’? Is it yellow?  Or blue? Or some other colour?” No one Seemed to know for it was a time when the truth  Was told by all. None kenned what a “lie” might be.   ‘The many folk gathered What would this day hold?  What rash and reckless spirit Had made their king so bold?      *     *      *  ‘A madding crowd had clustered to see what  This mysterious thing could be, the King  Would now unleash upon the world. They hoped  To see the “lie” as if it were a beast  ‘Of distant provenance, or hap a spell To dazzle and impress. The King, as was His wont, clad in full regalia, stood High in the air above the multitude.   ‘To his great surprise, and anxious wonder,  The sage Kapila, airborne, joined him there.

164 
His hide of antelope he spread, quite sure His Majesty’s attention was with him.   ‘Seated on the hide he asked, “Is it true, O King, that, by a lie, you plan to make The junior the senior like that!” He snapped his fingers, looked him in the eye.  ‘“That I will shortly do, as I’ve declared,” The brazen youthful king glared in return.  “Great King,” the sage replied, “grievous indeed  Is the destruction of good qualities  ‘That such a lie will cause. A King who speaks A lie destroys right and, by right so Destroyed, that king is destroyed too, I say.” The King, undaunted by the sage’s words,   ‘Shamelessly made his statement thus, he said,  “Sir, O Sage Kapila, you are the younger And Korakalambaka the elder.” At that very moment the lie was spoke  ‘The devas four said they would no longer guard One such as this. Swords cast they at his feet. They turned their backs to him and disappeared. His breath turned foul, fume of a rotten egg.   ‘His body smelled not like sandalwood but Like an open drain. He fell, ungainly From the air and landed amid the crowd, All his powers supernatural gone.  ‘The kindly Sage Kapila, Seeing this great fall Said, “If you recant this lie Return will your powers all.”    * * * ‘Aggrieved and shamed so publicly the King Replied, “You wish only to deceive me!” Which was untrue and, so, a second lie.  Then, strange as it may sound but this era

165 
 ‘Was the First Age itself when much magic Filled the air, and fell and wondrous effects Of earth and sky and water, were not rare, More common than today. What then occurred,   ‘With the second lie, the fallen king was Pulled into the earth, up to his ankles.  He restated his first lie once again,  Again and again; each time he was pulled  ‘Deeper and deeper – to his knees and then  To his hips; to his navel and then, yes, He repeated the heinous lie again For the sixth time and was swallowed up to  ‘The breast. He paid no heed to this, a clear Message of where his lie would surely go.  One last time the Sage Kapila cried out,  “One word of truth, O King and all’s restored.”  ‘The haughty King was strangely undeterred,  Pronouncing his bold-faced lie he stated,  “You are the junior and Koraka Is the elder.” This was the seventh time.  ‘And lo! His head slipped below the earth and He was never seen again. In that life King Apacara was the liar; he Reappeared this life as Devadatta.  ‘All this goes to show that lies Unless retracted, recognized,  Lead to misery, but pain Ends when truth is realized.’   * * *  The search in Kapilavatthu continued, Maggot and her friends focused on the palace, but since virtually every human could not see them, and since most of the devas, yakkhas, and various sprites did not apparently pay much attention to the humans, it seemed to be turning into a bit of a lost cause. They knew what Hiri and Siri had heard, and they were getting to know the areas of the palace and its grounds

166 
where the slave families lived, so the field of possibilities was not too wide. One of the problems, however, was that many of the slaves had to work at the more rank tasks – emptying outhouses of their night-soil, mucking out stables, tending the cooking pots and fires in the kitchen, carrying fuel for the smiths, which often included dried cow-dung along with wood and charcoal – and the intense smells could easily mask any natural fragrance that Tambaka might have had.  Maggot’s eye, and all the others’ too, became acutely tuned to looking for a woman with a coppery skin and of about twenty-five sun-turnings or so – she was starting to see them everywhere, only to be disappointed again and again – the person, on a closer look, turned out to be too young or too old, or it was a long-haired boy, not a woman… it was hard to bear.  Finally, a breakthrough came when Bee was frustratedly endeavouring to delve into the dark corners of the kitchen. Jammed into an unswept nook, beside one of the low shelves in a store-room, Bee found a long hair, just one, but when she held it up to the light it was auburn, and the smell… ‘I think it’s hers… Am I fooling myself again?’ she wondered. She went out into the courtyard where there was fresh air and no breeze, she held it close up to her nose and inhaled.  ‘Yes! It’s hers but where is she?’ Bee raced to summon Maggot and the others and explained where she had found this special strand.  ‘So, kitchen, kitchen… do any celestials hang around here at all?’ Maggot wondered. ‘Well,’ Rhamba offered, ‘it’s not likely – it’s noisy and smelly and the virtue of the kitchen folk is not so lofty as to attract too many refined ones.’ ‘I saw a sprite or two round there,’ Gumbiya mentioned, ‘there’s some, deffo… er, definitely.’ The whole group raced to crowd into the halls and store-rooms of the kitchen. It took a little hunting but, eventually, they found a couple of kitchen-sprites nestled among the sacks of rice in one of the store sheds. They were tiny and, unsurprisingly, were both a bit overawed by these larger spirits and annoyed to be interrupted – they lived on the subtle fragrance given off by rice-grains and their repast had been disturbed.  Maggot tried to be as unintimidating as possible to these small and slightly shy, fellow bhumma-devas. They wore what looked like homespun garments woven from spider-webs or cornsilk, or perhaps (more likely) threads drawn from rice plants in their ripened season. She knelt down before them and held up the precious hair that Bee had found.  ‘Excuse us please for intruding upon you,’ she politely began, ‘but I lost my child many sun-turnings ago and, when I heard she might be here in the palace, I came straight to this place, with my friends, to see if we could find her. She was hatched perhaps some twenty-five sun-turnings ago. This is a hair from her head, so we are sure she was here, but can you tell us if you recognize her fragrance? She is half-human, half-kinnari, but when she was a babe, she had a flower aroma like mine, of the Jambu.’

167 
The two little sprites seemed to get interested quickly – it was certainly the most exciting thing that had happened all day – and they gave the hair a good sniffing. It was rope-like in their tiny hands. After mumbling to each other in their own dialect for a bit, one of them spoke up.  ‘Know ’er – sure we do. That’s from the girl Vasabha but we didn’t know she was half-kinnari – that’s a first ’ere – as far as I know… did yoo ever ’ear o’ that?’ The other shook her head, with her minute cap of rice-papery material wagging vigorously.  ‘She’s gone now, been gone about ten sun-turnings, maybe nine…’ Maggot took a sharp breath, ‘Gone as in…?’ ‘Nah! She in’t dead, not as far as I know, but she was part of the crowd of kids that Yasa and Nagamunda had – they’ve got a pile of gran’ kids now. Ain’t seen ’er since that big king from the sarf came ’ere, back ven, ’baht ten, maybe fifteen or more sun-turns ago. I ain’t seen ’er since they all left so she prob’ly went wiv ’em. Don’ know any more – I don’t mind the comin’s ’n’ goin’s of the big folk very much – but she in’t bin arahnd the kitchen or the sheds since then.’ The little being was enjoying being useful and having some real information to give them all.  ‘F’r a human she was nice – she did always smell good, come ter fink of it – not like rice,’ as if that was plainly the best scent in the world, ‘but pretty. Under all the reeks o’ the kitchen, ’n’ the ’eat and smoke, you c’ld tell when she was abaht, come ter fink of it. She couldn’t see the likes of us, though,’ he turned to his rice-capped partner, again she shook her head, ‘Nah, no sign that she or any of the kitchen folk could see us. They have an eye for rats and mice, no’ us!’ Salassa stepped closer, ‘This “big king” who came to visit, any chance you can recall a name, or some of the things they wore? There’s a lot of kings and queens south of here.’  The two sprites went into a huddle once more. The female one then spoke, ‘It were Kosala – I ’member vat. Kept goin’ on abaht how big and rich it was – Kosala deffo.’ Gumbiya was pleased to hear his own accent; the fact it was coming from a being about one hundredth of his size was even more endearing. He liked these kitchen-sprites.  ‘So! Savatthi! That’s where we need to go.’ Maggot was excited and the whole group were grinning. ‘We’re closing in… and we know her adoptive parents are Yasa and Nagamunda.’ ‘Well, ’e’s gone, the dad, died a few years back, but Naga’s ’ere, plus ’er brood, but y’ won’t be able to ask ’em any fink, she won’t be able to see or hear y’. Best off you head to Savatthi, dahn sarf, and see if y’ can find y’ girl in the kitchens there, or doin’ summat else. That’s my bes’ guess.’ ‘Thank you! Thank you so much! This is all wonderful news! Is there anything we can do for you by way of a favour, to express our gratitude?’ Maggot was amazed and delighted by all the help they’d given.

168 
‘Not really,’ the male started, then his partner whispered something to him. ‘Oh yeah. We live on plant smells, ’n we don’ see many kinnari ’ere indoors so, ’ow would you two,’ indicating Bee and Maggot, ‘like to breathe on us. That’ll be a nice addition to our rice – which is course our main – but please, give us a blast.’ Both Bee and Maggot were happy to do this for them for they knew that their breath had natural invigorating, curative powers. Where Maggot’s breath had the fragrance of fruity Jambu, rose-apples, that of Bee had the scent of the red or purple lotus. The two kinnaris leaned forward and gently exhaled in the faces of the sprites. ‘Whoah! That’s the stuff! Eh?!’ The two drank in the fragrant airs, blown into their faces like a warm wind from the south.  ‘Fank you!’ They were both a bit giddy from the blasts, ‘T’riffick – jes’ the ticket. By the way, me name’s Cob and ’er’s Green-Blossom.’  They then made their farewells and the group gathered in their now-familiar courtyard – ‘So – Savatthi and the royal palace. Let’s go!’   * * *  Krishna was sitting at the Master’s feet. It was an informal time, late in the morning after most of the Sangha had dispersed following the communal meal. Ananda was there, as were a few junior monks and novices. Devadatta and his group were keeping to themselves and rumour had it that he would soon depart, if he had not done so already. Surama had been drawing ever closer to Devadatta and, seemingly now that Krishna was so deeply buried in a funk, the Elder had forgotten his erstwhile friendship with him. Little did Krishna know that Mara considered his work done there – at least for a while.  To the degree that he noticed at all, Krishna was surprised that Surama was still firmly with that group despite the dire rumours that circulated following Matanga’s death and the trial. One might have thought that anyone in their right mind would give Devadatta a wide berth by now however, that right-mindedness was, apparently, still rare in the world and the miscreant Elder continued to draw a substantial coterie of sycophantic followers into his sphere of influence.  The Buddha was now speaking and Krishna was paying close attention.  ‘There are these two extremes that should not be followed, by one who has gone forth and who seeks the good: the Way of Indulgence – which is low, coarse, vulgar, ignoble and unprofitable – and the Way of Self-Torture, Suppression, which is painful, ignoble, and unprofitable.  ‘In the former Way an individual seeks happiness and fulfilment through trying to satiate the senses and maximise sense-pleasure; in the latter Way an individual seeks happiness and fulfilment through trying to negate the senses and to get beyond all feeling; or they follow the mistaken belief that painful, racking, piercing feelings on their own are intrinsically liberating; or they hold that the more pain that is endured, the closer to enlightenment and liberation they are drawing.

169 
‘Both of these are wrong, deluded views. By avoiding these two extremes, the Tathagata realized the Middle Way, which gives vision and understanding, which leads to calm, penetrative insight and enlightenment, to Nirvana.’ Krishna was enraptured, he could not restrain himself from blurting out, ‘This is exactly it! Those are precisely the two paths I got stuck on – the first one for much longer than the second – amazing, Venerable Sir! This is the first time I have heard this expressed so clearly!’ The small group which sat clustered around the Buddha went quiet. The Master himself pausing before continuing. The pause became more pregnant and was drifting into being an uncomfortable silence when one of the younger bhikkhus spoke up.  ‘Venerable Krishna, you do realize that what the Blessed One just said was the words with which he began his first discourse, that which set in motion the Wheel of Dharma over thirty-five Rains ago. We recite those words often.’ Once more Krishna experienced a mixture of both embarrassment at his folly and inattentiveness, and delight that this marvellous teaching – so tailor-made to his own condition, was at last sinking in.  ‘I am shy to admit,’ Krishna replied, ‘that it has taken me twenty-five Rains to put two-and-two together. Please accept my apologies for being a student so slowly wise, Venerable Sir.’ The Master accepted the apology in silence, with a slight inclination of his head. ‘If I might ask,’ Krishna continued, ‘with respect to the Middle Way – that does not just mean being indulgent half the time and suppressive the other half, that much I can understand straight away, but what exactly is this Middle-ness and how is it found and embodied?’ ‘You are not so slow to learn, Krishna,’ the Master smiled wryly, ‘there are those among my disciples who for years have held to the “indulge half the time and austerity the other half” understanding, or mis-understanding of these words. Let me demonstrate.’  Near Ananda there were some offerings that had been made earlier. In amongst these were a few balls of twine. Ananda, being quick on the uptake, had already drawn out a length about a forearm long and had cut it, being familiar with the example that he was sure the Master was about to give. There was a small dried and hollowed gourd that held balm, which had a tight lid, sitting by the Master’s seat. Ananda tied the string around the neck of the gourd so that it made a neat little pendulum. He offered it in both hands to the Master.  In his left hand the Buddha held up the end of the string and in his right, he held the gourd below it. He moved the gourd to the left, holding his upper hand still.  ‘This represents the extreme of Indulgence in Sense-pleasure’; he then moved the pendulum to the right, ‘this represents the extreme of Indulgence in Self-Mortification, Suppression. The Middle Way is not just half-way between the two

170 
extremes’; he now moved the gourd to the nadir of the arc, ‘rather, the Middle Way is represented by the point at the centre, the hub where the pendulum pivots from. He joggled his left hand. ‘This is the mysterious Middle that those who have gone forth are tasked to find.’ Saying nothing further, the Buddha neatly rolled up the twine and gourd and handed them to Ananda. It was plainly the end of this informal gathering so the assembled monks and novices bowed three times and the Master returned to the Gandha-kuti.   * * *  Krishna’s heart was greatly refreshed by this teaching and he resolved to make the realization of this Middle Way his new goal. Still, however, there was a niggle, like a name that he just could not remember, or a verse of the teachings that he knew was getting wrong. ‘This is a clear and wonderful new direction but… what did Gavinna mean? Well, it seems I’m never going to be able to get Dusaka or the Master to explain it and, if I haven’t figured it out after twenty-five Rains, I suppose I should just forget it, or at least leave it aside. Oh well, never mind – begin again!’  ==*==
