# Chapter 22: The Attack on the Sakyans  1) p201:– but not by you, slave-son!: In the original story, found in Jāt 7, Jāt 465 and the Commentary to Dhp 47, Buddhist Legends, Vol II, p44, it is said that the King, ‘degraded her from her rank and also degraded her son Viḍūḍabha,’ ‘to the condition of slaves.’ The scenario that follows is informed, as before, by these same texts.   2) p203:– kings and princes regularly consorted with any low-class girl they pleased: This practice, which is recognized as egregious behaviour today, was extremely widespread in the ancient world as well as, unfortunately, up to modern times.   3) ibid:– You will be kept in the palace dungeons: In the original story Vāsabhakhattiyā is not imprisoned.   4) p204:– they made their way to the Jetavana: In the original story the Buddha came to them rather than they going to him: ‘Some few days later the Master came to the palace and took a seat.’  5) ibid:– have you considered how fickle the matters of birth and rank are?: This same issue is explored in Mara and the Mangala I, in a discussion between the Minister Ghosaka and a young Samavati, in Ch. 10, p103.   6) ibid:– a brahmin pandit called Pokkharasati: This passage is based upon D 3, the ‘Ambaṭṭha Sutta’.   7) ibid:– Known as Kanha: The name has been left in the Pali original. The Sanskrit would be ‘Krishna’ so, to avoid confusion as well as to be faithful to sources, it has been kept as per the sutta.   8) ibid:– the yakkha Vajirapani hovered above the head of the youth: The Buddha, and any of the enlightened ones, would never wish harm upon any being, however, it is recognized that certain actions taken, intended to harm a virtuous being, or as in this case, not respond to a direct question when put three times by a Buddha, there will necessarily be a negative consequence. In the scriptures this is called ‘being burnt by the recluse’s fire’, as in the dialogue between the Buddha and King Pasenadi found at S 3.1.   9) ibid:– he gave her his signet ring: This story is from Jāt 7, the ‘Kaṭṭhahāri Jātaka’, it is found in The Jātaka, Vol I, pp27-29.

329 
Chapter 22: The Attack on the Sakyans  1) p201:– but not by you, slave-son!: In the original story, found in Jāt 7, Jāt 465 and the Commentary to Dhp 47, Buddhist Legends, Vol II, p44, it is said that the King, ‘degraded her from her rank and also degraded her son Viḍūḍabha,’ ‘to the condition of slaves.’ The scenario that follows is informed, as before, by these same texts.   2) p203:– kings and princes regularly consorted with any low-class girl they pleased: This practice, which is recognized as egregious behaviour today, was extremely widespread in the ancient world as well as, unfortunately, up to modern times.   3) ibid:– You will be kept in the palace dungeons: In the original story Vāsabhakhattiyā is not imprisoned.   4) p204:– they made their way to the Jetavana: In the original story the Buddha came to them rather than they going to him: ‘Some few days later the Master came to the palace and took a seat.’  5) ibid:– have you considered how fickle the matters of birth and rank are?: This same issue is explored in Mara and the Mangala I, in a discussion between the Minister Ghosaka and a young Samavati, in Ch. 10, p103.   6) ibid:– a brahmin pandit called Pokkharasati: This passage is based upon D 3, the ‘Ambaṭṭha Sutta’.   7) ibid:– Known as Kanha: The name has been left in the Pali original. The Sanskrit would be ‘Krishna’ so, to avoid confusion as well as to be faithful to sources, it has been kept as per the sutta.   8) ibid:– the yakkha Vajirapani hovered above the head of the youth: The Buddha, and any of the enlightened ones, would never wish harm upon any being, however, it is recognized that certain actions taken, intended to harm a virtuous being, or as in this case, not respond to a direct question when put three times by a Buddha, there will necessarily be a negative consequence. In the scriptures this is called ‘being burnt by the recluse’s fire’, as in the dialogue between the Buddha and King Pasenadi found at S 3.1.   9) ibid:– he gave her his signet ring: This story is from Jāt 7, the ‘Kaṭṭhahāri Jātaka’, it is found in The Jātaka, Vol I, pp27-29.

330 
This arrangement is reminiscent of the ring given by King Dushyanta to Shakuntala, in the Indian legends of the Mahabharata, who had similarly enjoyed a brief relationship and then were parted. In that story Dushyanta is caused to forget Shakuntala and then she loses the ring on the way to being reunited with him. It had been dropped in a pool of water and then swallowed by a fish. A fisherman chances to find it, the ring is produced, and Dushyanta acknowledges their son, who was Bharata, who grew up to ‘conquer the world’. The story is found both in the Mahabharata and in the Abhijnana-Shakuntalam.  A modern equivalent is found in Thailand where a young country-woman, having had a liaison with King Rama II, the King reputedly gave the young woman a silver belt he was wearing and told her, ‘If you have a son, bring him to me at the palace.’ She did and the boy was adopted and raised in the monastery, and became one of the most eminent monks in Thailand, the preceptor and teacher of King Rama IV.   10) p205:– a true warrior faces greed, hatred and delusion: The Buddha consciously transformed the goal of his birth family – warrior nobles – to be spiritual rather than military. He still used the language of battle regularly, however, when describing spiritual endeavours. For example, before his enlightenment he declared, affirming his intent to realize complete liberation, ‘I fly the banner that denies retreat,’ SN 442.  In the Thai forest tradition ‘the warrior heart’ is often used as a phrase to describe the attributes of the dedicated spiritual practitioner.   11) ibid:– a true brahmin is pure of heart: This is spelled out repeatedly in Ch. 26 of the Dhammapada; for example in verses 385, 386, 388, 391, 393 and 396-423.   12) ibid:– a true craftsperson: As described at Dhp 80, and at M 86.18:    ‘Conduit-makers guide the water,  Fletchers straighten out the arrows,  Carpenters shape the timbers  Wise people seek to train themselves.’  13) ibid:– we too renounce all caste: The Buddha was resolute in not allowing the caste system to have any influence on ordination. Thus one can be born into any family and still be eligible to join the monastic order. Those in robes do not observe any caste distinctions, thus a person’s seniority only depends upon the years they have spent in robes.   14) ibid:– I will reinstate the Prince: In the original texts both the Queen and the Prince have their states restored by King Pasenadi, following the encouragement of the Buddha.

331 
15) ibid:– you got torched in that fire: As described in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 23, ‘The Perfumed Holocaust’, pp293-304.  16) p206:– I was proud to sacrifice myself: In the Buddha’s teaching he did not praise the sacrifice of one’s physical being for the sake of lofty ideals, or out of mistaken judgements. This did not just relate to dying for spiritual causes but one important aspect of this principle is that, in this, he was also going against the warrior-noble ethic of an assumed virtue to dying in battle, regardless of one’s mind-state. Such values, of dying gloriously in war have had a strong influence in many societies, ancient and modern; for example, in ‘Horatius at the Bridge’:    And how can man die better than facing fearful odds,  For the ashes of his fathers, and the temple of his Gods.       Thomas Babington Macaulay  When asked, by a soldier called Yodhājīva, if it’s true that if one like him dies in battle he will go to the ‘heaven of the battle-slain devas’ the Buddha tells him this is a delusion (S 42.3) and the destination is likely to be one of the lower realms.  Despite this discouragement clearly being the case in the main nikāyas of the Pali Canon, the voluntary relinquishment of one’s life for the sake of others does appear in some post-Canonical stories. For example, the Bodhisattva lived as a hare that threw itself on a fire to provide food for a supposed brahmin, who was actually Indra (in Jāt 316, The Jātaka, Vol III, p37). Another well-known example is ‘The Hungry Tigress’, the first story in the Jātakamāla, written by Aryaśura around the 2nd Century CE. In this story the Bodhisattva sees a starving tigress with cubs at the bottom of a cliff. He throws himself off, to die close to her, in order to provide food for them all.  17) p207:– my uncle, General Bandhula: Again, this follows the scriptural accounts, in Jāt 465 and Commentary to Dhp 47, in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp45-49.  18) p208:– King Pasenadi had been sick at heart: This is mentioned in Jāt 465 and in the Commentary to Dhp 47, but not at the related passage at M 89, ‘The Discourse on Monuments to Dhamma’. In the latter text the town near where the Buddha stayed is called Medaḷumpa.  19) ibid:– went up to the door, coughed and knocked: This is the standard way in which visitors approached not only the Buddha’s kuti but it is also how monastics announce their presence at another’s door today. It is found, for example at D 3.1.9.

332 
20) ibid:– the five Symbols of Royalty: These are mentioned in a footnote in The Jātaka, Vol IV, p80.   21) p209:– great mountains … closing in: This motif is mentioned, in part, at S 3.25, with reference to the imminence of ageing and death of King Pasenadi.  His escaping to a place of refuge, having been deposed, is reminiscent of many tales of such vanquished kings. For example, Charles I, after defeat at the Battle of Naseby, on June 14th, 1645, sought refuge at the humble Anglican religious community of Little Gidding. T.S. Eliot refers to this in one of his Four Quartets, also entitled Little Gidding: ‘If you came at night like a broken king’.  In the scriptural accounts Queen Mallikā did not outlive the King but rather passed away before him.  22) p210:– separated Prince Jeta’s head from his shoulders: This is mentioned in Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, p963, quoting Life of the Buddha by A.L. Rockhill (published by Kegan Paul). p121.  23) p211:– her fearless little sister: as mentioned regularly in Mara and the Mangala I.  24) ibid:– our wise friend can walk past all guards: Dusaka displayed this kind of talent in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 14, pp 155-7.   25) p213:– train her in deva-vision: This is called the ‘dibbacakkhu’ in Pali, ‘the divine eye’. Dusaka first taught this to Krishna in Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 15, pp169-71.    Chapter 23: The Buddha in the Shade  1) p215:– her murderer: In their previous lives, as Samāvatī and Māgandiyā, Māgandiyā was responsible for the fire that killed Samāvati, as described in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 23, pp293-308.  2) ibid:– bodhi tree, with its sparse leaves … instead of the deep cool shade of the agèd banyan: The story of the Buddha’s attempted intervention, and his choice to sit in the scanty shade of the tree in Sakya, is described in the Commentary to Dhp 47. It is found in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp37-52.

333 
3) p216:– that was something your father neglected to do when we met: This refers to the opening scenario of The Pilgrim Kamanita and particularly to Chs. 18-20, pp107-22, (2017).  4) p219:– How has this weakness taken you?: This is adapted from Sir Edwin Arnold’s translation of the Bhagvad Gita, Ch. 2, ‘The Book of Doctrines’.   5) ibid:– Do not become a coward, Arjuna: This is from an alternative translation of the same passage, by Ramananda Prasad.   6) p220:– the worshipful Vajashravas: This is a character invented by Karl Gjellerup for The Pilgrim Kamanita. He features particularly in Ch. 10, ‘Esoteric Doctrine’, pp57-60 ,where he expounds on a theme similar to that stated here.  7) p222: my grandmother was an animal!?: In Jāt 481 a king, frustrated that a pair of captured kinnaris will not sing and dance for him, demands that his staff, ‘Kill these creatures and cook them, and serve them up to me.’ He asked for one to be cooked for his supper and the other for breakfast the next day. In Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 26, p367, one of the protagonists, Pitipuppha, muses, about Bee, ‘How could a dumb animal like her ever dare to implicate royal devas … she’s practically half plant.’   8) p223:– The Tathagata has exercised his influence three times: See above, Ch. 17, note 18.  9) ibid:– All the warriors of Kapilavatthu: These passages follow closely the narrative of the Commentary to Dhp 47, Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp50-52.  10) ibid:– His heart was closed to any moral sensitivity: Kilesa-Māra, around whom this collection of plots is woven, is the embodiment of the kilesas = defilements. These are listed as: Greed (lobha), hatred (dosa), delusion (moha), conceit (māna), views (diṭṭhi), skeptical doubt (vicikicchā), sloth (thīna), restlessness (uddhucca), shamelessness (ahirika), lack of a fear of consequences (anottappa). This list of ten is not found in this exact form in the suttas but can be summarized as this group from various sources. ‘Shamelessness’ and the ‘lack of a fear of consequences’ are the kilesa referred to here as indicating being ‘closed to any moral sensitivity’.   11) p225:– We won’t be possessed by the son of a slave-girl: In the Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, p877, the author notes:  ‘According to Chinese records, Viḍūḍabha took five hundred Sakyan maidens into his harem, but they refused to submit to him and abused him and his family. He ordered them to be killed, their hands and feet cut off, and their bodies thrown into

334 
a ditch.’ From The Romantic Legends of the Buddha, S. Beal, published by Kegan Paul, ii, 11f.  In ancient Egypt, the hands of enemies who had fallen in battle were cut off as war trophies and for the practical purpose of accurately counting the casualties.     Chapter 24: Reunions  1) p228:– He was a sincere and dedicated disciple of the Master: This close and beneficial relationship is evidenced in many places, for example: M 89 (which is the ‘Monuments to the Dhamma’ discourse, coincidentally given at the time Pasenadi lost the throne), and the twenty-five suttas of the ‘Connected Discourses with the Kosalan’ S 3.1-25.   2) ibid:– at the local shrines: Such cetiya were frequently visited by both the Buddhist Sangha and many adherents of other faiths, although it is rare for it to be mentioned in the Pali Canon what deity or being those shrines were dedicated to. Examples abound – just near Vesālī alone there are mentioned the: Udena Shrine, Gotamaka Shrine, Saltambaka Shrine, Bahuputta Shrine, Sārandada Shrine and the Cāpāla Shrine (in D 16.3.44-47).  3) ibid:– King Pasenadi had had a number of other, so-called ‘minor wives’: The first three of these wives are mentioned in the texts; the ‘sister of King Bimbisara’, named Vimalā here, does not seem to be named in the suttas and commentaries. Kosaladevī was indeed the name of Pasenadi’s sister and Queen of Magadha.  Ubbirī’s new-born child died and this caused her to leave the palace life and become the Buddha’s disciple. She became an Arahant. Her verses are found at Thig 51-2. Somā and Sakulā were sisters; they are mentioned at M 90.3.  4) p229:– to appoint Queen Mallika as Royally Anointed Regent: These titles, and indeed the regency, are an invention of the author.  5) ibid:– The Princess … as yet unmarried: According to the commentaries and the Jātaka, Princess Vajiri was given, by her father, in marriage to Ajātasattu (in Jāt 283 & Jāt 492).  6) p232:– to live on the Eight Precepts: This is the standard framework of conduct for anyone living in a monastery of the Southern School of Buddhism. Exceptions can be made (usually allowing working staff to eat in the evening) but the Eight Precepts is the general basis for life in any monastery.

335 
7) ibid:– Sister Khema: She was the Arahant nun recognized as ‘Foremost amongst nuns possessed of great wisdom’  – mahāpaññānaṃ aggā (at A 1.236)’ On one occasion she gave teachings to King Pasenadi (at S 44.1); her verses of enlightenment are found at Thig 139-44.   8) ibid:– Oh, what bliss!: This expression is borrowed from the account of the ex-ruler of the Sakyans, Bhaddiya, on having renounced the throne and entered the monastic life (at Ud 2.10).   9) p233:– a lot of layers of resultant karma: This is called ‘vipāka’ in Pali. Often when the word ‘karma’ is employed in common usage, it is meant to mean ‘kamma-vipāka’ i.e. ‘intended action and its result’.   10) ibid:– when he had been a child in the garden in Ujjeni: See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 15, pp169-71.  11) ibid:– Let go of the past: The advice given here is a combination of ‘The Discourse on One Fortunate Attachment’ (M 131.3) and the frequently given instruction on learning from our mistakes and transgressions, such as at M 140.33.   12) ibid:– visible world, invisible world: In the Buddha’s teaching he defined ‘the world’ as ‘The eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, the mind.’ The ‘world’ is thus taken to be the world of our experience, rather than the external objects like the planet and the stars, (see S 35.116).  13) p235:– he clapped his huge hands together: This method is informed by a monk who once told a group of young Buddhists whom he was guiding for a class, ‘I guarantee you will learn to levitate, but you’ve got to keep your eyes closed.’ Once he was sure everyone there was complying, he pulled an oogah horn out of his bag and set it off in the room. All the participants succeeded in levitating but a few took some time to recover. It was intended to be a lesson in perception – saññā.  14) p236:– evil counsel: This is the translation of the name ‘Mordred’, who was the equally ill-starred son of Morgan le Fay and King Arthur, who brought about Arthur’s death and the breaking of the Round Table.   15) p237:– Checking to see there was water: Such duties in preparing the Dhamma seat before a teaching are still carried out today, although electric fans are now ubiquitous in contrast to the paddle-like, classical ones used in electricity-free locations.

336 
 16) ibid:– Evam – thus it is: This is a classical way to close a Dhamma talk. However, this form of formally ending a teaching is not found in the Pali Canon.   17) p239:– The great lay disciple Visakha: She was one of the great patrons of the Sangha in Sāvatthī and the region. She built the Monastery of the Eastern Park and donated it to the Sangha, as well as having provided substantial material support, on a smaller scale, as described at Vin i 290 and MV 8.  18) p240:– For what reason would you pay honour: This dialogue is based on the exchange between the Buddha and the sick monk Vakkali, shortly before his realization of Arahantship and his death (at S 22.87).   19) p241:– the Aviha Brahma World: This is the lowest of the five Pure Abodes, being high brahma realms that only Non-returners are born into. The other four are, in ascending order: Atappā, Sudassā, Sudassī, Akaniṭṭhā. For more information on these realms, see The Buddhist Cosmos, by Ajahn Puṇṇadhammo, 3:6:17-20, pp660-72 in the 1st edition.   20) ibid:– She realized Arahantship even before she reappeared there: There is an interesting set of similes given by the Buddha on the different types of Non-returner (at A 7.55). Of the seven different grades, from the quickest to enlightenment to the slowest, the first three are all described as ‘realizing Nibbāna in the interval’. Khujjuttarā is presented as being amongst these quickest ones. The imagery he uses is of ‘an iron bowl, when heated all day and is struck, a chip which is red-hot might fly off’.   21) ibid:– She was foremost: This refers to the Buddha’s naming her as bahussutanaṃ – the most excellent of his lay women disciples in terms of analytical knowledge.   22) p242:– Patient with my inability to forgive: This is derived from the title of a Dhamma talk, given by Ajahn Sumedho in 1995.  23) ibid:– Like the Bodhisattva Gotama: The story this refers to is found at Jāt 66, ‘The Story of the “Sign of Gentleness” Birth’, in The Jātaka, Vol I, pp161-64.   24) ibid:– to the Himavant: A legendary forest stretching over a large region of the south-facing Himalayan mountains.
