# Chapter 1:  The Hell of Molten Copper    hirsty?’ jested the hell warden, ‘’ere, try some of this.’ He yanked viciously on the woman’s hair from the back, cricking her neck and forcing open her mouth. The stone scoop in his hand glowed with a sick green sheen as licklets of ﬂame darted over the surface of the viscous liquid it contained.  ‘Drink up! Hyeh heh heh,’ the demon’s throaty chortle kept going despite being drowned in volume by her screams. His bird-claw hand held the scoop with practised steadiness as he poured the molten metal down her gullet. ‘WossamaNer?! Lost yer taste fer drink?’ Within seconds she was silenced by the lethal heat of the draught burning out her throat and her voice. It was scarcely slowed as it hit her stomach and seared her innards to a stinking crisp. The waves of pain pounded through her being, mounting in a rapid crescendo as the ﬂesh burned oﬀ her bones.  She felt the merciful blackness of unconsciousness rising in the wake of pain, but, as is the curse of all those condemned to such hells as these, no sooner had the bliss of oblivion been promised than she was wide awake and her body had been made quite whole again, ripe for torture once more.   * * * The reek of singed ﬂesh and smouldering hair was everywhere, blended with the fume of burning hoof. The stench bit the nostrils and so, even though every hot breath was gasped for, when it entered it chewed her nose and left her wincing.  Streams of molten copper swung lazily through the land around her; she had no memory of rural riverbanks and darting dragonﬂies amid the reeds but something in her knew that the gentle wending curves of blazing orange and green bore a resonance of another world. Here, now there was only heat, pain, clamour and stench.  There was no space or possibility for thought as the rhythms of pain and strain pounded on without relent.  The hell-dwellers were driven to hack ore-bearing rock from the cliﬀs around them. The wardens, beast-headed and rough-limbed, lashed any and all at every sign of laziness or pause. Weak or strong, young or old, female or male, all the Damned had to swing their picks and load the ore without respite.  ‘Wanna rest, do yer?!’ She heard the roaring of the wolf-faced overseer behind her, to the left. She risked a glance and saw him twisting an old, straggle-headed

4 
Chapter 1:  The Hell of Molten Copper    hirsty?’ jested the hell warden, ‘’ere, try some of this.’ He yanked viciously on the woman’s hair from the back, cricking her neck and forcing open her mouth. The stone scoop in his hand glowed with a sick green sheen as licklets of ﬂame darted over the surface of the viscous liquid it contained.  ‘Drink up! Hyeh heh heh,’ the demon’s throaty chortle kept going despite being drowned in volume by her screams. His bird-claw hand held the scoop with practised steadiness as he poured the molten metal down her gullet. ‘WossamaNer?! Lost yer taste fer drink?’ Within seconds she was silenced by the lethal heat of the draught burning out her throat and her voice. It was scarcely slowed as it hit her stomach and seared her innards to a stinking crisp. The waves of pain pounded through her being, mounting in a rapid crescendo as the ﬂesh burned oﬀ her bones.  She felt the merciful blackness of unconsciousness rising in the wake of pain, but, as is the curse of all those condemned to such hells as these, no sooner had the bliss of oblivion been promised than she was wide awake and her body had been made quite whole again, ripe for torture once more.   * * * The reek of singed ﬂesh and smouldering hair was everywhere, blended with the fume of burning hoof. The stench bit the nostrils and so, even though every hot breath was gasped for, when it entered it chewed her nose and left her wincing.  Streams of molten copper swung lazily through the land around her; she had no memory of rural riverbanks and darting dragonﬂies amid the reeds but something in her knew that the gentle wending curves of blazing orange and green bore a resonance of another world. Here, now there was only heat, pain, clamour and stench.  There was no space or possibility for thought as the rhythms of pain and strain pounded on without relent.  The hell-dwellers were driven to hack ore-bearing rock from the cliﬀs around them. The wardens, beast-headed and rough-limbed, lashed any and all at every sign of laziness or pause. Weak or strong, young or old, female or male, all the Damned had to swing their picks and load the ore without respite.  ‘Wanna rest, do yer?!’ She heard the roaring of the wolf-faced overseer behind her, to the left. She risked a glance and saw him twisting an old, straggle-headed

5 
man by his ankle. ‘Why not take a dip in the river while yer at it?’ His scaley arm held the squealing man over the swirls of liquid metal. Vermillion-orange light coloured his features, now twisted in paNerns of dread. Purple shadows danced with amber and scarlet across his skin.  Wolf-head dunked him deep into the stream, paused as if counting to an accustomed span of seconds, then hoiked his victim from the current again. His ﬂesh was burned away and only the sinews held the skeleton together as it dripped molten metal on the bank.  Even as he held him there – like a dish-rag among a load of laundry – the ﬂesh began to reform on the bones and the howls of boNomless pain emerged from the new-made throat-ﬂesh.  If she could have remembered the sight of a buNerﬂy emerging from its chrysalis and drying its new-formed wings in the morning sun, perhaps this miraculous spreading of new ﬂesh would have brought this to mind. As it was, the piercing pick of her fellow suﬀerer’s screams slammed into her ears and her own terror of being caught pausing and watching too long made her jerk her eyes away and bury herself in her task of loading her steel cart full of the copper ore.   * * *  Once their waggon was fully laden, she set herself behind the hauling bar with her work-gang partner and set to, pushing it to the smelting vats far across the valley.   The eﬀort was wickedly painful, as the weight of the rock they had to pull meant that their feet were forced with greater intensity against the burning ground. Flesh was roasted oﬀ their feet as they walked, the tang of their own scorching skin being left in a trail above their pathway. She could feel her bones grinding against the boiling rock and the slicing pain as the ﬂesh reformed between each step.   Her partner was gibbering ﬁtfully. He started by murmuring the usual litany of the Damned: ‘I can’t go on… I can’t go on…’ This was a familiar cry and the plea of all of them but, since they all knew there was no other possibility than to submit to their tortures, they contented themselves with the pale satisfaction of bewailing their fate and carried on. There was nothing else.   But his murmurs had turned to ﬂailing cries, his eyes were swimming wildly in their sockets. Now his legs began to crumple and she had to jerk him back to his senses.  ‘Don’t give up. Don’t drop – you know what they’ll do to you. Get a grip!’ She barked at him, trying her best to pierce the fog that was clearly mounting in his mind.   She had vivid memories of the last time he had swooned. As he lay in a crouched heap the hell-wardens – one with a boar’s head and thick-bristled arms, another sporting a horse’s face but with ﬂesh-eater’s fangs – laid into him with their ﬁre-whips and tore the ﬂesh from his bones. He had huddled there whimpering

6 
miserably, pleading for mercy, while they had waited for his ﬂesh to reform and then they did it again – lashed him until the threads of muscle hung smoking on his bones and laughing with each other all the while. Her heart broke to see it but she was powerless. Her tears boiled and burned her smuNed cheeks as they rolled down.   Sometimes she was surprised at the strength she found within herself, although she only noticed it when she saw how much more easily others succumbed to the pain and heat of torture. Also, that strength mostly showed itself as anger at her tormentors and a deep resentment of their treatment of the Damned. Now her pulling-mate was spiralling into madness and seemed certain to collapse again beside her.   ‘It’s never going to end… the horror, it’s never going to end.’ He fell to his knees and looked up into her face, ‘I can’t… I… see… even the Buddha has come to mock us… we’re damned and it won’t end. No one… Don’t laugh at me!’  She saw him looking past her in a strange haunted way and, as she desperately tried to heave him up, she glanced over her shoulder, to where her companion was looking.   Framed in ﬂame against the high rock walls, a tall robed ﬁgure stood, seemingly ﬂoating in the smoke-threaded air. In his right hand he held a blazing walking staﬀ; crimson and mauve ﬁre licked around his body as gold and rainbow-coloured light radiated from his heart.   It was the Buddha, and his face, wriNen with the gravest compassion as it was, also carried a distinct and gentle smile.   She had no time to think of what to make of this apparition – or whether this being was truly mocking their misery – she had only the will to act, and now. This was her whole concern.   * * *  Her partner had fallen and the burning rock beneath their feet now scorched the skin of his arms and face, his body. Acrid smoke rose as he smouldered there. Her sinews strained as she pulled his inert form up and draped him over the pulling bar. In the same breath she pressed all her weight against the drag of the loaded cart and pushed with every ounce of strength she had, grimly determined to do the work of both of them.   Sweat boiled on her forehead in sizzling rivulets. Her hands were seared by the bar but her pain was by now beyond a feeling.   ‘Push! Just push. Don’t think. Just do.’ She muNered aloud, ‘They will not get him. I will not let them.’ Her will was a bright diamond, a seed of blinding radiance, impervious to heat and pain, untouched by reek and racket. In that moment her being was drawn into a single blazing point. All else fell away and she knew that she had won – the waggon was underway and she was unstoppable. Her friend had been saved from further torture.

7 
 As the ﬂush of success dawned within her breast – its thrill almost rapturous amid the gloom and threat – she seemed to feel her own strength faltering simultaneously. The landscape shimmered and shifted around her, everything started to feel thinner, distant, as if she was losing her purchase on the world, although she still seemed to be pushing the cart along with ease.   A collage of images ﬁlled her vision as it began to swim, dream-pictures that linked with each other yet were drifting apart; they had reached the smelting pools so she was stopping the cart; her ears were ﬁlled with a soft rushing sound, like waves shooshing across a shore and soaking into the sand; her partner raised his head and smiled; the heat that pounded relentlessly from the ground below was there but it caused no pain; the scarlet ﬁres and molten pools seemed transparent, shell-like, and a golden light rose around everything she saw.   It was cool; there was softness; she was fading, rising, ﬂoating in a gently giddying spiral.   She was disappearing into a single point but that point was everywhere.   ==*==
