# Chapter 20: Prince Vidudabha Visits his Ancestral Home  1) p180:– Vidudabha had been pestering his mother: This long scenario is all based on the Commentary to Dhp 47, as found in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp37-52.   2) ibid:– the King had appointed Vidudabha as commander-in-chief of the army: In the original the King does this when his son is no older than seven(!), see Buddhist Legends, Vol II,  p43.  3)  p182:– five gold kahapanas: At gold prices today those five gold pieces would be worth about £1600. A hefty sum indeed for a single job. (See above Ch. 10, note 8)  4) p183:– made offerings both before and after the mealtime: The offerings made in the Southern Buddhist monasteries before the meal and after would be both food and other items, such as cloth, or oil for lamps. If it’s the occasion of a special blessing such as this there would usually be a richer variety and abundance of offerings.   5) ibid:– He seemed to be consciously attuning: This is the way that Dhamma talks are offered in the Southern Buddhist world, particularly in the Thai forest tradition. Talks are not prepared but are, ideally, spontaneous and are a genuine desana (Hindi: darshan) a ‘demonstration’ or embodiment of Dharma, arising from the speaker’s mind and informed by the assembled attendees’ moods, natures and levels of understanding.   6) p184:– the things we customarily take to be who … we are: This passage is based upon the principle first expounded by the Buddha in the ‘Discourse on Not-self’, found at S 22.59, and MV 1.6.38-47, as in The Life of the Buddha, pp45-7. There are comparable teachings found in many other places.   7) ibid:– on account of ignorance: this is ‘avijjā’ in Pali. It means ‘not being aware’ ‘not seeing the reality clearly’ rather than the English usage that has the meaning ‘not possessing certain information’.   8) ibid:– ‘I am’ is a conceiving: This passage is based on M 140.31, the sutta is the ‘Discourse on the Exposition of the Elements’. (See above, Ch. 17, note 20).  9) ibid:– is there a self?: This passage is based on an encounter of the Buddha with Vacchagotta, an adherent of another group of wanderers, who regularly came to ask questions of the Buddha. Eventually he left his original community, became a bhikkhu and

326 
Chapter 20: Prince Vidudabha Visits his Ancestral Home  1) p180:– Vidudabha had been pestering his mother: This long scenario is all based on the Commentary to Dhp 47, as found in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp37-52.   2) ibid:– the King had appointed Vidudabha as commander-in-chief of the army: In the original the King does this when his son is no older than seven(!), see Buddhist Legends, Vol II,  p43.  3)  p182:– five gold kahapanas: At gold prices today those five gold pieces would be worth about £1600. A hefty sum indeed for a single job. (See above Ch. 10, note 8)  4) p183:– made offerings both before and after the mealtime: The offerings made in the Southern Buddhist monasteries before the meal and after would be both food and other items, such as cloth, or oil for lamps. If it’s the occasion of a special blessing such as this there would usually be a richer variety and abundance of offerings.   5) ibid:– He seemed to be consciously attuning: This is the way that Dhamma talks are offered in the Southern Buddhist world, particularly in the Thai forest tradition. Talks are not prepared but are, ideally, spontaneous and are a genuine desana (Hindi: darshan) a ‘demonstration’ or embodiment of Dharma, arising from the speaker’s mind and informed by the assembled attendees’ moods, natures and levels of understanding.   6) p184:– the things we customarily take to be who … we are: This passage is based upon the principle first expounded by the Buddha in the ‘Discourse on Not-self’, found at S 22.59, and MV 1.6.38-47, as in The Life of the Buddha, pp45-7. There are comparable teachings found in many other places.   7) ibid:– on account of ignorance: this is ‘avijjā’ in Pali. It means ‘not being aware’ ‘not seeing the reality clearly’ rather than the English usage that has the meaning ‘not possessing certain information’.   8) ibid:– ‘I am’ is a conceiving: This passage is based on M 140.31, the sutta is the ‘Discourse on the Exposition of the Elements’. (See above, Ch. 17, note 20).  9) ibid:– is there a self?: This passage is based on an encounter of the Buddha with Vacchagotta, an adherent of another group of wanderers, who regularly came to ask questions of the Buddha. Eventually he left his original community, became a bhikkhu and

327 
realized full enlightenment (M 73.26). The silent response of the Buddha, and Ānanda’s follow up questions, are found at S 44.10.  10) ibid:– The Master does this sometimes: The Buddha treated questions on the teachings in four different ways; they were 1) Questions deserving a straight answer;  2) Those that need their terms defined before they can be answered; 3) Those that are best responded to by a counter-question; 4) Those that should be put aside.  This list is found at A 4.42. Of the questions ‘to be put aside’, Buddha spoke eloquently of his reasoning for this at M 63.8, the ‘Shorter Discourse to Mālunkyāputta’, and in the famous ‘handful of leaves’ teaching, found at S 56.31.   11) p185:– It is time now: this is an extremely common way for the Buddha to close a discussion or teaching, such as at M 89.20, M 145.6 and S 44.1.  12) ibid:– the King wanted to marry her off to Prince Ajatasattu: The marriage between Vajirī and Ajātasattu is mentioned in commentarial and later literature (e.g. at Jāt 285, Jāt 492 and in the Commentary to Dhp 325, in Buddhist Legends, Vol III, p77) but is never mentioned in the Pali Canon’s suttas or Vinaya texts. Ajātasattu was King of Magadha by the time the marriage was said to have occurred.   13) ibid:– self-view and the threads of conceit: ‘Self-view’, ‘sakkāya-diṭṭhi’ in Pali, is the first of the Ten Obstacles to Enlightenment (saṃyojanā); ‘the conceit of identity’, ‘asmi-māna’ in Pali, is number eight on the list. It is only completely let go of at the realization of Arahantship.  14) p186:– Brave but slowly wise, thus we hail our hero: This phrase comes from the ‘Prologue’ of Wolfram von Eschenbach’s epic Parzival, composed in Middle High German in the first part of the 13th Century.   15) ibid:– If … when asked, ‘Is there a self?’: Again, as above, this comes from S 44.10.  16) p187:– at the death of the body, an existent being is utterly annihilated: The Buddha elucidates this point also at M 22.37: ‘I have been misrepresented baselessly, vainly, falsely and wrongly by some samaṇas and brahmins thus: “The Samaṇa Gotama is one who leads astray; he teaches annihilation, the destruction or the extermination of an existent being.” As I am not; and I do not proclaim this, I have been misrepresented … both formerly and now what I teach is suffering and the ending of suffering.’

328 
 17) ibid:– When a being is enlightened, where do they reappear, after the death of the body?: This passage is derived from another encounter of the Buddha with Vacchagotta, at M 72.16-19, the ‘Discourse to Vacchagotta about Fire’.  18) p190:– lammergeiers: Also known as ‘bearded vulture’, Gypaetus barbatus. They have a wingspan of roughly 2.5m and are scavengers rather than killers. The prince need not have been afraid.    Chapter 21: The Prince’s Fury  1) p194:– hobs and brownies: A ‘hob’ is defined as ‘a kind of sprite’; the name is related to the more familiar word ‘hob-goblin’. It has been speculated that J.R.R. Tolkien’s name for the ‘hobbits’ was informed by this word and the actual word ‘hobbit’ is indeed found in archaic materials. It appears in a book called The Denham Tracts, (published in 1895 but written decades earlier by the Yorkshire tradesman Michael Denham), referring to accounts of witchcraft dating back to the sixteenth century. There are, mentioned there in a list, such beings as: ‘Boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, hobbits, hobgoblins, brown-men, cowies.’  A ‘brownie’ is, similarly, an old word meaning: ‘A benevolent spirit or goblin, of shaggy appearance, supposed to haunt old houses, esp. farmhouses, in Scotland, and sometimes perform useful household work while the family were asleep.’ O.E.D.   2) p195:– Prince Vidudabha was received with splendid and colourful ceremony: This scenario is based upon Jāt 7, Jāt 465 and the Commentary to Dhp 47, as found in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, p44.   3)  p198:– The embassy’s visit only lasted a few days: As above, this is based upon Jāt 7, Jāt 465 and the Commentary to Dhp 47, in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, p44.  4) ibid:– Viraja by name: In the original story, the soldier who goes back to retrieve his sword (or spear, as in Jāt 465) is not named.
