# CHAPTER 13: THE GROUP OF SIX  uite soon after Krishna had arrived at the Jetavana he had renewed his friendship with Khujjuttara and that connection had developed helpfully over time. He had been somewhat sobered, chastened by the painful consequences of what he and the other monks had got up to in Kitagiri, so he was now much more motivated by caring and compassion, and an appreciation of the consequences of the choices that he made. He was still thoroughly convinced of the value and validity of his ‘Sooner! More!’ philosophy of life-affirmation but he was now much more discerning and thoughtful about the impact that his words and actions, and those of the people around him, had upon the world. In this light he was very grateful for the company of Ananda and Khujjuttara and her young helper, Matanga. They were a good influence upon him, he felt, and he was glad of their always practical and sage advice, and their example of modesty and kindness.  Since the Buddha spent most of his time these days at the Jetavana, and since Ananda was his chief attendant, it often came about that he was not available for a chat with Krishna, to offer his counsel and companionship. This led to Krishna regularly sitting with Khujjuttara and Matanga, chatting in the sala or under the trees, and spending many hours of the day in their company. He felt that this was all very innocent; Khujjuttara was, after all a white-haired Elder, and Matanga was pointedly restrained and properly behaved. Certainly she was young and pretty but she was modest to a fault and never roused any flirtatious feelings in the monks or laymen that drew close to her sagacious charge, when they came to Khujjuttara for advice or to be reminded of various passages of the Teachings that she was well-versed in.  It was now a Moon or two after Krishna had arrived from Kitagiri and he was getting very comfortable with this new routine and circle of friends, when his old companion, Surama, walked into the monastery. He had moved on from Kitagiri a dozen years before and Krishna had not seen him since.  ‘Hello, old friend!’ Krishna was very excited to meet him after such a long absence. ‘Where have you been all this time? I’ve not heard a word about you from anyone who came to Kitagiri, or here either, for that matter. What have you been up to? Where have you been living? You look well.’ Surama gave a cursory nod to the two women that Krishna had been talking with, when he had walked up to them, and made it clear to Krishna that it would indeed be good to catch up. With another derogatory glance at Krishna’s companions, he suggested, ‘Let’s go to your kuti, or somewhere quiet, so we can have a proper talk.’

101 
CHAPTER 13: THE GROUP OF SIX  uite soon after Krishna had arrived at the Jetavana he had renewed his friendship with Khujjuttara and that connection had developed helpfully over time. He had been somewhat sobered, chastened by the painful consequences of what he and the other monks had got up to in Kitagiri, so he was now much more motivated by caring and compassion, and an appreciation of the consequences of the choices that he made. He was still thoroughly convinced of the value and validity of his ‘Sooner! More!’ philosophy of life-affirmation but he was now much more discerning and thoughtful about the impact that his words and actions, and those of the people around him, had upon the world. In this light he was very grateful for the company of Ananda and Khujjuttara and her young helper, Matanga. They were a good influence upon him, he felt, and he was glad of their always practical and sage advice, and their example of modesty and kindness.  Since the Buddha spent most of his time these days at the Jetavana, and since Ananda was his chief attendant, it often came about that he was not available for a chat with Krishna, to offer his counsel and companionship. This led to Krishna regularly sitting with Khujjuttara and Matanga, chatting in the sala or under the trees, and spending many hours of the day in their company. He felt that this was all very innocent; Khujjuttara was, after all a white-haired Elder, and Matanga was pointedly restrained and properly behaved. Certainly she was young and pretty but she was modest to a fault and never roused any flirtatious feelings in the monks or laymen that drew close to her sagacious charge, when they came to Khujjuttara for advice or to be reminded of various passages of the Teachings that she was well-versed in.  It was now a Moon or two after Krishna had arrived from Kitagiri and he was getting very comfortable with this new routine and circle of friends, when his old companion, Surama, walked into the monastery. He had moved on from Kitagiri a dozen years before and Krishna had not seen him since.  ‘Hello, old friend!’ Krishna was very excited to meet him after such a long absence. ‘Where have you been all this time? I’ve not heard a word about you from anyone who came to Kitagiri, or here either, for that matter. What have you been up to? Where have you been living? You look well.’ Surama gave a cursory nod to the two women that Krishna had been talking with, when he had walked up to them, and made it clear to Krishna that it would indeed be good to catch up. With another derogatory glance at Krishna’s companions, he suggested, ‘Let’s go to your kuti, or somewhere quiet, so we can have a proper talk.’

102 
Krishna bade farewell to Khujjuttara and Matanga and took off with Surama, helping to carry the Elder’s bowl and robes and chatting ardently as they strolled along. The hours rolled by at Krishna’s kuti as the two of them exchanged their news of the previous twelve Rains. There was a lot to catch up on. One element of this was that Surama had not just come to the Jetavana in order to spend more time close to the Master, but also because several of his old respected friends in the Sangha were here too.  ‘If you haven’t met them already, I’m sure you’ll be impressed,’ Surama was getting energized as he spoke.  ‘To be honest, I’ve not been mixing much as yet,’ Krishna replied, ‘I’ve mostly been chatting with the people I knew from before – Ananda, of course, then that elder laywoman I was talking with when you showed up; I knew her in Kosambi, years ago. She’s very wise, and knows the Teachings inside out.’ ‘Well, I’ll be very happy to make the introductions,’ Surama continued, ‘the two Elders from the Sakyan nobility are Panduka and Lohitaka, then there are Mettiya and Bhummajaka – they are brilliant fellows too. Also, I don’t know if you heard, but your old teachers from Kitagiri have just arrived here as well – Assaji and Basuka – they all know each other from way back and have been disciples of the Master for many years.  Krishna had some mixed feelings about the Elders Assaji and Punabbasuka arriving, since he was trying to turn over a new leaf and to leave at least a certain amount of the Kitagiri experience behind him. He reflected, however, that the troubles that had been caused, and the hurts inflicted there, had largely been on account of over-zealous or selfish monks misinterpreting the words and the example of the two leaders of the community. The destructive and cruel things that had happened were not anything that Assaji or Punabbasuka had themselves encouraged. With this thought in mind Krishna smiled and responded to the excitement in his friend’s voice, ‘That sounds like a great opportunity. I had no idea that such wise and inspiring Elders were here as well.’   * * *  ‘The Group of Six’, as they were known, gravitated to a cluster of kutis on the north-eastern corner of the forest of the Jetavana. The three large dwellings in the centre were occupied by Panduka and Lohitaka, who shared the one on the left, Mettiya and Bhummajaka were in the central one while Assaji and Basuka took up residence on the right. A small covered courtyard in the middle of the enclave served as an informal gathering place for the Six and their followers, and those drawn by the laughter and loudness of the conversation.  ‘It’s a frightful pain,’ Panduka was waxing lyrically, ‘an absolute bore, but that barber Upali has been haranguing the chaps, left and right, about all the blessèd rules he assumes we should be keeping, Elders, newbies, everyone! It’s an unmitigated disaster,’ he leant upon the word. ‘If everybody is clued up on the ten

103 
thousand tiny details then we’re bound to be pushed and pulled around by every Johnny-know-it-all in the monastery, and by the lay-people too.’ He sneered superciliously. ‘It will be awful!’ Lohitaka harrumphed his agreement.  ‘If you ask me,’ Bhummajaka chimed in, ‘the thing to do is to start a very reasonable and quiet campaign, along the lines of, ‘The Master’s Dharma teaching is all about ending suffering. So why are these lesser and minor training rules repeated and promoted when they lead only to anxiety, bother and confusion?’ He glanced from side to side, pleased to see the crop of shaven heads nodding in agreement.  ‘Bhummajaka is absolutely right,’ Mettiya spoke up, catching everyone’s attention. ‘If we steadily, and with logic, carefully considered reason, put this into the mix, hopefully Upali’s classes will get less popular and there will be a minimum of criticism projected our way.’  Surama had brought Krishna into the edges of the circle and he was slowly making out who was who and how this group had been functioning over the years. Surama had already impressed him with how the Group of Six, and their students, were ardent adherents of exactly the same life-revering philosophy that Krishna had given himself to for so many years. He was delighted to hear of this but it seemed that, as at Kitagiri, there had been a few unfortunate accidents and excesses from time to time. In the flow of conversation – mostly led by the six great Elders but with some of the younger followers joining in as well – there were references to a cowherd who had unfortunately been killed when one of them had playfully tossed a rock off the Robber’s Cliff, and which had struck him on the head; a man, whose wife was the object of desire for one of the Six, who was persuaded to kill himself; then there was one of the young, delicate Group of Seventeen monks, who died when tickled by one of Mettiya’s students, and a number of other such incidents.  That said, Krishna was impressed by how often they had avoided being harassed by those petty, minor rules. Furthermore, by cleverly making sure that at least four of the Group always attended every formal Sangha meeting, it ensured that no punitive act could be carried out against any of them, since that was how the Sangha law was constituted. If one or two went on their own, they would be in deep trouble! Apparently it was Mettiya or Bhummajaka who oversaw such manoeuvres; they had the best legal minds of the team and were usually a few steps ahead of the game in this regard.  They had been reprimanded, and rules had been established by the Buddha, for a lot of very insignificant incidents, as far as Krishna could tell. Things such as owning too many robes or going to a free food distribution centre too often – these seemed unimportant items for the Buddha to be making stipulations about so he heartily agreed that the Group of Six were justified in their way of operating.  One thing he was uncomfortable about was the way they spoke of the Group of Seventeen – these frail and refined youngsters seemed to be an object of teasing and bullying to the point of deliberate cruelty – but such was the general good humour, the playful and positive way that the Group of Six related with each other, that such misgivings were washed away in the tide of Krishna’s joyful appreciation.

104 
‘You are right, Surama, these are all fine fellows!’ He found himself using his poshest accent in his friend’s company and round the Group of Six. ‘It’s like all the best of Kitagiri without (most of) the bad parts. These are my people!’   * * *   Dabba the Mallian was one of a small number of the Buddha’s monastic disciples who had realized enlightenment as a seven-year-old novice. He was in fact so precocious in his wisdom and spiritual maturity that it is said that it was at the first touch of the razor, when his head was being shaved for the first time, that his great awakening was actualized. He was highly respected in the Sangha and generally considered to be above reproach.  A wealthy householder in Savatthi had been making it a practice of generosity and faith to invite four bhikkhus every day to his home, to offer them a meal of fine alms-food. Each day a new group went, according to a roster organized at the Jetavana. One afternoon this householder, named Punna, went to the Jetavana and happened to meet Dabba the Mallian. He was glad to have this opportunity and, sitting down with the Elder, had an inspiring and illuminating Dharma discussion with him for a while. At the end of his questions about meditation and how best to live a wholesome life he asked, ‘Venerable Sir, do you happen to know to whom amongst the bhikkhus the meal offering at my house tomorrow is assigned?’  It was just a passing thought, and he had not been intending to act in any kind of preferential way, but he found himself upset and disappointed when Dabba replied, ‘Mettiya and Bhummajaka, together with two of their followers, are the ones on the list.’ Dabba thought no more of it as the faithful Punna bowed and departed for his home. The householder, however, was seething, since he was well aware of the poor reputation that those monks had, a notoriety shared by all of the Group of Six and their faction:– How can those awful monks eat in my house with me and my family? It will be an embarrassment for all of us, and who knows what kind of worldly talk they will indulge in, and what favours they might ask of us?’ By the time he had reached his home he had decided what to do. He went straight to the kitchens and spoke to one of the servants there, instructing them, ‘When the time comes for the four monks to visit for the meal tomorrow, prepare mats for them out in the gatehouse and, by way of food, offer them porridge which is made of unhusked rice and with brine from the pickles for a sauce. Nothing else! Got that!’ The servant could tell that her master was in a mood and that there was no room for discussion or questions.  ‘As you say, master,’ she replied, ‘it will be done exactly as you have asked.’ Back at the Jetavana it was very much on the minds of Mettiya and Bhummajaka, as well as their two followers who were due to go along with them,

105 
that a meal of fine food at Punna’s house was scheduled for the next day. They could not keep quiet about it, imagining how Punna and his wife and children would be lining up with all sorts of rich curries and sauces, condiments and desserts. They had chatted with some of the other monks who had gone on previous days and the prospects seemed very exciting. They could hardly sleep that night for the saliva in their mouths, the rumbling of anticipation in their stomachs and the fantasies running through their minds:– This is going to be really something! The next morning the four of them walked into Savatthi, to the house of Punna and his family. The servant saw them approaching and, when they arrived, she ushered them into the gatehouse and indicated the mats. ‘Please have a seat, honoured sirs.’ Mettiya and Bhummajaka both had the thought, ‘It must be that the food is not ready yet, which is why we are being invited to sit in the gatehouse, instead of being welcomed into their home.’ The same servant then picked up the pot of unhusked rice-porridge and offered it to the elders, then the jar of brine. ‘Please eat, honoured sirs,’ she politely said, making the gesture of añjali.  Bhummajaka spoke up, ‘Sister, we are the ones here for the daily meal offering,’ hoping that there had been some error of communication and that this foolish woman had not understood the instructions of her employer.  She was quite aware how the words she was about to say would go down but, since the master had given her strict instructions, and since she was also aware of the bad reputation that these particular monks had, she fixed her expression – determined not to smirk – and said, ‘I know you are the ones here for the daily meal offering, sirs but, yesterday, Master Punna ordered me to seat you all in the gatehouse and to offer you porridge of unhusked rice, with pickled-brine sauce. So, please, honoured sirs, do eat.’ Then she bowed and left them to it.   * * *  The meal had been a very unsatisfactory affair, in many ways, and Mettiya and Bhummajaka were determined to get to the bottom of how it had come about that they had been so poorly treated, as they saw it. While they stomped back to the Jetavana, grumbling and grousing as if that would salve their wounded pride and unamused palates, one of the junior monks in the group said, ‘Yesterday, in the afternoon, I saw Master Punna sitting and talking with Dabba the Mallian. Maybe it was that conceited Dabba who turned him against us.’  ‘That sounds highly likely,’ Mettiya perked up on hearing this. ‘He’s a pompous little man, so proud of his “I was enlightened when I was a little novice, when the razor touched my head” story. It’s all bunkum as far as I’m concerned.’  The four of them reached the gateway to the Jetavana and sat in the shade of the broad-spreading trees for a bit, before heading to the corner of the monastery

106 
where their dwellings were, as there were a couple of low platforms by the gate for anyone to sit on while they were waiting to enter or to meet an arriving visitor.  The early afternoon heat was a drain on their energies and for a moment they all stopped talking – they were glum, slack-jawed, shoulders drooping and furrow-browed. Just at this moment a nun, also called Mettiya, happened by. She was in a cheery mood and so greeted them brightly, ‘Greetings to you, venerable sirs!’ But such was their sombre mien that none of them gave her any reply. This was odd since her namesake – the monk Mettiya – usually made some wisecrack about them being related, or even twins. Today there was nothing.  ‘Have I offended you, sirs? Why no response?’ She was curious now as it was so unusual for any of the Group of Six to be so subdued.  ‘If you have offended us,’ the bhikkhu Mettiya began, ‘it’s only by you being in a good mood whilst all of us have been grievously offended by Dabba the Mallian. He has been treating us like dirt.’ Mara, who was close by and taking great interest in the unfolding of this conversation, caused the nun to respond by saying, ‘What can I do to help?’ Then, muffling all cautions and reservations, Bhummajaka said to her, ‘If you really want to be of assistance, you could get the Master to expel Dabba from the Sangha this very day.’ ‘How can I do that?’ ‘Go to the Master and say, “Where there once was calm, harmlessness and freedom from fear, there is now dread, harm and danger. What was tranquil is now whipped by storms; it’s as if water is ablaze. I have been raped by Dabba the Mallian.”’ Mara, leaning into his task, caused any qualms or hesitancy to vanish from the nun’s mind. The fact that she had just been asked to tell a deliberate lie to the Buddha seemed the most normal and straightforward thing to do:– She was glad indeed to be able to help her friends and her namesake!  ‘As you say, venerable sirs; it shall be done.’  * * *  The news about the shocking accusation spread quickly through the Jetavana, in no small part because the Buddha had immediately called a community meeting to question Dabba and to establish the facts of the issue in a public forum.  Surama had been encouraging Krishna to spend more time with the Group of Six, not only because he felt they would be a good influence on his younger friend but also he had chided Krishna a few times about his closeness with Khujjuttara and her attractive companion. ‘You know, after getting so much flak for being one of those “disreputable Kitagiri monks” it doesn’t look good for you to be spending so much time around those women.’ He sneered a bit too dismissively as he said this, which hurt Krishna’s feelings, as he had come to respect the pair of wise and kind people. The agèd elder laywoman was a motherly presence in his life that he greatly

107 
appreciated and he felt a big-brotherly protectiveness towards Matanga, who continued to blossom in her friendship with Krishna and in the many conversations she had had with him. Krishna took it in good part, however, that Surama essentially meant well and had his best interests at heart, so he did not argue the point; besides, the Group of Six and their many followers were a lively and interesting crowd and it was always fun to be around them.  Krishna was sitting with them when they heard that the Sangha meeting had been called for that very day. They all moved swiftly to gather their robes and prepare for the meeting, and headed over as a large group to the Dharma Hall, where the investigation was to take place. Krishna was excited by the story of what had happened – how Dabba had insulted them but that now his big secret was about to be revealed, or rather confirmed, and he would be taken down a peg or two. It looked like his claim to have been enlightened as a child would be torn to pieces as well – an added bonus!  Dabba was not someone that Krishna knew well but he was famous as one of the ‘enlightened novices’ and also for his ability, when he was the lodgings monk, to light up one of his fingers, to make a luminous torch, to show the way along the forest paths at night to late arriving bhikkhus. He got into trouble for this when the Buddha found out that monks were deliberately arriving after dark so they could witness Dabba the Mallian’s glowing finger for themselves.  There was mostly a grim cast to the expressions on the faces of the monks gathered at the hall. It was very quiet as the Master was already seated at the centre of the assembly. Only the male monastic community were there, with the nuns and the lay people not being a part of this legal procedure for the bhikkhus.  It did not take long for everyone to gather. When the community was all present the Buddha called Dabba to the front and questioned him: ‘Do you remember doing as the nun Mettiya said you have done, that you raped her?’ To this Dabba replied, ‘Venerable Sir, you know the reality with regard to me.’  This was not a very helpful way to respond so the Master asked again, to which Dabba answered in the same way. After a third round of this the Buddha changed his line of questioning.  Dabba was not very wise to the ways of the world and, somewhat naively, assumed that the Buddha’s previous acquaintance with and knowledge about Dabba’s spiritual state would be enough to settle the issue; he was missing the fact that the Buddha had convened a full-scale meeting so that the facts could be aired publicly, rather than a case being decided solely upon the Master’s accurate knowledge of the thoughts, states of realization and memories of others, as well as his awareness of the reliability (or not) of people’s words.

108 
‘Dabba,’ the Buddha began, ‘people of your clan, the Mallians, are wise and do not give evasive answers like that. If what was said to be done by you was done by you, say so; if it was not done by you, say it was not.  ‘Venerable Sir, since I was born, I cannot call to mind ever indulging in sexual intercourse even in a dream, much less so when I was awake.’ The Buddha was aware of the truth of Dabba’s statement and, now that it had been declared publicly, it was sufficient for him to close the case. Such was the utter fullness of confidence in the Master’s knowledge and impartiality, that the matter was ended there, or at least it ended with him establishing a new, serious training rule.  On realizing that their ruse had failed completely, the Group of Six did a rapid about-face, aiming to ameliorate the situation by coming clean straightaway. They admitted that they had put the nun Mettiya up to it and asked for her not to be punished. Since there was no training rule on this issue of false accusations at that time, they thought they could confess with impunity and no repercussions would ensue. Krishna was shocked and a bit perplexed at the revelation of their deception – he had not been told that the accusation was completely fabricated – as well as by the immediate readiness of Mettiya and Bhummajaka to admit the falsity of the story.  He was still trying to make sense of it all when the Master declared, ‘The nun, Sister Mettiya, was possessed by the Evil One the Lord of Lies, and spoke as she did under his malign influence. Just as was the shepherd boy, who threw a rock and injured the head of Vidhura, the chief disciple of the Blessèd One Kakusandha, and just as the member of the Brahma Baka’s assembly was, who addressed me casually and warned me not to disrespect his Brahma lord. Sister Mettiya should be considered as innocent of wrong-doing as she was not in her right mind at the time of making the accusation. She needs kindness, forgiveness and advice as to how to protect her mind from the Evil One, protection best established through mindfulness and wisdom, not by any kind of punishment.  ‘From this time a new training rule is established that: ‘Any monk, malignant, malicious and ill-tempered, who defames a monk with an unfounded charge involving Defeat, then afterwards, whether he is pressed on the issue or not, if the charge turns out to be unfounded, and if the monk confesses his malice, it is an offence entailing a formal meeting of the Sangha.’ ‘Since the members of the Group of Six were the instigators of the charge, their conduct deserves to be criticized, however as the “first wrong-doers” in this instance no such formal meeting of the Sangha is needed now.’  * * *  Krishna had been taken aback to learn that Dabba had, in fact, been innocent all along. That had not been clear to him at all in the conversations that had gone on

109 
at the enclave of the Group, before the meeting they had all just attended. He was raising this with Surama and grumbling about the dishonesty involved, as well as how the elders of the Group of Six had been shamed so publicly.  Surama did not at first respond to the issue about the deception that the Elders had persuaded the nun Mettiya to carry out but, taking an oblique tack, he had a very interesting take on the Group of Six, as well as monks like Udayin and Arittha, who had been the cause of many rules being established.  ‘These good bhikkhus receive a lot of negative comments and are looked upon by some as “disreputable, unworthy, sham monks” and so forth but, to me, those who have been the cause for these precepts being established are true bodhisattvas – sacrificing their good name and any pride for the sake of others.’ Krishna was perplexed and a bit confused, ‘I admire them for their liberality and the freedom of spirit they all have, and that’s inspiring to me but, as happened today, the Master really scolded them. He might have to do that as part of his “public performance” but surely, if they were the cause of something he approved of, why give those liver-withering rebukes and public haranguings? Is that harsh treatment just a smoke screen? The ones who are the cause of the rules get the “mogha-purisa!” treatment “Oh, foolish man!” How is it that they are being self-sacrificial, for the good of others? I don’t quite get it.’ ‘Isn’t it obvious?’ Surama gave him one of his by-now-familiar sideways glances, pausing to see if Krishna could indeed join up the dots. ‘I’ll give you a clue. Did the Master not often say “Vinaya is the life of the religion” and how the teachings of the Buddhas who established the patimokkha training rules lasted long while those who didn’t had but a short-lived influence in the world?’ He smirked more openly, raising an eyebrow for emphasis. Krishna still didn’t quite get the point. Surama was enjoying putting him to the test. ‘And how do the rules all get established, every single one of them, whether major or minor?’ ‘By the “wrong-doings” of the various monks and nuns,’ it was now dawning on Krishna, ‘So, if no wrong-doings (so-called), no Vinaya, and thus a short life-span of the dispensation.’ ‘Ergo…’ ‘Ergo the Group of Six, Udayin, Arittha, Sudinna, Thullananda, Sundarinanda and all the others like them are great bodhisattvas, willing, no eager, to give up their reputations as “good monks and nuns” so that the Vinaya gets fully established and the words and influence of the Master Gotama, our great teacher, last for a very long time! I get it!’ Surama smiled appreciatively. ‘This boy really is a sucker,’ he thought but did not say.   * * *

110 
Inspired and, consequently, aspiring to these dizzying spiritual heights, Krishna had had a brilliant idea, at least it seemed to be so when it formed in his mind the following day, as a complete and neat conceptual package when on alms-round in Katara, one of the villages close to Savatthi. Just out beyond the edge of the houses one of the farmers had a goat pen. He had put the billy in with the nanny goats and the billy was joined with one of the nannies, busily engaged in endeavouring to increase the herd.  Krishna caught up with Bhummajaka, who was on the same alms-round and pointed out the two goats to him.  ‘Look – if we name the billy goat “Dabba the Mallian” and the nanny “Sister Mettiya”, then we can validly declare, “Formerly we accused Dabba the Mallian about what was hearsay but now we have ourselves seen Dabba engaging in sexual intercourse with Sister Mettiya,” don’t you think this is an excellent idea?’ The Elders, Bhummajaka and Mettiya, heartily approved of this wheeze and prompted Krishna to bring the matter to the Master as soon as possible. He, full of the great notion that he was doing something very useful, approached the Buddha after the mealtime that very day and, as expected, another meeting was convened and Dabba was questioned as before.  The flow of the examination went as previously but this time, after Dabba had declared his innocence, the Master required that the monk who had made the accusation, in this case Krishna, be questioned as to more details on what he had seen. The story of the goats came out, to the dismay and disgust of most of the well-behaved monks, they wondering, ‘How could you think of defaming Dabba with this flimsy legal pretext? And how on earth did you assume that the Master would not see that it was a total falsehood?’  Heads were shaken in dismay at the degree of delusion apparent in Krishna but there was surprise at how well he seemed to take the rebukes. He actually appeared to be smiling, which indeed he was. Krishna himself was feeling ‘mission accomplished’ and when another new rule was formalized – to deal with accusations made on a legal pretext – he even glowed with pride that:– This is one that I have done by myself! Surama, meanwhile, observing this latest episode unfolding, reflected:– I chose the name ‘Surama’ since it means ‘good sport’, ‘fine amusement’, ‘great pleasure’ and this fool is providing worthy sport indeed. He has foiled me in the past, but he’s well and truly under my influence now – I rule him completely – he hasn’t even guessed the clue of my name ‘Surama’. Mix the few letters and one finds: ‘Mara? Us?’ He really is an idiot. Perhaps I should come up with an anagram for ‘Surely not?!’  * * *  Queen Vasabha’s friendship with Khujjuttara and Matanga ripened over the years. She would come and spend time with them at the Jetavana when she could

111 
and, sometimes, she invited them to her chambers at the palace. At first Matanga was somewhat overawed by the surroundings of the royalty, this being an environment she had never set foot in before but, after a few such visits, and on account of the Queen’s warm and easy company, and her sharp-witted humour, Matanga began to feel fully at ease.  Five Rains had passed since Matanga had arrived at the Jetavana and she was by now very much a part of Khujjuttara’s life. They spoke freely with each other, as they did with Queen Vasabha, and on this morning of the cold season they were ensconced in a cosy room with some charcoal braziers in the Queen’s quarters, and with her maid Kesini. The birds in the garden were warming up on the wall-top, soaking up the blessing of the sun’s rays as the rising light dispersed the dew of the early hours. Their calls became stronger as their feathers eased and were less fluffed, no longer needing to ward against the night chills. The subject of Krishna had come up and they were airing their feelings about his recent choice of friends.  ‘That Group of Six are a bunch of shameless rogues, no more, no less,’ Khujjuttara declared. ‘Mettiya and his friend Bhummajaka, they’d sell you a cart with no wheels and a two-legged ox to pull it!’ She scowled and made it clear she was deadly serious in her assessment. ‘And those Sakyans are a disgrace to your clan, Your Serene Highness, if you don’t mind me saying so; that Panduka, and Lohitaka, he’s even worse. They think they’re above the law, their own discipline too, just because they come from Kapilavatthu and are kshatriyan nobs. As for Assaji and Basuka – any excuse for a party, those two; the stories out of Kitagiri are shocking, even to an old hag like me, who’s seen a lot!’ The Queen, Matanga and Kesini nodded in agreement, the two younger women settled comfortably beside each other on the bank of cushions, both of them choosing to sit away from the pans with the warming coals. The Queen then invited Matanga to ignore protocols and to sit with her. Matanga was touched by this gesture of friendship and she enjoyed the warmth of Vasabha’s presence, as well as the beautiful perfume that she always wore, which reminded her of some childhood memories she could never quite pin down.  ‘I wish my Royal Husband would do something – I’m sure he would if he could – but their behaviour seems to be beyond the scope of his law, since they are monks and, at least on the surface, disciples of the Master.’ ‘They are sham monks,’ Matanga spoke up, ‘living the holy life only in name and costume. They pretend to be one thing but all the time they are something else altogether,’ she was prone to keeping quiet and letting Khujjuttara, as the elder, and Vasabha, as the Queen, do most of the talking but she felt strongly about this. At the words ‘sham’ and ‘pretend’ however, Vasabha felt herself to be blushing and was embarrassed to add anything to the conversation.  Matanga continued, ‘Krishna is a fine person and he was very kind to me. He treated me, a candala, as a complete equal from the time we first met, after he left Kitagiri. Now he’s mixed up with these ne’er-do-wells and doesn’t want to spend time with us. Well, I’m disappointed in him and I’m sure it’s the Group of Six, and

112 
that shady friend of his, Surama, who are persuading him to ignore us and to spend time only with them.’  ‘You know,’ Vasabha smiled at her, ‘you have quite the voice of authority when you speak up like this – and your accent’s changed too. When I first met you you had a distinct country burr; you talk like a Savatthi city girl now.’ ‘Do I?’ Matanga blushed, her golden colouring flushed with a sudden redness. ‘It’s not intentional. I grew up with a different accent altogether, from the north, and I only acquired the local country twang when I was doing all those rough jobs in the villages between the Gomati and Sarayu Rivers, north of Kitagiri.  ‘I don’t know why I pretended to be a local when I met Ananda – I mean the Sangha – I could just as easily have told them I was a mountain girl,’ she blushed. ‘Something made me want to be sure to be accepted so it made me tell a story I didn’t really need to. Funny how the mind does that.’ She looked at the mat pensively. ‘You even sound quite posh now, young lady,’ Khujjuttara chuckled, making nothing of Matanga’s admission of deception, ‘much more ’n me. You might even pass for a high-up, if you dressed a bit more fancily that is.’  ‘Funny you should say that,’ Matanga replied, ‘my mother used to have some delusions of grandeur – she fancied she was really the Lost Princess of Taxila – and she would put on a high-class accent as a joke sometimes – very convincing too. I don’t know where she’d heard it because there were never any nobles coming through Kulluta where we lived. But she had it down perfectly. She was only playing around, mostly, but part of her still believed, despite what my grandparents said, that she was secretly a princess that had been hidden away in the hills to protect her from evil plots in the palace of Taxila. She even called me a princess too – if you can believe it – my given name is Harittaca-Kumari, “Princess Golden-skin”, but I prefer “Matanga”, it’s a bit less grand and it keeps me down to earth.’  * * * One of the most frequent visitors to the Jetavana was the Royal Garland-maker’s daughter Pujika. She had been bringing flowers, woven into colourful and fragrant garlands and threaded together in intricate displays, since she was a small child.  She came again on this day, not only bearing floral gifts but carrying her child of nine Moons too. Krishna was at the main hall, enjoying a nowadays rare conversation with Ananda, when Pujika and her child approached, accompanied by her older sister and her young husband. They had been married when they reached sixteen Rains and their son had arrived nine Moons after. They had come to request a blessing for their first child and one for the next child too, who was clearly on the way.

113 
The young family settled on some mats in front of the two monks while they chanted blessings for the children. Pujika had prepared a bright array of red kanavera flowers to offer and she presented these to the monks with great devotion.   ==*==
