# Chapter 6: The Encounter at the Well  1) p38:– all daughters, who now lived in their new family homes: It is still the custom in India for a newly-married couple to reside in the husband’s home.   2)         p39:– after extensive astrological research had been made: This echoes the process of %nding a new wife for Kamanita, in The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch. 14, pp83-86.  3)         p40:– regular applications of madayantika: This is henna, or camphire, which is still used today in these regions of Northern India and Pakistan.   4)         p42:– he bowed three times: This is the traditional way of formally greeting elder monastics, in both the Southern and Northern traditions. The customary way of doing this, in the Southern Buddhist world, is to kneel down then bring the hands, palms together, to the forehead, then to bow the head to the ground, with the forehead just between the two hands. This is repeated three times. After the third bow the hands, palms together, are brought to the heart.   5)          ibid:– Sariputta, ever the dialectician: One of the most signi%cant qualities of Ven. Sāriputta was his analytical ability and he was named by the Buddha as supreme in this respect. It was also one reason why he was called ‘Dhammasenapati’ ‘The Marshal of the Dhamma’. There are numerous discourses and dialogues of Sāriputta that demonstrate his skill in both understanding and teaching; he was given the recognition of being ‘etadaggami mahapaññānami’ meaning ‘foremost among those who possess wisdom’.  6)         ibid:– and they take steps to cater for it: As found re the combative factions of the Kosambi monks, coming to stay at the Jetavana: ‘How should they be accommodated for lodging, Venerable Sir?!’ ‘Lodge them secluded from each other,’ (Vin MV 10).  7)         ibid:– less-than-fully-enlightened like you and me: Ven. Ānanda is being generous here! Whilst he was an anāgāmi (a Non-returner) at this point Krishna was still on the very preliminary stages of the path, before Stream-entry.   8)        ibid:– I was concerned: Ānanda was the great conciliator of the Sangha, always looking to reduce di0culty and con"ict. For example, his request to the Buddha to allow women to be ordained as nuns (A 8.51, Vin CV 10), also when Vacchagotta, the wanderer, asked some questions and the Buddha remained silent (at S 44.10).

291 
Chapter 6: The Encounter at the Well  1) p38:– all daughters, who now lived in their new family homes: It is still the custom in India for a newly-married couple to reside in the husband’s home.   2)         p39:– after extensive astrological research had been made: This echoes the process of %nding a new wife for Kamanita, in The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch. 14, pp83-86.  3)         p40:– regular applications of madayantika: This is henna, or camphire, which is still used today in these regions of Northern India and Pakistan.   4)         p42:– he bowed three times: This is the traditional way of formally greeting elder monastics, in both the Southern and Northern traditions. The customary way of doing this, in the Southern Buddhist world, is to kneel down then bring the hands, palms together, to the forehead, then to bow the head to the ground, with the forehead just between the two hands. This is repeated three times. After the third bow the hands, palms together, are brought to the heart.   5)          ibid:– Sariputta, ever the dialectician: One of the most signi%cant qualities of Ven. Sāriputta was his analytical ability and he was named by the Buddha as supreme in this respect. It was also one reason why he was called ‘Dhammasenapati’ ‘The Marshal of the Dhamma’. There are numerous discourses and dialogues of Sāriputta that demonstrate his skill in both understanding and teaching; he was given the recognition of being ‘etadaggami mahapaññānami’ meaning ‘foremost among those who possess wisdom’.  6)         ibid:– and they take steps to cater for it: As found re the combative factions of the Kosambi monks, coming to stay at the Jetavana: ‘How should they be accommodated for lodging, Venerable Sir?!’ ‘Lodge them secluded from each other,’ (Vin MV 10).  7)         ibid:– less-than-fully-enlightened like you and me: Ven. Ānanda is being generous here! Whilst he was an anāgāmi (a Non-returner) at this point Krishna was still on the very preliminary stages of the path, before Stream-entry.   8)        ibid:– I was concerned: Ānanda was the great conciliator of the Sangha, always looking to reduce di0culty and con"ict. For example, his request to the Buddha to allow women to be ordained as nuns (A 8.51, Vin CV 10), also when Vacchagotta, the wanderer, asked some questions and the Buddha remained silent (at S 44.10).

292 
9|)        ibid:– his penetrating gaze and quiet yet daunting authority: Mahā-Moggallāna was the Second Chief Disciple, after Sāriputta. He was known for his extensive psychic powers. There are very few discourses attributed to him.   10)       p43:– followers of Assaji and Punabbasuka to leave Kitagiri forthwith: This closely follows the account in the Vinaya (Vin iii 179) when the Act of Banishment was carried out. The Pali word for this is ‘pabbājaniyakamma’. This event was also the cause for the Buddha establishing the Saṅg #13 – re not disputing Sangha acts that have been validly carried out.   11) ibid:– I won’t have to wander its lanes at this time of the day: Monastics go to the village or town in the morning to receive alms-food. By the end of the day and evening – if the Sangha members are keeping the Rule – they will not be accepting offers of food and, since the evening is usually the time of day when people engage in pleasure-seeking and  amusements after the working day, it is not advised for monastics to be spending time in such inhabited areas, such ‘wrong resorts’ (micchagocāra) are to be avoided.   12) ibid:– would you be kind enough to give me some of your water?: This story is very well known but it is not found in the Pali Canon. One source is the Sārdūlakarṇāvadāna of the Divyāvadāna (Ch. 33). There have been several Chinese and Tibetan translations of this, starting in the Second Century CE. Western renditions of the story have been made by Eugène Burnouf, in his seminal Introduction to the History of Indian Buddhism (1844); an English version can be found in the Katia Buffetrille and Donald S. Lopez translation (Chicago University, 2010) on pp22-25.  Paul Carus published a briefer version in Buddha, the Gospel, (1894) in a chapter entitled ‘The Woman at the Well’. Interestingly it was also a major theme of the prospective opera, by Richard Wagner, called Die Sieger, (The Victors), which was sketched out in 1856 but never completed, although doctrinal elements from it can be found in his great musical drama Parsifal.  Most of the Divyāvadāna has been expertly translated into English by Andy Rotman (Divine Stories, Vols. 1 & 2, Wisdom Publications, 2008, 2017) but for some unknown reason, even though he states in the Introduction to Volume 1 (p4) that the Sārdūlakarṇāvadāna chapter will be included in Volume 2, it has not been, with the brief comment in the Introduction to Volume 2 stating merely that ‘the stories not translated in this collection are mostly available elsewhere’ (p x). This is disappointing.  A derivative version of the story is the linchpin of the Shurangama Sūtra, a Chinese text. In it a girl, only referred to as ‘Matangi’s daughter’ sees Ānanda on his alms-round and falls in love with him. She asks her mother to put a spell on him, via a mantra of the Kapilas, and he is about to break his Precepts with her when the Buddha intervenes by reciting the Shurangama Mantra, to counteract the Kapila region’s mantra. Ānanda swiftly

293 
comes to his senses and the Buddha then gives him instruction on the mind and the nature of perception. See The Shurangama Sutra, Vol I, pp36-37 and pp132-142 (Ch. 4, ‘Ananda’s Fall’), pub. DRBU/BTTS, 2003.  13) p44:– I did not ask you for your caste but for water: When entering the monastic order of the Buddha all caste and social rank are put aside, and caste laws no longer apply. This was portended in a vivid dream before the Buddha’s enlightenment, where different coloured birds came from the four quarters and alighted at his feet, where they all became of one colour. This represented the four castes becoming equal in the Sangha (A 5.196). Additionally, water is the only consumable that a monastic can ask a layperson for, according to the Vinaya, as in Pac. #40.   14) p45:– that woman’s name is Khujjuttara: She was the lay-woman disciple of the Buddha acknowledged by him as having the keenest wisdom and being foremost in learning. She was also physically challenged by a deformity of her back (which gave her her name ‘Bent in the upper parts’). The only book of the Tipiṭaka that is attributed to a lay person is the Itivuttaka, ‘As it Was Said’,  being her recollections of the Buddha’s teachings in Kosambi. She plays a major part in the story of Mara and the Mangala I.   15) ibid:– an obhāsa-dhārā of the Buddha: This is a ‘light-body’ projection that the Buddha was able to send forth, also known as a ‘transformation-body’: a kind of hologramic presence that he occasionally used to offer teachings with when he was physically distant. It is mentioned in the commentarial literature as often used when teaching nuns who were alone in retreat. There is a whole chapter recounting twelve such incidents in the book The Enlightened Nuns from the Time of the Buddha, Ch. 5, by Ven. Panadure Vajira Silmatha, ed. by Ajahn Candasiri and the author, Amaravati Publications, 2024.   16) p46:– a subject of King Dhatarattha: Dhataraṭṭha rules the East and the gandharvas; as above Ch 3, note 17.  17) ibid:– the invigorating perfume, amatagandha: This invention forms a major part of the story of Mara and the Mangala I, p190 ff.     Chapter 7: Matanga’s Devotion  1) p48:– not cross nobody’s shadow: According to the ritual observances of the brahmins, not only should they never touch a low caste person, they should never even let such a

294 
person cross their shadow – see Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 21 note 9. In the Mātaṅga Jātaka, Jāt 497, the Bodhisatta was called Mātaṅga, and was of the caṇḍāla caste. The daughter of a rich merchant, on the way to a picnic in the park with her friends, happened to see Mātaṅga so she ‘washed her eyes with perfumed water’ and cancelled the picnic. Her friends, annoyed at the loss of the free food and liquor, then beat Mātaṅga blaming him for their loss.   2) ibid:– humble lay devotees, upasika and upasaka: these two Pali terms are used in reference to all lay female and male disciples respectively. The word literally means ‘One who sits close by’.   3) ibid:– to help with any needs along the way: When going on long ‘tudong’ walks in a large group like this, in the Thai forest tradition at least, it is not uncommon for a few lay devotees to participate in the journey, both for their own spiritual enrichment and to help with practicalities along the way. A single monk or nun, or a small group, would often travel with a lay supporter of the same gender, in a similar fashion. See Tudong – The Long Road North (1984) by the author.   4) ibid:– between the River Gomati and the River Sarayu: These are known today as the River Bomti or Gomati, and the River Sarju or Sarayu. They meet at the town of Bageshwar, in the present day State of Uttarakhand.   5) p49:– holdouts at Kitagiri: The detailed story of how the emissaries came from the Jetavana to Kīṭāgiri, and the unreceptiveness of the monks there, is found in the origin story of Saṅg #13. The account of the Buddha himself coming to see those ‘hold-outs’, and endeavouring to offer them guidance, is found in the Kītāgiri Sutta, M 70.   6) ibid:– She would chat with him: The precepts that govern conversation and social contact between monks and women, and nuns and men, are quite detailed. In the customs of travelling in a group like this, such conversations would only be considered suitable when there was an informal time, (perhaps walking through a broad pasture or through a park, where the group would not have to walk in a narrow line), or at a rest stop with other monks or lay men close by and in earshot.   7) ibid:– we’re on probation for a bit: The Buddha had already established many rules that the Kītāgiri monks had transgressed – the Saṅg #13 rule being the last one in that category. The monks having repeatedly come into physical contact with women, with lustful intent, transgressed Saṅg #2, and having engaged in flirtatious speech they had broken Saṅg #3

295 
and Saṅg #4. It is likely that they broke Saṅg #1 as well, which prohibits masturbation, but no mention is made of that in the Vinaya origin story or in the Sutta.  Since Krishna and the other monks desirous of rehabilitation now acknowledged the faults that they had made, this entailed a formal loss of status and exclusion from some Sangha events a) for the period of time for which the offences were concealed and then b) an additional six days of extra-strict observance. After all that is completed then there would be a ceremony, with at least twenty monks present, in which the monks who had transgressed would be fully reinstated. The three stages are called: parivāsa, mānatta, and abbhāna.   8) p50:– like a goat that’s had all the bad luck of the village tied to it: This is the literal ‘scapegoat’, a custom found in various forms in many traditional communities, even today. A good example can be found in the Bible, Leviticus 16:21-22: ‘Aaron shall lay both his hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the iniquities and transgressions of the Israelites, whatever their sins, putting them on the head of the goat; and it shall be sent off to the wilderness through a designated man. Thus the goat shall carry on it all their iniquities to an inaccessible region; and the goat shall be set free in the wilderness.’  9) ibid:– I can even read and write: As described in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 13, p142.   10) ibid:– it’s a long story: Viz. the whole story of Mara and the Mangala I.   11) p51:– he was known as a Non-returner: This is the third level of enlightenment. The first is Stream-enterer (sotāpanna); the second is Once-returner (sakadāgāmī); this third is anāgāmi; and the fourth is full enlightenment (Arahant). An anāgāmi has fully let go of all ill-will (byāpāda) and lustfulness (kāma-rāga).   12) ibid:– thirty-seven Rains before taking on robes: Ven. Ānanda was part of a group of Sakyans who went forth into the Sangha in the second year after the Buddha’s enlightenment, when he went to visit the place of his early life, Kapilavatthu. With Ānanda there were five other Sakyan princes – Bhaddiya, Anuruddha, Bhagu, Kimbila and Devadatta, as well as Upāli who had been their barber. As an aspiration towards humility, being vauntingly proud Sakyans, they invited Upāli to Go Forth first, so he would always be senior to the rest of them, as now former princes.   13) p52:– a completely new song: This phrase is borrowed from The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch. 36, p213.

296 
14) ibid:– Three is enough, Matanga: Customarily, in the Buddhist tradition, when paying respects to an Elder or senior one bows three times – once for the Buddha, once for the Dhamma and once for the Sangha. In some traditions the practice of extensive repeated bowing is found – for example the 100,000 prostrations that form a part of the ‘preliminary practices’ of ngöndro in the Tibetan field of training. Also, when in a state of exultation and grateful reverence, after his realization of enlightenment, it is said that Ven. Ajahn Mun Bhuridatto, ‘wept as he thought of how he finally came upon a pool of crystal-clear, wondrous tasting water. He had reached Nong Aw (“a pool of understanding”), that sparkling pool of pure Dhamma that the Lord Buddha and his Arahant disciples encountered and then proclaimed to the world over 2500 years ago. Having at long last encountered it himself, he tirelessly paid heartfelt homage, prostrating himself over and over again to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. Should people have seen him then, tears streaming down his face as he prostrated over and over again, surely they would have assumed that this monk was suffering immensely, shedding tears so profusely.’ Venerable Ācariya Mun Buridatta Thera – A Spiritual Biography, by Ācariya Mahā Boowa Ñāṇasampanno, Bhikkhu Dick Sīlaratano trans., Forest Dhamma Publications, 2010.  15) p54:– soft chords on vinas: The vina is a seven-stringed instrument known as ‘the Indian lute’ or ‘mandolin’. It is akin to the sitar of today, although somewhat smaller.  16) ibid:– endless interchanging melodies... into the heights: This passage is borrowed from The Silmarillion by J.R.R. Tolkien, Ch. 1, pp3-4, ‘The Music of the Ainur’, pub. HarperCollins, 2022.  17) ibid:– banners flying from the turrets and pinnacles: This description of the Gandharva Realm is derived in part from The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, Reynolds and Reynolds trans., University of California, Berkeley (1982).   18) ibid:– the assembly hall, the sala: A sālā is any large, usually open-sided, building used for gatherings of various kinds, spiritual teachings and meditation being among them. The French word for a room or a hall, ‘salle’, ultimately derives from the same Proto-Indo-European ‘sel’ meaning ‘human settlement, village, dwelling’. The Latin ‘cella’ meaning a cell, the Greek ‘kalia’, meaning a hut, and the Old High German ‘halla’, meaning a hall, are all related.   19) ibid:– the Master’s voice is so clear: One of the characteristics of the Buddha was not only that he had ‘a Brahmā-like voice, like that of the karavika bird’ (D 30.1.2) but also that, ‘The speech that issues from his mouth has eight qualities: is distinct, intelligible, melodious, audible, ringing, euphonious, deep and sonorous. But while his voice is

297 
intelligible as far as the audience extends, his speech does not issue out beyond the audience,’ (M 91.21).  20) p55:– Four asankheyyas and one hundred thousand kalpas ago: An asankheyya kalpa is 10140 years, according to H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil – much longer than the age of our current known universe (1.37x1010   years)!  This account of the brahmin Sumedha making the Bodhisattva vow with the Buddha Dipankara, is found in the Buddhavaṃsa and the Apadāna. A curiosity of the history of Amaravati Monastery in England is that Ajahn Sumedho chose the name for the monastery without being aware of this story. A regular kalpa, by some reckonings, is roughly seventeen million years.   21) ibid:– They who forsake the truth … the reality of things: This passage is found at Jāt 431, Jātaka Stories, Vol III, p296.   22) ibid:– I picked up a water dipper ... tell a deliberate lie: These passages come from M 61.3-6, ‘The Advice to Rahula at Ambalaṭṭhika’.  23) p56:– the underlying tendencies, the anusaya: These are mentioned in various formats and contexts in many places in the Pali Canon. The full set of seven are listed at M 18.8, ‘The Honeyball Discourse’.   24)  ibid:– The mind can be influenced by: The Pali terms for these seven are: rāga; paṭigha; diṭṭhi; vicikicchā; māna; bhava-rāga;  and avijjā.   25) ibid:– said ‘Sādhu!’ three times, with a single voice: It is customary in the Southern Buddhist world to express approval of a teaching by all the assembly responding in this way. The word ‘sādhu’ means ‘it is well’ or ‘I approve!’ Saying it three times is also part of classical Buddhist style, to make sure the meaning and intentions are clear to the speaker and the hearer.    Chapter 8: Kapilavatthu – The Citadel of the Sakyans  1) p57:– The Jetavana – Jeta’s Grove: The story of the purchase of the Grove from Prince Jeta is found at Vin CV 6.  2) ibid:– She had come from a humble background ... that very same day: The story of how Mallika met King Pasenadi and became his queen that same day is found at Jāt 415.

298 
 3) p58:– We have had disputes from time to time: Such as at M 87.5, where a disagreement ends with, ‘Be off Mallikā, away with you!’ And in another she berates him thus, ‘You are a simpleton, Your Majesty. You may have an abundant supply of food, you may feast upon viands flavoured with all manner of sauces and curries cooked by the bucketful, you may rule over two kingdoms, but all the same you have very little sense.’ This is found in the commentary to Dhp 60, in Buddhist Legends, Vol. 2, E.W. Burlingame trans., p113.  4) ibid:– No monks are available to come: The majority of the story here comes from the preamble to Jāt 465, in The Jātaka, Vol. IV, p91ff. In the original there is no connection made with the fact that Queen Mallikā had not borne a son, it was just to cement relations with the Sakyans. The story also forms the Commentary to Dhp 47.   5) ibid:– put on a diet by the Master: This account is found at S 3.10. The Buddha’s advice to him, having arrived ‘huffing and puffing’ after having eaten ‘a bucket-measure of rice and curries’, was:   ‘When a man is always mindful knowing moderation in the food he eats  his ailments then diminish:  He ages slowly, guarding his life.’  (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)  6) ibid:– hands in añjali: This is the Pali term for the gesture mentioned above, in Ch. 6, note 4; it means ‘the hands brought palms together, at the heart or raised to the forehead’.   7) p60:– eight or nine leagues: The term ‘league’ here is being used as a loose translation of the Pali word ‘yojana’. This was reckoned, by some accounts, as the distance an oxcart could travel comfortably in one day. This is about eight to ten miles or twelve to sixteen kilometres. The distance from Sāvatthī to Kapilavatthu was about sixty miles or just shy of 100 km. NB A ‘league’ has been commonly defined as about three miles but this measure varies, as does the yojana.   8) p61: you have to guess whether the person is lying or not: The British TV programmes ‘Call My Bluff’ and ‘Would I Lie to You?’ are good contemporary parallels to this.  9) p63:– a cheerful one-handed maid named Kesini: This character was introduced in Mara and the Mangala I, in Ch. 23, p295, as a helper and servant of the seeress Gavinna.

299 
10) p64:– How kind of you to let me come: These words are borrowed from the film My Fair Lady, a musical about the transformation of the flower-girl Eliza Doolittle into one who can pass as a duchess. The film loosely follows the original play Pygmalion, by George Bernard Shaw, (1912), which in turn is based upon the ancient Greek/Roman myth of Galataea and Pygmalion, where the latter is a sculptor who falls in love with a statue he has made. The gods smile upon him and bring the statue to life, as Galataea. An account of this is found in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Book 10.   11) ibid:– in her finery: The stage direction in Pygmalion, at a comparable point in the plot, reads: ‘Eliza, who is exquisitely dressed, produces an impression of such remarkable distinction and beauty as she enters that they all rise, quite flustered,’ (Pygmalion, Act 3).    Chapter 9: A Bride of the King  1) p67:– would never use anything but their right: This custom still pertains in may parts of the Middle East and Asia, particularly with respect to eating food and giving an object to someone else – to give with the left hand would be insulting.   2) ibid:– just one hand, having lost the other in a tragic fire: This is referring to Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 23, pp295-308.   3) ibid:– right hand and forearm burned off: Unfortunately this kind of prejudice still is found in the world today. It is based on a misunderstanding of karma and its results, according to the Buddha’s teaching, and also on more deterministic and rigid folklores of other religions and cultures. The Buddha does sometimes refer to the results of actions deriving directly and obviously from the action that has been performed (e.g. at M 135) but he also points out how those results can ripen at unpredictable times and in unpredictable ways (e.g. at M 136). This is to say that there is no fixed result of an intended action; precisely how and when it will ripen is complex and not calculable.  Similarly, the precise causes of every specific experience cannot be fully pinned down – notably the structure of each present moment’s field of perceptions, how the experience of an individual’s ‘now’ is shaped, depends not only on the patterning of intended actions of the past (kamma-niyāma) but also on the laws of physics and chemistry (utu-niyāma), the laws of biology (bhija-niyāma), the laws of psychology (citta-niyāma) and the laws that govern the structure and process of reality itself (Dhamma-niyāma).

300 
4) p70:– Mara, the Lord of Lies: Māra is the personification of death and delusion in Buddhist cosmology his name actually meaning ‘death’. He appears in the title of this book, and its predecessor, (Mara and the Mangala I). There are a vast number of occasions in the Pali Canon where Māra is depicted as appearing in order to seduce, tease or threaten, or quietly influence an individual’s thoughts and actions, for example at SN 3.2, S 4.1-25, S 5.1-10, M  49.5-31, M 50.1-31. In almost every case a deception is directly intended, to encourage a person, or a deity, to see things not as they really are, or to encourage unskilful and worldly actions – hence the title used here ‘The Lord of Lies’.  According to Buddhist cosmology there are five Māras or five aspects of that single delusional and destructive influence, one associated with each of the five khandhas:  1) Maccu Māra – physical death – this mode is related to ‘material form’.  2) Kilesa Māra – defilements – this mode is related to ‘feeling’. 3) Khandha Māra – identification with the body and personality, the five khandhas – this mode is related to ‘perception’.  4) Abhisaṅkhāra Māra – attachment to thoughts and opinions, emotions and choices – this mode is related to ‘mental formations’. 5) Devaputta Māra – identification with bright and wholesome states – this mode is related to ‘discriminative consciousness’.  Lastly, one of the ways that Māra is addressed in the suttas is ‘Kinsman of the Heedless’ or ‘Cousin of the Negligent’, ‘Pamatta Bandhu’ (e.g. at SN 3.2 and S 5.1). This well describes his nature, being deeply related to heedlessness, unawareness, ignorance. As the Buddha phrased it in the Dhammapada:    Heedfulness is the path to the Deathless  Heedlessness is the path to Death.  The heedful never die,   The heedless are as if dead already.  Dhp 21  5) p72:– the border with the Yakkha Realm: the topography of the Realm of the Four Great Kings, or the Guardian Deities is described, in The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, Ch. 6, pp218-23. The Realm is considered to be roughly circular with Mount Sumeru at the centre, surrounded by the Yugandha Mountain Range. The four separate realms occupy each quarter thus:

301 
  6) p73:– The Tavatimsa devas ... and kumbhandas: this passage refers to events in Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 26, p368.   7) p74:– sit in a howdah: This is a canopied seat for riding on the back of an elephant. The mahout, the guide and handler, would sit on the neck of the elephant.   8) pp74-5:– Jetavana ... the nuns monastery – the Visakharama … the Eastern Park Monastery: These three were the principle Buddhist monasteries close to Sāvatthī. They were established by the Sangha and their supporters, after having been offered to the Buddha by his great laywoman disciple Visākhā and the great layman disciple Anāthapiṇḍika.   In the scriptures the residence for the community of nuns was not referred to by a name; the author has taken the liberty of giving it one here. The term that is used for the place in the Pali Canon is simply ‘bhikkuṇu-passaya’ meaning ‘the residence of bikkhuṇīs.’ Since the great lay-woman disciple Visākhā was a supporter of the nuns as well as the monks (e.g, see Vin MV 8) and since she donated the Eastern Park Monastery at Sāvatthī (the Pubbārama), and since no donor is named (to the author’s knowledge) for the bhikkhuṇi monastery, the name seems appropriate to use here.   9) ibid:– caused the whole city of Savatthi to be decorated: This description is from the preamble to Jāt 465, ‘The Bhadda-Sāla Jātaka’.    Chapter 10: Prince Jeta’s Grove  1) p76:– prohibited from performing marriages by their Rule: This stipulation is still observed today in many Buddhist countries. It derives primarily from Saṅg #5 which forbids a monk to act as a go-between. The principle of monastics not getting involved in any way with romantic and/or marriage partnerships in the Buddhist tradition is thus different from the Christian traditions wherein a marriage conducted by a priest is considered a holy sacrament. In the Buddhist view of things it is entirely up to an individual or couple as to how they form their relationships and social commitments.

302 
Wholesomeness and honesty are naturally encouraged, along with simplicity and modesty, but how people choose to bond, or separate, is not the domain of the renunciant monastic community. This kind of division of roles described here pertains in, for example, Thailand – where a brahmin priest carries out the wedding and the Sangha bless it afterwards.   2) ibid:– to bless their union as well: This kind of chanting is called ‘paritta’ or ‘protection’.   3) ibid:– and repeat it all: This is how the sutta collection called the Itivuttaka was composed, (see Ch. 6, note 14, above).  4) p77:– made their way out of the city in the mid-morning:” Sāvatthī was right beside the River Aciravatī, (now known as the River Rapti and which has since changed its course), while the Jetavana was about one mile away to the south of the city. Nowadays the two places are referred to as Saheth-Maheth, the former being the Jetavana site and the latter being the ancient city. The banks of the old city walls, and its gateways, as well as the remains of many buildings in the Jetavana, are still in evidence today. They are protected by the Archaeological Survey of India and are visited by thousands of pilgrims annually.   5) ibid:– a roaring sea of silvery sound brimmed in her hearing: This sound is known, in the Vedic tradition, as ‘brahma-nada’ or just ‘nada’, meaning ‘the divine sound’ in Skt its presence can be used as a meditation object. See Inner Listening by the author; there is, seemingly, a significant appearance of it in The Shurangama Sūtra as well, in Ch. 3, (p256 of the BTTS/DRBU ed., 2009).  6) p78:– had washed their alms-bowls: One of the standard forms of daily practice for Buddhist monks and nuns, and also spelled out in the Vinaya rules, is that immediately after finishing the morning meal, the alms-bowl should be washed, dried and put away tidily. Monastics have few possessions, and are encouraged not to be attached to worldly things, but the few things they do have are to be taken care of in a thoughtful way.   7) ibid:– the Gandha-kuti: The Gandha-kuṭī is the name of the Buddha’s dwelling place, it means ‘the fragrant chamber’ and was said to have a delightful natural perfume owing to the presence of the Buddha. It was not scented by flowers, scents or incense. The site of the Gandha-kuṭī at the Jetavana is the central focus of pilgrimage there today.  8) p80:– two hundred and #fty gold kahapanas every year: A kahapana was worth one sixth of a troy ounce of gold. At gold prices today those fifty gold pieces would be worth about £16,000.

303 
9) ibid:– Prince Malabhari: Prince Mālābhārī is mentioned as a deva prince in the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven, in the Commentary to Dhp 48.   10) p81:– Lake Anotatta: The name means, literally, ‘No Heat’. It is likely to be Lake Manasarova, close to Mount Kailash, in Western Tibet, by modern reckonings.   11) p84:– the Tusita Heaven: In Buddhist cosmology this is the fifth of the seven sensual heavens. It is two above the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven. The name means ‘The Heaven of the Contented’. The time scale here is such that a single day and night is equivalent to four hundred years in the Human Realm – hence the need for our trusty protagonists to make a very short visit there.   12) ibid:– an interview with the Lord Maitreya: The Pali form for the name is ‘Metteyya’. According to Buddhist mythology all Buddhas spend their last lifetime as a Bodhisatta, before their birth in the Human Realm and full enlightenment, in the Tusita Heaven.    Chapter 11: Together Forever  1) p86:– I should be prepared for separation: One of the ‘Five subjects for frequent recollection’, as recommended by the Buddha for both monastic and lay disciples, is: ‘All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will become separated from me.’ It is found at A 5.57. It one of the most frequently recited recollections in the countries of the Southern Buddhist world.   2) ibid:– if a couple ... generosity and wisdom: This advice is given by the Buddha to his elderly disciples Nakulapitā and Nakulamātā who were concerned that they might not be able to share a life after the present one. The passage is found at A 4.55.  3) ibid:– “reappearance through aspiration” ... lead to you being born there: This passage is found at M 120. These pieces of advice were indeed given by the Buddha but it is important to bear in mind that they were given in the context that no birth can be permanent, and that ending rebirth is recommended!   4) ibid:– this is for one who is virtuous: This elaboration on the theme of willed ‘reappearance’ is found at A 8.35.  5) ibid:– one who is virtuous succeeds because of purity: This comment is from the same sutta as the preceding quote.

304 
 6) ibid:– kanavera reds: Ant’s proper name is Sugandha-Kanavera. This red flower is nerium odorum, a type of oleander.   7) p87:– cared for by older sisters and an occasional aunt: This type of shared childcare is still very common in rural Asia.   8) ibid:– What shall his name be?: This whole passage on the naming of Prince Viḍūḍabha is from the preamble to Jāt 465.   9) p89:– I undertake the Precept to refrain from lying: The Five Precepts, as the standard form of skilful conduct as advised by the Buddha for lay-people, are:  1) I undertake ... to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.  2) I undertake ... to refrain from taking that which is not given.  3) I undertake ... to refrain from sexual misconduct. 4) I undertake ... to refrain from lying. 5) I undertake ... to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs which lead to carelessness.   10) ibid:– One who meditates ... a real brahmin: This passage is Dhp 386.  11) p90:– a lump of palm-sugar: This is a simple and common sweet in South and South-East Asia. It is made from the sap of the palm tree. A close but distinct equivalent is jaggery, made from the sap of sugar-cane.   12) ibid:– sympathetic joy: This is one of the Four Sublime Abidings, or Brahmā Vihārā. They are:  1) Mettā – loving-kindness, a radical acceptance.  2) Karuṇā – compassion, empathy.  3) Muditā – sympathetic joy, delight at the good fortune of others.  4) Upekkhā – serenity, equanimity, even-mindedness.  13) ibid:– the city of Lord Indra ... golden turrets filled the view: Many aspects of the description of the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven here come from The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp223-9, and The Buddhist Cosmos, pp446-7, by Ajahn Puṇṇadhammo.   14) p91:– she was supposed to be betrothed to him: In the original story, in the Commentary to Dhp 48, the corresponding deva partner of Prince Mālābhārī, is unnamed.

305 
15) ibid:– while you are dancing ... beyond all human forms: These verses come from the ‘Stories of the Heavenly Mansions’ the Vimāna Vatthu. The translation here is based on that of I.B. Horner; it is found at Vv 3.10.  16) ibid:– the mañjusaka tree: This is a celestial type of tree, found in the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven. It is mentioned at this quoted passage, from the Pāricchattaka Sutta, and in various Commentaries.    Chapter 12: A Kanavera Falls  1) p92:– celestial flowers – mandarava: This is the flower of the Coral Tree, in the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven, with the earthly counterpart being Erythrina fulgens. The blossoms are mentioned at D 16.5.2.  2) ibid:– her gossamer robes seemed more sombre: The five signs of dying for a deva of the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven are:  1) The flowers in their abode wither and have no fragrance; 2) The garments they wear appear dull and drab; 3) They are no longer happy; sweat and scurf seep out from their armpits;  4) The seats and cushions upon which they sit and lie seem to be hot, hard and rigid; 5) Their bodies become withered and dim and do not emit radiance as before; they become tired, suffer discomfort in their hands and feet, and become restive.   3) ibid:– there’s nothing I can do about it: It is said that: ‘Some kinds of devatā live, play and enjoy themselves ... and forget to eat their food; and those devatā then die. Even if they forget to eat just one breakfast, or only one meal like that, they are not at all able to retain or bring back their life; and this is true even though, at a later time, they eat a hundred meals. This is because the flesh of the devatā is weak.’ Three Worlds According to King Ruang Ch. 6, p241.  4) ibid:– the deva-life ... was coming to an end: The lifespan of a Tāvatiṃsa deva is said to be 1000 celestial years. This is equivalent to 36,000,000 human years, see Three Worlds According to King Ruang, Ch. 6, p240.   5) p93:– My end is approaching fast: Again, in Three Worlds According to King Ruang it states: ‘In the case of the devatā who have merit there are five signs that appear seven days before they reach the limit of their lifespan and pass away (p242) ... As for the devatā who have less merit, they simply live and pass away’ (p243). The conditions Ninka is

306 
experiencing are a mixture of the effects of merit – having lived generally skilfully, and the effects of her demeritorious deception at the last.   6) ibid:– Take your disgusting, shit-covered hand ... cut off: In Asia and the Middle East the left hand is considered the ‘toilet hand’ used for cleaning after defecating. Its use is thus generally avoided when handling food.   7) p94:– a previous life of the Buddha when he had been a deer: This refers to Jāt 483.   8) p95:– a high speed tabla player: A tabla is a small Indian drum, played with the fingers and the heel of the hand.   9) p98:– Everything depended on how she focused now: The effects of intention and resolution in directing a rebirth have been noted above (Ch. 11, notes 2, 3, 4 & 5). In addition, the passages at S 55.21 & .22, being dialogues between the Buddha and his cousin Mahānāma, are significant.  Mahānāma, as a ruler, is concerned that, should he die suddenly (say by accident), his mindfulness being muddled by concerns with affairs of state, then where would he be reborn? Would that confusion and preoccupation at the last moment have a negative effect? The Buddha reassures him, ‘Do not be afraid, Mahānāma, your death will not be a bad one ... When a person’s mind has been fortified over a long period of time by faith, virtue, learning, generosity and wisdom ... their body will break up at death but their mind will go upward, rise to distinction. Just as if you immerse an earthenware pot filled with ghee in water, then break the pot, the shards of clay will sink but the ghee will rise to the surface,’ (S 55.21).     PART II  Chapter 13: The Group of Six  1) p101:– chatting in the sala or under the trees: For a bhikkhu to have a conversation with a woman, if he does not have a male chaperone, he should not sit down with them in a secluded or screened place (Pacs ##44 & 45) and he should not speak more than five or six sentences of Dhamma teachings with that person (Pac #7). Thus, sitting for a general conversation in a public area is quite acceptable.

307 
2) p102:– helping to carry the Elder’s bowl and robes: It is part of a monk’s duty, when receiving visitors, to offer to carry their things and to find suitable lodgings for them.   3) ibid:– Panduka and Lohitaka ... Mettiya and Bhummajaka ... Assaji and Basuka: The three pairs of Elders were the leaders, who thus gave their name to ‘The Group of Six’. All six were originally based in Sāvatthī but at certain times they gravitated to different monasteries, as above, Ch. 5, note 13.  4) ibid:– that barber Upali: The Ven. Upāli was the memorious elder monk who was called upon, at the First Council, just after the Parinibbāna of the Buddha, to recite all the rules of the Vinaya Discipline. Ven. Ānanda was the one who recited all the sutta teachings. Ven. Upāli went forth at the same time as the Sakyan princes and had been their barber, (see above, Ch. 7, note 12).   5) p103:– these lesser and minor training rules ... lead only to anxiety, bother and confusion: The Group of Six were the cause of many training rules being laid down by the Buddha. This one relates to Pac #72.   6) ibid:– a cowherd ... killed when one of them playfully tossed a rock off the Robber’s Cliff: This relates to one of the stories associated with Par #3, the deliberate taking of a human life. Since there was no intention to kill, it was deemed a minor offence.   7) ibid:– a man ... was persuaded to kill himself: Again this is related to Par #3. In this case it was deemed an offence entailing Defeat – that is to say, a disrobing offence. As that member of the Group of Six was the ‘first offender’ i.e. the rule had not been established when he caused the suicide, the offender not subject to disrobing.   8) ibid:– sadly died when tickled: this relates to Pac #52.  9) ibid:– no punitive act could be carried out against any of them: In order for the possibility of schism to be reduced it is forbidden by Vinaya for a quorum of Sangha members (i.e. four) to carry out a legal act against another quorum. This relates to Pacs ## 79 and 80.   10) ibid:– too many robes: This relates to Nis Pacs ##1 and 7.  11) ibid:– going to a free food distribution centre too often: This relates to Pac #31.  12) ibid:– The Group of Seventeen ... teasing and bullying: This relates to Pacs ##52, 17 and 77.

308 
 13) p104:– at the first touch of the razor … his great awakening was actualized: The account of the enlightenment of young Dabba the Mallian can be found in Thera Apadana, Ch. 43, #25, also in the Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Vol II, by G.P. Malalasekera, published by Pali Text Society, p1059.  14) ibid:– A wealthy householder in Savatthi … she bowed and left them to it: This story is based on the background to Saṅg #8.  This is also where the story is found of Dabba assigning lodgings and guiding monks through the dark paths at night-time with his luminous finger: ‘When monks arrived at night, he entered the fire element and assigned dwellings with the help of that light. Monks even arrived late on purpose, hoping to see the marvel of Dabba’s supernormal powers.’  15) p108:– The nun, Sister Mettiya, was possessed by the Evil One: This is an invention of the author. In the original Vinaya text the Buddha orders Mettiyā to be expelled. This is commented on as a very unlikely and historically problematic act by I.B. Horner, the translator of the text. She notes: ‘This is, I think, clear evidence of monkish gloss. In every case of supposed wrong-doing the Lord has always asked the supposed wrongdoer “Is it true?” and has never condemned anyone without first hearing what he has to say. It is so noteworthy as to be suspicious: Where a woman is involved she is given no chance to exculpate herself to the Lord.’ See I.B. Horner, Women Under Primitive Buddhism, published by Routledge & Sons., 1930, pp266-7. In the centuries after the Pali Canon was composed many people have criticized, and complained about, the treatment of the bhikkuṇī Mettiyā, as recounted in the Vinaya text. According to the ancient Commentary, her expulsion was one of the controversial points dividing the bhikkhus in the Abhayagiri Vihāra from those in the Mahā Vihāra, in the former capital of Sri Lanka, Anuradhapura.   16) ibid:– the shepherd boy … who threw a rock and injured … Vidhura: This incident is mentioned at M 50.20-21, ‘The Rebuke to Māra’.   17) ibid:– the member of the Brahma Baka’s Assembly … warned me not to disrespect his Brahmā lord: This incident is mentioned at M 49.5, ‘The Invitation of a Brahmā’.  18) ibid:– she was not in her right mind at the time: This is a standard ‘exclusion’ clause at the end of the analyses of most Vinaya rules; if the person was ‘mad’ or ‘the first wrong-doer’ – i.e. the one who caused the rule to be first established – then ‘there is no offence’.

309 
19)  ibid:– protect her mind from the Evil One: The whole section entitled the ‘Bhikkuṇī Saṃyutta’ of the Connected Discourses – a collection of ten discourses, all relate incidents of Māra coming to test and threaten, tempt or otherwise harass ten different nuns, see S 5.1-10. They all are very aware of these attacks, and by whom they are being made, and all dispel Māra’s challenges by wisdom, mindfulness and fortitude. Each of these suttas ends with, ‘Then Māra the Evil One, realizing, “The Bhikkhuṇī So-and-so knows me,” sad and disappointed, disappeared right there.’  20) p109:– Vinaya is the life of the religion: The Pali for this phrase ‘Vinayo sāsana āyu’was inscribed in stone at the entrance to the original sīma boundary at Cittaviveka Monastery, West Sussex, when the sīma was created in 1981 for the first ordinations of monks by Ajahn Sumedho. The more complete quotation is: ‘Vinayo nāma sāsanassa āyu, vinaya ṭhite sāsanaṁ ṭhitari hoti,’ meaning: ‘The Vinaya is the very life of the Dispensation of the Enlightened One, as long as the Vinaya endures, the Dispensation endures,’ (Samantapāsākikā 3.13).  21) ibid:– the teachings of the Buddhas who established the patimokkha training rules lasted long: This is mentioned in the Vinaya; the description is quoted in detail in the origin story of Par #1, Vin. I 3, Book of the Discipline, Vol. I, I.B. Horner trans., pp14-17.   22) ibid:– the Group of Six, Udayin, Arittha, Sudinna, Thullananda, Sundarinanda: these were all monks and nuns who were the cause of many Vinaya rules being established.   23) p110:– defaming Dabba with this flimsy legal pretext?: This derives from the origin story to Saṅg #9, although the incident cited there took place in Rājagaha, near the Vulture Peak, rather than near Sāvatthī.   24) p112:– the Lost Princess of Taxila: As mentioned in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 20, p252.   25) ibid:– She had been bringing flowers … since she was a small child: This story is based on the Commentary to Dhp 48; the heroine of the tale there being called Patipūjikā.      Chapter 14: ‘Avoiding the Master!?’  1) p114:– ‘Bhikkhus, I eat at a single session’: This passage comes at the beginning of the Bhaddāli Sutta, M 65.2. Krishna’s name and story has been substituted for the bhikkhu Bhaddāli in the story.

310 
 2) ibid:– members of the Sangha can eat one part of the day’s food early … later in the morning: This is adapted from M 65.3.  3) p115:– We shall eat in the morning, the afternoon and the evening: This is adapted from the Kīṭāgiri Sutta, M 70.4.  4) ibid:– Why make such a to-do out of a mere trifle?: This is adapted from the Laṭukikopama Sutta, ‘The Simile of the Quail’, at M 66.7, where Ven. Udayin is surprisingly enthusiastic about the new restrictions on eating.   5) ibid:– The Blessed One tells us to abandon the more sumptuous of our two meals … benefit and well-being: This is adapted from M 66.4-6.  6) ibid:– They had lost their way: This is adapted from M 70.24.  7) p116:– Better to be afflicted in body, not in mind: This is from the discourse to Nakulapita, an agèd disciple of the Buddha, at S 22.1.   8) ibid:– Bad Monk: This is referred to in Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 8, p78. The Pali word is defined in the PTS Dictionary thus: ‘Dūsaka – corrupting, disgracing, one who defiles or defames; a robber, rebel.’  9) p117:– the sacred thread, the yajña pavita at their upanayana ceremony: This is indeed a ritual event for brahmin boys only.   10) p118:– A true dvija: This is the term for the egg-born as well as brahmins in Indian lore. The word is composed of ‘dvi’ meaning ‘two’, and ‘ja’, from ‘jāti’, meaning ‘birth’.   11) p120:– the Tusita Heaven: The name means ‘The Heaven of the Contented’; this indicates some of the causes of the devas of that realm not to be interested in events and beings outside their sphere of experience. The Lord Maitreya is the exception!  12) p121:– Every minute here is a day gone by: This is a very rough approximation; the definition in the suttas is that ‘For the Tusita devas, a single night and day is equivalent to four hundred human years … the lifespan of those devas is four thousand such celestial years,’ (A 8.42).

311 
13) ibid:– holding a flaming sword: The figure of guardian devas holding swords is not just found in the biblical world but also in the Pali tradition. In Jāt 422, where the telling of the first lie is recounted, it states: ‘There was a king named Mahāsammata … He reigned over the kingdom of Ceti … he could walk aloft and pass through the air, he had four angels, in each of the four quarters to defend him with drawn swords … At the moment when he uttered this lie, the four angels said they would guard such a liar no longer, threw their swords at his feet and disappeared.’ The Jātaka, Vol. III, pp272-3.   14) ibid:– Oh rest ye, fellow travellers, ye need not wander more: This line is adapted from the last line of Song of the Lotus-Eaters by Alfred, Lord Tennyson: ‘O rest ye, brother mariners, we will not wander more.’ This line is the inscription on the gravestone of the author’s mother as she related strongly to its sentiments in her last months.   15) p122:– Discrimination is consciousness … no Buddhas: The lines were spoken by the Bodhisattva Maitreya to the monk Han-Shan Te-Ch’ing (1546-1623) in a dream. He was one of the three ‘dream elephants’ (nāgas) or ‘most illustrious monks’, during the final years of the Ming Dynasty. He is particularly renowned for reviving the Ch’an school of Buddhism in China.  The dream in question occurred in the thirty-third year of his life. He saw his body ascend into the highest realms. In his dream there is an immense chamber and in the very centre he sees what appears to be a Diamond Throne. The chamber remains distant until he realizes that, ‘The clean and the unclean are only created in the mind’; when he grasps that, the chamber comes closer. He is led to Lord Maitreya and is then told that, ‘Discrimination is consciousness … no Buddhas.’ Once he is told this by Lord Maitreya, his ‘body and mind suddenly became void – and at that moment he thoroughly understood the difference between consciousness and wisdom.’ Adapted from The Mystical Visions of Master Han Shan Ch. 44, by Steven Todd Kaster, from The Taboric Light website.   16) p123:– Rare it is in the world: This is based on the observations listed at A 1.333-347 and, more briefly, at A 6.96.   17) p124:– encouragement towards simplicity, fewness of needs: For example, the Buddha’s advice to Mahā Pajāpati Gotami at A 8.53.   18) ibid:– This robe is being made for the Blessed One: This passage is based on M 65.6.  19) p125:– may you forgive my transgression: This derives from M 65.10.

312 
20) ibid:– I knew, when I surveyed your mind, ‘This misguided man does not heed the Teaching, he does not listen’: These passages come from M 65.32 and from M 70.24.  21) ibid:– You were empty, hollow, a wrong-doer: This passage derives from M 65.12.  22) ibid:– one day, in the far future, he will know: As in The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch. 44, p258, when Kamanita has been born as a long-lived brahma god.   23) p126:– When the kindly Queen … you must do: This prophetic verse is included in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 26, p355.   24) ibid:– There is no ‘teacher’s closed fist’: This refers to the tradition, in some spiritual circles, for teachings to be restricted deliberately, some principles and practices only being accessible to certain initiates or an inner circle. In D 16.2.25, ‘The Discourse on the Buddha’s Last Days’, the Buddha specifically states that he never operates in this way, ‘I have taught the Dhamma, Ānanda, making no “inner” and “outer”: The Tathāgata has no “teacher’s closed fist” with respect to various teachings and practices.’ As the translator Maurice Walshe notes on this: ‘A famous statement, implying that there is no “esoteric” teaching in Buddhism, at least as originally taught by the Founder.’ An example of a tradition that does use the “closed fist” is found in The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch. 10, pp57-60, and in note 1 for that chapter, p287.  25) p127:– Devadatta, the Master’s cousin: He was one of the Sakyan princes who left the home life along with Ānanda and others (see Ch. 7 note 12, above). His father was the brother of Queen Mahā Māyā, the Buddha’s mother; his mother was Amitā. His sister was Princess Yasodhara, also known as Rahulamātā, who was the Buddha’s wife, before his Great Renunciation. Devadatta was thus brother-in-law as well as a cousin to the Buddha.   26) ibid:– the ‘bitter practices’, the dhutangas: These are thirteen practices allowed by the Buddha for his disciples whereby they could sharpen and polish their practice, without resorting to the extremes of self-mortification. The thirteen include such as: only eating once a day; only eating food received on alms-round; only using three robes; sleeping under trees instead of in a building; only sleeping sitting up, i.e. never lying down. The word ‘dhutaṅga’ literally means ‘a method used for shaking things off’.
