# CHAPTER 6:  THE ENCOUNTER AT THE WELL   ife in Kulluta had become increasingly stressful and precarious over the last fifteen years. Sugandhi had been blissfully happy for the first year, after Harita was born, and even Mata-ji had been reasonably benign, but when her little girl reached the completion of one Rains the broad hints and out-right demands – ‘Now it’s time for a son!’ – began to mount. It was a mild irritation at first, and Sugandhi was otherwise very content with her new life, away from the gruesome duties and stench of her father’s slaughtering yard.  In time however, year by year, the stress mounted and was openly talked about as ‘the family problem’. No more babies came – girl or boy – no maNer what lengths they went in choosing auspicious days, fertility potions, spells by local shamans and seers of both genders. It didn’t help that, at least to Sugandhi’s eyes, her daughter might not have inherited her suspected father’s blue-black skin but the set of her features, her ink-black hair and the big dark purple eyes bore a striking resemblance to Krishna’s. Thankfully no-one else seemed to have made note of this but the growing resemblance was a worry.  When Harita turned six Rains the momentum of concern, as repeatedly voiced by Mata-ji, led to a new marriage being arranged for Jayanta. ‘Since you haven’t been able to give my son any more children, other than this girl,’ Mata-ji managing to both sneer and scowl simultaneously, ‘we have arranged that my son will take another bride.’ There was no discussion between Sugandhi and Jayanta on this, his parents had decided.  It had always puzzled Sugandhi why so many women only wanted sons and seemed biased against their own sex. She adored her girl and, now that she was six Rains, she was a friendly and helpful companion around the house and shared the village duties with the other womenfolk, both young and old.  The new bride was found, coming from a family of many children and, this time from the same caste as the Headman and Mata-ji, even a liNle bit more upscale in the social hierarchy. She seemed a nice enough girl, and when Jayanta eventually got round to talking with Sugandhi about it, he was quite apologetic and asked for her understanding about how diﬀerent things would be. She was touched by this gesture as it was plain he had had no choice in the maNer – Mata-ji had pressed the issue and her husband was also keen for a grandson from Jayanta. Their other children were all daughters, who now lived in their new family homes, three of them away and only one who still resided in Kulluta. Jayanta was also keen to reassure her that she was not being pushed away. As he said these words they had the tone of a prepared speech he was trying to

38 
CHAPTER 6:  THE ENCOUNTER AT THE WELL   ife in Kulluta had become increasingly stressful and precarious over the last fifteen years. Sugandhi had been blissfully happy for the first year, after Harita was born, and even Mata-ji had been reasonably benign, but when her little girl reached the completion of one Rains the broad hints and out-right demands – ‘Now it’s time for a son!’ – began to mount. It was a mild irritation at first, and Sugandhi was otherwise very content with her new life, away from the gruesome duties and stench of her father’s slaughtering yard.  In time however, year by year, the stress mounted and was openly talked about as ‘the family problem’. No more babies came – girl or boy – no maNer what lengths they went in choosing auspicious days, fertility potions, spells by local shamans and seers of both genders. It didn’t help that, at least to Sugandhi’s eyes, her daughter might not have inherited her suspected father’s blue-black skin but the set of her features, her ink-black hair and the big dark purple eyes bore a striking resemblance to Krishna’s. Thankfully no-one else seemed to have made note of this but the growing resemblance was a worry.  When Harita turned six Rains the momentum of concern, as repeatedly voiced by Mata-ji, led to a new marriage being arranged for Jayanta. ‘Since you haven’t been able to give my son any more children, other than this girl,’ Mata-ji managing to both sneer and scowl simultaneously, ‘we have arranged that my son will take another bride.’ There was no discussion between Sugandhi and Jayanta on this, his parents had decided.  It had always puzzled Sugandhi why so many women only wanted sons and seemed biased against their own sex. She adored her girl and, now that she was six Rains, she was a friendly and helpful companion around the house and shared the village duties with the other womenfolk, both young and old.  The new bride was found, coming from a family of many children and, this time from the same caste as the Headman and Mata-ji, even a liNle bit more upscale in the social hierarchy. She seemed a nice enough girl, and when Jayanta eventually got round to talking with Sugandhi about it, he was quite apologetic and asked for her understanding about how diﬀerent things would be. She was touched by this gesture as it was plain he had had no choice in the maNer – Mata-ji had pressed the issue and her husband was also keen for a grandson from Jayanta. Their other children were all daughters, who now lived in their new family homes, three of them away and only one who still resided in Kulluta. Jayanta was also keen to reassure her that she was not being pushed away. As he said these words they had the tone of a prepared speech he was trying to

39 
remember. Sugandhi, who was quick on the uptake, suspected that along with wanting a grandson, Jayanta’s parents were also probably keen to maintain the ﬁnancial connection with her family, her father having the prestigious, and lucrative, role of being the oﬃcial slaughterer of royal horses – those too old or too injured to serve the royal household – as well as looking after the nurturing of foals and the brood-mares. The summer pastures up the top of the valley, beyond the Rohtang Pass, were under his protection and were valuable grazing during the dry summer months.  The wedding of Jayanta and Ratana duly took place but, to the chagrin of the Headman and Mata-ji, and the frustration of the young couple, no children were forthcoming from this union at all.   * * *   Another four Rains came and went and, on the unreliable but ancient principle of ‘third time lucky’, a third wife was ordained to be the solution to the ‘big family problem’. Their other children, the various daughters near and far, had produced oﬀspring – so they had some grand-daughters and grandsons – but Jayanta was seen as special. He was the heir of the family and the last one bearing the family name:– He has to produce a son! Was the now-obsessively held imperative.  Ratana duly stepped into the background, along with Sugandhi, and the arrangements were made for a new marriage. Bride number three, Sukha, was brought to the home, after extensive astrological research had been made, to match her perfectly, in blissful and fecund matrimony, with Jayanta – now well over thirty Rains and still sonless.  Yantras were drawn, mantras recited, holy beings were bestowed with oﬀerings and delicious food, gods were propitiated, seers and sages worshipped, all to multiply the benevolent auspices and to guarantee a boy-child. To no avail. Another ﬁve years passed but Sukha also remained childless. By this time Mata-ji was beside herself with grief and disappointment. She had often been a diﬃcult character to deal with and now she was lashing out in all directions. Sugandhi and her ‘brat’ (although Harita was by now sixteen Rains and no longer a child) and Ratana were barked at daily, Mata-ji having given up on any possibility that either of them would conceive, while she encouraged Sukha to engage in ever-more elaborate rituals that were demanding and uncomfortable, and to take potions and possets that would ‘quicken her womb’ as she would say.    * * *  Things came to a head with the death of Ahimsa, Sugandhi’s father. Her mother, Karuna, had passed away a few years before and Ahimsa had been running

40 
the yard by himself, with whatever help of the candala community he could muster, which was sporadic and meagre.  The ageing of his body and the extra burden of work took its toll and one day, as he was sharpening some knives, he simply said, ‘I don’t feel quite right,’ and keeled over then and there, by the grinding wheel, his heart having ﬁnally given out.  Once he was gone, and his funeral rites completed by the candala community, Sugandhi’s suspicions about her place in the family proved to be true. Almost as soon as the funeral was over, and before the burning pyre had cooled, Mata-ji rounded on Sugandhi and Harita. ‘You two do not belong here anymore! You are never going to bear my son a child – considering the age you are, you are an old woman, like me.’ (This was a liNle unfair as Sugandhi was thirty-seven Rains at this point, hardly a crone). Mata-ji continued, ‘I’ve had enough of you low caste types around this house – you’re useless to my son and useless to my husband and me too. You’re both just dead weight. I want you and your garish scarlet hair, and your oh-so-preNy daughter, out of this house before the next full moon.’  She was also increasingly suspicious of the fact that her son had failed to produce any children other than the girl who was born so soon after his ﬁrst marriage. She refused to think of her son as infertile but, if the girl was pregnant by someone else when they married, that might explain some things:– If Jayanta isn’t the father of the brat, then these impure vermin belong here even less.  In a way it was a relief, as Sugandhi had been wondering what would happen when her father died. She knew the responsibility for the royal horses would be passed on to an older man, skilled in the ﬁeld of caring for the old horses and in despatching them when necessary, and it would not remain in her family. So it had only ever been a maNer of time. Someone from the palace stables and stockyards would be sent and that would end the family’s connection with that lofty role, albeit necessary for a low-caste person to occupy it.  As Sugandhi combed out her ﬁve-coloured hair, still rich and thick, and varying from russet, chestnut, auburn and ginger to ﬂaming orange – its own natural redness assisted by regular applications of madayantika, she mentally readied herself for the road, pondering the years here at the Headman’s house. She had always been an outsider, having had to be on her best behaviour and needing to suppress her natural cheekiness. She had played the demure wife as best she could and Jayanta had always treated her decently. She had had sixteen years to bring up her girl, now on the brink of womanhood; this home had provided food to eat, shelter, and the clothes she wore – although many of those had been paid for by her father’s income – so she, at heart, felt grateful and was now ready for the test of the unknown. She would set oﬀ with Harita on the morrow, after saying goodbye to everyone, then they would see what the universe had to oﬀer.    * * *  Krishna was now well-accustomed to life in Kitagiri. After more than a dozen years there he was part of the furniture, known to everyone, and was reckoned as a

41 
good sort who was always ready to join in with the games with the village children, picking ﬂowers and making garlands, and happily rollicking along with the singing and dancing with the local men and womenfolk. At the beginning it had been great fun, after the narrower conﬁnes of the life expected of him at the Ghositarama, even as a novice. He felt like he could truly break out of his shell here and develop his spiritual life, his journey to enlightenment, according to his life-aﬃrmative principles.  It had been great fun at ﬁrst but now that he’d been here almost ﬁfteen Rains he had to acknowledge some misgivings about the way Assaji and Punabbasuka had led things, and the kind of behaviours they endorsed and rejoiced in. It had been enjoyable to pick up a bow and arrow, and to practice archery again, but when he and some of his fellow monks shot animals and birds, just as targets and not even to eat them, he felt a quavering in his heart. It had been fun to listen to music and to ﬂirt and dance with the local girls, but he saw some of his brother monks force themselves on to people’s wives, daughters and betrothed ones, and press them into embraces and intimacies when the women were not so willing. Even unaNached young girls were propositioned by some monks and, more embarrassingly, he had found himself a few times, after having had a drink or two, either overdoing it with one of the young wives on the couch or casually teasing, and then dismissing, one of the women who had plainly got strong feelings for him. ‘Even if I am not aNaching (hopefully) to the pleasure I feel, it doesn’t go just one way. Those birds we shot wanted to live. We were seeing them solely as a target to aim at but their pain and fear was very real to them. These towns-women we ﬂirt and play around with, we monks might enjoy it but those feelings, of being taken advantage of, that some of the womenfolk have had and then the way we persuade them not to be aNached and uptight – that’s not honest or noble, even though we might be able to justify it somehow, philosophically.  ‘To play with some young girl’s feelings too; let her know you ﬁnd her pleasing and then to just ignore her. It might be a spiritual exercise for us, but for some of them there are a lot of tears, and there was even that young wife who hanged herself because the monk she was in love with made it clear, even though he had played around with her, that he did not really care for her beyond occasional entertainment. That was cruel.’ These kinds of thoughts were coming into Krishna’s mind more and more often, though he did what he could to supress them or distract himself from them. They were on his mind again as he was in the town one day and watching some younger monks racing around the town square, playing at piggy-back ﬁghting with some of the young wives, with a crowd gathered and cheering the antics on.  ‘I used to enjoy things like this,’ he pondered, ‘but, honestly, this sort of activity makes sense for children but what’s it got to do with enlightenment, really?’ He was geNing up to depart when he saw a steady stream of people heading down the main thoroughfare of the town, all moving towards the northern gateway. He

42 
found himself joining the ﬂow and, as he drew close, asked, ‘What is it? Why is everyone going to the north gate?’ ‘It’s the monks,’ was the ﬁrst, not very informative reply. He drew closer to the edge of the town and saw that a large assembly of monks were indeed arriving, walking silently and with gravitas. At their head were SaripuNa and Maha-Moggallana, with Ananda and many other well-respected Elders following closely behind, including other enlightened bhikkhus. The serenity and peacefulness of their arrival hit Krishna like a hammer. As he was now one of the more senior Kitagiri monks present, he stepped forward and knelt in the dust of the street. He saw the group had paused and so he bowed three times, head to the ground.  ‘Venerable Sirs, I am honoured to greet you. What brings such a large and august assembly of the Blessèd One’s disciples to this humble town?’ SaripuNa, ever the dialectician, replied, ‘This town may be humble in its physical proportions, however we have been reliably informed that the Sangha here has been behaving in a far from humble manner for a very long time. Please ask the Sangha to convene at the monastery as soon as possible. This assembly, which has travelled from SavaNhi, will request accommodation there. If that is not possible, or not agreeable, we will camp in the wild forest. Either way please inform the Elders Assaji and Punabbasuka that we wish to hold a formal assembly tomorrow.’  * * *  ‘That meeting was intense!’ declared Krishna, now walking beside Ananda as they made their way north. They had traversed the hills that gave Kitagiri its name, had passed Alavi, and were heading towards the River Sarayu.  ‘There was a certain tension, I agree, but for enlightened ones like SaripuNa and Moggallana, they are aware when there is an awkward mood, such as was present at Kitagiri, and they take steps to cater for it, but it is not burdensome or personally stressful for them.’ Ananda had a wry smile on his face, as he often did, ‘but for the less-than-fully-enlightened, like you and me, it was intense, and I was concerned.’  ‘They were so cool though, in presenting the Master’s message and stipulations – SaripuNa with his ﬂawless logic and Moggallana with his penetrating gaze and quiet yet daunting authority – I was very impressed.’ Krishna, although by now thirty-six Rains in age and ﬁfteen Rains as a monk, easily reverted to his youthful exuberant manner when with Ananda; his company seemed to draw it out of Krishna, taking him back to his early days in the Ghositarama.  The message from the layman Sudhamma had been relayed to the Buddha in the Jetavana by Parisuddhi. The Master had immediately summoned SaripuNa and Moggallana and asked them to travel to Kitagiri with a substantial number of other wise and experienced Elders, in order to establish the verity (or not) of the stories and, if accurate, then to carry out an ‘Act of Banishment’, a serious formal

43 
procedure, compelling all those Sangha members who were followers of Assaji and Punabbasuka to leave Kitagiri forthwith.  That Act, when carried out, had unsurprisingly met with all kinds of protest and reaction from the over-liberal, unrestrained and unruly monks of the area. In short, most refused to mend their ways, they did not ask for forgiveness but rather abused the monks from SavaNhi and argued with them. Many went away and left the Order, a few declared they would stay on with their avowed masters Assaji and Punabbasuka, but a few saw the virtue and goodwill of the great Elders and accepted their Act. Krishna was one of these laNer so he had been glad to be banished from Kitagiri, to start anew.   * * *   It was getting close to the end of the day, the ‘hour of cow-dust’ as it is called, and the group of travelling monks drew close to the edge of a village. There was an inviting forest, with towering trees rising at its heart, a little to the east and already they could hear the distinctive sounds of the roosting calls of many of the local birds as they settled in the high branches for the night.  ‘I will go to the village,’ said Ananda, ‘my throat is very dry – probably from talking with you, Krishna, so much – and my water gourd is empty. I will see if I can find a well close to the edge of where the houses are so I won’t have to wander its lanes at this time of the day.’ As was often the case, this village had a well dedicated for wanderers and outcastes, candalas and matangas, that was situated at the edge of the inhabited area. Ananda got directions from a farmer with his small wooden plough on his shoulder, returning from his fields at the end of the day. ‘Jes’ over there, zur,’ he pointed down the track. ‘Y’ can’t miss it.’ Krishna tagged along, mostly because he liked Ananda’s company and because they had been talking for a while up to this point. As they approached the well Krishna saw that there was a young woman there who had just raised a bucket of water and had it perched on the rim of the well-head. Ananda approached her and asked, in his usual gentle and friendly way, ‘Young lady, would you be kind enough to give me some of your water?’  One glance at Ananda was sufficient to tell her he was of the warrior-noble caste. He was wearing robes but, in her limited knowledge of caste laws, and remembering the punishments she had received in the past for disobeying their rigid stipulations, she was taken aback and a little frightened that she was being tested and could be beaten, or worse.  ‘Sir, Oi can’t possibly give y’ any of this water. Oi’ve touched it. Oi’m a candala, a matanga. Oi’ve worked at the most filthy and ’orrid tasks. Y’re a kshatriya, a warrior noble, Oi can see that just from your looks, y’r way of talkin’. If y’ drink of this water it will surely pollute y’ and Oi would be punished sternly for tha’.’

44 
Ananda was moved by the politeness and sincere kindness of the young woman. He replied, ‘I did not ask you for your caste but for water.’  He walked over and opened the top of his gourd so that she could pour the water carefully in, although her hand was shaking a little. This was as much from her heart leaping with rapturous joy at being treated so respectfully and kindly, as it was from caution not to spill anything. She could scarcely believe how matter-of-fact this great being was in his demonstration of friendliness.  She offered to fill Krishna’s water gourd as well, which he gratefully accepted. Since he was so dark-skinned, unlike the complexion of Ananda, she felt a little less intimidated by him and asked, ‘So, what does your manner of dressin’ mean, and where are you all a-goin’?’ ‘These are the patched ochre robes that are worn by the disciples of the Lord Buddha, the Enlightened One. Have you heard of him? He’s also known by some as the Samana Gotama,’ Krishna explained.  ‘As for where we are going – we are with a large group of other monks, who are camping in the forest outside this village, and we are all heading for the Jetavana Monastery, near Savatthi. That’s where the Master is residing at the moment.’ The young woman was suddenly struck by an outrageous thought, ignited mostly by her new-sprung adoration of Ananda. ‘Can Oi come with yez?!’ She pleaded, her big eyes glancing up cautiously into their faces, hardly daring to hope. She felt magnetically drawn to Ananda and longed to be close to him always.  ‘Don’t you have a family here? Can you just walk off like that without letting your loved ones know where you are?’ The caring heart of Ananda never took such things for granted.  ‘No. Oi don’ ’ave any family ’ere. Oi’m a lone traveller these days. Oi go from place and find whatever job Oi can that is open to being done by a candala woman. Oi ’ave a small bundle that is at the place where Oi stay at the moment – the kitchen shed where they store the dried cow-dung for fuel – but ’part from tha’ Oi just have what Oi’m standin’ up in.’ She pointed to the somewhat threadbare sari she was dressed in. ‘Can Oi?’ She implored, ‘Come with yez? If it won’t break any caste laws. Oi won’ be a problem, Oi promise, and Oi can ’elp with chores, like finding firewood or cow-dung for fuel along the way; and Oi can sew, if y’r allowed to touch what’s come from moy ’and.’ Her eyes moistened with hope and fear that these gentle men might say no.  ‘What would you do when we get to Savatthi?’ asked Ananda.  ‘To be honest, Oi’m so impressed by ’ow kind and polite you both are, Oi’d like to meet y’r teacher and learn what Oi could from ’im. So, if that’s possible, Oi’d like to stay at this Jetavana, or som’ers nearby, and help out where Oi can. Oi know Oi’m a lone woman, and young and Oi’m an outcaste, but Oi might be able to be of some use there.’ ‘One of the Master’s wisest disciples,’ Krishna reassured her, ‘who lived in Kosambi when I knew her, is a lay-woman who was a slave and is nearly as dark-skinned as me. She has been more than useful, to many many people, so I’m sure a

45 
place could be found for you with her. That woman’s name is Khujjuttara; by the way, what’s yours?’ ‘Oi’ve gone by many names over the last li’le whoile; mostly Oi’m just known as ‘Matanga’, which is what they shout when they want me to empty the out’ouse pit or find more cow-dung. My mother passed on a year ago so, since she died, Oi’ve jes’ been Matanga, which is fine by me.’  * * *  ‘’Ow long d’y’ fink we’ve bin ’ere?’ Gumbiya asked nobody in particular.  ‘I thought you were the expert in this territory,’ sniffed Bee, by now even she was beginning to despair of ever leaving those dungeons. All seven of them seemed to be being held close together but it was so dark and the sounds of their voices so variable it was hard to know if they were in separate cells or all together, and where the walls and the door were, as everything physical and temporal seemed very fluid and unpredictable.  Sometimes they seemed to be shackled and chained to the wall, or the floor or ceiling; other times they could move freely for a few paces, then they were paralysed again. They never saw any kumbhanda guards but somehow food and drink, suited to their various needs, appeared. Bee tried counting the number of such meals they had had to try and keep some track of time, but then her mind would temporarily lose its sense of number, ‘Is seven bigger or smaller than four?’ she asked one time, quite seriously at that moment, and was roundly teased for it. She joined in the laughs with the others – it was a brief interlude of humour amidst the grimness – but when all had gone quiet she still wondered, ‘But, which is bigger?’ After she stopped trying to track the time, her numeracy came back again – this was a very mysterious prison they were in.   * * *  Some indeterminate time later Ninka remarked, ‘Is it just me, or is it getting brighter in here?’ ‘It’s not just you,’ said Maggot, ‘I can see all of us, and it’s definitely getting clearer.’ They were all stirring by now, from their various reveries and meditations, and looking at where the light was growing strongest. ‘I bet it’s Dusaka, pulling some clever trick,’ Ant offered.  ‘Or it could be an obhasa-dhara of the Buddha, come to give us some teachings,’ suggested Ninka.  The glow increased and a form began to crystallize within it. The seven each had a different impression of what was taking shape in the shimmer and glint of the brightening. At last it took shape as a male celestial, which Rhamba and Salassa recognized immediately. ‘It’s a gandharva!’ They declared excitedly. ‘I don’t

46 
recognize his face but he’s one of us – how did he get in here and how come he can light the place up so gloriously? This is most excellent!’ A few moments passed and this visitation finally took distinct form. ‘My friends, it’s so good to meet you. Honoured fellow beings of the gandharva’s Eastern Realm, Lady Ninka, your Serenity,’ he bowed particularly to her, ‘noble yakkha of the Northern Quarter, honoured kinnaris all – at last I have found you! Please allow me to introduce myself, my name is Muñca, I am gandharva of the Eastern Quarter, a subject of King Dhatarattha, majestic and divine ruler of that domain, as are Rhamba and Salassa here, although I am more of a musician than a dancing apsara.’ He chuckled:– He was even making a joke in this dire prison they were locked in! He looked at each of them in turn and, unhurriedly, began a short speech. ‘You are all surprised to see me, I can tell. I, like many others, were impressed and inspired by the group of you doing such a sterling job of fending off that war between the devas and the asuras over that trivial issue of the invigorating perfume, amatagandha. To be honest I became something of a fan, from a distance, and always asked for news of any of you. I heard about Krishna and Jambu-sirivanna or Maggot as you call her, having a child and I also heard that Lady Ninka and Sugandha-kanavera, Ant,’ he smiled graciously at them, ‘had grown close, as had the warrior-yakkha Gumbiya and Maha-paduma-sundari, or Bee, as you’re affectionately known.’  He smiled warmly at all of them, then continued. ‘When the child of Maggot and Krishna went missing, I did not hear of it straight away but when I did, and then when I asked about you all, it seemed you had gone to hunt for her and were last seen in Uttarakuru in the foothills of the mountains then – boof! – you were all gone, disappeared from view. No one heard a word or saw a sign, in any realm. I’ve been looking for you all for three sun-turnings, in the human reckoning, although a lot less than that in gandharva time.’ He went on to explain how he had found them owing to certain abilities with concentration and the Divine Ear. He was glad that the prisoners all talked together as that gave his psychic hearing, enhanced with his musician’s training over long years, the chance to pinpoint them, even in the fluctuating spaces and timescales of the Underworld.  ‘I also have the ability to carry beings to different realms so, hopefully, I will be able to get you all out of here without having to wait upon Her Chthonic Majesty’s Pleasure. ‘Yes!’ Maggot shouted, ‘Yes, right away! I don’t know what spells we are held by or what enforces our confinement here but yes! We must try. From what you say my child is three Rains now and I haven’t seen or held her since just after she was born. We have to try!’ ‘All of you, please gather around as close as you can and take hold of my arms or my body. Lady Ninka, if you would take my right hand; Miss Maggot my left; off we go.

47 
* * *  The apsaras Rhamba and Salassa cried out in unison as they recognized their home in the Gandharva Realm. ‘We made it!’ Salassa burst into spontaneous dance, whirling his sister Rhamba with him. The seven had all made it through to the Gandharva Realm, which was part of the Heaven of the Four Guardian Deities.  ‘Thank you, Muñca! Thank you from the bottom of my heart!’ Maggot shed a few tears of joy. ‘Now let’s see if we can find my girl.’   ==*==
