# CHAPTER 21:  THE PRINCE’S FURY   ephyrs carried scents and falling petals gently across the Grove. Ant and Ninka had been locked in an intense conversation before the newly-arrived deva had joined them. Ant tried to bear in mind that her belovèd had just been hatched into this new life but she was aggrieved and sick at heart, ireful too. The beauty of their surroundings was lost to them.  ‘How is it that you didn’t recognize Muñca when he first appeared? The princesses said he was notorious in this, their realm – the devas in the Realm of the Guardians had said nothing but, for all of you here in the Thirty-Three, it sounds like he’s infamous,’ Ant pressed her.  Ninka looked up into her face and could not speak at first.  ‘Did you recognize him?’ Ant was doing her best to read Ninka’s expression, now tear-stained as it was. Her heart sank. ‘You did know. You knew all along. How could you?’ Ant was aghast, feeling a storm of emotion. ‘Why?!?’ A righteous rage flashed through her. ‘Poor Maggot! And the rest of us tagging along, with the nagas and the yakkhas, and all the way up to the Tusita – you let him drag us all behind him on a wild goose chase,’ her words slowed down and softened as she took in Ninka’s sweet face now twisted with tears and anguish. A weeping deva is a wrenching sight to see. A realization began to dawn in Ant’s heart, ‘It was…’ Ninka wiped her eyes, ‘For you, it was that I could not bear to be parted from you. A day at a pointless party in the Nandana Grove and decades will go by in the Realm of Humans, for you in the Realm of Earth-spirits too.’ She took a breath, letting the vitality of the airs of her home clear her head a little.  ‘I confess, and I ask your forgiveness – and of everyone of our friends, especially Maggot – I thought that I knew who he was as soon as he appeared in the Underworld. When he whisked us out of there I was certain, then it all came crashing in. If I called him out and challenged him, our search for the baby would lose direction and the group would be scattered, I wouldn’t have an excuse to stay with you and I would have had to come back here. Now, as I think of it, it doesn’t make sense. Why did I believe those thoughts? What made me choose deception? Anyway, in that flash of recognition, I decided not to reveal who he was, that he had such a deceitful reputation, but instead to pretend. And he gave me a look, as if to say, “I know that you know, but you’re not going to say anything, are you?” He was teasing, provoking, relishing the trap I was in – that I had put myself in.’ Her eyes were a thousand leagues of sadness and regret.

191 
CHAPTER 21:  THE PRINCE’S FURY   ephyrs carried scents and falling petals gently across the Grove. Ant and Ninka had been locked in an intense conversation before the newly-arrived deva had joined them. Ant tried to bear in mind that her belovèd had just been hatched into this new life but she was aggrieved and sick at heart, ireful too. The beauty of their surroundings was lost to them.  ‘How is it that you didn’t recognize Muñca when he first appeared? The princesses said he was notorious in this, their realm – the devas in the Realm of the Guardians had said nothing but, for all of you here in the Thirty-Three, it sounds like he’s infamous,’ Ant pressed her.  Ninka looked up into her face and could not speak at first.  ‘Did you recognize him?’ Ant was doing her best to read Ninka’s expression, now tear-stained as it was. Her heart sank. ‘You did know. You knew all along. How could you?’ Ant was aghast, feeling a storm of emotion. ‘Why?!?’ A righteous rage flashed through her. ‘Poor Maggot! And the rest of us tagging along, with the nagas and the yakkhas, and all the way up to the Tusita – you let him drag us all behind him on a wild goose chase,’ her words slowed down and softened as she took in Ninka’s sweet face now twisted with tears and anguish. A weeping deva is a wrenching sight to see. A realization began to dawn in Ant’s heart, ‘It was…’ Ninka wiped her eyes, ‘For you, it was that I could not bear to be parted from you. A day at a pointless party in the Nandana Grove and decades will go by in the Realm of Humans, for you in the Realm of Earth-spirits too.’ She took a breath, letting the vitality of the airs of her home clear her head a little.  ‘I confess, and I ask your forgiveness – and of everyone of our friends, especially Maggot – I thought that I knew who he was as soon as he appeared in the Underworld. When he whisked us out of there I was certain, then it all came crashing in. If I called him out and challenged him, our search for the baby would lose direction and the group would be scattered, I wouldn’t have an excuse to stay with you and I would have had to come back here. Now, as I think of it, it doesn’t make sense. Why did I believe those thoughts? What made me choose deception? Anyway, in that flash of recognition, I decided not to reveal who he was, that he had such a deceitful reputation, but instead to pretend. And he gave me a look, as if to say, “I know that you know, but you’re not going to say anything, are you?” He was teasing, provoking, relishing the trap I was in – that I had put myself in.’ Her eyes were a thousand leagues of sadness and regret.

192 
‘Once that moment passed I knew I was now committed to the lie. Can you forgive me?’ Ant was weeping gently too. ‘What you did was terrible, stringing everyone along, but not unforgiveable at all. It was a strange choice for you to make but, when we’re deluded, blinded by love, such things easily happen.’ Ant’s words were cool, serious and loving. ‘Such was the malice and mischief of Muñca, I feel sure he was guided by the Evil One, if not being the Lord of Lies, Mara himself, in disguise. What you said about him relishing your predicament looks like a clear sign to me.’ She took her hand and they sat in silence.  ‘Of course I forgive you; if we can rejoin the others you’ll have to tell them too but I’ll speak up for you.’ Ninka smiled. ‘I love you so much.’ It was just after this, as they sat under the trees and looked out over the blossoms and the dancers, that their new companion had arrived.   * * *  Ninka was now fully back in the Realm of the Tavatimsa. The challenging conversation she had just had with Ant had brought her firmly into this life once again. After having got through the issue of her deception, Ant had then brought her up to date on the word from Hiri and Siri; things had been looking up with respect to the search and Ant was excited to tell her all. Their quiet companion, so far nameless, listened in, trying to follow all the events and places being talked about.  Breathless by the end of this Ant went quiet, noticing that Ninka’s brow had become furrowed. ‘What is it?’ she asked, ‘You look worried. I thought you’d be pleased to hear all of that – we’ve got a lead.’ Ninka replied, ‘Yes, and you and I should be there too. I’m scared that he’ll say no but I’m going to ask the Prince!’ Ninka rose up and headed straight for the heart of the party, which it seemed was now growing a little quieter. Ant followed just behind her and the other deva tagged along too.  ‘Your Divine and Serene Highness,’ Ninka bowed, ‘Although I have but recently returned to this joyous festival, and although you had to ask me to return many times, I humbly request your Divine and Royal Leave to depart once again, before the revels have ended.’ Prince Malabhari looked at her, a slight puzzlement crossed his face, ‘Asked you to return? Did I?’ He looked about, as if to seek out someone nearby. ‘Well, I might have enquired of one of these sublime beings, ‘Where’s the Lady Ninka?’ but, did I send out some sort of command?’ His gaze landed on one of the devas close to him, ‘Ah, you’re in charge of messages. Did I send for this girl?’  ‘Not exactly Sire, but you had noticed she was not about so I took the liberty.’ ‘As I thought, it was merely a passing curiosity, not a demand for your presence, my dear. The Divine and Royal Pleasure invites you to do whatever you like, go wherever you please.’ It was apparent that the hours of partying had been

193 
accompanied by copious draughts of nectar-mead – which had an extraordinary potency when made from flowers of the Tavatimsa Heaven – so the magnanimity of Prince Malabhari was more expansive than usual. ‘If you wish to slum it with some…’ he looked askance and somewhat haughtily at Ant, ‘… kinnaris…’ the word seemed to bring a off-putting taste to his mouth, ‘… no problem.’  * * *  ‘I can’t believe it!’ Ninka was a mixture of relief, resentment, regret and excitement. ‘That whole time there was no need for me to be here at all! This stretch of stressing, hating myself, grinding my teeth in self-justification, fearing to lose you and to be parted for good – the travails of a whole lifetime and having four children in the human world – the suffering, anguishing in all of it was completely unnecessary. If it wasn’t such a tragedy I would laugh.’ Through all of this the amber-golden deva who had just introduced herself stayed close by. When Ant suggested they go to the Human Realm and to Kapilavatthu straight away, to follow the rest of the searchers, she asked, ‘Can I come too? I feel I know you and this world is strange to me, although I’m getting a bit more used to it. Can I follow along? Just tell me what to do, or to not do.’  Ninka took her hand, and Ant’s, and they appeared instantaneously in Kapilavatthu. ‘Nink,’ Ant called out, ‘Come on, let’s find them or see if they’ve left traces if they’ve moved on already.’ Ninka was a skilled tracker and it was not difficult to pick up the scents of their familiar friends, especially the spoor of Gumbiya. ‘Let’s go – this way,’ Ninka motioned them to follow her to the palace. The golden deva was meanwhile fixed to the spot, looking at the hills and distant white-capped peaks to the north, ‘Come on!’ Ant broke the spell and took her hand.  They found a courtyard that was thick with the fragrances of Rhamba and Salassa and the fruity aromas of Maggot and Bee, as well as the notably ripe hum of Gumby. Ninka looked around, breathing in the messages that the place gave her, sorting through the many animal and human smells. ‘I’m not sure,’ she shook her head, it was all a bit thick, heavy and coarse after their long stint passing through the higher, more sensorily refined realms.  ‘’Allo,’ a slight but firm voice sounded nearby, as they glided by the kitchen storerooms on their search.  ‘You look jes’ like them other flower-devas wot woz ’ere a while back.’ Ant, Ninka and their nameless friend looked about them until they saw two small sprites hovering before them. The brownish one introduced himself again. ‘’Allo. I’m Cob, this ere’s Green-Blossom, pleased to meet yer,’ his green-clad partner waved, with a smile and wagged her cap.  ‘You all look like y’r lookin’ for someone or sumfing too.’ ‘Yes,’ Ant was delighted to meet these beings who it appeared had seen at least Bee and Maggot. ‘We’re looking for our friends who came to Kapilavatthu, and

194 
they’re searching for the lost baby of Miss Maggot, one of the ones who looked like me.’  ‘Right you are. They woz ’ere all right, a few Moons ago now, eh?’ He turned to Green-Blossom who then picked it up, ‘They were very nice so we told ’em what we could. By the way, ’oo are you all? We don’t get many visits from high ups ’n’,’ she indicated Ninka and the golden deva, ‘it’s an honour for us hobs and brownies to meet such,’ she searched for the right word, ‘noble and ’oly ones.’ She nudged Cob vigorously while she curtsied and Cob made an awkward bow, ‘Er, Your Highnesses, Holinesses, er…’  ‘Please, I’m Ninka, this is Ant and this is our new friend, whose name is…’ and she realized that she didn’t have her name yet. The new deva looked at her blankly, and affirmed, ‘No one has given me a name yet.’ She looked a little vacantly at Ant and Ninka.  ‘Well,’ Green-blossom spoke up, ‘such a one as you milady should ’ave a real nice name. Since ’e’s cob-brown, and I’m as green as a rice-flower, we could call you Ambaka, on ’count of you bein’ the colour of golden mangoes. ’Ow does that sound?’ Ant was pleased with this; it resonated as the perfect name for her new friend but she was getting impatient. ‘So, what could you tell them, the others who were on the search?’ ‘Oh yea, right,’ Cob cleared his thoughts, ‘What we told ’em was we thought that the girl she was what, sixteen sun-turnings then? She’d gone off to Savatthi. She were a slave-girl from the kitchens ’ere so she’s prob’ly in the kitchens there.’ ‘Savatthi? How long ago?’ Ninka was eager to make up for lost time, feeling that she had been to blame for so much delay already.  ‘Mus’ be a dozen, p’raps fifteen sun-turnin’s at least now’ Green-blossom counted on her tiny fingers.  The three devas wasted no more time before setting off to Savatthi, Ninka carried Ant, as she could fly faster, and Ambaka slipstreamed them, greatly enjoying both the power of flight and the sound of her new name – it was exactly right somehow.  The three of them approached the palace at Savatthi and aimed towards a leafy garden courtyard, close by the main buildings. Tall trees and shrubs were there, amid the structures that filled the area. As they were landing they saw a cluster of very familiar forms, gathered beneath one of the trees. They swiftly descended and joined with their dear companions.  Salassa was the first to greet them, ‘Hey, you’ve got here too!’ He turned to Ninka, asking, ‘So, how was the party?’ ‘Long,’ she replied, hit by a wave of flashbacks from the garland workshop and the births of her four children in Katara village, ‘Long, like you wouldn’t believe.’  * * *

195 
 Prince Vidudabha was received with splendid and colourful ceremony as they marched into Kapilavatthu’s palace grounds. He realized he shouldn’t get too carried away but this was deeply pleasing. He loved to be the centre of attention and he certainly was at this time.  The embassy was given space to unpack and settle and then the Prince and his party were welcomed into the Santhagara, the grand audience chamber. ‘Well, they called this “grand” but it’s not much compared with Kosala; still, they are country cousins, after all, so I should keep quiet on that,’ he reflected. Prince Mahanama and Princess Maddarupi, ostensibly his grandparents, were in the forefront to usher him in and invite him to meet his royal Sakyan family.  Prior to his arrival agitated discussions had been taking place around the halls and homes of the nobles of Kapilavatthu. ‘It is impossible, Sire, for any of us to pay obeisance to this individual, the son of a slave-girl,’ one of the ministers said through a sneer. ‘What are we to do?’ ‘Should we arrange an “accident”?’ ‘Have all the senior royals be busy on a mission elsewhere?’ ‘How by all the gods should we handle this?’  Mahanama, who was shrewd and experienced in matters of diplomacy, was struck with a bright idea, ‘We shall not send away us senior royals, but simply the junior ones. By rights, as a younger person, the Prince should pay respects to his Royal Elders, correct?’ The lords and ladies and members of the royal house nodded or murmured in agreement. ‘So,’ the King continued, ‘if we send away the young princely children into the country on some excuse, then he will pay obeisance to us elders yet none of us will need to pay respects to him. Is this acceptable?’ There were some who baulked at even being on the receiving end of a formal greeting from the son of a slave – despite his father being the mighty King of Kosala – but these few were persuaded that discretion was the better part of pride in this case and they agreed to go along with the ruse.  There was an impressive array of crowned and bejewelled nobles in the audience chamber. The Prince began to chat amiably with Vidudabha, expressing how delighted and impressed he was to meet him, and for the first time, and how glad he also was that the great King Pasenadi had brought their houses closer by his marriage to Queen Vasabha:– Now, by having fathered the Prince and named him as his heir to the throne of Kosala, he had cemented those ties for many generations to come. This was a cause for celebration!  ‘Before we begin any festivities or entertainments, I should introduce you, Your Serene Highness, grandson, to other members of the Sakyan Royal House.’  The Prince was led to the assembled line of nobility and paid respects to each one, until his back ached from the effort. He was sincerely endeavouring to be humble and polite but he was losing patience. Not a one of them had offered him the respects in return – not one – so, at last, once he had come to the end of the long line, he could not restrain himself.

196 
‘How is it,’ he asked, ‘that though I pay obeisance to all of you,’ he looked pointedly along the line of finely-clad and tall-standing Sakyans, ‘none of you offer your respects to me?’ ‘Oh, Your Highness,’ Prince Mahanama put on his most convincing, matter-of-fact, dissembling voice. ‘It is our custom here; only juniors pay respects to elders and not the other way round – never!’ As if such a possibility were unthinkable to any right-minded person. ‘Our younger princes and princesses are all off in the countryside at the moment – it’s a seasonal thing we do – so, at the moment, if you’ll excuse us, Your Serene Highness is the most junior of the kshatriyan royals here.’  His words were honeyed and they did their job. Mahanama then invited him to sit in a seat especially prepared for the entertainments, Prince Vidudabha settled himself down and brushed his concerns aside. Any lingering sense that he was being insulted or not treated with proper honour was washed away by the lavish display of dancers and pulsing music that the Prince then offered, by way of amusements. The dancing was followed by a grand banquet and the Prince was swamped with gifts, fine flavours, exotic smells and soothing textures.  ‘They may be country people from the hills but these Sakyans really know how to hold a feast.’ He was pleased. ‘I believe I’m going to enjoy my days here.’   * * *  Ant and Ninka quickly noticed that Maggot was wreathed in smiles. ‘You look happy,’ Ant remarked.  ‘How could I not be,’ Maggot’s bright face lit up even more.  ‘So…’ Ninka dared to ask.  ‘So we found her!’ Bee proudly announced, ‘but there’s good news and bad news.’  ‘Bad news?’ Ant was now concerned, ‘is she ill? Or dead? No, she can’t be, you’re too happy. What happened?’ Bee settled herself back into Gumbiya’s armpit, leaning against his massive thigh and flank; she loved the fume of him and, now that their search was over, they could all feel more relaxed. ‘You tell the story, Maggot, it’s yours to pass on.’ ‘When we got here, a few Moons ago, we raced about, hither and yon all over the palace grounds: the kitchens, the workshops, the stables, the servants’ quarters, since all we knew was that Tam had grown up in a slave family who mostly worked in the kitchen at Kapilavatthu and that is what she had done before going south.’ ‘Yes, we heard that.’  ‘Shh, Nink,’ Ant scowled.  ‘We picked up traces of her fragrance pretty quickly.’ ‘Even me,’ Gumbiya chipped in; Bee dug him in the ribs.  ‘She was definitely around but we soon came to the conclusion that she did not live with the slave families or in the servants’ quarters.

197 
‘The places where the signs of her were strongest were around the royal chambers. So then, one morning while it was still fresh, I was looking through the windows as the maid opened the shutters and there she was, leaning on some cushions in a parlour room, with some other princess or some high-up lady. I was frozen, couldn’t more or speak for shock, but then Bee came up and hovered beside me.  ‘“It’s her!” Bee shouts out. “She looks like a queen, and twice as old as you!” I thought that was a bit of an exaggeration,’ she tipped Bee a nod, ‘but she was certainly all grown up. We reckon it’s been thirty-five sun-turnings here in the Human Realm, give or take, since she was hatched. And she is certainly no slave girl.’  All five of them who had been in Savatthi for this time were in full agreement on this.  ‘We’ve been asking around the local rukkha-devas and kinnaris of the gardens and all seem to say the same: She’s a queen indeed and mother of the Crown Prince, as well.’ ‘So,’ Ant was enthralled to hear all this, ‘What was your meeting like?’ Maggot went quiet.  ‘That’s the bad news,’ Rhamba broke the silence, ‘She can’t see us and it doesn’t seem like any of the other people in the palace can either.’ ‘Gave it our all, we did,’ Gumbiya joined in, ‘in the palace, rahnd the gardens, jumpin’ ’n’ yellin’. I ’it the grahnd wiv me club a few times – nuffink. They fort it woz an earthquake’ ‘Blowing in her ears, whispering her name, singing her favourite lullabies from when she was a baby, none of it gets through.’ ‘Breathing a full kinnari breath into her face – not a thing, or, maybe she cocked her eyebrow and inhaled a little deeper,’ Bee recounted.  ‘I think that might have been wishful thinking, Bee,’ Maggot smiled appreciatively.  ‘Anyway we’ve found her and it’s wonderful to be with her but, so far, she can’t see me or hear me, or any of us, so she doesn’t know she’s been found.’ ‘Does she know she was lost?’ Ninka reflected.  ‘That’s another story; we don’t have any idea about her past. She certainly behaves like she’s always been a queen, or a princess rather than a slave or an ordinary person, even when she’s just with her maid, who’s a girl with one hand who we think is Kesini from Kosambi.’ ‘I’m sure it is’ said Salassa, ‘the way she walks is even more distinctive than the missing hand.’ ‘Though how she got here from Kosambi…’ ‘No’ a clue,’ finished Gumbiya.  Ant was intrigued. ‘So, what about the Jetavana and the enlightened ones there, could they help?’

198 
‘We haven’t tried that yet,’ Maggot looked a bit sheepish, ‘since she’s my belovèd daughter but she is also the offspring of a novice monk, as he was then, and that’s not a situation that I’m very proud of.’ Again Maggot went quiet.  ‘So,’ Gumbiya cracked half a smile, ‘’ere we all are, ’appily ’sconced in the royal gardens, doin’ our best to come up wiv a way to help young – not-so-young – Tambaka meet ’er mum.’  * * *  The embassy’s visit only lasted for a few days and then it was time to head back to Kosala. Vidudabha felt he had acquitted himself well, made a good impression and had acted very properly, as befitted a prince of high rank. His mother and father would be proud of him and he was now weighted down with rich gifts that his newly-met grandparents had bestowed upon him. It had all gone swimmingly.  His elephant was now prepared and the military escort was drawn up in ranks to depart, the waggons and carriages were ready with their oxen and horses standing in gleaming tack and harnesses. The Himalayan sun shone from a clear bright sky and the road lay ahead.  The drums and trumpets had already sounded when one of the junior lords of Kosala, Viraja by name, noticed that his sword was not strapped at his waist. He began to panic; to lose such a precious item was a shameful thing for any warrior-noble, so he desperately tried to remember where he could have left it. There had been so much drinking and carousing over the previous days it was difficult to recollect anything clearly.  It then struck him that, ‘Aha, bladed weapons were not allowed in that audience hall and we had to unbuckle our belts by the door. It’s there, I’m sure.’ He ducked away from the other young nobles on horseback, saying, ‘Hold my nag a minute, I’ll be right back,’ and thrusting the reins into the hand of his squire he took off.  He passed through the Sakyan folk who had been gathered to give them a good send-off and he made his way to the hall as fast as possible. To his great relief, there to the left of the broad portal, on a shelf, was his sword-belt and his prized weapon, together with a handsome dagger that one of his friends had forgotten too.  He stood by the entrance while he sorted out the buckling on of the scabbard and sword, and was pocketing the knife to return to Sujiva, (after he’s made sure to torment him for having lost it) when his eye caught a strange sight. There were several people in the hall tidying up, doing various tasks, but what struck him was that a slave woman was washing the seat where Prince Vidudabha had been sitting. As he looked closer he saw she seemed to be using an mixture of milk and water to do this. This was strange indeed.  ‘What are you doing?’ He asked.

199 
‘Oo me?’ She was still fixed on the task at hand so didn’t even bother to glance over her shoulder at him. ‘This is the seat that son of a slave girl was sittin’ on so it’s got to be a slave wot washes it, ’n’ with milk an’ water too; don’ ask me why.’  ‘“Son of a slave girl” – you don’t mean Prince Vidudabha?’ ‘’Course. ’E’s the son of Vasabha who was a slave girl here, so, got to wash it down special, otherwise no one else can use it – well, none of the nobs anyway.’ Now, noticing his accent, she glanced his way and realized it was one of those ‘nobs’ she was talking to, ‘Oh, sorry sir, didn’t mean to be rude.’ And, thinking no more of it she caried on with her cleaning.  Viraja scurried out and got back to his horse, his mind teeming with thoughts and confused emotions. The way the woman had spoken implied it was common knowledge that Vasabha was no queen and that the Prince was ill-born. His heart pounded as he fretted:– She was telling the truth I’m sure, and revealing a huge secret without realizing it. She didn’t twig that I was from the party of Kosalans. What on earth should I do? The first thing he did was to seek out his friend Sujiva and return his dagger, quite forgetting to tease him, as he was eager to get some counsel. When he described what he had seen, Sujiva’s dusky face turned ashen.  ‘We can’t keep this secret. We have to tell the Prince. It will be our heads if we delay as we’ll be seen to be complicit.’  * * *  They waited until the next rest stop for the great caravan and rode up to the Prince’s elephant, where he had just dismounted.  ‘Viraja, Sujiva, what’s up? You two chaps look like you’ve just seen a ghost and it’s still broad day.’ ‘A spectre we have encountered in truth, Your Serene Highness,’ Sujiva started, then grew quiet, turning to Viraja to continue. He recounted the incident, reporting it as calmly and clearly as he could, but his pulse was hammering in his head, his chest, and he was sweating rivers; by way of finishing he repeated, ‘“Son of a slave-girl” was what she said Sire, and did so as if it was something that every Sakyan person was aware of.’ As the story unfolded and reached this ending the Prince’s face distorted, reddened and then became empurpled with affronted pride and fury. He raged and yelled, attacking those around him, asking if any of them said the same, had known this sickening truth that shamed him so. As he lashed out he saw the faces of those around him – the nobles, the other princes, the officers of the army, the servants – they all looked equally aghast and shocked. No one knew of this, which was, to him, a terrible truth.  When calm returned he spoke, ‘If these proud Sakyans now see fit to wash the seat whereon I sat with milk and water, here and now before you all, I vow that

200 
when I come into my power I will wash that chair and this city with their heart’s blood, and their halls will be filled with corpses and lamentation.’   ==*==
