# CHAPTER 17: SCANDAL IN SAVATTHI   nable to deal with her anger and grief Queen Vasabha needed to lash out. Even though more and more people seemed to be of the opinion that the Buddha was innocent, and was being framed by malicious parties, she still harboured a feeling, deep within her, that he was at fault and that he thought he was above all laws. There was some kind of intuition that he was haughty and dismissive of ordinary human standards, which was enraging her and causing sleepless nights.  Even though Khujjuttara had delivered Matanga’s message to the Buddha, explaining that Matanga had willingly given her life and that the actual murderers were Devadatta’s faction, and Khujjuttara was a close friend of Queen Vasabha and had told her this in detail – something continued to irk her. It didn’t make sense but the Queen could not get beyond the doubt that the Buddha considered himself above all human laws and had indeed been responsible for the murder. Her frustration and agitation were made all the stronger by her being unable to acknowledge, to all but Kesini and Khujjuttara, that Matanga had been her half-sister as well as a dear friend.  Matters were not helped when her young son, in his worst ‘I’m-the-Crown-Prince-and-soon-I-will-be-in-charge’ voice, full of the self-righteous pomposity of high privilege, said when she was in tears one day, ‘I don’t know why you are so upset mother. She was a person to chat to when she met you at the monastery but she was only a candala, the lowest of the low so – by all rights – you should not have even been speaking with her at all. At least only to give orders.’ And he was a child of only six Rains! It was infuriating:– If he only knew who his Royal Mother really was, Vasabha ground her teeth, that would wipe the conceited, bigoted look off his little face. She had to use every pennyweight of resolve to restrain herself while the storms of emotion blew so fiercely. She managed it, through the years of determined effort that she had made, but the outlet was an indignation directed at the Buddha – she was sure that he was guilty of the crime. The many times that she had sat in his presence, and felt the oceanic love and compassion for all that emanated from him, were either pointedly forgotten or she wrote such feelings off as, ‘Some sort of psychic trick he plays on people – it’s all a mask, a charade!’ King Pasenadi was surprised at the intensity of Vasabha’s distress – Queen Mallika and Princess Vajiri had also been fond of the girl who had died – but he shrugged it off as one of life’s mysteries and, when Queen Vasabha was appealing, raging at him to bring the Master to justice, he felt her pain but was not drawn into her perspective on the scandal. In his other ear Queen Mallika was full of assurances

146 
CHAPTER 17: SCANDAL IN SAVATTHI   nable to deal with her anger and grief Queen Vasabha needed to lash out. Even though more and more people seemed to be of the opinion that the Buddha was innocent, and was being framed by malicious parties, she still harboured a feeling, deep within her, that he was at fault and that he thought he was above all laws. There was some kind of intuition that he was haughty and dismissive of ordinary human standards, which was enraging her and causing sleepless nights.  Even though Khujjuttara had delivered Matanga’s message to the Buddha, explaining that Matanga had willingly given her life and that the actual murderers were Devadatta’s faction, and Khujjuttara was a close friend of Queen Vasabha and had told her this in detail – something continued to irk her. It didn’t make sense but the Queen could not get beyond the doubt that the Buddha considered himself above all human laws and had indeed been responsible for the murder. Her frustration and agitation were made all the stronger by her being unable to acknowledge, to all but Kesini and Khujjuttara, that Matanga had been her half-sister as well as a dear friend.  Matters were not helped when her young son, in his worst ‘I’m-the-Crown-Prince-and-soon-I-will-be-in-charge’ voice, full of the self-righteous pomposity of high privilege, said when she was in tears one day, ‘I don’t know why you are so upset mother. She was a person to chat to when she met you at the monastery but she was only a candala, the lowest of the low so – by all rights – you should not have even been speaking with her at all. At least only to give orders.’ And he was a child of only six Rains! It was infuriating:– If he only knew who his Royal Mother really was, Vasabha ground her teeth, that would wipe the conceited, bigoted look off his little face. She had to use every pennyweight of resolve to restrain herself while the storms of emotion blew so fiercely. She managed it, through the years of determined effort that she had made, but the outlet was an indignation directed at the Buddha – she was sure that he was guilty of the crime. The many times that she had sat in his presence, and felt the oceanic love and compassion for all that emanated from him, were either pointedly forgotten or she wrote such feelings off as, ‘Some sort of psychic trick he plays on people – it’s all a mask, a charade!’ King Pasenadi was surprised at the intensity of Vasabha’s distress – Queen Mallika and Princess Vajiri had also been fond of the girl who had died – but he shrugged it off as one of life’s mysteries and, when Queen Vasabha was appealing, raging at him to bring the Master to justice, he felt her pain but was not drawn into her perspective on the scandal. In his other ear Queen Mallika was full of assurances

147 
that it could not possibly be the Buddha who was responsible. He heard them both and, a half-Moon after the murder had occurred, he declared, ‘The rod of justice is not to be used with bias or with prejudgement – the stories of the various parties who have been accused will be heard in court and we shall uncover where the truth lies.’  * * *  Just as he had done when sending men to search the Jetavana, as soon as the crime was heard of, King Pasenadi called on his spies and undercover agents to mingle with the populace of Savatthi: to frequent taverns where the rogues and scoundrels tended to gather; to shop in the markets where the honest commonfolk would ply their trades and meet and talk, and also to join them in hauling water from their wells; he sent them to the camps of wanderers of various sects, with the excuse of coming to hear spiritual teachings; and, dressed in the gaudy finery of the servants of rich merchants in their guild-halls, they mingled with the wealthy traders and their staff – all to find out what the word was on the street and to have ears close by if one responsible for the egregious act dropped an incautious word, or conveyed crucial and incriminating evidence.  The court was convened the next Moon and Ananda, as a representative of the Master, as well as some leaders of other sects of wanderers, and a number of the most eminent brahmin priests, accompanied by their wealthy patrons, were summoned to the palace, as were, at the other end of the scale, a number of notorious thieves and cutthroats. Family and friends were allowed to attend as witnesses, and a number of the bhikkhus and followers of other groups of wanderers were present too. Devadatta was there, with Kokalika and Samudadatta, and Krishna who sat away from them by choice.  Among the witnesses to the event was Khujjuttara and, beside King Pasenadi were Queen Mallika and Queen Vasabha, as well as the King’s armed guard and a large group of courtiers.  Vasabha’s jaw was rigidly set and her beauty overshadowed by the cloud of grief and aversion that surrounded her. In defiance of the usual norms of dressing modestly when they were receiving visits from religious leaders and teachers, she had made a point of decking herself in as much regal finery as she could. Round her neck was a heavily bejewelled carcanet and on her brow was a diadem that had a massive blood-red ruby at its centre. Her robes and armlets, and gold and silver bangles, were of the finest quality. All of this emanating a statement of Royal Power.  She had to be mindful of not over-dressing and making the King look shoddy in comparison but he, to her relief, was, as the dispenser of justice, arrayed from head to toe in all the appurtenances of the Crown, the head-anointed warrior-noble King of Kosala.

148 
Mallika, meanwhile, had simply followed her usual form of dressing in an unadorned and modest fashion and, by way of contrast, in as simple a garb as she thought she could get away with and not humiliate His Majesty by her being inappropriately under-dressed. The choices of the two queens in their modes of apparel didn’t pass unnoticed. Neither did their expressions, as Queen Mallika’s face displayed a complete freedom from anxiety and a serene radiance, quite unlike that of her junior counterpart. The King called the court to order by welcoming all who were assembled and by acknowledging his own respect for the young candala woman whom he had met on a few occasions. He reminded the court – and gave the brahmin priests, along with the warrior-noble gentry, a meaningful look, as he did this – that he respected the putting aside of caste and rank when in the company of the samanas of different groups.  ‘Thus it should be taken to heart that, within the monasteries and encampments of such spiritually committed renunciants, a king or a queen, or anyone of rank, is at liberty to befriend or learn from a monastic or a lay disciple of any caste, any station in life whatsoever.’ He made a point of seeking out Khujjuttara in the crowd and smiling to her as he had developed great respect and affection for her over the years. She raised her hands in añjali by way of acknowledgement.  ‘Similarly, the fact that the victim of this cruel murder was a candala by caste, who even went by the name “Matanga”, does not diminish the seriousness of the crime. If anyone in this court, when acting as a witness or one being accused, indicates any disrespect for her saying such as, “she was only a candala…” or “a person of high rank should not be punished on account of the death of a candala”, that person will be held as having insulted the Crown and will be punished accordingly, irrespective of rank or caste.’ His brows bristled with icy authority as he said this, ‘Am I clear!?’ Hands were raised in añjali all around with a hearty ‘Sadhu’ being heard in some quarters whilst quieter in others.  ‘To move now to the case at hand – we have a number of people who have been accused, who have graciously agreed to be present for this trial, some well-known and of high rank, some less well-known. We also have a number of witnesses that the Crown wishes to hear speak publicly. I thank those of you who have volunteered to offer what information you can. Are there any witnesses who have been brought to this court involuntarily?’ The King was using the customary words for this part of the formal procedure but those who were close by could see a sharpening of his look and a suggestion of a smile under his moustache.  ‘Yes indeed, Sire. We have two… gentlemen… from the Sukhavati Tavern, well, that’s where we caught ’em, going by the names Sattuka and Kalidanta,’ the Captain of the Guard announced, as properly as he could.  ‘Just those two?’ The King raised his brows – already knowing the answer. ‘Well, let’s call them in, shall we?’  Out of the great respect for the Master, despite being one of the accused, King Pasenadi had made it clear that he would not be called into a court of this nature.

149 
Queen Vasabha was not at all happy with this but the King had insisted. Even though he used the words ‘the chief accused’ repeatedly during the proceedings, he was unable to treat the Master as just one other individual and so refused to cause him to be physically present. Ananda was in the court as a representative of the Sangha and to retain the words of the discussions. He was assigned a seat in a place of respect; this too irked Vasabha but she had no choice in the matter. It seemed that, in the unlikely case that the Master was found to be guilty, word would be taken to him at the Jetavana of this conclusion.  * * *  The two men from the tavern were brought in, between two guards each, and the King ushered them to kneel before the throne immediately.  ‘So, good men, what do you have to say? The King politely asked.  ‘Nuffink,’ the taller one, Sattuka, replied.  ‘You?’ He asked the other one.  ‘Me neever,’ was all Kalidanta would say.  ‘If I may, Sire,’ a non-descript person in somewhat obscuring clothing then stepped up, ‘please excuse my wrappings but I am one of your undercover agents and to be unrecognized is one of my tools-of-the-trade.’ ‘Of course, go on.’ ‘Sire, whilst I was conducting researches, at the Sukhavati Tavern, these two gentlemen, who were clearly friends or… er… business associates, were deep in their cups and were arguing or debating with each other. Kalidanta seemed to be angry that Sattuka had taken all the money for a task they had both been contracted to fulfil. Kalidanta said, and I quote,’ here the witness closed his eyes to recite: ‘“You killed the girl and then chucked ’er in a ditch, wivaht even telling me you were going ter do the job that night. You took all the money for yourself and now ’ere you are, drinkin’ it all away – wha’ abou’ my share! I was in on this too!”’ King Pasenadi was scrutinizing the faces of the two. They both looked horrified at hearing those words, particularly they were shocked at how precisely the spy had recalled them. They looked at each other, silently trying to see a way forward that might be a means of keeping their heads attached to their bodies.  ‘Well?’ The King pressed them for a response. ‘It might go a little easier for you both if you told the court who paid you to do this.’ Before anyone had time to draw a breath Sattuka blurted out, ‘It were two of the monks!’ The words both condemning themselves but also deflecting the blame, if possible.  ‘And which kind of monks – the Buddha’s disciples or those of another sect? Please be clear on this now.’ ‘It was them two – sittin’ over there!’ Sattuka pointed in the direction of Devadatta’s group. Devadatta, prepared as he was for any outcome, with no hesitation looked with shocked horror at his two companions.

150 
‘Do you know the names of these two Venerables?’ The King leant into the honorific with a deliberate sarcasm.  ‘Nah, they woz cagey ’bout that. But it woz them. Kno’ ’em anywhere.’ The guards were already moving towards the groups of monastics, gathered on their mats on the north side of the hall. Devadatta had drawn away from the two monks sitting near him, increasing his look of disgust and looking about himself, as if for help. It was a convincing act.  The two Elders were hauled in front of King Pasenadi, with a little respect but more severity and purposefulness on the part of the guards.  ‘Your names?’ The King raised one of his impressive grey brows, going through the formality but knowing full well who they were already.  ‘My name is Venerable Kokalika.’ ‘And….’ ‘I am Venerable Samudadatta.’ ‘”Venerables” eh? Well, we’ll see about that, shall we not? Can you refute the statements of these two gentlemen?’ He leant forward in his throne, pressing the question upon them.  ‘Why, Sire, Your Majesty, these are a mere pair of n’er-do-wells, disreputable people. They have probably been hired to put the blame on us innocent Elders.’ Kokalika was sweating.  ‘You do remember what I said about seeming to dismiss the worth and word of the lower castes?’ ‘Oh, of course Sire.’ He was lost for words and looked desperately at his partner Samudadatta.  ‘So did you, or did you not, hire these two to kill the upasika Matanga? In the midst of this court, and before your own mentors and teachers, did you do it?’ Mara, as was his wont, had been listening to and watching the whole proceedings eagerly. He had been especially pleased with Devadatta’s feigned surprise and disgust at his accused co-conspirators. Now he waited for more deceit and blaming, relishing the ongoing chaos and division in the society that would come from all this. He was disappointed when, out of the hushed, suspenseful silence Samudatta spoke:  ‘Yes, I cannot lie any further, it was us but we…’, his words seemed to catch in his throat and he looked over to Devadatta who was in turn looking at the matting before him and shaking his head. The words would not come to place the blame with his mentor and master. He kept his silence. Whether it was through his own volition or via a mental manoeuvre on the part of his teacher, it was impossible for ordinary folk to tell. ‘Since you admit your guilt the work of this court is almost done. All that remains is the pronouncing of sentence upon you all.  ‘The two hired killers acted for pay. Their crime is murder but the motivation for that death came from you. As I most generously promised that things would go a little easier for you two if you were compliant,’ he said, turning to the cut-throats,

151 
‘you will not be tortured before your heads are struck from your bodies, which is the approved punishment for murder.  ‘As for you two – as you have deliberately caused the death of a human being I believe,’ and here he cast a respectful glance at Ananda, ‘that according to your own discipline you ceased to be monks at the moment that poor Matanga breathed her last. Is that correct?’ Ananda, seated on a platform nearby, made añjali and indicated with an inclination of his head that this was a correct understanding.  ‘Accordingly, you will go through the city, no longer wearing the ochre robes of the Master’s Sangha but as you are, as lay people, and declare: “We caused this woman, Matanga, Haritacca-Kumari of Kulluta, to be killed because of the desire to cast reproach upon the Samana Gotama, the Lord Buddha; there is no fault in the conduct of the Master or in his other disciples.” After you have passed through the city and declared this at every crossroads, you will, like your partners in crime from the tavern, be taken to a place of execution outside the city walls where your heads also will be struck from your bodies, as is suitable for the heinous criminals that you are.’ Devadatta was relieved to hear the, ‘No fault in… his other disciples’ piece so, thwarted though his scheme had been, he himself had fully evaded blame, as far as he was aware.  Krishna, despite his involvement and the risk that he might be blamed as the one who persuaded Matanga to be putting herself at risk, was so sorrowful and filled with remorse that he had been numb to most of the proceedings.  Khujjuttara was pleased to see justice done but was thoroughly unconvinced by Devadatta’s displays of surprise and horror.  Queen Vasabha was a mixture of feelings – pleased that her sister and friend’s killers had been found and would be punished but confused and regretful that she had been so wrong about the Buddha.  King Pasenadi, meanwhile, surveying the court as the guilty parties were led away, had a satisfied smile on his face. ‘My friends, citizens, Venerable Sirs. I am glad that these matters were able to be dealt with so swiftly and efficiently. Let us all go and see about some lunch.’   * * *  Krishna was devastated; he was uninterested in food and couldn’t sleep. He was visited, however, about three days after the trial, by Dusaka and Tingri who, kindly, didn’t try to chat with him or cheer him up or fix him, but rather simply took up residence under his kuti, on a low cord-strung bed and a small mat, and left him to his misery.  Finally Krishna was not able to sustain the fug of self-hatred and remorse any longer and besides, his belly was growling, so he came unsteadily down the wooden steps and joined with his wizened mentor below.

152 
Dusaka began by asking, ‘How are you?’ and Tingri came and laid her shaggy head in his lap. For a time Krishna wept and could not speak but then, as the tears dried up he moaned, ‘But she didn’t have to do that! Why did she not just tell me I was being a fool and get me to wake up to what Devadatta and the others were plotting, if she could see it so quickly and so clearly? And I know he’s as much to blame as the others even if he wriggled out of it at the trial.  ‘I don’t care that I was tricked and was made a dupe myself – that’s a familiar story to me – but Matanga, she was such a sweet girl, and then I find out she was my daughter! How long had she known that anyway?’ He was not looking for an answer, rather he was simply howling to the universe by saying this, but Dusaka, with a quick nod from Tingri, chimed in, ‘No more than a Moon or so; I gave her the news myself. You were wrapped up in Devadatta’s crowd, and we never saw you, so you didn’t hear sooner. She was looking for an opportunity to meet you quietly and let you know.’  ‘But, but how could they do that? Kill a good person so brutally just to try to discredit the Master?!’  ‘Well, sadly, perhaps part of it was that they saw that, as a candala, she didn’t really count as a “person”. It’s strange and sad but some people think that way. It’s also likely that because you are so dark, despite coming from a rich merchant family, that they also easily used you and were ready for you to be blamed and cast out. It’s ironic, as it’s only “virtuous beings in human form” that are classed as “manussa” in the Master’s scheme of things. You can have a human body – be a “puggala”– but not be “dwelling in the Manussa Realm”. If you are living a life full of lies and self-centred hates and desires, you’re more like an animal, or a hungry ghost, or a hell-demon, rather than a true person.’ Dusaka sat quietly after this, hoping that his words were sinking in and were of some small comfort to his now middle-aged protégé.  ‘As for why young Matanga was so ready to give her life in order to help exonerate the Master and cause the guilty to be revealed, sometimes there are influences from the past, the distant past, that incline us to make the choices we do,’ he looked at Tingri, who responded by cocking her head minutely, as if to say, ‘Maybe.’ ‘Come on, I think there’s a few people visiting today that you might want to see – do you feel up to a bit of company? They are people you can cry with too, if you need to.’  * * *  Queen Vasabha, Kesini, Khujjuttara and Ananda were gathered at the sala. It was late afternoon in the Cold Season now and the sun was goldening as it descended. Dust drifted through the sunbeams, rising from the few passers by on the walking paths through the forest.

153 
Dusaka, Krishna and Tingri approached quietly as the group were in deep discussion recounting the details of the crisis and the false accusations, and discussing how they felt about Devadatta and the way he had evaded justice.  They welcomed the three newcomers and Krishna set himself beside the Elder Ananda; Krishna now being aged some forty-five Rains, Ananda was a grey-haired man of over seventy. Krishna was glad to be among friends again; Queen Vasabha was particularly quick to be welcoming and friendly. The events of the trial, and her conversations with these friends, had fully convinced her that Krishna had had no knowledge of what was planned to be done to Matanga. She regretted the amount of bitter words she had spoken and the vengeful, spiteful thoughts she had nursed with respect to him – as the one who drew Matanga into the plot – and to the Buddha whom she felt she had grievously maligned over these past weeks.  ‘I hear that Matanga had a very special message for you, informing you that she was your daughter, by her mother Sugandhi of Kulluta…’, she paused and looked over at Dusaka and Khujjuttara anxiously, as if to check that she could not be making life worse for everyone with what she wanted to say.  Before she could continue, Krishna said, ‘Yes! What with everything else,’ here he caught his breath for a moment, hoping not to burst into tears again, ‘I haven’t really had time to digest that.’ ‘Well, at the time that our friend Dusaka revealed that to her, he had also just disclosed to me something about my past.’  She took a breath. ‘The fact of it is, I am your child as well – not by Sugandha – but my mother was apparently a kinnari, with the nickname Maggot, who Dusaka has known for many years.’ ‘But, you’re a Sakyan, a princess from the north, everyone knows that!’ Krishna was astounded and boggled by her saying something so outlandish, so bizarre and against all that was common knowledge.  ‘Everyone thinks that, so I am taking a risk by letting you know, and Venerable Ananda here, but I had been hoping to tell you, just as Matanga was, as soon as I could.’ Krishna found his mind now racing. He was filled with questions falling over each other, the first out was, ‘You are my lost child?! How?!?... Does Maggot know you’re here?’ Then, ‘Is she here too!?’  ‘No, not yet. I only just recently found out myself. Apparently she’s been looking for me for my whole life and I’m twenty-five Rains old now.’ The Queen’s face was lighting up with this new change in her world and the clouds of grief and anger were dispersing. Krishna too, as the conversation unfolded, went from haggard and grey to a brighter and smiling state, the years falling away from him, his eyes shining.  ‘But this is amazing! How did you…? What happened? How…? This is wonderful! How can we tell Maggot you’ve been found?’ Dusaka was grinning like a cat with a bowl of cream, while Tingri was yipping and snorting in rapid succession. Khujjuttara and Kesini both dabbed their eyes with their shawls. Amid the laughter and the tears, Dusaka eventually spoke

154 
up, ‘I recognized her by her natural scent. Being half-kinnari she is blessed with her mother’s fragrance and that goes with her wherever she goes. It’s unmistakeable so, since I had known her and held her as an infant, I could not miss it.’ As he said this Krishna realized too that he had sensed a weird familiarity about her fragrance, when they had previously met, but he had never put two and two together before. ‘All we know, so far, is that she was alone in the forest at the Ghositarama and that somehow she got taken to Kapilavatthu, capital city of the Sakyans, where the Master comes from. How she ended up in the family of Yasa and Nagamunda, a slave family serving the palace, I have not a clue, but we can find out, with a bit of digging.’ He glanced meaningfully at Ananda at this point as if to appeal for a hand in this effort.  Ananda, easily picking up the hint, responded, ‘I’m sorry my friends, I have no powers to read minds or to delve past ages, unlike the Master and Elders such as Maha-Moggallana. I have a good memory but that does not help much here. I can only recall events I’ve been present at, or retrieve information I have been told. Beyond that, I’m as in the dark as you are.’ ‘But,’ Krishna, wreathed in smiles and not really caring that much about the details since Tambaka, his baby, had now been found, could not but ask, ‘if you were a kitchen slave, how did you get to be a queen, here in Kosala?’ ‘That’s a bit of a story, and at the risk of my life, literally, I will tell you.’ Vasabha then recounted the whole tale of her being chosen, and her current deception. She ended by saying, as she had to Khujjuttara and the others, ‘I leave it to you to keep silent or to tell others, as you see fit.’ Ananda replied, ‘Great Queen, as the attendant of the Master and as a monk, I have been privy to a vast array of people’s secrets, things they have mentioned or things that the Blessed One has divined. As he has the ability to read anyone and everyone’s mind, you can understand that the Master is knowledgeable about an even greater, immeasurably more vast number of secrets and hidden memories. He chooses not to intervene or cause action to be taken on the basis of his psychic powers alone. He prefers to leave it to the choices of the individual. He does not spy on people’s minds and lives and then share that knowledge with others. He teaches the Dharma so that individuals can wake themselves up. That is all. In short the knowledge of your birth is safe with me.’  ‘And me!’ Krishna echoed, ‘of course.’  ‘At the risk of going against this principle of privacy and caution, respecting the details of people’s lives,’ Dusaka interrupted, ‘I feel it will also be useful to you all to understand how far back your connections go. Yes, Matanga and Vasabha are your daughters in this life but you might also wish to consider, “Why? Why them and me?”’ He glanced at Tingri who half-cocked her head the other way, as if to indicate, ‘Go ahead, it’s your choice,’ Dusaka then turned to Khujjuttara and said, ‘My apologies for dropping another rock into your pond but the fact is that when Krishna was born he was the younger half-brother of Amba and Tamba, the two daughters of the merchant, later the pilgrim Kamanita.

155 
‘Amba became Queen Samavati and Tamba became Queen Magandiya, both married to King Udena of Vamsa, and both not recognizing or knowing each other until the tragic ending of their lives and, in truth, Amba did not even know it at the close, only Tamba in her final and most distressed moments. These two sisters, Amba and Tamba, Samavati and Magandiya, have now been born as Krishna’s daughters; Amba reappeared as Matanga while you, Your Majesty, were Tamba; this is probably why you recently conceived such an irrational suspicion and hatred of the Master.’ He chose not to mention her stint in the Hell of Molten Copper.  As he had suspected, this particular boulder being dropped into the pond left Krishna, Khujjuttara, Kesini and Queen Vasabha momentarily open-mouthed in astonishment but soon eager for more details.   * * *  Ant had decided to remain behind in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods in order to find Ninka, so the searching party was again reduced and only five of them remained. They arrived in Kapilavatthu and found it to be a quiet, smallish city beneath the foothills of the Himalaya.  ‘How long have we been gone from the human world?’ asked Bee, to no one in particular. ‘How do we find out what year this is? What would people here measure things by?’  The rest of the group were stumped by this until Gumbiya offered, ‘The Master leavin’ ’ome and then comin’ back as the fully enlightened Buddha, that has ’as to ’ave left a mark. Folk’d remember that.’  ‘Great idea’!’ Bee and Rhamba both clapped him on his back, at least the lower part that they could reach. Gumbiya glowed a little at the appreciation, but was a tad peeved by how surprised they all looked at him having had a bright idea.  ‘If Tambaka is here, living or working in the palace we should be able to find some traces of her and then we just follow them up. We don’t know how old she will be but, if we can get a reckoning from one of the local tree devas or kinnari of how long since the Master first came back to visit that should give us a lead. We got stuck in the Underworld and time was doing all sorts of strange things there so Tam could be a baby, a child, a young woman, a mother of ten or in her old age – we just don’t know yet.’ Maggot’s brain was now getting into mode.  ‘We should split up,’ suggested Salassa, ‘go our separate ways and see what we can find. The best bet is if Rhamba and I start on the tree-spirits and Gumby sees if he can find any local yakkhas, while you two comb the palace. We all need to see if we can figure out her age and, then, if there are recent sights or smells or signs that she’s here. She might be able to see us,’ he added, realizing then he might be setting Maggot up for disappointment, ‘… or she might not.’  ‘She could when she was a baby!’ Maggot interjected.  ‘But those things can change – remember, Krishna lost his ability to see us for those years he was caught in worldly things,’ Bee added, being suddenly aware that

156 
she had mentioned Krishna for the first time in a long while. Maggot looked at the paving slabs of the square where they were gathered and said nothing.   * * *  The five split up and went their separate ways as the sun moved a few spans across the sky. When they came together again at their landing spot in the square they compared notes and their discoveries.  Gumbiya found that, even though this was the place where the Master grew up, he very rarely came here so there were not the great numbers of yakkhas, devas and various earth-spirits that you found in the big monasteries, like the Jetavana, the Veluvana in Rajagaha or the Ghositarama in Kosambi. In the landscape around the city in the various clefts and woods, mountain gullies where he had checked, none of the beings he had spoken with had a precise idea of how long ago the Master had first returned.  ‘They wozn’t very ’elpful. I got “No more than five or six sun turnin’s ago” up to “Could’ve been forty, if y’ask me”. Not much use – sorry – and no smell of her to be sure.’ Bee and Maggot scoured the palace rooms and halls, especially the shanties and annexes where the slave families lived but no signs showed themselves and no one who was known as being half-kinnari and naturally sweet smelling.  Rhamba and Salassa came in last. ‘We think we’ve got a date. One of the agèd rukkha-devas, of a grand banyan tree, assured us that she remembered the first return of the Master as the Buddha, being exactly forty-one sun-turnings ago. The Master came here two sun-turnings after the enlightenment, so he was thirty-seven at that time. Add those two together and it tells us the Master must be seventy-eight right now, in human years.’ ‘He was fifty-three when Tambaka was hatched,’ said Maggot, thoughtfully, ‘so that makes her…’ ‘Seventy-eight less fifty-three is twenty-five,’ Salassa calculated quickly, noticing how the others all looked surprised at his command of numbers. ‘I know I can easily be focussed on my clothes and making beautiful music and dance-moves but, if you want to make that music, you need to know your numbers.’ ‘Anyways, she is twenty-five Rains now, by their human calculations, that much at least we know. So, how do we widen the search?’ Maggot’s mind was again racing, seeking for solutions.   * * *  Queen Vasabha had requested the opportunity to speak with the Master, as privately as possible. She came to the Jetavana just with Kesini, and very modestly clad with a white shawl and without any jewellery this time. The Buddha just had Ananda sitting with him. He gave the Queen the rare privilege of receiving her on

157 
the veranda of the Gandha-kuti. She was able to speak freely, without concern that they would be overheard or interrupted.  ‘Venerable Sir, I would humbly like to ask for forgiveness from you. During the days following the death of Matanga I was confused, sad, enraged, grief-stricken and I struck out at many people and things around me, to blame and to vent my heated, agitated feelings upon. You, I regret were chief among my targets and I spoke ill of the Blessèd One in many and various ways. Please forgive me for all I have done, by body, speech and mind that was injurious or disturbing for you.’ ‘I forgive you, Great Queen.’ The unqualified and immediate acceptance by the Master of her and her shortcomings was utterly disarming and liberating to her.  Also, since not only was she no Sakyan princess but a sham kshatriya, and furthermore that she had been the notorious and murderous Queen Magandiya in a recent life, was something she knew that he knew and yet there was not a shred of ill-will in his gaze upon her. There was only kindness and compassion. She bowed, and wept freely at the weight removed from her heart.  ‘Venerable Master,’ Kesini raised her one hand in añjali, ‘forgive me for being so bold as I’m just a servant here but can I ask about Devadatta?’ She very deliberately granted him no ‘venerable’ honorific.  ‘You may, of course,’ he replied.  ‘Since you have great psychic powers, and, one assumes, are able to read the minds and to know the actions and intentions of others, why did you not obstruct Devadatta in carrying out his plan of having our dear Matanga killed? And, further – please forgive me Venerable Sir but I’m blunt by nature – why in the court did Ananda not speak up and tell the court, and Devadatta himself, that you were fully conscious of his guilt?’ ‘These are good questions, Kesini. As I believe that Ananda has explained before but which I can state for myself now, the Tathagata works by allowing people to be the makers of their own salvation and their own mistakes. On occasion I will offer advice or guidance, up to the third time but, if the individual chooses to ignore that advice, then the Tathagata must necessarily step aside and let the person act according to their will. This is how all the Buddhas of past ages have given guidance and taken action, or stepped aside. Sometimes such allowance of action ends with great anguish and bloodshed amongst the consequences. This is the way it is.  ‘In these present circumstances, and according to this method, it is up to Devadatta to see the error of his ways and to endeavour to do better in the future. He knows the truth of the matter. It is up to him to acknowledge that; otherwise if only force or threat is used to make his behaviour change, the heart will still remain stuck to its views and habits. It is up to Devadatta to tell the truth, if he can bear to.  ‘He has wedded his heart to fame, honour and renown, to riches gained from spiritual prowess. Only when he sees in his heart that these are superficial, worldly qualities, not worth pursuing, let alone lying for, only then will he learn and be free. As I have said, “The liar goes to hell…” but when we see our transgressions as such,

158 
and make efforts to do better, this is called “development” in my teaching and discipline.’  * * *  The executions – of Sattuka and Kalidanta, Kokalika and Samudadatta – were as grim an affair as one would imagine. One part of the ritual of execution, however, was that the condemned would go to the block with a thick garland of kanavera flowers around their necks. The blood-redness of the blossoms mimicking and symbolically sanctifying the act of beheading and the blood that would surely flow forth.  Pujika was a devout regular at the Jetavana and also had the task, after her father, of preparing the garlands of kanavera for the prisoners going to meet their final punishment. It was a strange task to be entrusted with; on the one hand these were people who had committed the worst crime, that of murder, but she was duty-bound to weave the garlands in the most careful and beautiful way and to use the freshest blooms available, just as she would for an offering to the Master.  She had three young sons now and another child on the way. The boys were not very disciplined in the flower room at their workshop, making an incessant racket, and her belly felt like that of an elephant as she waddled from her mat to get another basket of florets. She heaved herself up, with an ‘oof’, and gave out another as she sad down again.  ‘In my next life I want to be a kinnari, for sure! I would get to live with flowers for a thousand years and I wouldn’t have to deal with all this noise and, hopefully, without such a swollen girth.’ She wasn’t sure about that last part – kinnaris were supposed to lay eggs and the babies would hatch  from those but she wasn’t quite sure how big the eggs were. Still, she reflected, ‘A thousand years as a flower deva would be much more comfortable, and far more delightful than this.’   * * *  At the killing ground the four condemned men were gathered, their kanavera garlands making them a matching group and levelling the social status between them – equal in death with each other as they had not been, in the eyes of society, in their lives before.  Devadatta had risked staying to see things through to the end, even as he began his next round of scheming. He reflected, as if to tell the world:– Don’t worry, I will leave. I’ll leave and go my own way, to my own place, to save my esteemed cousin the embarrassment of any suspicions about me. Gayasisa, that is where I shall reside, and perhaps there will be some who will choose to come with me. My time is not yet done.  ==*==
