# CHAPTER 20:  PRINCE VIDUDABHA VISITS  HIS ANCESTRAL HOME   idudhabha had been pestering his mother, and occasionally his father, since he was seven Rains old. He had seen that the other children of the royal household – his half-sister Princess Vajiri and the daughters and sons of the noble families of Kosala – all received presents from their maternal as well as their paternal grandparents whereas he never did. Toy horses, elephants, play-swords and shields, things he envied came to his companions in this way but not to him.  This was not to say that he was not showered with gifts from his royal father’s mother, and his great-grandmother who was still alive although very deaf and a little loose in thought, however these ‘women’s presents’ were not like the ones the other boys got from their grandfathers. King Pasenadi’s father, King Mahakosala, had passed away long ago, so Vidudabha had received no sharp jewelled daggers, or bows with a spring to make arrows go a decent distance, or any keen-pointed arrows for that matter. He was aggrieved.  Over and over again he would complain, ‘Mother, the other boys and girls get many presents from their maternal grandparents but I never do. Are you an orphan? Don’t you have a mother and father?’ Vasabha, who often found it hard to love her petulant and demanding, entitled son had become used to this appeal and always countered him with such as, ‘My dear, my parents are Sakyan royals and they live a long way off, below the Himavant, that’s why they never send you anything.’ The prince was not satisfied with this but it would end the issue, for a time.  When he reached the age of sixteen Rains his status had changed from that of a child to not just an adult but, in a show of confidence in his only royal born son, the King had appointed Prince Vidudabha as commander-in-chief of the army as well.  The Prince was no longer so interested in boyish presents from grandparents – he had plentiful supplies of all the clothes, weapons and ornaments that an heir to the throne of the great kingdom of Kosala could wish for – but he was eager to go out into the world and he was ever intrigued by the family of his royal mother:– Why do they never visit? Why had they never even sent any messages? Weren’t they the family of the Buddha himself? Why were visits from the Sakyan royal family never made? Other folk from the north came by – Koliyans, Sakyans and Kullutans – so the journey could not be so arduous, so why never his grandfather, Prince Mahanama, and his grandmother, the Princess Maddarupi? It was mysterious.

180 
CHAPTER 20:  PRINCE VIDUDABHA VISITS  HIS ANCESTRAL HOME   idudhabha had been pestering his mother, and occasionally his father, since he was seven Rains old. He had seen that the other children of the royal household – his half-sister Princess Vajiri and the daughters and sons of the noble families of Kosala – all received presents from their maternal as well as their paternal grandparents whereas he never did. Toy horses, elephants, play-swords and shields, things he envied came to his companions in this way but not to him.  This was not to say that he was not showered with gifts from his royal father’s mother, and his great-grandmother who was still alive although very deaf and a little loose in thought, however these ‘women’s presents’ were not like the ones the other boys got from their grandfathers. King Pasenadi’s father, King Mahakosala, had passed away long ago, so Vidudabha had received no sharp jewelled daggers, or bows with a spring to make arrows go a decent distance, or any keen-pointed arrows for that matter. He was aggrieved.  Over and over again he would complain, ‘Mother, the other boys and girls get many presents from their maternal grandparents but I never do. Are you an orphan? Don’t you have a mother and father?’ Vasabha, who often found it hard to love her petulant and demanding, entitled son had become used to this appeal and always countered him with such as, ‘My dear, my parents are Sakyan royals and they live a long way off, below the Himavant, that’s why they never send you anything.’ The prince was not satisfied with this but it would end the issue, for a time.  When he reached the age of sixteen Rains his status had changed from that of a child to not just an adult but, in a show of confidence in his only royal born son, the King had appointed Prince Vidudabha as commander-in-chief of the army as well.  The Prince was no longer so interested in boyish presents from grandparents – he had plentiful supplies of all the clothes, weapons and ornaments that an heir to the throne of the great kingdom of Kosala could wish for – but he was eager to go out into the world and he was ever intrigued by the family of his royal mother:– Why do they never visit? Why had they never even sent any messages? Weren’t they the family of the Buddha himself? Why were visits from the Sakyan royal family never made? Other folk from the north came by – Koliyans, Sakyans and Kullutans – so the journey could not be so arduous, so why never his grandfather, Prince Mahanama, and his grandmother, the Princess Maddarupi? It was mysterious.

181 
Soon after his installation as the head of the army and his adulthood had been formally declared he asked the King and Queen, ‘Honoured Royal Parents! I have long wished to meet the other half of my Royal Family. I have been more than well provided for, educated and trained in military arts here in Kosala. I am surrounded by admirable family and fine friends, but I have felt an increasingly irksome absence as I have grown up. Please! Mother, Father! Your Majesties! Please allow me to visit the Sakyan kingdom and meet my Royal Mother’s esteemed family there – my own blood and heritage.’ Vidudabha had taken long hours to prepare his speech and, since he was not gifted in oratory or in verbal persuasion beyond raising his voice and grimacing, he had brought in the court poet and had enlisted his aid with the wording of his appeal. It seemed to be working. King Pasenadi and Queen Vasabha leaned into each other to whisper a discussion. The Queen, after a few moments, turned to the Prince with her most charming smile, and said, ‘But Vidu, what would you do there? I don’t think it’s really worth the bother.’ She was a bit desperate as, foolishly, she had become somewhat complacent and, since for quite a while her son had not been asking about her family – when would they visit, or could he go there one day – she had assumed that he had dismissed the idea altogether. She had not realized he had been saving things up for this moment so she was not prepared. As the words left her lips she realized, ‘Well, “something to do” there is beside the point, it’s the going there and meeting the people that matters.’  ‘I would meet my family, of course, mother.’ The Prince suppressed a smirk as this was an argument that would be hard indeed to contend with, family and bloodlines being held so sacred in the Sakyan world, as he had learned in his studies.  His parents leaned into their huddle once again, the King shrugging and the Queen dropping her gaze momentarily. Finally they both turned to face him and the King pronounced, in formal tones and with a smile, ‘Prince Vidudabha, my general, we have long overlooked this aspect of your life and we acknowledge that such a visit to your Royal Sakyan family is long overdue.  ‘Accordingly, not only will we sanction a visit by you to the north-east, to Kapilavatthu the capital of the Sakyan Kingdom, but also we ask you to head a formal embassy to the Royal Court there. You shall travel with a full troop of elephants and horses, and five platoons of foot soldiers will accompany you. I shall offer Royal Gifts to Prince Mahanama and…’ here the memory of King Pasenadi faltered, not being able to recall the Royal Spouse, or Spouses’ names, ‘…er… his wives, and I ask that you bear these offerings from the House of Kosala.’ Prince Vidudabha was pleased, mightily pleased.  * * *

182 
Proud and big, radiant in the armour he had been gifted for the attainment of his rank as head of the army, Vidudabha strode about the barracks and through the palace store-rooms endeavouring to put the stamp of his authority on the embassy in all its dimensions.  Seasoned victuallers, quartermasters, stewards and armourers, to say nothing of the maids, pages and squires, were quick to perk up at his approach even though, once past, they all tended to mock his haughty inflated manner.  ‘’E’s ’ardly shavin’ and ’e thinks ’e knows how to pack a waggon,’ the grizzling head of stables grumbled. ‘You should hear ’im tell me what food for the road we should take,’ the cook was unimpressed, ‘’e’s hardly ever left the city district and ’e’s an expert on campfire cookin’’; the theme was echoed all around.  Despite, rather than because of, the Prince’s ministrations, the embassy was readied and all the regal gifts were wrapped and packed before the next Full Moon. Every sign was there that they would be leaving soon and Vasabha knew that a rider had been sent already to inform the Sakyans of the intended visit. She was anxious about the adventure for all sorts of reasons, fearful of the outcome of her son’s visit when the Sakyan nobility were all clearly aware of who his mother really was, not to mention the widespread gossip among the commonfolk. Her having been a slave was an open secret, the servants and workers around the palace having witnessed a brand-new, full-grown princess suddenly appearing from nowhere. ‘Oh look! Lady Madda jes’ gave birth to a sixteen-y’r-ol’. Tha’s clever.’ She had heard the jokes even before they had left Kapilavatthu.  At a moment of great anxiety, as her thoughts ran freely through a list of tortuous possibilities, there was a sudden earthquake that shook her chambers. In the sudden shock she felt it was her fate coming to meet her; her bad karma ripening and the earth about to open up and swallow her. But the shocks subsided quickly and the palace rang with a vibrant silence. She was still safe, for now. She pulled Kesini in and, in great secrecy, managed to find a messenger who was both discreet and who had a fast horse and good connections along the route. ‘He’s well-used to carrying delicate, private messages, for the merchants as well as the high-ups Ma’am. He’s reliable but expensive,’ Kesini advised. ‘Expense is not a problem,’ Vasabha was pleased with the news, ‘our lives and a lot else is on the line here. Whatever he’s asking, pay it, with an advance and a tip. I don’t care if he’s overcharging – whatever gets the word through, I’ll pay.’  ‘Right you are, Ma’am!’ Kesini was in motion already. When the courier was brought into the stable-yard, with his horse and his provisions readied, Kesini, placing in his palm the weighty pouch of five gold kahapanas said, ‘Here’s your first payment, plus a little extra to speed your way; you’ll get the other half on your return – having delivered the message to His Royal Highness Prince Mahanama, personally. Got it?’ This was a fortune that had been placed in his hand. He realized it meant that this was a highly important contract and so he wanted to make sure he got it right.

183 
‘And the message for the Prince is: “I am living here happily. Let not my lords make any difference in their treatment of him,’ is that correct?’ ‘Well done. That’s it, word for word. You know your job well. Ride fast, be safe and keep your mouth shut along the way. By the way, don’t drink up the gold before you return. We need you sober on horseback and at the way-stations.’  Kesini and Vasabha had discussed the wording at length. Their final version said what it needed to clearly enough without betraying any secrets, also making any interception that might be made, that could be interpreted in a negative way, plausibly deniable as anything untoward. Vasabha felt satisfied that they had done all that was possible and the rest was up to the laws of karma, and the chances of nature to ripen as they would. She relaxed into a heap of cushions, saying to Kesini, ‘We’ve done all we can. There is no point in fretting further.’ As she breathed in to give a sigh of sincere relief a strange subtle fragrance filled her senses for a moment, floral, like her own natural scent but unique and fruity. ‘What’s that incense you’re burning?’ she asked.  ‘There’s no incense Ma’am,’ Kesini sniffed to see if she could tell what Vasabha was referring to. She smelled nothing but her mistress’s natural fragrance and the evening jasmines, blossoming this season. ‘Oh, well never mind, it seems to have gone again.’   * * *  It was the day after the Full Moon and King Pasenadi had insisted on the Prince and the leaders of the embassy coming to the Jetavana to seek a blessing from the Master before departing. Vidudabha had proposed that, instead, the Buddha and some monks should be invited to the palace (mostly because it would be more convenient for His Serene Highness) but the King and the rest of the family disagreed so it was to the monastery that they went.  They made the effort to be very modestly dressed, to the chagrin of the Prince, and made offerings both before and after the mealtime. The Master gave his blessing for the embassy, with a peaceful but sober cast to his visage. He was warm and sincere as usual but there was a cool, almost sombre tone to his expression.  Queen Vasabha requested a Dharma teaching, to inspire and aid her son along his way, so the royal party settled in to listen closely, although Vidudabha was indicating a need to, ‘Carry on with preparations soon,’ despite everything having already been arranged.  The Master sat and looked over the group – at his old friend Pasenadi, at Mallika who had been a flower girl until the King raised her up, at Vasabha, at Vajiri and Vidudabha. He raised his eyes and took in the crowd of senior soldiers, ministers, lords and ladies and servants who had come along for the blessing too. He seemed to be consciously attuning to who was present, what was in store in their imaginations, what would be useful for them all to consider. He then began.

184 
To the surprise of many of them he spoke of the insight into the characteristic of ‘not-self’. This was a subtle topic which even many Elders in the Sangha still found hard to grasp. He explained how the things we customarily take to be who and what we are, and what we consider our possessions, are not in truth that. How, on account of ignorance, we believe the lie that the body, sensations of pleasure and pain, perceptions, thoughts and emotions are ‘mine’, that they are ‘what I am’, and that they are ‘the real me’.  To the puzzlement of quite a few who were gathered, but what was music to the ears of Mallika, Vasabha, Vajiri and the King, he explained how the attitude ‘I am’ was a foolish painful conceit to believe in.  ‘“I am” is a conceiving; “I am this” is a conceiving; “I shall be” is a conceiving; “I shall not be” is a conceiving. Conceiving is a disease, it is a cancerous tumour, it is a poisoned arrow. By overcoming all conceivings one is called “a sage at peace”. And the sage at peace is not born, does not age, does not die; they are not shaken and are not agitated.’ The Master, as he finished this profound statement, paused to let these principles sink in and be reflected upon.  The Prince, meanwhile, had been growing steadily more restless and he was beginning to wonder if all of this talk of selflessness was being aimed at him. He knew he had a bit of a reputation for being pompous and self-aggrandizing, despite high status and being looked up to being the norm for a Crown Prince, so he was getting suspicious. The Buddha didn’t look at him directly – as if to say, ‘This is for you’ – but it was chafing nonetheless.  At last he could not restrain himself any longer and this pause was the opportunity to speak up, ‘Venerable Sir, I’m curious, how can you say “I am” is a poisonous delusion when you yourself, an actual living person, are sitting there talking to us, right in front of you. To me this doesn’t make sense.’ To his delight he saw one or two heads in the party wagging, nodding in agreement that this was a good point. He was encouraged.  ‘Venerable Sir, is there a self?’ The Master remained silent.  ‘Then is there no self?’ Again the Master remained silent. His eyes were now trained upon Vidudabha, to indicate he was not avoiding the question, but still he did not speak. Silence hovered.  Some of those present realized that the silence of the Buddha was the answer to the question. The Prince was waiting for a reply and took the absence of words to mean he had stumped the great wise one with a question that was beyond him. A few others realized ‘The Prince is out of his depth here; the Master does this sometimes when someone has asked the wrong question, or they are asking a question that he sees doesn’t have any value.’ The King cleared his throat, ‘Venerable Sir, the Blessed One has given us a lot of time today and has graced my Prince with a blessing for the journey. We will now take our leave by paying our respects and with offering our gratitude.’

185 
‘It is time now, Great King, to do as you see fit.’  * * *  Vasabha had seen that Krishna was amongst the bhikkhus sitting near the Master. She had also noticed that the now extremely elderly and frail Khujjuttara had joined the group at the back, and was sitting with a couple of the helpers that the Queen had assigned to look after the Elder’s physical needs after Matanga had been so cruelly murdered. Her white hair was thin now and her frame crumpled but her eyes were as bright as ever.  She saw that Dusaka was in attendance too so she asked the King, ‘Sire, as I see that some of my Dharma friends are gathered here to add their well wishing to the embassy, I would like to stay in the Jetavana for a while, to meet and also to discuss this last discourse of the Blessed One. Khujjuttara is learned and wise beyond many of those in robes and I see that she is back there, by the eastern side of the hall.’  King Pasenadi glanced over and saw that the agèd sage was there and readily agreed to let Queen Vasabha linger. ‘Of course, my dear, please find a spot to sit and talk. I’m not sure how much longer Khujjuttara will be with us in this world, she must be close to ninety Rains in age by now.’ The Queen came over to where Khujjuttara was seated and she greeted her warmly. They were old friends by now. They had hardly finished their greetings before Krishna, now getting some grey hairs himself to contrast with his dark complexion, came up and said, ‘I’ve set up a place over there in the shade. We can go and sit where it’s cooler.’ It was a familiar, well-worn pattern by now that, whenever Vasabha had the chance to spend time in the Jetavana, she would seek out Krishna, or he her, the bond between them having become ever stronger. She had lost her family in Kapilavatthu, they were gone from her for good, and the only one she was close to in her official family was Vajiri who, against all odds, had still managed to remain unwed and so was still in the palace. Rumour had it that the King wanted to marry her off to Prince Ajatasattu in Magadha but she was magnificently adept at finding excuses not to comply with the Royal Wishes. There was Kesini, her oldest friend, but to have found Krishna, as her real father, was an unexpected joy.  She had loved the times that they had had together over these nine Rains. He was genuinely warm and caring towards her, even when she teased him for being a bit slow on the uptake when Dusaka or Khujjuttara – their regular companions and wise mentors – had made some observation that he had missed the point of. Vasabha could be prickly too, if Krishna or one of the others said something that wounded her pride, but she was even quicker to remind herself that, in truth, she was no queen, either relatively or ultimately speaking, and that she had nothing much to be that proud about. These were just reactions triggered by self-view and the threads of conceit that most folk seemed to have.

186 
The thing that pained most deeply, and which she liked to get advice on, was the longstanding deception based on her pretence to be a person of rank. She was living a lie. It was like a stone in her shoe that could not be removed.  Dusaka had joined them on a mat, in their shady spot on the north side of the sala and, when Vasabha brought this issue up again, along with her new anxieties around the visit of her arrogant and inflated son to Kapilavatthu, the old monk did his best to clarify the picture as he saw it, in order to give her some comfort.  ‘Great Queen,’ he began, a bit formally, ‘you should be more self-forgiving and put your heart at ease. It is true you are not without blame, you maintain the façade every day, but the motivation for the pretence didn’t come from you, did it? No. It was the proud Sakyans who put you up to it, or should I say, forced you into it,’ he raised a shaggy eyebrow, ‘you didn’t really have much of a choice, as I have heard it, eh?’ He then added, for propriety a, ‘Your Majesty.’ ‘Oh don’t!’ Vasabha’s appreciation of his friendly mocking of her supposed rank was genuine and she giggled. She was grateful for his sincere friendship, and she could discern that the way he liked to use her titles and honorifics playfully was his manner of encouraging self-respect in her, while he simultaneously took a shot at the whole notion of rank and social status.  Krishna felt an unremitting love and delight at being in Vasabha’s company. He had spent twenty-five Rains as an absent father, assuming his fragrant beautiful child was lost to him forever and now – here she was! And so close by! It was something special and a possibility of which he had never dreamed. He did his best to empathize with his daughter’s troubles and anxieties, also being aware of the past traumas and travails of her life in Kosambi as Magandiya, however it was not always easy to do so.  ‘I can’t say that I have deliberately deceived people so much,’ Krishna began, ‘but I feel I have believed the lies of others way too easily, too often and, worse, I have believed the lies I have told myself over and over. That’s the hardest thing for me,’ he looked at Dusaka, recounting old lessons, ‘I continually believe my desires, my fears, my opinions, my grudges… all of it… to be absolutely real. I try to learn but I’m slow.’ ‘“Brave but slowly wise, thus we hail our hero,”’ Dusaka quoted. Kujjuttara gave a wink; Krishna dipped his head, acknowledging the assessment by his mentor, who had been close by and guiding him for nigh on fifty Rains.  ‘So,’ Krishna asked, changing the subject, ‘all that “my-ness” I suffer from. How does the Master’s silence on “self” and “no self” relate to that?’ The Queen and Kesini were very interested in this too. ‘Yes,’ she joined in, ‘can either of you wise Elders illuminate this for us? Why was it, when the Master was asked those questions, that he remained silent?’ ‘If,’ Khujjuttara began, ‘when asked, ‘Is there a self?’ He had answered, “There is a self”, the Master would have been siding with the eternalists, those who believe in an individual entity existing for all time. If, on the other hand, when he was asked “Is there no self?” He had answered, “There is no self”, then he would

187 
have been siding with the annihilationists, those who believe that there is no substantial reality of any kind and that, at the death of the body, an existent being is utterly annihilated, destroyed. Neither of these two extremes is what the Blessed One teaches. Are you still with me?’ Her voice, like her eyes, was clear and energized. There were nods all round.  ‘So, if when he was asked by the Prince, “Is there a self?” he had answered “There is a self” would that have been consistent with the Master’s very common teaching that “all things, both the created and the uncreated, are not self”? To answer my own question: “No it wouldn’t.” Then, when he was asked, “Is there no self”, the Prince, already confused, would have fallen into even greater confusion, thinking, “I am sure I had a self when I came here but now the Master tells me that I don’t exist at all.” So, rather than answer the questions according to the way that they were posed, the Master indicated “Wrong questions!” by what I heard as a very meaningful and resonant silence.’ Krishna, despite his many years as a contemplative, was perplexed and somewhat irritated by this explanation. ‘I don’t mean to be rude…’ ‘But you will be,’ Dusaka cracked.  ‘… but, how can a reasonable question be “wrong” in itself?’ Dusaka cleared his throat, hinting that he was ready to pick up the discussion. Kujjuttara gave him a, ‘Yes! Please! You explain,’ look with a tilt of her snowy head.  ‘Take, for example, a question that you have asked me a few times, such as, “When a being is enlightened, where do they reappear, after the death of the body?”’ The whole group was keenly focused since, when Dusaka was in full explication mode it was a wonder to behold and to be a part of.  ‘Would you say that is a fair question?’ Dusaka looked at each of the four people and included Tingri at his side.  ‘Yes, it’s a fair question,’ Krishna responded. The rest, with a sense of where Dusaka was going with this, restrained any reply or gesture.  ‘Wrong – “reappear” doesn’t apply.’  ‘Then they do not appear in another realm?’ ‘Wrong again – “do not reappear” does not apply either.’ ‘Well, do they both reappear and not reappear?’ ‘Doesn’t apply.’ Krishna’s effort to cover every option then made him ask, ‘So, do they neither reappear, nor not reappear?’ He felt sure that one of these four must be correct:– What other options could there be? ‘Remember,’ Dusaka continued, ‘we are talking about the principle of “wrong questions”. So, imagine we had a little fire burning here, made of grass and some small sticks, and we then let the fire go out. If I then asked you the question, “Where did the fire go? Was it north, south, east or west?” How would you answer?’ ‘That those directions don’t apply. It just went out.’ ‘Exactly!’ Dusaka was alight and Tingri had to position herself to not get knocked by his gesticulations. ‘The way you ask the question – here about “direction” –

188 
presumes a reality that does not exist. With respect to the enlightened, identity, time and location don’t apply, and neither do language and concepts. The heart of such a one has realized perfect attunement with its own fundamental nature which is timeless, unlocated and not a self or belonging to a self. “A being” doesn’t apply, “going” doesn’t apply, “to” doesn’t apply, and “another realm” doesn’t apply either. Got it?!’  * * *  Golden. Everything was golden, rich, bright, fragrant. ‘Where? What?’ There was wakefulness, a clear perception of light and scent, and sound, strange wonderful sounds.  Consciousness continued to expand: petals, flower-petals; feeling, soft feeling; there is music in the air; air; daylight; fingers, face, feet… soft ground beneath. ‘I’m lying on soft ground. It’s day somewhere. What I remember… Who is “I”? I remember the grip on my shoulder, an angry eye… My neck… the half-expected, anticipated cut… almost no pain. I gave my self away… I chose that…’ Soon the fragments of memory were lost in the dazzling light which seemed to hold an extra dimension of substantiality, as if the light were alive. Petals, which had been dressing her eyes, fell away as the new-born deva woke into this fresh life. She looked down the length of her body and saw that the golden petals were also formed into strands that clad her; blossoms and soft gossamer threads formed a draping cobweb about her. She lifted a hand and turned it in wonder.  She breathed deeply in and, more so than the light, the air of this place, wherever it was, was quick with life, it loved her, she loved it. Energy rampaged through the limbs, the chest, the belly, the head she now bore. She smiled – ‘Now, this is what I call being alive!’ Enthralled by the vital power of that breath she took in another and another, as deep as she could. After the third things began to spin, and kept spinning.  ‘Rest, I should rest a bit. Rest. What a place… And what am I?’  The passing of time was lost to this newly-born awareness. There was softness beneath her and the delicious, deeply scented living air, then it was gone.   * * *  Again her eyes opened and she could, now, clearly remember how it had been when she first awakened. She had no sense of time having passed as the light around her was without a form. She looked into the sky above her, there were jewelled, flower-bearing trees and between them the bluest blue she had ever seen. The sun was there but was it higher or lower than before? She couldn’t tell.  Standing, she swayed for a moment then took a few steps. Moss that looked like living emeralds sprang between her toes. ‘Well it seems I have hands and feet here, and I can stand and walk.’ She reached for a cluster of blossoms on a low

189 
branch nearby. As she reached her effort drew her up into the air, which it took a moment to notice. ‘Oh! I can fly too!!’ This was indeed a place of wonders.  The distant music now caught her attention, it was coming from…  where? She looked about and tried to sense where the sound was loudest although it was in the space around her and in her as much, apparently, as it was emanating from a single spot. She followed the intensity, once she had pinned it down, and drifted through the air towards it, feeling like streamers of light and fragrance were billowing out behind her and following in her train.  There was a grove ahead thickly packed with other beings. She could see they all looked like she did, as far as she could tell. Cautiously, not knowing what she was coming upon, or whether she belonged. Gentle resonances from her life before said to her, ‘Beware, there might be danger,’ but she tasted that, knew the feeling, and pushed herself on, ‘Don’t be afraid. No need. I am bigger than this.’ At the edge of the broad glade she paused and looked about her. The rhythmic music was shimmering in the fragrant air and the presence of these hundreds of beings was like the crackling shocks of fur on amber – something she remembered from… Where? When?  Beneath one of the flowering trees, off to one side, she saw a beautiful young being close to a less bright, smaller being, clothed all in carmine and vermillion, a dozen shades of red.  ‘I know them… do I? From where? When? I know…’ She was thinking as she unconsciously floated towards them. ‘The red one, she’s so familiar… there was a yakkha… long ago… who is her friend?’ As her memory stretched to recognize, find a name, she arrived beside them. The two broke off their conversation and turned to her, seeing in her mango-golden raiment and her big-eyed innocence, a friendly face.  ‘Greetings,’ the two said simultaneously. The brighter, beautiful being then spoke, ‘I have just reappeared here.’ The red-clad one added, ‘And I’m only a visitor.’ ‘And I’m new here too.’ She found she had a voice and that she knew their language. ‘I have just arrived, appeared, I’m not sure what, as well.’ She looked closely at the small being, seeing now that most of her garments were made from skilfully woven kanavera blossoms. ‘Do I know you from somewhere?’  * * *  It was with great pomp and a beating of drums that Prince Vidudabha led the procession out of Savatthi. In taking leave of his Royal Father, the pleasure at now standing at least a hand-span taller than the King, if not nearly two, was deeply relished. The King was broader, deeper in the chest by far, but the Prince now looked down upon his father and he would probably grow some more before he was done. His elephant was at the van of the great embassy and he was flushed with pride at how splendid he was sure he looked, arrayed in all his finery at the head of the awesome, powerful assemblage of Kosalans. He was not able to hear the

190 
comments such as, ‘’E’s got more sparklers on ’im than a bride in a double dose of bangles,’ and ‘’E’s gonna be in deep shtook if ’e tries to go into a fight on that tusker. It’s got more paint ’n’ finery all over it than the dancing girls dahn at Sukhavati.’ The journey was, even at a slowish pace, not such a long one, only nine or ten yojanas, but Vidudabha did not want to rush so they only progressed a third or even a quarter of a yojana per day, with a late start, a long lunch pause and an early camp each night. The Prince made out that the lightness of the burden of distance each day was out of compassion for the animals pulling the carts and bearing the horsemen and howdahs of the group but closer to the truth was that he found the whole affair extremely uncomfortable. He had become somewhat nauseous from the steady rocking motion of his elephant and was saddle-sore from riding when he took to horse as an alternative. He was shocked at how thoroughly inconvenient things were – one had to choose the pausing places according to the needs for water, food and shelter for the animals rather than to meet the Royal Preference.  Twenty days passed in this fashion before, to his great pleasure, caparisoned riders from Kapilavatthu met them on the road. He had enjoyed the first sight of the forested hills of the Himavant, beginning in the foothills of the snow-capped distant peaks. He had expressed his pleasure at the sight of wilder creatures than they ever saw in the grounds of the palace or in the villages scattered around Savatthi, beasts such as leopards and herds of deer, and wild buffalo but, in truth, he only made such remarks since he felt he was supposed to. Also the courtiers around him, and some of the more diplomatically-minded army officers, would grunt in agreement, or come up with a cheery ‘Yes, Your Serene Highness, look at that!’ when he spoke thus, so it gave him the cue that this was what was expected of the Crown Prince.  He was shocked at the sight of a pair of broad-winged lammergeiers, coasting on an updraft at the edges of the lowlands but more out of fear of being attacked by one rather than in wonder at their majesty.  In short he was glad to be arriving and he looked forward to the comforts of a settled bedroom and not having to be told what to do on account of the needs of elephants, horses and oxen. It had become profoundly annoying that the beasts seemed to need to eat, sleep and defecate all the time and that he had been expected to arrange his life around that.  The Sakyan riders were soon joined by further troops from Kapilavatthu and horns were blown, drums beaten and banners unfurled, to welcome the Prince into his ancestral home.  ==*==
