# CHAPTER 5: THE UNINSPIRING MONK  o, what did you make of all that?’ Krishna had returned to his kuti after the communal meal and had invited his friend Surama, an Elder amongst the community of monks, to come along and continue the conversation they had begun, once the Master had departed, after he had given some forthright instruction to the community.  ‘Well,’ responded Krishna, ‘I had hoped to ask him if he could use his powers to tell me where Tambaka had disappeared to but, since he was mainly addressing Udayin about how misguided he had been with those brahmin visitors, I didn’t feel it was the right time. He even laid down a new, serious rule about not coming into contact with the opposite sex, with lustful intent, and he gave Udayin the full “Mogha purisa!” treatment – “Oh foolish man!” If I had asked him about Tambaka he would almost certainly have enquired if she was a relative, or how she was known to me; then what would I say? It wouldn’t be a good subject to raise in public.’ ‘Good point,’ Surama replied, ‘you were best oﬀ keeping a low proﬁle.’ He saw that Krishna was looking fraught and unseNled so he continued, ‘You know that I agree with you about how the Buddha has to keep up a front for the sake of the public, and that in its essence the teaching he espouses is a lot more broad and accommodating. ‘In his usual way of speaking, about the Middle Way, he says how happiness cannot come from pursuing sense pleasure as you will always want more. When the thrill is gone you just desire something else to replace it. That is one extreme.  ‘Then the other extreme is to try to supress all desires, to annihilate them, but that is doomed to failure as life keeps producing more things to want. No maNer how hard we try.  ‘He says the Middle Way is “to let go of desire” but I agree with you that that’s just the version for the masses. Really, how could that work? If I want something, if I need something and I “let go of the desire” there is still something missing, as far as I can see – you didn’t get the thing you needed and wanted, so surely you are still lacking that – no?’ ‘Absolutely, that just how I see it,’ said Krishna.  ‘So,’ Surama continued, ‘I feel it’s our duty as living beings to fulﬁl as many of those needs and wishes as possible, to honour the potential of our lives, and then to let go of aNachment to the pleasure we feel. This is the advanced path that the Master is encouraging but that he can’t speak about publicly as it would look like he was an indulgent and less-than-admirable teacher. We should not use the scanty virtue and meagre wisdom of the narrow-minded to measure the vast sagacity and compassion of the Buddha!

31 
CHAPTER 5: THE UNINSPIRING MONK  o, what did you make of all that?’ Krishna had returned to his kuti after the communal meal and had invited his friend Surama, an Elder amongst the community of monks, to come along and continue the conversation they had begun, once the Master had departed, after he had given some forthright instruction to the community.  ‘Well,’ responded Krishna, ‘I had hoped to ask him if he could use his powers to tell me where Tambaka had disappeared to but, since he was mainly addressing Udayin about how misguided he had been with those brahmin visitors, I didn’t feel it was the right time. He even laid down a new, serious rule about not coming into contact with the opposite sex, with lustful intent, and he gave Udayin the full “Mogha purisa!” treatment – “Oh foolish man!” If I had asked him about Tambaka he would almost certainly have enquired if she was a relative, or how she was known to me; then what would I say? It wouldn’t be a good subject to raise in public.’ ‘Good point,’ Surama replied, ‘you were best oﬀ keeping a low proﬁle.’ He saw that Krishna was looking fraught and unseNled so he continued, ‘You know that I agree with you about how the Buddha has to keep up a front for the sake of the public, and that in its essence the teaching he espouses is a lot more broad and accommodating. ‘In his usual way of speaking, about the Middle Way, he says how happiness cannot come from pursuing sense pleasure as you will always want more. When the thrill is gone you just desire something else to replace it. That is one extreme.  ‘Then the other extreme is to try to supress all desires, to annihilate them, but that is doomed to failure as life keeps producing more things to want. No maNer how hard we try.  ‘He says the Middle Way is “to let go of desire” but I agree with you that that’s just the version for the masses. Really, how could that work? If I want something, if I need something and I “let go of the desire” there is still something missing, as far as I can see – you didn’t get the thing you needed and wanted, so surely you are still lacking that – no?’ ‘Absolutely, that just how I see it,’ said Krishna.  ‘So,’ Surama continued, ‘I feel it’s our duty as living beings to fulﬁl as many of those needs and wishes as possible, to honour the potential of our lives, and then to let go of aNachment to the pleasure we feel. This is the advanced path that the Master is encouraging but that he can’t speak about publicly as it would look like he was an indulgent and less-than-admirable teacher. We should not use the scanty virtue and meagre wisdom of the narrow-minded to measure the vast sagacity and compassion of the Buddha!

32 
‘After all,’ Surama continued, ‘Look at the example of how he led his half-brother Nanda to full enlightenment. Nanda had gone forth as a monk when he was on the way to his wedding, his faith in the Master having been roused to a high degree that day. Later on the mental image of his betrothed, Janapada Kalyani, brushing her hair aside and saying, “Come back soon, prince!” was frequently in his mind. The Buddha heard about this and called Nanda to him.  ‘“Nanda, I hear that you are missing your ﬁancée and that you are unhappy in the monastic life – is that so?” ‘“Yes, Venerable Sir,” he replied. “In fact I would like to return to the household life and go through with my marriage to my belovèd.”  ‘Then the Master took him by the arm and, through exercising his psychic powers, conveyed them both to the Tavatimsa Heaven – the abode of the Thirty-Three Gods. There the Master conducted him to the Nandana Grove where they saw crowds of apsaras, nymphs with feet as delicate as doves, waiting upon Lord Indra, the ruler of that heavenly kingdom.  ‘The Buddha then said to Nanda, “Who is more beautiful, Nanda, more perfect in form, more pleasing to behold, Janapada Kalyani or these ﬁve hundred nymphs with feet as soft as the breasts of doves?” To this Nanda immediately replied, “There is no comparison, Venerable Sir! The woman to whom I was betrothed has not a fraction, not half of a fraction, of the perfection of form and loveliness of these nymphs.” ‘The Buddha then continued, “Nanda, if you commit to the monk’s life and take delight in it, I will guarantee you gaining the company of ﬁve hundred apsaras, just like these.” ‘“If that’s the case,” said Nanda, “then I will indeed take great delight in pursuing the spiritual path under your guidance.” The Master then conveyed them both back from the Tavatimsa Heaven to Jeta’s Grove and Nanda renewed his eﬀorts with great vigour.  ‘When the, if I might say, prissy and narrow-minded monks heard about the agreement struck between the Master and his half-brother Nanda they criticized him for being a hireling and a sell-out, shocked at the idea of puNing in eﬀort in meditation in order to possess the crowd of nymphs that the Buddha had promised. To me the promise of a Buddha is a powerful thing, of no small consequence, so those shallow monks should not have been so swift to condemn. Anyway, before long Nanda did indeed realize full and complete enlightenment and then went to declare this to the Master.  ‘The public records of that exchange have Nanda saying, “Venerable Sir, I release you from that promise,” and the Buddha responding, “When I knew you were enlightened that promise was dissolved automatically.” However, I reckon,’ and here Surama looked from side to side, as if checking for eavesdroppers and also for dramatic eﬀect, ‘I reckon this was another of those “dressed up for consumption by the masses” accounts. If we’re right about the Master’s advanced teaching on fulﬁlling desire being happiness – and I’m sure we are – privately his half-brother is

33 
currently enjoying the company of that crowd of beauties in his spare time. What d’you think?’  * * *   Krishna had parted company with Dusaka earlier in the day. The Elder seemed to be intent on travelling further with Tingri, although he had made no indication as to which direction he was headed. Krishna was therefore free to spend the afternoon talking with Surama. It pleased him greatly to have such a supportive friend who was senior in the community, and one who didn’t give him any grief, like Samiddhi and Dusaka had done.  By the late afternoon – they had managed to chat for several hours – Krishna was thoroughly conﬁrmed in his understanding that the superior, protective mangala was the maintenance of the aNitude: ‘Sooner! More!’ when it came to sensual experience. This was the great aﬃrmation of life and reality; and to each and every doubt that he had had, or that others, like Maggot and Samiddhi, had voiced, his friend Surama easily explained how their understanding was faulty and their logic was impaired and inconsistent. The story of Nanda and the nymphs was just one of a number of thoroughly convincing examples he gave.  It also became clearer, in Krishna’s mind, how for advanced students who were ready for the higher teaching (that allowed and rejoiced in maximum sensual pleasure), part of the discipline, if not most of it, was ‘Don’t get caught’ rather than the preliminary teaching of ‘Don’t do’. On account of the general view that monks and nuns were supposed to be celibate renunciants it was necessary to be discreet; if you were an advanced student then you were free to do as you liked as long as you didn’t ﬂaunt things and thereby upset the narrow-minded and simplistic followers. As long as you were not geNing aNached to any sort of pleasure, then the energetic and joyful engagement in all the delights available was a fulﬁlment of that ‘best way to evade the King of Death, to blindfold Mara’ that the old seeress Gavinna had spoken of.  Krishna treasured that advice, but he still kept the amulet that warded oﬀ physical death and injury as well:– There was no harm in being doubly careful.  ‘Now that you’re a bhikkhu,’ Surama began, ‘and seeing that you haven’t got much to hold you here in Kosambi anymore, why don’t you come with me to Kitagiri?’ ‘Where’s that?’ Krishna asked, ‘and what makes that a good place to go? I may have had a spat with my kinnari companion but I know lots of others here and it would be a shame to just take oﬀ. Besides, the Master is staying here and, you never know, I might be able to have a private conversation with him and then I could ask about Tambaka and who stole her away.’ ‘Didn’t you hear?’  ‘What?’

34 
‘As the Master was leaving the hall, after having given Udayin an earful, Ananda asked him about seNing oﬀ on the morrow.’ ‘Oh, I missed that, I must have been wrapped up in my thoughts.’ ‘It sounds like they will be leaving if not tomorrow then very soon after. So, what do you think, shall we take to the road as well?’ Even as Surama was speaking Krishna’s mind began to ponder:– Well, why not? What’s to keep me here now and, besides, it’s been a couple of years since I trod the paths and forest trails of a wanderer. After all the struggle with Maggot, and considering no one seems to want my help in ﬁnding our baby, why not? It’ll be good to be out on the road once more, to feel the wind on my skin and the sun in my face.   * * *   The Master did indeed leave the next day, right after the mealtime, with a substantial group of monks walking with him. All those remaining monastics, together with the devotees and well-wishers in the Kosambi area, paid their respects after asking for forgiveness for any irritation they had caused him or for any negative actions by body, speech or mind, intentional or unintentional, that had caused any diﬃculty whatsoever.  Krishna noticed his heart rate increase a liNle in the communal ceremony, but, even as he recited the words, he reassured himself he had done nothing at all blameworthy. Any lingering doubts were not allowed a voice.  He was now free to make his plans with Surama. He knew him fairly well but he was hard to pin down as to his background and other personal qualities. He was quite senior, so as a junior monk Krishna could be oﬃcially apprenticed to him, in ‘dependence’, as it was called, but exactly what his original language was or his family history – the conversation always seemed to drift away from those details when the subject came up.  Kitagiri was east of Kosambi so they took a diﬀerent route to the Buddha and the great group travelling with him to SavaNhi. Krishna had been surprised at the heartfelt pangs of separation he felt as they packed up their bowls and robes and he said goodbye to his companions of the last two years and to the Gositarama forest. So many memories: the sight of the now-empty nest, where he and his dear Maggot had spent such sweet hours, and where the egg had rested almost glowing with its ethereal opal colours, and when it hatched and beautiful liNle Tambaka had appeared, tawny-skinned and her coppery hair, and as ﬂower-fragrant as her mother. ‘Jambu-Sirivanna... I never used Maggot’s real name... “Radiant beauty of the Jambu tree.”’ His eyes moistened, heart aching at the loss, but it was now time to move on.  Once away from Kosambi and heading towards the rising sun of the next morning, Krishna felt a surge of energy welling up within him. The dust of the footpath under his feet, the new types of tree and birdcalls as they covered the

35 
leagues, the roof of branches and the starlit sky overhead at night – he was astonished how much he had forgoNen about life on the road, how inspiring and invigorating it was.  ‘You know, Surama, this reminds me of how I spent more than a year working in a knacker’s yard in Kulluta. I had not realized how stuck I had got in the place; I forgot that other valleys, other hills and towns existed.’ ‘I wouldn’t say that the Ghositarama is quite as bad as a slaughterhouse,’ Surama quipped, ‘but I know how oppressive any place can be, when time for a change has come.’ The town of Kitagiri lay in the country of Kasi, to the north of Varanasi and on the road through there to SavaNhi. As they drew closer to it, and their arrival was imminent, Krishna’s stride naturally lengthened, making it necessary for the shorter Surama to scurry to keep up, to his great dissatisfaction. Every now and again Krishna would recollect that he should not be geNing ahead of the Elder so he would pause and apologize profusely. As he was only twenty, much younger than Surama, the over-exuberance was forgiven.  Along the way Surama had often mentioned how the people of Kitagiri, the lay-folk as well as the monks, were very amenable to the advanced, reﬁned philosophies of the Buddha. When they sat in the evening, at their various forest camps, Surama would expound on the excellent leadership and teaching of the two great Elders there, Assaji and Punabbasuka, meanwhile making sure that Krishna knew, ‘This great Elder Assaji is very diﬀerent from his stuﬀy namesake – who is very pleased to let anyone and everyone know he was one of the original Five Disciples’.  His clear and sonorous voice, replete with reason and good stories, described how they had nurtured Kitagiri as a haven of the higher teachings both for monastics and lay people too. Krishna loved to hear his eloquent descriptions, as they mingled with the sounds of the forest night – the ringing of crickets and cicadas, the calls of night-birds and the hoot of owls – so when they ﬁnally stepped onto the dusty main street of the town, Krishna felt he knew the place already.  The locals called out friendly greetings and Surama called back, chaNing in a most casual and familiar way. As they walked towards the monastery they came upon a group of children playing hopscotch on a paNern of yantras marked upon the ground.  ‘Come and play, sirs!’ The youngsters called out. To Krishna’s surprise, rather than Surama declining, as any Elder, or indeed any monk or nun, would do in Kosambi, he said, ‘What fun, let’s see if I remember the sequence of right and left correctly.’ And oﬀ he went, quite expertly in fact, completing the hops and steps onto the paNerned squares without making any mistakes.  The children were impressed and beckoned Krishna to join in too but, since he had not tried this game since he was a lad of seven rains, he demurred and said he was too big and clumsy:– His Elder had already shown how to do it best.

36 
‘That’s something diﬀerent!’ Krishna chuckled as they continued to the monastery.  ‘Oh, just you wait and see.’ Surama gave him a sideways glance and a substantial smirk crossed his visage.   * * *   Krishna was astonished. They did everything here: the monks grew and picked ﬂowers and made garlands for all the womenfolk of the town – wives and daughters, female slaves, everyone. They would sit and share food with women, often from the same dish; they would snuggle up close, even lie on the same couch with women or laymen; they would eat at any time they fancied during the day or night; they happily drank alcohol; they would sing and dance, play music, as well as engage in all kinds of games with the children; they practiced archery, rode horses and elephants; they would wrestle and box sometimes; and would even lay out their robes as a stage and say to the dancing girls, ‘Here, sister! Dance for us!’ Krishna was greatly impressed by it all as it ﬁNed so well with his own understanding of the Buddha’s teaching. Surama had prepared him thoroughly and the two presiding Elders, Assaji and Punabbasuka, welcomed Krishna with open arms. Everyone here seemed very liberal and no one found fault with his deep dark skin. ‘Anything goes’ seemed to be the ethic of the whole town and Krishna ﬁNed in perfectly:– Now we’re talking!  He decided to stay and did so for the next fourteen years.   * * *   After those fourteen years had gone by it so happened that a monk by the name of Parisuddhi set out from Varanasi, the capital of Kasi, on the bank of the River Ganga, to make his way to SavaNhi, to spend time with the Lord Buddha. His path led him along the road that ran through Kitagiri. He was a very innocent person by nature (hence the name he’d been given, meaning ‘Purity’) so the stories that circulated in the area close to Kitagiri did not register with him as anything of signiﬁcance if they registered at all.  He had camped in a forest glade half a league or so before the edge of the town, and he made his way through the streets after dawn, when folks were up and about and preparing their ﬁrst meal of the day. This was a familiar and time-honoured paNern that he had followed for all the many years of his monastic life.  To Parisuddhi’s surprise, rather than being oﬀered any alms-food, he was heckled and abused by many townspeople, saying such as:  ‘Who is this idiot, a fool amongst fools, a simpleton even to other simpletons. Who would give alms to such a one?!’

37 
Parisuddhi had, as he always did, made sure that his robes were on neatly, his bowl was half-concealed by his robe as the Vinaya discipline dictated. His eyes were properly downcast, looking only a plough’s length ahead, and he was walking at an even pace. He wondered what was wrong, ‘Is my upper robe stained without me knowing it? Is my lower robe falling down? What am I doing that is so worthy of this torrent of abuse?’ Someone called out, as if in answer to his unvoiced question, ‘Our own masters Assaji and Punabbasuka and their followers are friendly and chaNy, always smiling and are the ﬁrst to speak. It’s monks like them that are worthy of alms, not a stuck-up dummy like you.’ He patiently carried on walking through Kitagiri but received no alms-food at all until a certain layman came up to him and asked if he had been given anything as yet.  ‘No, nothing by way of alms-food but I’ve been given plenty of mockery and heckles.’ ‘Please,’ the man urged, ‘come to my place.’ He took Parisuddhi there and oﬀered a full meal to him. ‘I’m honoured that you have come to my house, Venerable Sir, my name is Sudhamma. Can I ask where you are headed, because I’m sure you won’t want to stay around here.’ ‘I am travelling to SavaNhi, my friend, in order to visit the Blessèd One, the Buddha.’ ‘Then let me ask you to bow down at the feet of the Blessèd One and tell him, in my name, that for years now Kitagiri has been thoroughly polluted. The followers of Assaji and Punabbasuka are shameless and self-indulgent. They engage in all sorts of practices that are contrary to the life of a true seeker of the spiritual path and the discipline established by the Master. Please ask him to send some worthy and responsible Elders to re-establish good conduct here. Those who had faith in the Master have seen that faith eroded and those who go about in his name are not following his True Path.’  Parisuddhi was moved by this polite, heartfelt request and it helped make sense of how he had been treated in the town. It had not been because of his sloppy or stained robes, or immodest conduct, but quite the reverse; his restraint and composed demeanour had been the cause for criticism owing to the long-standing eﬀects of the aNitudes and behaviour of Assaji and Punabbasuka, and their group. He would gladly carry this message of Sudhamma to the Master, to do what he could to restore wholesomeness to the town.   ==*==
