# Chapter 15: The Ambitions of Devadatta  1) p128:– Like the Buddha he had been a prince … uncle to … Rahula too: All this description of Devadatta is according to the Pali Canon.   2) p129:– Devadatta got up from his seat: The account of this challenge to the Buddha, and the suggestion by Devadatta that he take over the leadership of the Sangha, is found at CV 7.3.1 The Pali for ‘a gob of phlegm’ is ‘kheḷāpaka’. The original phrase the Buddha used in this exchange was ‘chavassa kheḷapakassa’ – ‘chava’ meaning ‘vile, low, miserable, wretched’. PTS Dic. p275.  3) p130:– There are five changes I wish to propose: These five are listed at CV 7.3.14-15. In the original text it is spelled out that Devadatta’s explicit intent in proposing these five changes was to create a rift, a schism in the Sangha. He was aware that austerity impresses the public so it would be a wedge to help break up the community.  Some of his co-conspirators were indeed named: Kokālikā, Katamorata-tissaka, Khandadevī-putta and Samudadatta.   4) ibid:– What qualities do you see in me: This passage is adapted from M 77.8-9, ‘The Greater Discourse to Sakuladāyin’.   5) p131:– Let those who wish to: This all comes from CV 7.3.15.  6) ibid:– However, there are attributes my disciples respect: This passage is paraphrased from M 77.10-38. The last of the categories listed (‘the ways to develop wholesome states’) is comprised of many subsections that the sutta describes in detail, such as: 1) The Four Foundations of Mindfulness; 2) The Four Right Kinds of Striving; 3) The Four Bases for Spiritual Power; 4) The Five Faculties; 5) The Five Powers; 6) The Seven Factors of Enlightenment; 7) The Noble Eightfold Path; 8) The Eight Liberations; 9) The Eight Bases for Transcendence; 10) The Ten Kasiṇas; 11) The Four Jhānas; 12) Insight Knowledge; 13) The Mind-made Body; 14) The Kinds of Supernormal Power; 15) The Divine Ear; 16) The Ability to Read the Minds of Others; 17) The Recollection of Past Lives; 18) The Divine Eye; 19) The Destruction of the Outflows (āsava).   7) p132:– Hiri and Siri, the asura sisters: These two played a significant role in Mara and the Mangala I , pp319-79. The Kalakanja-asura are mentioned at D 20.12; they are described as ‘terrible to see’. They are also described in The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp107-8. The parents of Hiri and Siri were Queen Sujā, an asura, and King Indra, a deva, so they were of mixed celestial ancestry. See also, Ch. 24, note 6 of Mara and the Mangala I.

313 
Chapter 15: The Ambitions of Devadatta  1) p128:– Like the Buddha he had been a prince … uncle to … Rahula too: All this description of Devadatta is according to the Pali Canon.   2) p129:– Devadatta got up from his seat: The account of this challenge to the Buddha, and the suggestion by Devadatta that he take over the leadership of the Sangha, is found at CV 7.3.1 The Pali for ‘a gob of phlegm’ is ‘kheḷāpaka’. The original phrase the Buddha used in this exchange was ‘chavassa kheḷapakassa’ – ‘chava’ meaning ‘vile, low, miserable, wretched’. PTS Dic. p275.  3) p130:– There are five changes I wish to propose: These five are listed at CV 7.3.14-15. In the original text it is spelled out that Devadatta’s explicit intent in proposing these five changes was to create a rift, a schism in the Sangha. He was aware that austerity impresses the public so it would be a wedge to help break up the community.  Some of his co-conspirators were indeed named: Kokālikā, Katamorata-tissaka, Khandadevī-putta and Samudadatta.   4) ibid:– What qualities do you see in me: This passage is adapted from M 77.8-9, ‘The Greater Discourse to Sakuladāyin’.   5) p131:– Let those who wish to: This all comes from CV 7.3.15.  6) ibid:– However, there are attributes my disciples respect: This passage is paraphrased from M 77.10-38. The last of the categories listed (‘the ways to develop wholesome states’) is comprised of many subsections that the sutta describes in detail, such as: 1) The Four Foundations of Mindfulness; 2) The Four Right Kinds of Striving; 3) The Four Bases for Spiritual Power; 4) The Five Faculties; 5) The Five Powers; 6) The Seven Factors of Enlightenment; 7) The Noble Eightfold Path; 8) The Eight Liberations; 9) The Eight Bases for Transcendence; 10) The Ten Kasiṇas; 11) The Four Jhānas; 12) Insight Knowledge; 13) The Mind-made Body; 14) The Kinds of Supernormal Power; 15) The Divine Ear; 16) The Ability to Read the Minds of Others; 17) The Recollection of Past Lives; 18) The Divine Eye; 19) The Destruction of the Outflows (āsava).   7) p132:– Hiri and Siri, the asura sisters: These two played a significant role in Mara and the Mangala I , pp319-79. The Kalakanja-asura are mentioned at D 20.12; they are described as ‘terrible to see’. They are also described in The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp107-8. The parents of Hiri and Siri were Queen Sujā, an asura, and King Indra, a deva, so they were of mixed celestial ancestry. See also, Ch. 24, note 6 of Mara and the Mangala I.

314 
 8) ibid:– the capital city, Masakkasara: The description of its appearance can be found in The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp223-5.  9) ibid:– Pharusaka Park: This is named as being to the south of Masakkasāra in The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, p224. Similarly the Nandana Grove is described as being to the east of the capital on the same page.   10) p133:– he and I might be of equal age by birth: They were of similar age, as there are stories of them competing in sports and other contests, but they were not said to have been born on the same day as the Buddha and Ānanda were.   11) ibid:– his battlefield voice: Like the Buddha, in his early life as a Sakyan prince, Devadatta had much military training. It is debatable as to whether either of them, or the other princes who became great Elders – Such as Ānanda, Bhaddiya, Anuruddha, Bhagu and Kimbila – ever went to war and fought in battles. As they were all in their 20s and 30s by the time they went forth this seems likely (by the standards of the social situation of the time) but no mention is made either in the suttas or the commentaries, to the author’s knowledge at least, of any of the great Elders ever fighting in a war or even a skirmish.  In one commentary, however, Devadatta is mentioned as ‘having the strength of five elephants’ (SA 62), this is the Sāratthappakāsinī, the ancient commentary to the Saṃyutta Nikāya.    Chapter 16: Matanga’s Offering  1) p135:– Matanga on a mat an arm-span away: The monastic rule dictates that a monk and a woman, or a nun and a man, should not share the same sitting place like a bench or small mat, but should have a clear separation between them, being on different seats or mats. In addition, Pacs ##44 & 45 specify that a bhikkhu should not seat himself together with a woman on a screened seat, or in a completely private place, like a closed room.   2) ibid:– I brought her into the Jetavana on a handcart: In the era before smooth roads and tracks, and wheelchairs, being pushed in a handcart, like a larger, level-based wheelbarrow, was a convenient way for those who cannot walk to get around, with the help of family and friends. The author witnessed this in N.E. Thailand, with a 90-year-old devotee of the International Forest Monastery, Mae Ohn, brought the mile from her home in such a cart – called a ‘roht-sukh’ in the local dialect.

315 
 3) p136:– the scheme that Devadatta and his group hatched: In the Pali scriptures it is a group of ‘wanderers of other sects’ who hatch this plot, and it is the wandering nun Sundarī, who was ‘exceedingly beautiful and fair to look upon,’ that was the one who was caused to visit the Jetavana often and who was taken advantage of to fulfil intentions of the plot.  In the scriptures there are two main accounts of this incident, at Ud 4.8, and in the Commentary to Dhp 306, the first verse of ‘The Hell Chapter’ of the Dhammapada. In the Udāna version all the Buddha’s monks are criticized for the act without the Buddha himself being implicated; in the Dhammapada Commentary the Buddha is personally blamed, as Sundarī was encouraged to tell those she met on the way, ‘I have spent the night alone with the monk Gotama in the perfumed Chamber,’ (Buddhist Legends, Vol. III, p190).   4) p138:– Devadatta, … had ingratiated himself with Prince Ajatasattu: This incident is recounted at CV 7.2.1. It is also the case that, according the Pali Canon, the many attempts by Devadatta to a) take power b) kill the Buddha and c) divide the Sangha in a schism, took place around Rājagaha, not Sāvatthī.   5) ibid:– he was easily old enough: Prince Viḍūḍabha was being hopeful here; he is about six years old at this point in this story.   6) ibid:– Great King, the lay-devotee Matanga … has gone missing: In the original narrative, this exchange is found at Ud 4.8 and in the Commentary to Dhp 306, (Buddhist Legends, Vol III, p190).  7) ibid:– the Maha-upasika Khujjuttara: This was an informal title given to the significant lay disciples of the Buddha. ‘Mahā’ means ‘great’; ‘upāsikā’ means ‘female lay disciple’.   8) p139:– his agents skilled in detection and undercover activities: At Ud 6.2 King Pasenadi asks the Buddha if any of a motley group of wanderers and ascetics that have passed them by are Arahants. The Buddha responds by saying one has to a) live together with b) engage with c) look how they go through adversity d) be in discussion with a person, in order that their accomplishment can be known. The King then tells the Buddha, with respect to the ‘wanderers’ who just passed by, ‘These men, Venerable Sir, are my spies, my scouts, returning after checking the countryside. Once they have scrubbed off the dirt, trimmed their hair and beards and put on clean clothing, I will reward them with their pay and the perks of the job.’

316 
9) ibid:– Khujjuttara was deeply sorrowful… but did not give rise to anger: As one who had reached the level of Non-returner – the third of the four levels of enlightenment – she was no longer subject to feelings of passion or anger, rāga, dosa and vyāpāda.  The sadness she felt is echoed in the description by the Buddha, at S 47.14: ‘This assembly appears empty to me now that Sāriputta and Moggallāna have passed away, have realized final Nibbāna.’  10) p140:– the Master could never act in the way he was accused of: At A 9.7 and 9.8 it is stated how it is impossible for an Arahant to deliberately take life or engage in sexual intercourse of any kind.  11) ibid:– This uproar will not last long: Again, this is a quote from Ud 4.8.   12) ibid:– The liar goes to hell … acts are vile: This is Dhp 306.   13) p141:– dark azure eyes: Mentioned at D 31.1.2.   14) ibid:– the female lay disciple he had publicly named: The Buddha made declarations about the accomplishments of his disciples, both monastic and lay. These are all listed at A 1.188-267. The Pali for the title given to Khujjuttarā was ‘Aggabahussuta’.   15) p142:– dear friend and kalyanamitta: This means ‘spiritual friend’. It is most famously defined by the Buddha at S 45.2, where he states, in response to Ānanda having declared that ‘kalyāṇamittatā is half of the holy life.’  ‘Not so Ānanda, not so. This is the entire holy live, Ānanda, that is good friendship, good companionship, good comradeship.’  16) p144:– Not like yer usual human: The observation that humans usually have a bad smell, in the perceptions of devas, is mentioned in Acariya Mun Bhuridatta – A Spiritual Biography, by Acariya Maha-Boowa Ñāṇasampanno, p132: ‘In the scriptures it says that devas do not like to be near humans because of their repugnant smell. What is this repugnant odour? If there is such an odour, why do you all come to visit me so often?’ ‘Human beings who have a high standard of morality are not repugnant to us. Such people have a fragrance which inspires us to venerate them; so we never tire of coming to hear you discourse on the Dhamma.’
