# CHAPTER 15: THE AMBITIONS OF DEVADATTA   nawing doubts still pressed hungrily on Krishna’s heart although now they had taken a different form. He had sought out Devadatta and had immediately been impressed by his confidence and his demeanour. Like the Buddha he had been a prince of the Sakyan people, and had the commanding presence that came as a natural result of that. He was also brilliantly clever and knowledgeable about his cousin’s teaching; coupled with all this he had lived close to the Buddha since they were children and was not just the cousin of the Master but his brother-in-law as well – the princess Yasodhara, the Master’s former wife, being Devadatta’s sister, made him uncle to the Buddha’s son Rahula too.  The source of Krishna’s doubts now was that Devadatta – wise and impressive as he was – continually criticized the Buddha for having gone soft and lost his way. The conversation that Krishna had had with the Master had been illuminating and heart-warming, and had greatly strengthened his confidence in the Buddha’s teachings. The overwhelming power of the Buddha’s kindness and compassion had made an indelible impression on his heart, leaving him with the certainty that, ‘The Master cannot be wrong!’ in any way. This realization and trust had brought a great ease, a relaxation in him that he had never known before. Now, this trust was being challenged, and so soon after it had dawned.  When he had introduced himself to Devadatta, and had given him a brief rundown on how he had been thinking and acting for the last twenty Rains, to his surprise the Elder, after pausing for a moment, said, ‘Your indulgences have certainly been reprehensible, and their philosophical justification dubious, however you were not completely wrong in your intentions, they were merely directed in a faulty way. I am acquainted with the late sage of Kosambi that you had the good fortune to meet – the Lady Gavinna was wise indeed – but I see that you interpreted her guidance in the way opposite to what she had intended. I can assure you,’ and here Devadatta leaned his tall frame forward and flared his eyes, ‘When she stated “’Sooner! More!’ is the way to enlightenment” the words unspoken, in her wounded and ailing state, were, “Give it all up sooner, rather than later. Relinquish more than you think you can.” Thus you have sincerely followed a mistaken path for the last two decades.’ He then went quiet, looking at Krishna intently, as though pondering how, or if, to continue.  ‘I have seen you in the company of my close students over these last few Moons. You will therefore have heard me explaining my concerns that the Master has become overly lenient in the Discipline and too liberal in his expounding of the

128 
CHAPTER 15: THE AMBITIONS OF DEVADATTA   nawing doubts still pressed hungrily on Krishna’s heart although now they had taken a different form. He had sought out Devadatta and had immediately been impressed by his confidence and his demeanour. Like the Buddha he had been a prince of the Sakyan people, and had the commanding presence that came as a natural result of that. He was also brilliantly clever and knowledgeable about his cousin’s teaching; coupled with all this he had lived close to the Buddha since they were children and was not just the cousin of the Master but his brother-in-law as well – the princess Yasodhara, the Master’s former wife, being Devadatta’s sister, made him uncle to the Buddha’s son Rahula too.  The source of Krishna’s doubts now was that Devadatta – wise and impressive as he was – continually criticized the Buddha for having gone soft and lost his way. The conversation that Krishna had had with the Master had been illuminating and heart-warming, and had greatly strengthened his confidence in the Buddha’s teachings. The overwhelming power of the Buddha’s kindness and compassion had made an indelible impression on his heart, leaving him with the certainty that, ‘The Master cannot be wrong!’ in any way. This realization and trust had brought a great ease, a relaxation in him that he had never known before. Now, this trust was being challenged, and so soon after it had dawned.  When he had introduced himself to Devadatta, and had given him a brief rundown on how he had been thinking and acting for the last twenty Rains, to his surprise the Elder, after pausing for a moment, said, ‘Your indulgences have certainly been reprehensible, and their philosophical justification dubious, however you were not completely wrong in your intentions, they were merely directed in a faulty way. I am acquainted with the late sage of Kosambi that you had the good fortune to meet – the Lady Gavinna was wise indeed – but I see that you interpreted her guidance in the way opposite to what she had intended. I can assure you,’ and here Devadatta leaned his tall frame forward and flared his eyes, ‘When she stated “’Sooner! More!’ is the way to enlightenment” the words unspoken, in her wounded and ailing state, were, “Give it all up sooner, rather than later. Relinquish more than you think you can.” Thus you have sincerely followed a mistaken path for the last two decades.’ He then went quiet, looking at Krishna intently, as though pondering how, or if, to continue.  ‘I have seen you in the company of my close students over these last few Moons. You will therefore have heard me explaining my concerns that the Master has become overly lenient in the Discipline and too liberal in his expounding of the

129 
Dharma. The Sangha is losing its focus as the Master ages and so I see a need for substantial reform – coincidentally based around exactly the principles we just spoke of: “Renounce all worldly pursuits sooner rather than later; let go of more than you think you can.”’ Krishna felt flattered that so highly esteemed a monk, and the Master’s cousin no less, would not just heed his trials and tribulations, and offer advice about them, but that he would also take the words that had played such a central role in Krishna’s life and hold them up (albeit with a reversed meaning) as a standard for all to follow.  As the moon waxed and waned a few more times Krishna’s confidence in Devadatta’s approach made more and more sense and he ardently undertook the stricter ascetic standards that his new teacher espoused.  He had also gone back to listening to more of the Master’s teachings as well, now that he had returned from his annual wanderings at the end of the Cold Season, but, in the informal discussions with Devadatta and his group after these talks, the Elder always managed to point out clear signs that the Master was going soft in his old age and that the need for reform was becoming more and more obvious.  Matters came to a head when King Pasenadi, and much of the royal court, had come to listen to a Dharma talk that the Master was giving on one of the Lunar Observance Days. Devadatta got up from his seat, raised his hands in añjali and stated, for all the assembly to hear, ‘Venerable Sir, the Blessèd One is now old, agèd, burdened with years and come to the last stage. Let the Blessèd One now rest. Let him dwell in bliss in this present life. Let him hand over the governance of the Sangha to me; I will lead the community.’ He turned to Devadatta and calmly responded, ‘Enough, Devadatta, do not aspire to govern the Sangha. I would not hand over the leadership of the Sangha even to Sariputta or Moggallana, how should I do so to such a wastrel, such an unworthy person, such a gob of phlegm as you are?’ The Master spoke this harsh rebuke in a clear and steady voice. It was certain that all in the assembly had heard his words, then everything went quiet – there was a tension in the Hot Season air, no one knowing how Devadatta would react.  Internally Devadatta was seething, angry and indignant, but outwardly he silently bowed three times and left the gathering, a few of his close circle departing at the same time. Soon after, in the quarter of the Jetavana where Devadatta had his dwelling, his full coterie of adherents came together and the Elder spoke, ‘You can see why I have become concerned about my revered brother-in-law, my cousin, the Blessed One.’ His tone was studiedly sympathetic. ‘Never before has he used that kind of language – “a gob of phlegm” – for anyone, let alone his own close relative. His faculties are indeed failing, both in terms of ability to govern properly and in terms of his own mental capacities.’ Any hint of resentment or anger at having been publicly disgraced, shamed, was completely absent. He was the picture of the compassionate family member, devoted student who was saddened by the waning abilities of their loved one and noble guide.

130 
‘My friends, since the Master has rejected, by this public statement, any possibility of handing over rulership of the Sangha to me, let us at least try to encourage him to tighten some of the lackadaisical standards that have crept in.’  ‘Venerable Sir, what do you have in mind?’ One of the monks asked. The whole group was listening carefully now. Krishna particularly so as he had been keen to adopt all the stricter standards that Devadatta encouraged.  ‘As it happens, I have been developing a small collection of reforms, to be standards adopted by the whole Sangha, not just the few who favour living according to the voluntary ascetic practices, the dhutangas. There are five changes I wish to propose which I feel will go a long way to reinvigorating the Sangha’s spiritual life and which will conduce to great communal harmony. The five are:  ‘1) All monastics should dwell in the forest and any village or city monasteries or dwellings would be prohibited.  ‘2) All monastics should live only on the food they receive on alms-round, not accepting any food offered later in the monastery or on invitation to a lay-person’s house.  ‘3) All monastics should only make robes from discarded scrap cloth, not from any material specially given by lay people.  ‘4) All monastics should not live in any kind of dwelling but only reside at the foot of a tree.  ‘5) All monastics should be vegetarians for life and should never eat fish or meat.  ‘For the sake of preserving the Master’s precious legacy, we need to intervene somehow and these reforms are the ideal solution!’   * * *  The day came soon enough when Devadatta requested the opportunity to speak with the Master, ‘On an important matter.’ Ananda was anxious about what was intended since the previous exchange between the two had been the public request by Devadatta for the Buddha to hand over the role of leadership, and the Master’s blunt rebuttal of that. It was not such a big gathering this time and only monks and a few novices were present. Devadatta was the epitome of politeness and proper form and, after having paid respects, and once he and all the Sangha members had settled, he presented his five points to the Master.  Once he had finished his list, and without addressing Devadatta directly, the Buddha asked the assembly a question, ‘What qualities do you see in me because of which my disciples honour, revere, respect and venerate me and live in dependence on my teaching?’ One monk at once spoke up, ‘Venerable Sir, the Blessèd One eats little and commends eating little.’

131 
The Buddha responded, ‘There are disciples of mine who live on a cupful or half a cupful of food a day, while I sometimes eat the full contents of my alms-bowl or even more. So, if my disciples honoured me on the basis of that “I eat little and commend eating little” then those disciples who live on a cupful of food per day should not honour and revere me, nor live in dependence on me.’  Another monk said, ‘The Blessèd One is content with any kind of robe…’ The Buddha replied in the same vein, how some Sangha members used rags from charnel grounds or rubbish heaps to make their robes, while sometimes he wore robes that were so fine, ‘That pumpkin hair is coarse in comparison.’ Another monk said, ‘The Blessèd One is content with any kind of alms-food…’ Another said, ‘The Blessèd One is content with any kind of resting place…’ Finally one said, ‘The Blessèd One delights in seclusion and commends seclusion…’ To each of these the Master responded in similar ways, saying how he occasionally, according to time and place, accepted luxurious and abundant offerings. In this he was expressing the sentiment, ‘Please do not praise me or follow me just because of these external practices of austerity; they are not the whole story.’ He then turned to his maleficent cousin, ‘So, Devadatta, if you can heed these examples of living austerely when appropriate, but adapting to circumstances when appropriate (if offered fine food, a gabled mansion to reside in, new-woven cloth for robes and suchlike), then you will understand why I hereby reject all five of your proposals: let those who wish to, dwell in a forest; let those who wish to, dwell in a village. Let those who wish, live on alms-food; let those who wish, accept invitations. Let those who wish, use only discarded cloth for their robes; let those who wish, wear robes given by householders. Let those who wish live at the root of a tree but not during the Rains, as I have not allowed that. And I have allowed fish and meat to be eaten by the Sangha that is pure in three aspects: when it is not seen, heard or suspected that the creature has been killed to offer to the Sangha.’  The Master paused to let this set of refusals sink in, then he added, ‘However, there are attributes my disciples respect and revere me for that are indeed intrinsically worthy of such honouring. These are: the higher virtue, the qualities of knowledge and vision, the higher wisdom, the expounding and elucidating of the Four Noble Truths and, lastly, the explication of the many and various ways to develop wholesome states. These are the qualities for which I am appropriately praised and upon which those who wish to follow me can depend, and which are sure to bring them benefit.’ To the surprise of some gathered there, and to the relief of Ananda and others, Devadatta seemed to take this all in good spirit and he chose not to argue or discuss the issue further. He, instead, rose to his knees and asked leave to pay his respects, thanking the Master for having been granted the chance to offer his proposals.

132 
 It was a further surprise, to the few who glanced at Devadatta’s face as he rose to leave, that rather than any disappointment showing there, there was a distinct smirk. As if things had gone exactly as he had wanted them to.   * * *   Maggot could not say how she knew but, on hearing the cryptic verse from the Bodhisattva Maitreya, she instantly made the connection, ‘Don’t go by appearances and discriminate, clinging to sense-consciousness. The beings I know who are most different in their appearance and in their nature are Hiri and Siri, the asura sisters and daughters of Queen Suja and King Indra. They are of the kalakanja-asura type and ill-favoured to look upon, yet they are the most pure-hearted and honest, humble devas I have ever met. Find Hiri and Siri and they will know!’ She was absolutely sure.  The group appeared in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods close to the capital city, Masakkasara, surrounded as it was by glittering towers and streaming banners. The city walls with their thousand gates and thousand turrets were thickly studded with the seven types of gemstones and shone – now silvery, now golden – in the clear light of the sky.  Ant was very keen to be reunited with Ninka as soon as possible but the first thing that she was aware of in this new realm was that, as she had thought, the gandharva Muñca had released his hand from hers and, since he was at the end of the line that the group made, he had not arrived in the Tavatimsa Heaven with them.  ‘Was that an accident?’ Bee asked.  ‘How did he lose his grip?’ Rhamba wondered, ‘It’s not as though we were shaken about or anything.’  ‘He let go on purpose,’ Ant assured them, ‘it was deliberate and I even saw a nasty look in his eye as he broke away. It was strange – it is strange, after he put so much effort into helping us.’ Maggot was getting impatient already, ‘Look, whatever his reasons, he was a bit of a stranger to us so who knows what he had on his mind. We need to find Hiri and Siri.’ ‘And Ninka!’ chimed in Ant.  ‘So maybe that’s the best plan. Get to the Nandana Grove to find Ninka then she can let us know how to find the Princesses.’  ‘Good idea, Bee,’ Maggot was keen to move.  ‘Does anyone of us know the direction of the Nandana Grove from here?’ ‘No’ me,’ Gumby shrugged, ‘I bin ‘ere once or twice but it’s not my territ’ry.’ Salassa spoke up, ‘I’m pretty sure the Grove is east of the city; I’ve visited before, with the Four Great Protectors’ events, and where we are is the Pharusaka Park, to the south. We need to head east and north from here.’

133 
Maggot reached her hands out to either side, in the hope that they could just think themselves in that direction and get there immediately but both Rhamba and Salassa shook their heads.  ‘That method works in Tusita and above but I’m afraid that here we have to fly, the ordinary way. Gumbiya – you’re the quickest. Give us all a lift if you can!’ The yakkha expanded to his full height and gathered the five companions in his arms; he rose and tore off towards the Nandana Grove as fast as he could hurtle.   * * *  ‘My friends,’ Devadatta began, ‘as you have seen the Master is now agèd and burdened with years. He and I might be of equal age by birth but his life has been a continual round of cares and responsibilities so the years have not been kind to him.  ‘You all saw how he was reduced to insulting me in public and then pointedly rejecting my very reasonable reforms. He is falling into the rigidity and senility of old age and is refusing the next generation its opportunity to shine. This is not good for the noble religion, the sasana that he himself established.  It is a painful truth, when a founder becomes an obstacle to the well-being of their own creation, that the health of the whole can be most completely benefitted by the founder stepping aside or, if they will not or cannot, then by their being removed. Since the Master has declined my generous offer to lead in his place, and he has declined the beneficial reforms I suggested, do any of you have a vision of a way forward? If the Master will not step down or delegate authority, what should we do?’ It was a compelling speech, with Devadatta fully utilizing his height, his battlefield voice, his natural tendency to speak from a place of command, so that all his adherents were drawn into his appeal, his quest for a way forward, all little realizing that his words, guided by Mara’s influence, had been carefully crafted to head in one direction only.  ‘We could break away and start our own new order,’ one young bhikkhu offered.  ‘Yes indeed, we could,’ replied the Elder, ‘but if the Master is still seen to be an authority, a wise and reliable spiritual teacher, our new group would carry little weight in the eyes and hearts of the manyfolk.’ ‘Can we point out how old and soft he’s become?’ asked another. ‘We could,’ Devadatta responded, leaning on the word, ‘However, we did try that already and, besides, people tend to be very accommodating and sentimental when dealing with their Elders in their dotage. It might just cement the problem of stagnation.’ One by one suggestions were made, each having its flaws being highlighted by Devadatta’s keen intellect. Eventually someone piped up with, ‘Could we just find a way to discredit him, ruin his reputation, or at least show the world that his

134 
best days are done and now the wise and compassionate thing would be to let others take over.’  ‘Hmmm, what are you suggesting?’ Devadatta gently urged.  ‘Well,’ the young bhikkhu continued, ‘We could arrange for him to be responsible or at least seen to be responsible, for some inappropriate behaviour.’  ‘Are you suggesting we “frame” him for something?’ Devadatta’s brow furrowed with very convincing concern, as if he was weighing a serious moral dilemma. ‘Hmmm, I’m not sure…’, he lingered over the thought.  ‘It would be for the greater good!’ The monk who proposed the idea was warming to the possibility.  ‘Maybe…’, the aura of caution and propriety was palpable in Devadatta’s words.  Another voice chimed in with, ‘Maybe something involving a woman would do the trick,’   Devadatta feigned the ‘slowly coming around to the idea’ posture very well, his facial expression modulating to order, giving no sign of the self-satisfied grin he felt within.  ‘We would need to find a woman who is both young, good-looking and a regular visitor to the Jetavana… hmmm…’, Devadatta pondered out loud. Krishna, who had been following the discussion closely, not quite sure what to contribute, realized he could offer something here. ‘I think I know just the person, Venerable Sir. She will be ideal’ At this suggestion Surama, sitting at Krishna’s side, was sincerely, deeply satisfied; he turned his head away and smiled.  ==*==
