# Chapter 2: Forbidden Fruit  1) p8:– I’m a kinnari: Kinnari are a class of earth-devas. They feature extensively in Mara and the Mangala I: The Killer   2) ibid:– it’s not against the rules – at least I’m pretty sure it’s not: Eventually the Buddha did establish this detail of the Vinaya rule entailing ‘defeat’ for a monk, i.e. ‘now at that time a certain monk indulged in sexual intercourse with a female naga… a yakkhini… this is an o#ence involving defeat’ (Book of the Discipline I, pp57-8); also, it is the same ‘whether it is a young female naga or a kinnari’ (N1, VA 279-ThigA 225). These are the subclauses of Defeat Rule 1.   3) p9:– that is what society expects: A philosophy similar to that expounded by Krishna’s father Kamanita, as recounted in The Pilgrim Kamanita in Ch. 20: ‘The Unreasonable Child’; especially on p120.  4) ibid:– that urge towards enlightenment, is the life-pulse of the universe: This passage is adapted from D.T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism I, p75, quoted in Silent Rain, p86, note 1, and in Rain on the Nile, p196, note 21.   5) ibid:– ‘Jambu’. It’s even there in what you are called: The word ‘jambu’ is indeed the classical term for the ‘rose-apple’ as in the ancient name for the Indian sub-continent ‘Jambudvīpa’ (Skt) or ‘Jambudīpa’ (Pāli), ‘the Land of Rose-Apples’. The formal name for the tree is Syzygium jambos.   6) ibid:–  it’s what we call ‘skilful means’, as it has a noble cause in mind: The Pali for this is upāya. In the Southern Buddhist literature the Buddha never tells any outright lies for any reason but he does occasionally allow himself to be misunderstood, without correcting the wrong assumption. This is a major theme of The Pilgrim Kamanita and is exempli%ed on p121 and in note 18 to Ch. 20, pp306-7 (ibid). In the Northern School, outright lies seems to be sanctioned, as in the ‘burning house’ story in the Lotus Sutra.   7) p10:– soon we’ll have a hatchling to think of as well: As described later, kinnaris lay eggs and are thus known as ‘twice-born’. Although in the Pali Canon they are described as human-like in form and occasionally living as a couple with a human spouse, and having children together (for example, in Jāt 546, the hermit Vaccha and the kinnari Rahavatī and their children) they are sometimes represented iconographically as having a human torso and bird’s legs, and wings attached to their hips. This is plainly a misreading of the texts and an incorrect representation.

282 
Chapter 2: Forbidden Fruit  1) p8:– I’m a kinnari: Kinnari are a class of earth-devas. They feature extensively in Mara and the Mangala I: The Killer   2) ibid:– it’s not against the rules – at least I’m pretty sure it’s not: Eventually the Buddha did establish this detail of the Vinaya rule entailing ‘defeat’ for a monk, i.e. ‘now at that time a certain monk indulged in sexual intercourse with a female naga… a yakkhini… this is an o#ence involving defeat’ (Book of the Discipline I, pp57-8); also, it is the same ‘whether it is a young female naga or a kinnari’ (N1, VA 279-ThigA 225). These are the subclauses of Defeat Rule 1.   3) p9:– that is what society expects: A philosophy similar to that expounded by Krishna’s father Kamanita, as recounted in The Pilgrim Kamanita in Ch. 20: ‘The Unreasonable Child’; especially on p120.  4) ibid:– that urge towards enlightenment, is the life-pulse of the universe: This passage is adapted from D.T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism I, p75, quoted in Silent Rain, p86, note 1, and in Rain on the Nile, p196, note 21.   5) ibid:– ‘Jambu’. It’s even there in what you are called: The word ‘jambu’ is indeed the classical term for the ‘rose-apple’ as in the ancient name for the Indian sub-continent ‘Jambudvīpa’ (Skt) or ‘Jambudīpa’ (Pāli), ‘the Land of Rose-Apples’. The formal name for the tree is Syzygium jambos.   6) ibid:–  it’s what we call ‘skilful means’, as it has a noble cause in mind: The Pali for this is upāya. In the Southern Buddhist literature the Buddha never tells any outright lies for any reason but he does occasionally allow himself to be misunderstood, without correcting the wrong assumption. This is a major theme of The Pilgrim Kamanita and is exempli%ed on p121 and in note 18 to Ch. 20, pp306-7 (ibid). In the Northern School, outright lies seems to be sanctioned, as in the ‘burning house’ story in the Lotus Sutra.   7) p10:– soon we’ll have a hatchling to think of as well: As described later, kinnaris lay eggs and are thus known as ‘twice-born’. Although in the Pali Canon they are described as human-like in form and occasionally living as a couple with a human spouse, and having children together (for example, in Jāt 546, the hermit Vaccha and the kinnari Rahavatī and their children) they are sometimes represented iconographically as having a human torso and bird’s legs, and wings attached to their hips. This is plainly a misreading of the texts and an incorrect representation.

283 
 8) p11:– the Heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods: In Buddhist cosmology this is the third of the seven Sensual Heavens. In The Pilgrim Kamanita, Ch. 3, note 8, pp275-5, these are listed in detail. Brie"y they are: 1. Bhumma Deva – the earth spirits, e.g. kinnari, tree devas etc.  2. The Heaven of the Four Guardian Deities – the Lokapālā,  also their subjects: the kumbandhas, gandharvas, nagas and yakkhas 3. The Heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods – Tāvatiṃsa devā 4. The Devas of the Hours – Yama devā 5. The Heaven of the Contented – Tusita devā 6. The Heaven of those who Delight in Creating – Nimmānaratī devā 7. The Heaven of those who Delight in the Creations of Others – Paranimmitavasavatī devā  9) Ibid:– those ‘few minutes’ in the Thirty-Three were several seasons long: In Buddhist cosmology, as in many other mythic systems around the world, time runs at di#erent speeds in di#erent realms. See, for example, The Pilgrim Kamanita, note 2 to Ch. 39, p333.   10) p13:– the nine gems of the Bejaratana: An auspicious collection of precious stones, understood to bestow power and protection. The nine are: (1) diamond (2) ruby (3) emerald (4) yellow sapphire (5) garnet (6) blue sapphire (7) pearl (8) cat’s eye (9) coral.  11) p. 14:– even though she did a lot of bad things: See Mara and the Mangala I for the background to this statement; especially Chs. 24 & 25, ‘The Invitation’ and ‘The Iron Skillet’, pp311-45 (2019).     Chapter 3: The Stolen Child  1) p15:– You haven’t shaved your head yet: The regularity with which Buddhist monastics shave their heads varies from country to country but most have the custom of shaving before the full moon Observance Day.   2) ibid:– the Recitation: The Vinaya discipline requires that the whole monastic Rule be recited in a formal meeting on the full moon and new moon days. The 227 rules for monks takes about 45 minutes to recite "uently.   3) ibid:– the Komudi full moon:  This is the full moon of November, the time when the white lotus blooms. Krishna’s mother, Savitri, chose it as a suitable name since he was born

284 
on that full moon day and as his skin was so dark, to name him after the white lotus seemed a skilful way to counter-balance the picture. See Mara and the Mangala I, p6.   4) ibid:– You remember everything!: Ven. Ānanda was blessed with perfect recall. He recited all the Buddha’s sutta teachings at the First Council, after the Buddha’s %nal passing away.   5) ibid:– become a monk today: One has to be fully 20 years of age to receive Full Acceptance as a monk or nun, according to Vinaya.   6) ibid:– Ehi bhikkhu: This is the simplest form of ordination procedure, and could only be used by the Buddha. The process became more complex as the teaching spread but the form used today is as it was by the time the Vinaya was fully established, at the end of the Buddha’s life.   7) ibid:– the Simsapa grove: A forest outside the walls of the city of Kosambi. It is where the Buddha gave his famous ‘handful of leaves’ teaching, as at S 56.31.  8) ibid:– from my kuti:  A kuti is a small hut that is used as a dwelling place for a Buddhist nun or monk.   9) ibid:– Queen Samavati and Queen Magandiya: As in Mara and the Mangala I and in the Dhammapada Commentary to Dhp 21-23; also their story is recounted in Buddhist Legends Vol. I, translated by E.W. Burlingame, pp247-293.  10) p16:– the small Ghositarama forest: The Ghositarama seems to have been the %rst monastery of the Buddha’s community that was established inside the walls of a city. It was in a park inside the walls of Kosambi.   11) ibid:– his young dark companion: Krishna’s skin was extremely dark, hence he was given the nickname ‘Krishna’ meaning ‘The Black One’.   12) ibid:– the pilgrim Kamanita:  As in the book of the same name; see pp117-122.   13) ibid:– the physical necessities that every monk must possess: These comprise, three robes, alms-bowl, waistband, needle and thread, razor and a water %lter.

285 
14) p17:– double-layered sanghati robe: The saṅghātī is intended to be a warmer, outer robe that can be used as a wrap in colder weather. In Thai custom, based on the Vinaya, it is roughly the same size as the uttara-saṅga or ‘upper robe’.   15) ibid:– the &rst watch: This means from six in the evening until ten o’clock. The ‘second watch’ is ten o’clock to two in the morning; the ‘third watch’ is from two to six in the morning.   16) p18:– Where’s my cintamani?: This is an invention of the author, based on the idea of ‘the wish-ful%lling gem’ or cintamani-vijjā, mentioned In the Pali texts such as the Jātaka and at D 11.7.  The use it is put to here is included in Mara and the Mangala I, p241.   17) p19:– being a warrior yakkha: The yakkhā are a form of celestial demon, belonging to the Realm of the Four Great Kings. Their ruler is King Vessavana, also known as Kuvera, his domain is the Northern Quarter. This Realm is divided into four sections:  Dhataraṭṭha rules the East and the gandharvas.  Virūḷhaka rules the South and the kumbhandas Virūpakkha rules the West and the nāgas Vessavaṇa rules the North and the yakkhas.  There is more information available about this Realm in The Buddhist Cosmos by Ajahn Punnadhammo, pp426-40 and in The Three Worlds According to King Ruang, pp220-21.   18) p21:– the rukkha-devas: The rukkha-devas are tree-spirits, living in and protecting particular trees as their homes. They are members of the Realm of Earth Spirits – bhumma-devā.  19) ibid:– leave a changeling: In European folk beliefs a changeling was a fairy child substituted by acquisitive fairy folk for a human infant. They would take the human child and raise it as their own, in the faerie world, under a mountain or in a suchlike location.   20) ibid:– use it as a drug: As in Mara and the Mangala I, pp280-89, ‘The Noxious Cave’ and other parts of the book.   21) ibid:– that baby would ’ardly make a mar’ul: This is not scripturally accurate; at Jāt 513 it describes a yakkhinī stealing new-born princes and ‘crunching and devouring them before the queen’s eyes.’ Also at Jāt 510, after another yakkhinī had stolen a new-born prince, she ‘champed and mumbled him like an onion.’
