# CHAPTER 3:  THE STOLEN CHILD  ou haven’t shaved your head yet,’ remarked Ananda. ‘Wha…?’ responded Krishna, surprised to see the Elder coming down the path, at this back part of the monastery woods. ‘It’s the full moon – look – the sun is setting there in the west and the moon is rising in the east. By the time it’s above the forest we should be at the hall for the Recitation.’   Krishna realized he had completely forgoNen this fortnightly head-shaving but he could not reveal to Ananda that it was because he was taken up with caring for Maggot and the new baby. That was out of the question.   ‘Oh, right!’ He blustered, ‘I’ll do that before dawn tomorrow.’  ‘And,’ Ananda continued, giving Krishna a somewhat studied sideways glance, ‘as it’s the Komudi full moon, this makes it your birthday; if I remember correctly. And isn’t your proper name Komudi – that no one ever uses – on account of you being born on this day?’  ‘You remember everything!’ the impressed Krishna retorted.   ‘Perhaps not everything,’ Ananda smiled, ‘but a lot.’ He was arranging his robe over his shoulder as they spoke. ‘And, as this is your twentieth, you could request full ordination and become a monk today – a fully ﬂedged bhikkhu.’ He repeated the slightly loaded side-glance, checking Krishna for his reaction to this thinly-veiled hint. ‘Since the Master is here in the Ghositarama, if you were to request the Full Acceptance today, it could be a very short and simple ceremony; he just says, ‘Ehi bhikkhu’ and it’s done.’   ‘That would be a great honour, as well as being really convenient,’ Krishna replied, his mind now racing to calculate how long all of these unexpected (at least for him) ceremonies would take. He was now in a dilemma, torn between loyalties, as he had promised Maggot that he would take care of the baby for the night whilst she went to visit her parents over in the Simsapa grove, outside the city of Kosambi. He wondered if he had time to ask Bee or Ant, or Gumbiya to take a message to her, or to ﬁll in for him, or if it would all be over quickly so he could get back while Tambaka was still resting peacefully, as she had just dropped oﬀ to sleep before Ananda had appeared.  ‘What should I do?!’ His mind raced. Not being risk-averse he decided to gamble on the baby sleeping peacefully for the next hour – hidden away in their nest in the deep thicket – so he said, ‘Let me get my robe from my kuti and we’ll ask if I can be ordained this evening – that will be a great opportunity. Let’s do it!’  Ever since Krishna had joined the Sangha as a novice, after the tragic and dramatic deaths of his two sisters, Amba and Tamba (laNerly known as Queen Samavati and Queen Magandiya) the kindly Ananda had taken him under his wing,

15 
CHAPTER 3:  THE STOLEN CHILD  ou haven’t shaved your head yet,’ remarked Ananda. ‘Wha…?’ responded Krishna, surprised to see the Elder coming down the path, at this back part of the monastery woods. ‘It’s the full moon – look – the sun is setting there in the west and the moon is rising in the east. By the time it’s above the forest we should be at the hall for the Recitation.’   Krishna realized he had completely forgoNen this fortnightly head-shaving but he could not reveal to Ananda that it was because he was taken up with caring for Maggot and the new baby. That was out of the question.   ‘Oh, right!’ He blustered, ‘I’ll do that before dawn tomorrow.’  ‘And,’ Ananda continued, giving Krishna a somewhat studied sideways glance, ‘as it’s the Komudi full moon, this makes it your birthday; if I remember correctly. And isn’t your proper name Komudi – that no one ever uses – on account of you being born on this day?’  ‘You remember everything!’ the impressed Krishna retorted.   ‘Perhaps not everything,’ Ananda smiled, ‘but a lot.’ He was arranging his robe over his shoulder as they spoke. ‘And, as this is your twentieth, you could request full ordination and become a monk today – a fully ﬂedged bhikkhu.’ He repeated the slightly loaded side-glance, checking Krishna for his reaction to this thinly-veiled hint. ‘Since the Master is here in the Ghositarama, if you were to request the Full Acceptance today, it could be a very short and simple ceremony; he just says, ‘Ehi bhikkhu’ and it’s done.’   ‘That would be a great honour, as well as being really convenient,’ Krishna replied, his mind now racing to calculate how long all of these unexpected (at least for him) ceremonies would take. He was now in a dilemma, torn between loyalties, as he had promised Maggot that he would take care of the baby for the night whilst she went to visit her parents over in the Simsapa grove, outside the city of Kosambi. He wondered if he had time to ask Bee or Ant, or Gumbiya to take a message to her, or to ﬁll in for him, or if it would all be over quickly so he could get back while Tambaka was still resting peacefully, as she had just dropped oﬀ to sleep before Ananda had appeared.  ‘What should I do?!’ His mind raced. Not being risk-averse he decided to gamble on the baby sleeping peacefully for the next hour – hidden away in their nest in the deep thicket – so he said, ‘Let me get my robe from my kuti and we’ll ask if I can be ordained this evening – that will be a great opportunity. Let’s do it!’  Ever since Krishna had joined the Sangha as a novice, after the tragic and dramatic deaths of his two sisters, Amba and Tamba (laNerly known as Queen Samavati and Queen Magandiya) the kindly Ananda had taken him under his wing,

16 
oﬀering solace and companionship when needed and a steady stream of small tasks to keep the young and restless spiritual aspirant supplied with some outlets for his abundant energies. It had been Ananda’s hope that young Krishna would make this more substantial commitment to the monastic life when the time came so he was pleasantly surprised now how liNle conversation had been needed to encourage the lad to see that this increased level of discipline and rigour in his endeavours would be a worthwhile step to take. It is true that part of him wondered whether the boy really appreciated what he was now asking to take on – with all the extra observances and limitations, a monk having 227 rules compared with a novice’s modest ten – but Ananda was always inclined to look on the bright side, taking the optimistic view. Thus he was delighted to be striding down the moonlit paths of the small Ghositarama forest with young Krishna, to support him in undertaking the monk’s life with the Buddha himself as his preceptor – the one inducting him into the Order.  The fat yellow moon glowed above the trees ringing the small assembly hall. Crickets and cicadas ﬁlled the warm evening air with a susurrating wall of sound. An owl hooted before taking oﬀ on silent wings and dozens of robed ﬁgures gravitated quietly to the open sides of the hall from narrow paths between the shadowy trunks and forest undergrowth.  As Krishna and Ananda approached, they saw that the Buddha was seated on a small bench, in the open area just before the hall. He was talking with a group of monks, seated on a grass mat below him. The monks turned as Ananda approached and, in a familiar ﬂuid movement, made space for the Buddha’s aNendant and his young dark companion to kneel and pay their respects to the Master.  ‘This is the novice Krishna, Venerable Sir,’ Ananda began, ‘also known as Komudi since he was born on this full moon day twenty years ago.’ ‘I remember him too,’ the Buddha responded, ‘as the brother of the two queens of Vamsa, who both died not yet two years ago.’  Krishna was ﬂushed with pride that the Master recognized him and remembered his notable background.  ‘I also recall meeting their father, the pilgrim Kamanita, who was resistant to the teachings I oﬀered him but who may yet, in future ages, come to understand the Dharma that I taught him.’ Krishna was not so sure what to make of that comment – whether to be pleased that the Buddha had met the father that Krishna could hardly remember or whether to be chastened that his father had failed to appreciate the Master’s words – so, into the ringing silence of that moment he spoke, to both get away from the awkward feeling and to express his current aspiration:  ‘Venerable Sir, may I request the Full Acceptance as a bhikkhu in this Dharma and Discipline?’ ‘Do you have your alms-bowl and three robes?’ the Buddha asked, these being the physical necessities that every monk must possess, in his community.

17 
‘I have my bowl and two robes,’ Krishna began, ‘but the third robe, the double layered robe of patches that novices don’t have but monks do… that I have not made yet… I…’ ‘I can help with that,’ interjected Ananda, reaching deftly behind him to where a small bundle was placed on the mat at the edge of the cleared area in front of the hall. ‘I believe that this double-layered sanghati robe is the same size as your upper robe, Krishna. This is oﬀered to you – I prepared it in case you were inclined to ask for ordination as I noticed that, amongst the many ways you liked to spend your time, sewing was not included.’   * * *  ‘Ehi, bhikkhu’ – ‘Come, monk’ was formally uNered by the Buddha, with Krishna as the sole candidate that evening.  At that moment his life as a fully-ordained bhikkhu began. The surge of excitement and inspiration was great but, in the back of his mind, he was looking to see how he could get away and return to his parenting duties at the nest:– How was Tambaka doing on her own?  After his ordination – which was impressively brief – the Recitation of the Rule took another hour. However, as that ceremony came to an end, he had a sinking feeling that he was going to be there quite a while longer as the crowd of lay people had thickened at the back part of the hall and the Buddha was invited to ascend the Dharma seat to oﬀer a discourse. The Master began by greeting the many visitors: locals from Kosambi as well as travellers from Magadha, Koliya, Kosala, and his homeland of the Sakya kingdom as well as the northern land of UNarakuru.  The monastics were from various regions too – nuns as well as monks – so the range of his listeners was very broad, suggesting that the Master’s discourse would cover a lot of ground, to meet the experiences and background of such a variety of folk.  Krishna sat in agony, hardly hearing any of the wise words, as he was desperate to get away but, as the lone new bhikkhu, he had no choice but to stay seated near the front, vainly trying to pretend he was keenly hanging on every word.  When the Buddha ﬁnally closed, with his customary words of, ‘Now is the time for you to do as you see ﬁt,’ the assembly of lay people began to disperse but quite a number gathered around Krishna, to wish him well with his new undertaking and to oﬀer him gifts.   He was, again, hoping this would be over soon but at the same time he was charmed by the dewy-eyed devotion that some of the women were displaying towards him. He was eager to get away but something in him was relishing the aNention and the aﬀection being shown to him. It was well on into the night, at least the end of the ﬁrst watch, before, scurrying hurriedly in a most unmonkly way, he got back to the nest and, to his horror, found that Tambaka was gone.

18 
 * * *   ‘Oh no!’ Krishna’s mind was a storm of thoughts and emotions: trying to guess where the baby had gone, and how; trying to think of a way he could get help to ﬁnd her; making up excuses as to how he could have lost her when he was the responsible adult, supposedly – it was a tumult of anxious feelings and scaNered, ﬂailing ideas.  There was no sign of any disturbance of the nest and no bloodstains so it didn’t look like she had been seized by a wild animal or a hawk.  The bright moonlight now cast intense black shadows up against the silvered fronds of the trees and the leaf-liNer on the forest ﬂoor, thus it was hard to see if there were any footprints or broken twigs to show if people had been present. There were no signs at all. The forest rang with the incessant buzz of crickets, laid over an eerie foreboding silence and stillness. There were no sounds of movement, like the baby crawling in the bushes or murmuring for her mother; there was nothing.  ‘Help. I need help… Bee and Gumby, they’re nearby!’ Krishna’s feet started down the path to where his friends had their own bower in the woods. He raced through the stripes of moonlight and roused them, shouting their names as he approached, heedless of any disturbance he might have been making to the others who might have been meditating or resting in the area.  ‘Bee! Gumby! Come quick! I need you!’ He crashed into their forest shelter, waking them from their contented slumbers.  ‘What on earth is the maNer?’ Bee grumbled, ‘It’s halfway through the night, don’t you have any respect…’ ‘I’ve lost the baby’ Tam’s gone!’ Krishna’s face was such a picture of fear and distress that Bee quickly changed her tone from disgruntled to concerned.  ‘What?! What happened? How could you lose a baby who is too young even to crawl?’ Krishna gabbled a description of events, trying not to come across as too foolish or irresponsible whilst giving them the facts of it.  ‘So, how long were you away from the nest?’    ‘It was the whole ﬁrst watch, four hours altogether, but I was sure it would only be short while.’  ‘You were sure – well that was wrong for a start,’ Bee raised an accusatory eyebrow and was about to launch into a colourful listing of Krishna’s shortcomings but his shaNered expression and the need to act fast dissuaded her.  ‘We need to get Maggot here as soon as possible – right, where’s my cintamani?’ She rummaged for the talking-stone that she and her kinnari friends used to communicate with over great distances. Gumbiya, meanwhile had roused himself to action and was about to oﬀer Krishna a drink of ﬂower-mead to bolster his spirits when he remembered that Krishna was a novice monk and thus prohibited from taking alcohol.  Krishna saw him pulling out his ﬂask and said, ‘Don’t mind me – you go ahead and have a stiﬀener. Besides, I’m not just a novice now but a fully-ordained

19 
monk – that’s part of what took so long – so mead is even more forbidden than before.’  ‘When did that happen?’ Asked Gumbiya.  ‘Just after moonrise. So I’m preNy new to this.’ Krishna thought for a moment, then added, ‘There might however be a case for calling it “medicinal” as it would certainly make me feel beNer.’ Gumbiya, despite being a warrior yakkha and not one of reﬁned morals, felt this was preNy dubious logic but responded, ‘It’s your call. If you want some, here it is.’ Krishna looked at the ﬂask, looked away, then reached out for it, taking a hearty pull as he shut down his reservations.     * * *   ‘Maggot, come back here quick. There’s no way to dress it up, Tambaka’s gone missing... Yes... Krishna lost her somehow... No we’ve no idea... Gumby will come and get you, he can go at ten times your speed. He’s on his way already.’ Bee’s tense words punctured the midnight silence of the forest. ‘See you soon. I’ll tell Ant and Ninka... We’ll start the search.’ When she arrived, crashing through the canopy of leaves on Gumby’s stout arm, she was equal parts distraught at Tambaka’s disappearance and enraged at Krishna’s thoughtless folly and his divided loyalties.  ‘How could you have been so stupid!? So selﬁsh! What kind of a father are you?! Don’t answer that!’ Ant and Ninka, her deva partner from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, appeared and the whole group began to search the paths and undergrowth all around the nest of Maggot and Krishna.  There were traces of Tambaka’s fragrance in the nest itself but nothing remained on the ground or on any of the paths or bushes nearby. No hints of it lingered on the air as it was now several hours since she had gone, or been taken, or whatever had happened. There was no sign.  ‘Ninka, you’re the best tracker, at least your deva-senses are a bit more acute than the rest of us. What do you make of this? There are a few human footprints in the dust of the path but they could have been made any time, by anyone walking through the back part of the monastery. What do your eyes see? Any clues?’ Ninka knelt in the space around the entry to the bower but, since Krishna and Maggot had tried to keep their place hidden, it was understandable that it was hard to be sure of anything. There were recent footprints but she wasn’t ready to say exactly what time they were made or who might have made them.  ‘I think we need to do more searching,’ was all she eventually said.    * * *

20 
 The rest of the night passed as the team of friends searched high and low, calling Tambaka’s name in the vain hope there might be a response. Also fearing that they might come upon her small, lifeless body somewhere. This, thankfully, they did not ﬁnd but otherwise the hunt was fruitless. The baby had vanished completely.  ‘She must have been taken by someone, or something, but by who or what?’ Maggot’s tears were not abating, even as dawn approached. She was slumped at the edge of their nest.  Krishna cleared his throat, ‘Er... I will need to be going.’ He winced, even as he said it as he knew how out of place it was, in the midst of this crisis.  ‘It’s my ﬁrst day as a monk and I’m expected to go on the alms-round with the others this morning.’ ‘What?’ Maggot snapped. ‘Are you serious? Really?!’ Krishna made a careful study of the ground around his toes and kept quiet in the awkward ache of the moment.  ‘Just go. Don’t say anything, just go.’  She was at breaking point, the loss of her precious child pulling on her heart-strings and now to have to deal with the fecklessness of her supposed belovèd. Krishna left without a word, as quickly as he could.   * * *   Dawn light came to the forest and with it some of the children of the village. The ﬁve friends scurried up the path that led through this back part of the Ghositarama forest. From the other direction the familiar ragged ﬁgure of the monk Dusaka appeared.  ‘Guess what we saw!’ ‘Last night, when we were collecting ﬁrewood.’  ‘It was so strange – the baby from the nest, the one you showed us.’ Dusaka calmed them with a gesture and said, ‘One at a time – what did you see?’ As the children clustered around him the kinnaris, Ninka and Gumbiya, all unseen by the youngsters, swiftly gathered round to listen too. Dinka, being the eldest was the self-appointed spokesperson:  ‘We were ’ere in the forest collecting wood and kindling for the cook-ﬁres; it was after sunset but the moon was bright so we could see clearly, at least clearly enough to gather sticks. Anyway we were round here near the hidden nest when we saw the baby being lifted up in the air, ﬂoating like we’d seen ’er when she was in ’er mother’s lap. At ﬁrst we thought it was the invisible mother carrying ’er but then, when a few of us asked to look at the baby again – zoom! It was carried oﬀ real fast. Like we weren’t supposed to see or follow. Whoever had the baby went ﬂying oﬀ down the path then up into the trees and away. It was so diﬀerent from the time we came before that we all guessed that some demon or a deva had stolen the baby

21 
away. That’s what it looked like so we came to tell the dad, the black-skinned novice we met before, but you can tell him for us, and the baby’s mum too. That’s what happened. We wanted to tell someone ’cause they’re bound to be worried.’  * * *   Dusaka was some kind of a monk – and he had been known by the kinnari and Krishna and their friends for a long time – but none of them were quite sure exactly what kind of monk he was. He had a loose amalgam of wraps and shawls, scarves, malas, waistbands and bandoliers that he called his robes. His hair was long and grey and worn in a bundled top-knot that was held together by a couple of artfully placed twigs. He had large bone rings in his earlobes, that hung nearly to his shoulders, a twisted staﬀ to support his gammy leg and a small scruﬀy dog, of uncertain ancestry, called Tingri, who was his constant companion. He was very respectful of and friendly with the Buddha and there seemed to be occasional reference make to them being of the same family, or lineage, or of some type of close relatedness. But mostly, who or what he was exactly was a mystery.  The anxious group of deva friends now clustered close to him, all pressed together in the leafy bower that was Maggot and Krishna’s den. He had repeated what the village children had told him a couple of times now as they had been joined by Rhamba and Salassa.  ‘Do you think she was stolen by the fair-folk, the rukkha-devas? They sometimes take human children who they deem aNractive or valuable for some reason,’ Salassa asked.  ‘I don’t think so,’ Dusaka replied, ‘if the fair-folk take a child they usually leave a changeling in its place. There was no fairy child left to substitute for Tambaka.’  ‘Do you think it might have been Asa and Saddha,’ asked Bee, ‘The devas who were caught up in that plot to drain kinnari blood and use it as a drug. They got hold of my sister Minti and nearly killed her. They might be aiming to spite Maggot, as she helped to catch them.’ ‘Unlikely, they were condemned to smell terrible for a long time and that stench would still be here.’ ‘Well,’ began Gumbiya, ‘it deﬁnitely weren’t any yakkhas. That baby would ’ardly make a marﬀul and... oof! What?’ Bee had jabbed him sharply in the ribs and ﬂashed a glare that would have shrivelled a young oak-tree.  ‘Oh, right. Sorry, bad taste to say any think like that. Pardon,’ he blushed with the realization of what that mental image would have been like for Maggot. Abashed he mumbled, ‘I’ll keep quiet.’  ‘Do you think it could have been the kumbhandas, the pot-bellied imps from the underworld?’ Ant suggested.

22 
‘That’s quite possible,’ Ninka looked thoughtful. ‘They are greedy and impulsive too. They might have snatched her away just on a whim and simply to spite the family.’ As the conversation rolled around, exploring various possibilities, Maggot looked forlorn and dejected, head drooping. Tingri sniﬀed the path and made some meaningful yipping comments that only Dusaka seemed to understand.  It was mid-morning by then and, as the sun began to bring some serious heat to the forest again, Krishna appeared in a ﬂurry, his monks robes fallen awry from his rushing. ‘Has she been found?’ He began but a moment’s sight of the miserable expressions of all gathered there told him the answer.  ‘I...’ he was about to oﬀer some more apologies and excuses but Maggot, emerging from her saddened funk, stopped him short.  ‘I have had it with you, this place and your dishonesty. If you’re going to be a monk then do it properly. I’m ﬁnished with you and this deception. I know what we’ve been doing has been wrong and now I’m going to ﬁnd my baby.  ‘Goodbye!’    ==*==

23 
CHAPTER FOUR: ‘TO FULFIL DESIRE IS HAPPINESS’  elp me!’ Krishna stood forlornly in the track, looking at Dusaka and crying out both to him and to the universe in general.  ‘Help you?’ Dusaka raised a bristling eyebrow, ‘By that you must mean you are asking me to help find your child.’ ‘What should I do?’ moaned Krishna, not taking in what his wise friend had just said. ‘You’ve got to help me.’ A silent exchange passed between Dusaka and Tingri – as if debating whether to stay with the kinnaris and oﬀer advice, or to respond to Krishna’s plea – Tingri yipped a couple of comments but before any conclusion was apparent Krishna had taken hold of Dusaka’s arm and was tugging him along the path. A ﬁnal shrug from Dusaka and a snort from Tingri indicated that their discussion was being brought to a close, so they followed along with Krishna’s now urgent strides towards the central part of the monastery.  They reached Krishna’s kuti, in agitated conversation all along the way, and seNled in a shady spot between the stilts holding up the hut, as they had done so often before.  ‘I don’t know what to do! She’s kicked me out so I can’t help to look for our baby – she’s my baby too – why can’t she see that there’s nothing wrong with our love for each other, our relationship?’ ‘Well,’ Dusaka began, ‘she sees that if you want to be a monk, according to the way of life that the Buddha and the other monks lead here, then you can’t be a family man and have a girlfriend, or a kinnari-friend, for that maNer, at the same time. The two are incompatible. If you weren’t a monk it wouldn’t be a problem at all. The fact that you lost the child through being heedless is only the sour cherry on top of that biNer dessert.’ ‘But she’s wrong!’ Krishna warmed to the subject, ‘and you’re wrong too, if you agree with her!’ He darted a look at Dusaka to check his reaction to this accusation. Tingri snorted, clearly not impressed. ‘My friend AriNha the monk, the vulture trainer, he’s very clear about how things like enjoying sensual pleasures that the Buddha sometimes calls “obstructions” are not really obstructive to those who indulge in them. He told me how he said exactly that, to the Master’s face, when he was questioned about his views not long ago.’ ‘And did he say how the Master gave him an earful on account of that? He did not agree with AriNha’s take on things at all. He used the similes of carrying a grass torch against the wind, being dropped into a pit of burning charcoal, waking from a pleasant dream, having borrowed jewels taken away, cuNing down a tree to get the fruit, and others, to show how aNachment to sense pleasure always leads to suﬀering.’

24 
‘Yes, but he had to seem to go against AriNha’s perspective because there were all kinds of other people around too – all those “monkish” types who are convinced that the rules are to be taken literally and followed to the last detail.’ Krishna was glad of the opportunity to expound on how he saw things and what was now the driving force of his spiritual and thus monastic endeavours.  ‘I had this insight, you remember, when I met Gavinna, the old court lady who was burnt in the ﬁre at the palace. She said the way to enlightenment, the great mangala, was to keep remembering “Sooner! More!” This amulet you gave me,’ he ﬁshed it out of the pouch on his belt to show Dusaka that he still kept it close, ‘it provides physical protection from death and injury but it doesn’t help the mind. To keep up the aNitude of “Sooner! More!” is a devotion to life. It’s a rebellion against death and, in the monastery, against the prissy, frigid, rigid and sterile formalism that the narrow-minded like to take refuge in. It’s a devotion to the Goddess of Complete Being, the Mother of Nature, like the Holy Deva Dharani who rose up as a witness and vouched for the BodhisaNva at the time of his enlightenment and transformation into the AnuEara-Samma-Sambuddha. The Master could not have conquered Mara under the Bodhi Tree without her help. Isn’t that so?’ Krishna was warming to his theme. Dusaka raised each of his eyebrows in turn, indicating that he was hearing what Krishna said but without giving any sign that he was in agreement with this particular philosophy. ‘Go on,’ he urged.  ‘So, by welcoming all sensual experience, like living with Maggot and having Tambaka as our child, and living here in the forest close to the great enlightened Master – all this is embodying the spirit of being open to all of life, it’s a devotion to all reality. Death is conquered by saying “Yes!” to all of life. “Sooner! More! Give me all of it. Now!”’ Tingri cleared her nostrils, meaningfully, (she could make her snorts express an eloquent variety of opinions) to which Dusaka nodded sagely, the set of his mouth and silent wagging of his chin indicating to her, ‘I think you’re right.’  ‘So,’ Dusaka started quietly, slowly, ‘What does your friend, young Samiddhi, the monk from Rajagaha, think about all this? Didn’t he have a deva friend too?’  ‘That’s right. That really preNy deva from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. She’s gorgeous... and yes, they’re close. He brought her to see the Buddha and I was one of the few who could discern her. She’s quite something.’ ‘I wasn’t mentioning her on account of her looks,’ Dusaka scowled, half a wry smile ﬁNing itself into his expression too, ‘it’s possible Samiddhi might have some useful thoughts about how he has handled having a devoted deva friend and how that ﬁts into his monastic life. What d’you think? Let’s go and see him. He’s in a kuti just down the way.’    * * *

25 
 ‘You’re disgusting, Krishna.’ ‘What d’you mean?’ ‘You’re calling your aNitude, this philosophy of yours, something reﬁned and spiritual but you were smirking about how you were ﬂirting with and touching up those women from the town who were visiting Udayin’s kuti the other day. You’re proud of how you positioned yourself in the narrow corridor so they would have to squeeze by you. This is somehow a spiritual thing to you!? I don’t think so.’  ‘They liked it, especially when I gave that one a tweak – she giggled.’ ‘Did it occur to you that women sometimes giggle like that when they are shocked and distressed, and don’t know what to say when they’ve been treated abusively? And what did her husband think?? He was right there too. I saw him, he was practically purple with rage.’ ‘I didn’t realize he had arrived.’ Samiddhi was geNing exasperated with his friend by this point. Krishna, with Dusaka watching from the corner, carried on explaining, doing his best to convince himself as well, as he made the eﬀort to spell out his views to his friends.  ‘It’s not just AriNha who sees things from this broader perspective, by the way, but Udayin too. He’s very knowledgeable and can quote all kinds of scriptures. Like how in the Long Discourses it says: “In as far as this self, being blessed and endowed with the pleasures of the ﬁve senses, indulges in them, then that is when the self realizes the highest Nirvana here and now.” ‘Then, in the stories of the Master’s past lives, the sage Narada says: “The following of desires is happiness; to fulﬁl desire is happiness.” And, in another life, the Buddha’s former wife, Princess Yashodhara (who has now become an enlightened nun, I might add) said:  ‘“Great is the joy of sweet desire: no greater joy than love: Who follow this aEain the bliss of paradise above!”   ‘Not only that but the BodhisaNva himself, in a former life as the King Arindama said, when being preached at by a Paccekabuddha called Sonaka, “I have no need of monkish blessings” since he saw the precious value of sense pleasures. You see – in all these places, in the scriptures themselves, this same life-aﬃrming philosophy is displayed. These sages, the great nun Yashodhara, the Master himself, all were guided by the same principles that I’m commiNed to following.’ He felt pleased indeed at his presentation and how he had managed to remember all those signiﬁcant quotations accurately:– Surely the debate was now closed, wasn’t it?  ‘Krishna,’ Samiddhi scowled, clearly unconvinced by all this, ‘you do realize that all the things you just recited are there in the scriptures as examples of Wrong View – I can’t believe that somehow you missed that! That’s the whole point; people think and say these things when they’ve got it wrong. Even the Master made many mistakes and broke the Precepts during the long long succession of lives before his Supreme Enlightenment. The scriptures even state how he broke all the Precepts –

26 
against killing, stealing, sexual misconduct and using intoxicants – except for the one against lying. A BodhisaNva cannot lie under any circumstances: “A BodhisaNva can not tell a deliberate lie; for, being aNended by deception, intentional false speech violates the reality of things.”’ ‘Yes! That’s what you’re supposed to think; these statements are presented as “Wrong View” but to me that’s a code – it’s a clue that such aNitudes are what the Master’s real message is.’  ‘You’re hopeless,’ Samiddhi shook his head, ‘What kind of monk are you and how do you think your way of life like this is going to be a blessing to others?’ ‘For one thing it encourages the inspiring and enjoyable life-aﬃrming spirit,’ Krishna retorted, ‘but how come you are being so ascetic and rule-bound all of a sudden? Don’t you have a deva girlfriend like me? And didn’t you introduce her to the Buddha yourself? How do you square that with what you’re saying now?’ Dusaka looked up from his long study of the bamboo ﬂooring of the kuti, glancing in Krishna’s direction to see how he would hear Samiddhi’s story. ‘Yes I do have a friend who is a female deva but, when she propositioned me, at the hot springs near Rajagaha, saying: “You have gone forth while young, bhikkhu, a lad with black hair, endowed with the blessings of youth; enjoy sensual pleasures, bhikkhu! In this way you will not abandon what is directly visible to pursue what takes time,’ I was not at all interested in following that path. Instead I brought her to meet the Master who, with great compassion, taught her directly, with insightful instruction on the deceptive nature of identity. When she had fully understood this subtle teaching she replied:        ‘“Having abandoned sense pleasures,       Mindful and clearly comprehending,       One should not pursue a course      That is painful and harmful.”  ‘It’s true I have a deva friend, but she is devoted to the Master’s teaching now and we have a beautiful and wholesome relationship like sister and brother, appropriate to my life as a monk. It is possible, and very liberating I might add, to establish spiritual companionship like this!’ ‘Such a bhikkhu,’ Dusaka chimed in, ‘who has freed the heart from aNachment to sensual pleasures, is called: “One whose banner has been lowered, one whose burden is lowered, who is unfeNered”.’ Krishna felt cornered. ‘These are good points but I’m not worried, even if I’m criticized for unmonklike behaviour. As I quoted, the BodhisaNva said, “I have no need of monkish blessings”’; he was doubling down on the supposed ‘hidden message’ of those refuted teachings.  ‘I’m sure the meaning is really “Don’t be worried if people criticize you or look upon you as unmonkly”.’

27 
‘But if the Master is really not encouraging monkly behaviour, why on earth do you think he bothers to live as a monk – and an impeccable one at that?’ ‘Well, he has to, doesn’t he? Because that’s the way all spiritual teachers have to appear.’ ‘I give up!’ Samiddhi, Dusaka and even Tingri shook their heads and rolled their eyes as one.   * * *   Against the backdrop of the mountains above Kulluta, Maggot sat apart from the group of friends. In deep sadness she sang an ancient lament of the kinnaris:   ‘What maEers it, O breeze, If now has come the spring When I have lost them both The garden and the nest?’  Just as two kinnari lovers were known to have wept for seven hundred years after having been separated, or the kinnari Chanda, whose cries over her wounded husband, who had been the BodhisaNva, reached the throne of Indra himself in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, Maggot wept from the depths of her heart for her lost child.  The group had formed rapidly, in the forest at Kosambi, and had initially approached one of the rukkha-devas, a guardian of one of the great trees of the Ghositarama forest and asked if she thought one of her kind might have been the being who took Tambaka. This woody Elder, who dwelt in an agèd and gnarly sal tree, gently made it clear that abducting babies of humans or other earth-devas was not something that the tree-spirits could or would do. ‘When we practice what is called “gracious exchanging” it is always done for a good reason and we invariably replace the babe with one of our own precious oﬀspring.  ‘AdmiNedly sometimes a lost or stolen child is kept in the arms of our boughs. If a babe has been carried oﬀ by an eagle, or one of the supanna, they might tend the child in a nest in the upper branches of one of our trees, and even raise it there for many years, as was the case with LiNle Wild Rose, but that is not something we as devas can control.’ Ninka who, as a higher deva, had the greatest intuitive powers of the group aﬃrmed that this sal-spirit was speaking the truth. The sal-deva then departed and the group – comprising Bee, Gumbiya, Maggot, Ant and Ninka, Rhamba and Salassa – came to the conclusion that the kumbhandas were the most likely culprits since it was well-known that these often clumsily-formed beings loved the softness and delicacy of human children, the beauty they were often blessed with, so they had been known to whisk them away to the Underworld, to be raised as their own there

28 
and never leaving a changeling in its place. This is what had brought them north to the mountains and where they now searched for an entry-point to the mysterious Underworld dimension.  Ninka was nervous, as she had been given permission to spend time away from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and, even though time passed very diﬀerently in the lower and the higher realms (a day and night in the Thirty-Three was one hundred years in the human world) this lower plane was considered coarse and vulgar, it was almost shameful for a deva of the Thirty-Three to abide here. It was regarded as so corrupting and foul that to get to spend any time here at all one needed to have permission and a good reason to be around for more than a few moments. So Ninka worried that she would have her permission revoked and that she would have to go back to the upper realms at any time.  She had discerned that a way into the Underworld was somewhere close by but she needed to calm herself and concentrate in order to get an accurate inner reading.  Maggot sat to one side, quietly singing her lament; Bee and Gumbiya, Rhamba and Salassa were gathering some food and Ant sat nearby, trying not to distract Ninka as she focused. Slowly the image of a huge oak of the Himalayas formed in her vision. The base of this forest giant divided close to the ground and a dark cleft opened there, like a cave-mouth.  ‘I know the place,’ she spoke aloud, almost surprised to hear her own voice. ‘It’s close. Very close.’ ‘What’s close?’ said Bee, landing just beside her, newly returned from their scavenging of the area for edibles of various kinds, to meet their diﬀerent appetites.  ‘The entrance to the Underworld. There is an open portal near the stream, at the base of an old oak only a short distance from here. I had a feeling there was one nearby.’ ‘So, once we’re in there,’ Bee continued, ‘How do we go about looking for Tambaka – traces of smell are all we might have to go on and it could be preNy stinky among the kumbhandas, from what I’ve heard anyway.’ ‘The Underworld is a strange domain,’ Gumbiya chimed in, ‘I’ve bin down there from time to time, on various missions – there was this one time...’ He was about to launch into a favourite war story when a sideways glance from Bee caused him to get back to the subject at hand.  ‘Right... well you can go in one entrance an’, even if you’ve not gone far, by yer own reckoning, you can come out in a completely diﬀerent place, far away like. It’s weird. And time – you can go in there and think it’s just a day then when you come out half your team has retired, or died. Or it can be a minute later on the same day – throws you right oﬀ, it does. Everything’s catawampous, distorted, y’ need ter watch yerself going down there – anyﬁnk can happen.’ ‘Sounds interesting,’ Bee grinned. She and Ant went over to Maggot and handed her some pollen that Bee had collected.

29 
‘Have some of this. We’re all going to eat, then what say we head straight into the Underworld? Ninka’s a good guide, and Gumby’s been in that realm before, so we won’t be completely in the dark – s’cuse the pun.’ Her aNempt at humour didn’t exactly lift Maggot’s spirits but she appreciated the gesture of comfort from her friend. The chance of ﬁnding her lost child was the main thing on her mind so she ate quickly and, without registering much of the taste, she was soon up and ready.  ‘Let’s go.’    * * *   Ninka went ﬁrst, into the dark cleft at the base of the ancient oak. Her eyes were more sensitive so she could eﬀectively see in the manky dimness of the downward winding tunnel. Maggot insisted on being right behind her, Ant, Bee, Salassa and Rhamba followed with Gumbiya bringing up the rear.  Silence reigned, but for their footfalls on the dank earth ﬂoor; down and down and down, the tunnel turned and narrowed, broadened and straightened, according to its own underground logic. Down and down they went.  As the feel of the ground beneath their feet changed from earth and moisture to solid stone a voice in the dark brought them up short: ‘What brings you into the realm of Queen Oghabala and LiNle King Lhak?’ The voice echoed as the tunnel had now opened into, apparently, a vast cavernous space. Slowly lights glowed forth from crevices in the rock walls, revealing the shape of the space and the beings gathered before them, blocking their way.  ‘I asked you a question;’ a huge rotund ﬁgure at the centre of the group of kumbhandas stepped forward. Gumbiya instinctively moved to the front of the group of searchers and, baNle-ready, expanded to his full warrior-yakkha size. He was still considerably smaller than the being who had addressed them.  ‘And, in case you were wondering, I am the LiNle King.’ ‘Why’s he called “LiNle”?’ wondered Ant, in a whisper that came out louder than she had expected, ‘He’s huge!’ ‘Wait ’til you see Her Majesty,’ one of the LiNle King’s aNendants countered, also a bit louder than he had intended.  ‘We seek a lost child – one who is half-kinnari and half-human.’ Maggot spoke up in a clear and penetrating voice, ‘A stolen child, perhaps.’ ‘A half-human child that got lost down here would have wandered far indeed. How old is this missing child?’ The King asked, somewhat guardedly, ‘Is it a bold youth or a spritely maiden?’ ‘No – a babe but a few Moons old.’ ‘One that age could not have ventured into the Underworld unaided,’ a scowl formed on the crags of the LiNle King’s face.  ‘◆SO◆YOU◆ACCUSE◆THE◆KUMBHANDA◆OF◆KIDNAPPING?◆’ A thunderous voice rumbled from the depths of the cavern. The LiNle King and his retinue stepped aside and revealed a throne against the back wall of the

30 
echoing stone chamber. A magniﬁcently ugly being ﬁlled the stone throne’s embrace; she was at least three times the size of the LiNle King.  ‘WE ARE INSULTED BY THIS ACCUSATION OF THEFT AND BY THE IDEA THAT SOME SCRAWNY CHILD OF A FLOWER-SPIRIT, WITH NO FLESH ON THEIR BONES, WOULD BE OF INTEREST TO THE KUMBHANDA, TO STEAL AND TO CALL THEIR OWN. WE ARE DISPLEASED. YOU SHALL BE HELD IN OUR CAVERNS UNTIL SUCH TIME AS OUR PLEASURE CHANGES.’  ‘What does that mean?’ asked Bee.  ‘It means you will entertain Her Chthonic Majesty’s pleasure in her dungeons.’ ‘“Entertain” – do we sing and dance for Her?’ Ant wondered. ‘He means “detain” – we are to be locked up for the foreseeable future,’ explained Rhamba, ‘no dancing or singing.’ Gumbiya stepped forward, protesting, ‘’Ang on a minute, I’m a warrior-yakkha of King Kuvera’s old guard...’ ‘◆ AND ◆ I ◆ AM ◆ THE ◆ QUEEN ◆ OF ◆ THE ◆ UNDERWORLD ◆’ Her voice rang with currents of boiling magma, the thunder of tectonic plates grinding beneath the oceans.  ‘What right have you got to imprison us?’ Ninka bravely spoke up. ‘And how long do you intend to keep us? Some of us are devas of higher realms, like you.’ ‘◆ IN ◆ THIS ◆ DOMAIN ◆ WORM ◆ MY ◆ WORD ◆ IS ◆ LAW ◆ MY ◆ WILL ◆ IS ◆ YOUR ◆ REALITY ◆ YOUR ◆ SHALLOW ◆ NOTIONS ◆ OF ◆ SPACE ◆ AND ◆ TIME ◆ DO ◆ NOT ◆ HOLD ◆ SWAY ◆ HERE ◆ GET ◆ THEM ◆ OUT ◆ OF ◆ MY ◆ SIGHT◆’  ==*==
