# CHAPTER 8: KAPILAVATTHU –  THE CITADEL OF THE SAKYANS    ing Pasenadi was feeling torn. He deeply loved his queen, Mallika, but in all their years of marriage she had only borne him one daughter, the Princess Vajiri. She, in turn, he loved very much but she was not a male, and according to the laws and customs of the warrior-noble kshatriyans, only a son born to the anointed king and his queen could inherit the throne of Kosala. If he died without a legitimate son to inherit, it would inevitably fall to bloody disputes between nephews, cousins and boys that had been born from liaisons outside the royal marriage.  One such was Prince Jeta, who was a fine young fellow, and a wealthy and well-regarded personage in Savatthi. He had sold the park he owned outside of town to Anathapindika so that he in turn could gift it to the Sangha. He had not only made a fortune from that but he had had his name enshrined in the minds of the manyfold disciples of the Master since, through no wish of his own, the monastery had become known to one and all as the Jetavana – Jeta’s Grove. If he had been the son of Queen Mallika, all would be simple, however his mother was one of King Pasenadi’s concubines, the kshatriyan Lady Varshika, a minor princess, descended from a fourth son of his great-grandfather. All of this meant he would need to find another wife and to put her on an equal footing with Queen Mallika, and then hope that this new bride would provide him with the wished-for princely son. It was a worry.  Part of what he dreaded was the need to inform Queen Mallika for he wished always to respect her and, publicly as well as he did privately, demonstrate that he held her in the highest regard. She had come from a humble background and had only been the daughter of the chief garland-maker of Savatthi before King Pasenadi chanced to meet her and had fallen immediately in love, both marrying her and anointing her as Queen that very same day. There had been grumblings that she was a commoner but the King had always come to her defence, asserting his power as an absolute monarch to raise her up to His Royal Level.  When he finally brought the issue to her attention he was taken aback by her responding with the words, ‘I was wondering when you would realize that this was going to be a necessity. I’ve been waiting for you to bring it up for quite a while.’ ‘You really are a lot wiser than me,’ the King smiled warmly, ‘I have been chewing on this for the last few years but I didn’t want to risk hurting your feelings.

57 
CHAPTER 8: KAPILAVATTHU –  THE CITADEL OF THE SAKYANS    ing Pasenadi was feeling torn. He deeply loved his queen, Mallika, but in all their years of marriage she had only borne him one daughter, the Princess Vajiri. She, in turn, he loved very much but she was not a male, and according to the laws and customs of the warrior-noble kshatriyans, only a son born to the anointed king and his queen could inherit the throne of Kosala. If he died without a legitimate son to inherit, it would inevitably fall to bloody disputes between nephews, cousins and boys that had been born from liaisons outside the royal marriage.  One such was Prince Jeta, who was a fine young fellow, and a wealthy and well-regarded personage in Savatthi. He had sold the park he owned outside of town to Anathapindika so that he in turn could gift it to the Sangha. He had not only made a fortune from that but he had had his name enshrined in the minds of the manyfold disciples of the Master since, through no wish of his own, the monastery had become known to one and all as the Jetavana – Jeta’s Grove. If he had been the son of Queen Mallika, all would be simple, however his mother was one of King Pasenadi’s concubines, the kshatriyan Lady Varshika, a minor princess, descended from a fourth son of his great-grandfather. All of this meant he would need to find another wife and to put her on an equal footing with Queen Mallika, and then hope that this new bride would provide him with the wished-for princely son. It was a worry.  Part of what he dreaded was the need to inform Queen Mallika for he wished always to respect her and, publicly as well as he did privately, demonstrate that he held her in the highest regard. She had come from a humble background and had only been the daughter of the chief garland-maker of Savatthi before King Pasenadi chanced to meet her and had fallen immediately in love, both marrying her and anointing her as Queen that very same day. There had been grumblings that she was a commoner but the King had always come to her defence, asserting his power as an absolute monarch to raise her up to His Royal Level.  When he finally brought the issue to her attention he was taken aback by her responding with the words, ‘I was wondering when you would realize that this was going to be a necessity. I’ve been waiting for you to bring it up for quite a while.’ ‘You really are a lot wiser than me,’ the King smiled warmly, ‘I have been chewing on this for the last few years but I didn’t want to risk hurting your feelings.

58 
We have had disputes from time to time but your happiness and well-being are of paramount importance to me. I’m so glad that you seem to find this idea agreeable.’ ‘Well, it’s not ideal but it’s the way things are, so why create grief around it? Have you thought about who the lucky girl might be?’ She raised an eyebrow.  The King reached for some sherbet water and leaned back on his cushions. The weather was getting hot and even the open-sided chamber they were sitting in, high in the palace as it was, did not seem to provide any cooling breezes. He noticed that Her Serene Highness had a distinct smirk etching her visage.  ‘You look like you’ve been not only tolerant of this idea but that you’re ahead of me in having given it some thought.’ He lowered his eyelids a fraction, as if he would be better able to scrutinize her expression that way.  ‘You see through me as though through clearest water, oh Royal Husband,’ Mallika replied. ‘You know how you have grumbled recently – excuse me – have expressed Royal Displeasure at the way that sometimes, when you make an invitation to the Sangha to receive a meal offering here at the palace, you are told that no monks are available to come?’ ‘Yes…’ he was intrigued to see where this might be going, ‘… go on.’  ‘This circumstance has been noticed by quite a few of us and, once or twice, when the palace victualler has bought in large supplies in the expectation of a large group of monks coming to receive a meal here, the excess food has had to be given away to the widows and the needy of the city. The poor folk were, naturally, very happy about this bounty, however it made me think, ‘Why is this happening? The Sangha knows we have deep respect for the Master; the food we offer is certainly nourishing and abundant; we arrange it so all the palace staff are modestly clad when the monks or nuns visit so, what’s the cause?’ She let the mystery hover for a moment, enjoying her husband’s Royal Perplexity. ‘Go on.’ ‘It seems that we have neglected to consider what is the best kind of food.’ She smirked a little again, knowing that the King was inordinately attached to matters of the palate and had once even been put on a diet by the Master. He was mightily proud of the food his kitchens produced.  ‘What do you mean!?’ His patience now beginning to wear thin.  Sensing the Royal Mood, Mallika cut to the chase.  ‘When I went to the Jetavana, a while ago, when you were off at the borders, I asked the Master about this. He responded by asking me, “Great Queen, what do you think is the best kind of food?” ‘I was a bit nonplussed by this question and simply raised my hands in añjali, trusting that an appropriate answer might arise, because it was clear it was not a question about flavours, textures, ingredients or cooking methods. Before any words came to me, the Master answered his own enquiry.  ‘“The food of friendship is the best, Great Queen,” he said, “even sour rice gruel given by a friend becomes sweet.”

59 
‘“In that case,” I asked, “with whom are the members of the Sangha finding such friendship?” ‘“With their kin, and other Sakyan families here in Savatthi. Many of the community at this monastery are from the north, from the Sakyan kingdom that sits below the Himalayan mountains.” ‘This made perfect sense to me, as the words of the Master always do, so the thought then occurred, “How can this Royal House become kin with the Sakyans and thus feel more of a home to them?” It came to me surprisingly quickly:– Perhaps if the King married a Sakyan princess we would then become related to those Sangha members, and if she produced a son then the succession would be secure and great bloodshed and strife averted. What do you think, Your Majesty?’ ‘Brilliant, is what I think!’ And thus plans began to form.  * * *  ‘It’s much cooler here!’ King Pasenadi declared, ‘Savatthi in the hot season is Exhausting, enervating, I am glad indeed that I made the journey of this embassy myself.’ ‘We are deeply honoured, Your Majesty,’ Prince Mahanama replied. He was the head of the Sakyan people and had been scrambling to prepare adequately for this unexpected visit. Riders had come ahead of the Royal Progress, so they had had a couple of weeks’ warning, but it was a challenging task to put it all together and on so many fronts.  It was not just a matter of arranging food and lodgings, fit for a kshatriyan king and his entourage, but there was also a substantial faction of the proud Sakyan nobility, and even among the servants and townsfolk who, having got wind of the impending visit, felt, ‘Why are we making all this fuss and to-do about some Southern royals on a trip – they didn’t even ask permission from us!’ This reticence was by no means universal but it was voiced, unabashedly and liberally. Mahanama was thus tasked with a diplomatic balancing act along with everything else.  ‘Please, Your Majesty let me conduct you to your chambers. I trust they will be adequate to your needs and, I beg you, please do not hesitate to let me know if anything can be improved.’ It might be cooler in Kapilavatthu but Prince Mahanama was now sweating. As they walked through the palace grounds, and seeing he was nervous, King Pasenadi endeavoured to put him at his ease, making small talk and asking about the welfare of Kapilavatthu and the Sakyan kingdom. By the time they reached the chambers that had been prepared for the royal visitor, Prince Mahanama was more relaxed and felt ready to ask the next big question, ‘Er... how long would Your Majesty like to reside here? Of course we would be honoured to provide for and host you and your party for as long as you would wish.’ ‘That, honoured Prince, depends a bit on a question I have for you. This is in fact the reason we have come this distance from Savatthi; I have something to ask of

60 
you. Agreed it’s only eight or nine leagues, barely half a moon’s journey, but in this season the elephants and horses get thirsty, as do the people. One has to find shade where one can and the leaves have fallen from many of the trees so it’s been a short road but hard.’ ‘What is your question, Sire, that you have taken such pains to come and ask?’ Even as he said this, Mahanama had an inkling of what was coming next, knowing as he did that Pasenadi had fathered no legitimate heir, as yet. It was a question he was dreading as he knew it would be a contentious issue among the Sakyan nobility and in the marketplace as well.  ‘I would like you to give me one of your daughters in marriage for I wish to bind our houses together. I am, furthermore, in need of a son to inherit the Kingdom of Kosala. If a Sakyan princess became my bride I would raise her up to be Queen, on an equal basis with Queen Mallika, my Royal Wife of many years. In addition, since my kingdom is large and prosperous and Sakya is smaller and less wealthy and since I am making the request of you, and even though it would mean your grandson would become the head-anointed Warrior-noble King of Kosala, I am offering to forgo any dowry. The girl on her own would be enough. What do you say, good prince?’ The Prince was sweating again and somewhat lost for the right words. He couldn’t say, ‘I’m not sure if everyone will agree’ or ‘Let me consider it’ – which were the first things that came to mind. He was thinking quickly and, to his relief, in a flash it all clarified:– I need time. I can’t say no as he’s the King and we are a vassal state. There has to be a way to work it… Oh!…! I think I’ve got it; we’ll need at least one Moon.  ‘Your Majesty, we are deeply honoured that you would call upon the Sakyan people in this way. There will be many things to discuss and prepare. I have a big family, with many daughters, and it is not immediately clear which one would be most suitable to offer to Your Majesty as a bride. May I have the period of one Moon to consult with my fellow princes, my wives and my daughters, and then we will have a suitable girl to present?’ ‘That sounds very agreeable, please take all the time you need and I will enjoy the cool climes of this kingdom and the breezes off the Himalaya.’  * * *  Prince Mahanama had been correct in his assumption that the idea of a Sakyan princess marrying the King of Kosala would not go down well. There was uproar in the court.  ‘We are Adicca-bandhu, Kinsmen of the Sun God, descended from King Mahasammata of the First Age and, after him from King Okkaka – his descendants became the Sakyans and the Koliyans, we never ever take spouses outside these sacred clans!’

61 
‘We’re oak-hearted Sakyans!’ Another of the nobles interjected, ‘How dare this soft Southerner presume to ask for one of our princesses?!’ ‘Will you please listen!’ Mahanama barked, now seriously on edge. He did not have absolute rulership, like King Pasenadi, for Sakya was governed by a form of collaborative leadership. He had to come to agreements with his fellow kshatriyan princes before important decisions were made. ‘Will you please be quiet and hear me out.  ‘Point one: Sakya is a vassal state of Kosala so we cannot refuse the request. ‘Point two: We cannot break the customs of our clan and let a true princess marry outside the Sakyans and the Koliyans.  ‘Point three: The words of His Majesty’s request,’ there were a few haughty snorts at the use of the honorific and some cries of, ‘“Majesty”! Pah!’  Mahanama continued undaunted, ‘... of His Majesty’s request were: “Please give me one of your daughters.” Now I have a lot of daughters and it came to me that, if we schooled one of my, ahem, natural-born daughters in the manners of the court, to a convincing degree, she could be given to Pasenadi, King of Kosala, and I would not have broken my word, and no true princess would be breaking our sacred codes.  ‘Your views on this plan, honoured sirs?’ He cast his gaze around the thirty or forty nobles gathered in the Santhagara Hall for this discussion.  ‘I don’t like it!’ Prince Sinipura jumped in, ‘Even if she was a daughter of one of the non-royals, like your favourite Lady Piya, I feel that would be an almost equal disgrace. I don’t agree.’ There were murmurs of assent to this view all around.  ‘Yes, good point,’ Mahanama continued, ‘that’s exactly why I’m thinking of the daughter of a slave.’ There were more murmurs but quieter, one loudly questioned, bemusedly, ‘Does he keep track of his by-blows?’  ‘Who are you thinking of?’ Prince Sinipura asked.  ‘Some of you may know the slave Nagamunda, who works in the kitchens. She’s a handsome woman, to my eye, and I’m not ashamed to say we have... er... enjoyed congress from time to time over many years. She’s got a daughter – well several actually, and many sons – who I think could play the part well.’ ‘Is she a kitchen girl too?’ ‘As a matter of fact, yes, she is.’ ‘And you think she can shed the smells of the kitchen and pass for a princess in, how long have we got? One Moon? It’ll never work.’ Mahanama let half a smile lighten his face. ‘This is where it gets interesting. Not long ago I was passing some... er... convivial time with her mother, once again, and the daughter, who is now sixteen Rains, was around the chambers too. We fell to playing the lying game – you know, where each person in turn tells a story and you have to guess whether the person is lying or not. I invited a couple of her other daughters to put down their work and join us; I was in my cups at the time and was feeling magnanimous.

62 
‘This one daughter, Vasabha, who is quite good looking too, was astonishing. She could lie with complete conviction and no matter how hard the rest of us tried she always had convincing evidence for what she was saying, she backed up everything she uttered with completely natural ease. She won every time and she could guess the double and triple bluffs of others. I think she’s the solution to our problem.’ Silence hung in the hall for several heartbeats, a rare occurrence for a meeting of Sakyan princes. It was a momentous decision to make.  ‘I like it,’ Prince Sinipura said, nodding his head. ‘Similarly,’ followed Prince Nipuna. Murmurs of agreement were emerging all round. Mahanama let it ripen in people’s minds then spoke up, ‘Any disagree?’ He looked around the hall – no movement or sound showed any dissent at all. ‘Then I take your silence as approval.’  ‘One moment,’ Prince Jali quietly cleared his throat, ‘are you sure that this girl Vasabha is your daughter by Nagamunda? I mean, these matters can be hard to determine at the best of times, and in the most reputable families too.’ ‘Another good point – I have considered this myself and, to be quite frank, I was with her mother a lot in those days and, for our purposes here, I feel it’s likely enough. I have pondered this and I feel comfortable looking King Pasenadi in the eye and saying, “May I introduce my daughter.”’   * * *  When Nagamunda and Vasabha were summoned and told of this plan they each felt a small storm of emotions. The mother, recognizing that this would make for a totally different and wonderful life for her girl, was simultaneously afraid if, somehow, the façade slipped and Vasabha was revealed as a fraud, what would happen then? It could only be disastrous. Her girl could be tortured, maimed for life or executed on the spot. Her heart quailed at the prospect but, being slaves, they had no more say in the matter than the pots they cooked the rice and barley in had about their role in the world.  Vasabha, meanwhile, could only think, ‘Yes! Yes! Now I can get out of the kitchens and the smoke and steam I live with every day. The fires to tend and the pots to clean… Yes!’ At the same time, another more rational part of her mind was thinking, ‘I’ve got a month to learn how to be a princess – they must be jokin’. I’ve never had a hair-do like they have, no idea how to make one. I don’t even know the names for half their clothes, let alone how to put them on; I can tell a good story, and I can imitate voices – I done that, makin’ fun of the high-ups and the snooty girls in town – but the eatin’ customs, the dainty way of walkin’ – how am I...?’ It was baffling. Still, the benefits looked mind-boggling, if she could pull it off.  Vasabha knew as well as her mother that she had no real choice in the matter, being one who was owned as a slave. She also had to notice that the attention she was now getting, from the princes and princesses gathered around her, was thrilling.

63 
When she won at things like the lying game, or on those rare occasions when the palace cook grunted approvingly at her work in the kitchen, that gave her a warm glow but this, this prospect of becoming queen of a huge country like Kosala and the mother of the next in line to the throne – this was a thrill like no other she had known in her whole life.   * * *  That Moon was a cascade of new experiences, many of them painful or at least uncomfortable for Vasabha. Her mother joined in, where she could, to lend a hand with fetching and carrying and offering whatever reassuring noises she could make. The vast bulk of the many aspects of the transformation were looked after by a huddle of the Sakyan court ladies and a cheerful, one-handed maid called Kesini. It was exhausting, exciting and exasperating, but the whirlwind nature of the process meant she had no time to think and would collapse onto her pallet at the end of each day and fall straight into a dreamless sleep; that was until Lady Jantu and Lady Piya decided she needed to learn to sleep on a ‘proper’ bed and to learn the names and protocols, customs of the bedchamber, and she got moved out of her lean-to that she had shared with her mother and siblings for years.  On her first night in the bedchamber it was just before dawn that she fell asleep – she had never slept alone before, always having had a puddle of sisters and small brothers around her – and it was only after Kesini looked in on her late in the second watch of the night, and came to lie on the bed beside her, that she finally could drop off.  The days were filled with, amongst other things, the experience of bathing – and in hot water! A week of such scrubbings and rinsings was scarcely sufficient to rid her skin of the kitchen reek and the dust of charcoal and cinders that seemed embedded everywhere. It was hard work but Lady Jantu eventually, begrudgingly but almost proudly remarked, ‘You know my dear, you actually smell quite sweet once you’ve been uncaked from all the soot. Who gave you that perfume?’  But there was still more to do.   ‘Those hands!’ Lady Jalini declared, ‘Callouses and cuts, burn-marks, we’re going to need a magician to conjure all this away.’ Nevertheless they had the skills and set to work.  Then there was her hair, needing delousing along with copious washes to shed the grease and grime.  And her clothes; all the fittings and the names of things.  And jewellery; she felt like a bangle-tree with all the trinkets and rings, armlets, anklets, browbands, coronets, earrings, pendants, necklaces, navel gems, kamarbands around the waist:– Was there any part of her body they could not contrive to hang filigreed metal from?  Then the names of jewels, precious and semi-precious, and the designations and nicknames of how they were cut.  And the walk, to be dainty and demure.

64 
And the voice; ‘How kind of you to let me come to your court, Your Majesty’ – though to be fair the voice was one of the easiest of her challenges.  And the family history of the Gotama clan, since Mahanama, apparently her father, was a Gotama and the cousin of the Buddha, the most famous of the Sakyans in these times.  And then the knowledge of the basics of the Dharma, since King Pasenadi was a devotee of the Buddha too, she would have to be ready to join in with discussions. She was brilliant at faking stories but she needed to get some essential terminology down too, but not too much, to keep it convincing.  And her nails, which she’d never thought of as having any use but to prise open a nut, or scratch or pick apart the various ingredients of various foods, and to nip head lice. And her toenails too – who would have that that anyone in their right mind would consider their toenails as part of their beauty scheme?  And lastly eating – how to share a plate properly with the nobs and with the King.  There was probably more but, as the crowd of ladies kept saying, ‘Just the essentials, just the essentials’ – this was the bulk of it.  By the time the Moon was complete she hardly recognized herself and, one time, a younger sister of hers came to the chamber and, not recognizing Vasabha in her finery, sparkling with silver and jewels, she asked, ‘’Scuse me y’ Ladyship, d’y’ know where Miss Vasabha is?’ ‘Her Ladyship’ stifled her giggles for a moment and then, striking a pose, said in her poshest accent, ‘Why, foolish child, she is here,’ and grinned, watching her sister’s dawning recognition wash over her grubby face:– This was fun!    * * *  The Presentation was to take place over a formal meal with King Pasenadi. Rumours had circulated that the King had dropped a comment, without malice, that had been overheard by a Sakyan servant who was knowledgeable about the ruse being pulled. Apparently the King had remarked, to one of his own courtiers, ‘These Sakyans are desperately proud, especially in matters of birth. Suppose they should send a girl who was not one of them, not a royally born princess yet say that she was so?’ ‘Sire,’ his companion replied, ‘one sure way to tell is by eating together. If the girl eats from the same dish as her father and he eats with her in the same way, I feel it will be safe to say she is exactly what they say she is. A Sakyan prince would never eat from the same dish as anyone lower in rank.’  The mindful servant hurried to pass this on to his masters. They, in turn, doubled their efforts to keep the King distracted by hunts in the hills, large banquets in the region of the palace away from where the training and decorating of Vasabha was taking place, and elaborate picnics, with music and dancing, as well as more lavish food, in locations both beautiful and conveniently remote.

65 
The day arrived and Vasabha, fully bedecked in her finery, was brought into the dining chambers. Prince Mahanama was there with his senior wives, Princess Bhatta and Princess Maddarupi; King Pasenadi and two of his attending lords were already settled at the far end of the low table. Cushions of bright colours were spread liberally around to sit on and the cool breezes from the Himavant forest and the high mountains rippled the fine draperies. Clusters of servants hovered in attendance, ready to bring in the food once the royal party was all gathered.  Vasabha moved demurely and gently into the space and Mahanama introduced her, ‘Your Majesty, this is my daughter Vasabha, she has been selected from all those vying for the opportunity to be your queen. I trust she pleases you,’ he was sweating profusely and trying hard not to show it.  ‘Enchanted,’ said the King, almost in a whisper, and it was plain to all present that he was enchanted indeed.  Vasabha was just about to ask where she should sit but Mahanama drew her to his side and then let her place herself between him and the King. He then glanced over to the servants and, with a discreet gesture, indicated that the food should be brought in.    * * *   Vasabha had been fully briefed on the deception that was planned. Once the food was in front of them all and had been put onto dishes, they began. Prince Mahanama and Vasabha had a single dish between them, along with the others spread around the table. Mahanama reached across and took some food from that plate then put it in his mouth. In a fluid motion Vasabha followed, almost simultaneously but just after, and also picked some food from the same platter. She popped it in her mouth and, just as Mahanama was reaching for another mouthful, a minister appeared in a harried state and begged leave to speak. The Prince made a point of resting his hand on the dish as Vasabha continued to eat from it.  ‘Your Highness, a messenger has arrived from the ruler of Koliya; the matter requires your immediate attention.’  ‘Really, can’t it wait until we’ve finished eating?’ He endeavoured to sound as convincing as possible and put some genuine fret into it.  ‘Immediate Sire, I regret. The messenger is waiting, and he has a fresh horse saddled and ready to carry your reply.’ ‘Very well,’ he clambered to his feet.  ‘Your Majesty, please excuse me. Needs must.’ ‘Quite understand,’ the King replied with a mouthful of the delicious offerings that had been prepared.  ‘I’ll be back as soon as possible.’ Which of course he wasn’t. He returned in a feigned rush as the dishes were being cleared. ‘I’m so sorry. So rude of me, on such a special occasion; Your Majesty must think of me as the poorest of hosts.’

66 
‘Not at all, not at all. You don’t need tell me how affairs of state can interrupt the best of plans and the most sacred of duties. Will you have some more to eat? You barely started.’ ‘No need, Your Majesty, really. I can have something later. What I’m most concerned about is my daughter Vasabha. Is she acceptable?’ ‘Acceptable!?’ King Pasenadi had been thoroughly charmed and, having seen the Prince and his daughter literally eating from the same dish, any doubts that had been lingering were dispelled. ‘Not just acceptable, honoured King. We have already been discussing possible names my agèd granddam might offer for our son.’  ==*=
