# Chapter 25: Lone Wanderings  1) p243:– thereby breaking one of the Precepts: The seventh of the Eight Precepts is, ‘I undertake the Precept to refrain from entertainment, beautification and adornment’. Thus any use of perfume, jewellery, make-up and suchlike are not allowed for monastic residents and those adhering to the Eight Precepts.   2) ibid:– it was Magandiya: See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 21, pp268-9.   3) ibid:– it also reminds you that life is very uncertain and undependable: The active contemplation of the fabricated and fragile nature of the body was regularly recommended by the Buddha. This is to support non-identification with the body and the appreciation of the fundamental Law of Uncertainty in nature. See, for example A 5.57, the 'Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection.   4) p244:– flow of floral delight: For a description this action, see Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 23, pp300-1.   5) ibid:– the profound lessons she had learned: See Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 23, pp294-307.  6) ibid:– Mindfulness is the path to the Deathless: This verse is Dhp 21. The lengthy ‘Story Cycle of King Udena’ is the commentary to this verse. It is the longest entry in the Dhammapada Commentary.   7) ibid:– forest chickens: These are ubiquitous in India, South-east Asia and China. The most common ones are Grey Jungle fowl – (Gallus sonneratii) and Red Junglefowl (Gallus gallus).   8) ibid:– kukals: This common bird is also known as ‘crow pheasant’ (Centropus sinensis). It has a very deep, sonorous, distinctive call.   9) p246:– defer to the Mahasattva: A Mahāsattva is a great Bodhisattva who has been on the path for a long time. Examples would be the Bodhisattvas Maitreya, Avalokiteshvara, Mañjushrī, Samantabhadra and Ksitigarbha.    10) ibid:– One who is invited to share reflections: These criteria are mentioned at A 8.16 and CV 7.4.

337 
 Chapter 25: Lone Wanderings  1) p243:– thereby breaking one of the Precepts: The seventh of the Eight Precepts is, ‘I undertake the Precept to refrain from entertainment, beautification and adornment’. Thus any use of perfume, jewellery, make-up and suchlike are not allowed for monastic residents and those adhering to the Eight Precepts.   2) ibid:– it was Magandiya: See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 21, pp268-9.   3) ibid:– it also reminds you that life is very uncertain and undependable: The active contemplation of the fabricated and fragile nature of the body was regularly recommended by the Buddha. This is to support non-identification with the body and the appreciation of the fundamental Law of Uncertainty in nature. See, for example A 5.57, the 'Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection.   4) p244:– flow of floral delight: For a description this action, see Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 23, pp300-1.   5) ibid:– the profound lessons she had learned: See Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 23, pp294-307.  6) ibid:– Mindfulness is the path to the Deathless: This verse is Dhp 21. The lengthy ‘Story Cycle of King Udena’ is the commentary to this verse. It is the longest entry in the Dhammapada Commentary.   7) ibid:– forest chickens: These are ubiquitous in India, South-east Asia and China. The most common ones are Grey Jungle fowl – (Gallus sonneratii) and Red Junglefowl (Gallus gallus).   8) ibid:– kukals: This common bird is also known as ‘crow pheasant’ (Centropus sinensis). It has a very deep, sonorous, distinctive call.   9) p246:– defer to the Mahasattva: A Mahāsattva is a great Bodhisattva who has been on the path for a long time. Examples would be the Bodhisattvas Maitreya, Avalokiteshvara, Mañjushrī, Samantabhadra and Ksitigarbha.    10) ibid:– One who is invited to share reflections: These criteria are mentioned at A 8.16 and CV 7.4.

338 
 11) ibid:– If some samana or brahmin asks you: This dialogue is derived from S 22.85 and 22.86, and the Buddha’s interactions with the bhikkhus Yamaka and Anuradha, respectively.   12) ibid:– the amulet you gave me: See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 15, pp177-9.  13) p247:– That prophecy: See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 26, p355.  14) ibid:– the Eternal Youth, Sanat Kumara: This is a brahma god who is known by this name on account of his ever-young appearance. He is one of the few brahma deities who follows the teachings of the Buddhas. He is mentioned at D 18.17-29, M 53.25, and S 6.11.   15) ibid:– The sickness continued for many Moons: The narrative beginning here, about Devadatta’s last days, is derived from the Commentary to Dhp 17. It is also found at CV 7.4.  16) ibid:– Siddhartha had always been the favourite: This was the Buddha’s name, customarily only used up to the time of his renunciation of palace life.   17) p249:– made it intrinsically impossible for them to meet: There were a number of occasions in the Buddha’s life, or qualities of the natural order that were named, where the Buddha stated in this categorical way: ‘It is impossible, it cannot be.’ This situation with Devadatta is one example. There are many listed at A 1.268-95, as well as other examples in the Pali Canon.   18) p250:– Surama, who looked disconsolate: Surama is not a Canonical figure but an invention of the author. Here his mood echoes the ‘Stanzas of Disappointment’ uttered by Māra, after he has failed to fool the Buddha (as at S 4.24 & SN 446-49):   ‘Step by step for seven years  I have followed the Blessèd One.   The Fully Enlightened One, possessed  Of mindfulness, gave me no chance.   A crow there was who walked around  A stone that seemed a lump of fat;  “Shall I find something in this?   And is there something tasty here?”  He, finding nothing tasty there,   Made off: and we from Gotama

339 
 Depart in disappointment, too,   Just like the crow that tried the stone.’ Full of sorrow he let his vina slip from under his arm; and then the unhappy demon vanished. Now when Māra, the Evil One, had spoken these Stanzas of Disappointment in the Blessèd One’s presence, he left that place and sat down cross-legged on the ground not far from the Blessèd One, silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum and with nothing to say, scraping the ground with a stick.       (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli trans.)  The figure of Surama represents one of the two main ways that Māra appears to operate, this is by him manifesting a living being’s form as a disguise, for example as a nāga (at S 4.6), as a farmer, (S 4.19) or as a huge elephant (S 4.2).  The other main way that Māra influences things is by entering the minds of already existent beings, such as Muñca in this story or, in the Pali Canon, (at S 4.18), where he persuades the villagers not to give alms; or when he enters the mind of a certain youth who then hurls a stone at the attendant of the Buddha Kakusandha, Ven. Vidhura, injuring his head (M 50.21); or when he influenced the mind of one of the Assembly of the brahma god Baka, and then the whole Assembly (at M 49.5).   19) p251:– three-striped palm squirrels: These are common in India (Funambulus palmarum). In Indian myth the stripes are taken to have been caused by the hero Rāma who stroked its back with three fingers after a squirrel helped him to build the bridge to Lanka.   20) ibid:– long ago, Goddess Nü-wa: This opening part of Dusaka’s chanted tale is derived from The Story of the Stone by Cao Xuequin, Ch. 1, David Hawkes trans. (published by Penguin Classics).  21) p253:– Like that of Yeshe Tsogyal: See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 20, pp254-5.  22) ibid:– Even the Bodhisattva Gotama: The following narrative is derived from Jāt 66.   23) p256:– His duty as a grateful student: In the texts of monastic discipline, the Vinaya, it describes the duties a teacher has towards their students and, in turn, the duties the student has with respect to their teacher. Amongst these are: ‘If the preceptor is bordering on an offence then, speaking himself, the student should warn him.’ (MV 1.25.10); ‘If wrong views have arisen in the preceptor, the student should dissuade him from them.’ ‘If the preceptor has committed a serious offence, and is resistant to correction by the Sangha, then the student should consider, “How then can the preceptor be persuaded to conduct

340 
himself properly, subdue his bad behaviour, mend his ways so that he can be rehabilitated?”’ (MV 1.25.20-22).  24) p258:– the famed Cauldrons of Youth: This narrative is derived from the Russian fairytale ‘Ivan – Young of Years, Old of Wisdom’, in Vasilisa the Beautiful:– Russian Fairy Tales, Dorian Rottenberg trans., Progress Publishers, (1966), Moscow.   25) p259:– AN APSARA OF THE WATERS: Rhamba, one of the characters of this story, is an apsara, as is her brother Salassa. The most ancient descriptions of apsara portray them as water nymph-like beings (e.g. in the Rigveda). They were originally female spirits of the clouds and waters. The speciality of dancing came later.  26) p260:– That inner voice: As above, see note 18 for this Chapter. In a comparable fashion, the murderer Anna Marie Hahn wrote in her prison letters to the Cinncinati Enquirer, in December 1938, shortly before her execution in the electric chair: ‘I don’t know how I could have done the things I did in my life.’  27) p261– THIS WORKS FOR THE VIRTUOUS: This principle is mentioned in a variety of places in the Pali Canon such as at A 8.35, where the Buddha speaks about: ‘Eight kinds of rebirth on account of generosity’. He describes how, after having made offering food or lodgings, robes etc., that person may set their mind on being reborn amongst wealthy householders, devas of the various levels, up to the Brahma Realms. ‘If they set their mind on that thought, keep to it firmly and foster it, then after the death of the body they will be reborn in the realm according to their wishes. This, however, I declare is only for the virtuous, not for the unvirtuous … Because their hearts are free from unwholesome passions, the heart’s desire of the virtuous succeeds.’  The scenario with the cauldrons is reminiscent of the test Sitā gave herself in the Rāmāyaṇa: After Sitā has been rescued from Lanka by Hanuman, Rāma asks to have her brought to him. She is exceedingly happy to see him at last and to be reunited. Rāma, however, is cold towards her and speaks to her cruelly. He announces to her, and to everyone else, that he cannot accept her as his wife after she has spent such a long time in another man’s company –‘in Ravana’s lap’. Astonishingly, and heartlessly he tells her that the only reason he actioned Hanuman to rescue her ‘… was to save my own honour.’ Sitā proclaims her virtue, her maintenance of the brahmacariya vows, her unwavering devotion to Rāma and her innocence. To prove her virtue she asks Lakshmana to light a -re. She walks into the -re and emerges unscathed – even the lotus in her hair is unscorched. There is sweat upon her brow after the ordeal but this largely due to her indignation about the whole procedure.

341 
Rāma, somewhat unconvincingly, then claims that he had known that she was innocent all along but had wanted her to prove it to the world.   28) p262:– The precious few items a wandering forest monk might need: A forest monastic always has to carry their robes, alms-bowl, needle and thread, a water-strainer (to not harm small creatures in natural water supplies), a belt and a razor. In addition, a good water-canteen or gourd, a length of thin rope (to hang and dry robes after washing or just to air them), a small sharp knife and means of making light are all helpful.   29) ibid:– He had said farewell in gratitude: It is regarded as a good policy to consciously appreciate the feelings of the beings, visible and invisible that one has shared a place with.     Chapter 26: On the Western Shore  1) p263:– Jammu, Swami-ji: This region is in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir of today. The address ‘swami-ji’ is a way that ascetic yogis and religious seekers, renunciants are addressed in India today.   2) ibid:– Taxila?: This was an ancient city of great consequence. It is mentioned many times in Buddhist scriptures as a centre of great learning. It is spelled ‘Takkasilā’ in Pali. It was the capital of Gandhara. It is to be found today about 20 miles west of Islamabad in Pakistan.   3) ibid:– River Vitasta: Today this is known as the River Jhelum.   4) ibid:– stone-built houses … layered with wooden timbers: This is still a method used today, in order to build with stone in regions prone to earthquakes – Jammu, Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Kulluta are all of this nature. The stones can slide side-to-side along the horizontal wooden beams, thus enabling the buildings to move without falling.   5) ibid:– iron alms-bowl … maintained with great care: Such bowls are still used today. The surface is protected from rusting by baking the bowl in a very hot bonfire or forge, to form an oxide coating, but this coating can be chipped; the training with respect to the alms-bowl – whether it is iron or steel like this, or of clay or even stainless steel these days – is to treat it as if it was the skull of the Buddha.

342 
6) p264:– Bhavatu sabba mangalam, rakkhantu sabba devata: This is the start of the blessing given at the meal-time, customarily in Thailand. It means ‘May there be every blessing, may the devas protect you.’  7) ibid:– Me bhikkhu, bhikshu: The latter word is the Sanskrit spelling of ‘bhikkhu’. This language, and hybrids of it with Pali were often used in North India and the region mentioned in the story here.   8) ibid:– Repaired with woven tree-bark: This method has been used up to the present time, by forest meditation monks in Thailand.   9) p265:– the paddy-field patterns: The Buddha asked Ānanda to design a patterning of monastic robes, to easily include smaller and larger pieces of scrap cloth, and to sew them ‘like these rice-fields of Magadha.’ Since that ancient time, this has been the form used for Budddhist monastic robes, up to the present day (see MV 8.12.1).  10) p266:– Keeping the old for patches: It is common practice, among forest monastics, to salvage what serviceable parts of old robes etc. one can for future repairs as needed. See Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 21, pp263-66.  11) ibid:– was quite the philosopher: As described in The Pilgrim Kamanita, especially Chs. 9 and 10, pp51-60.  12) ibid:– a bhikkhu of nearly seventy Rains: The practice in the monastic order is for those younger in years of monastic training to make room for, and offer the highest and most comfortable seat, to any Elders they are with. They should also listen respectfully, as one would expect, to what an Elder has to say.   13) p267:– the ‘highest blessings’ of the Teacher: This refers to the ‘Discourse on the Highest Blessings’, as recited to Krishna in Mara and the Mangala I , Ch. 26, pp365-66.   14) ibid:– Gandhara, Ariana: This list of names of countries and regions is probably not as the locals would have referred to those places in all instances in that era. They are listed, dear reader, with these names for convenience of today’s readership.   15) p268:– tents of hazel-rods: Such tents are called ‘benders’ in current times and are still in use in communities of Travellers and other country-dwelling folk inclined to simple living. The name ‘bender’ comes from bending cut hazel saplings in the rails of a fence or, in ancient times, in between the upright trunks of close-standing trees, into U-shapes, then

343 
arranging them to form a small, domed chamber. They are draped in blankets and canvas to keep the bell-shaped space warm. The floor is a bed of hazel twigs covered by canvas, skins or rugs, so rodents etc. can move easily underneath and the human occupant is off the cold damp ground. Skins would have been used as well as waxed cloth in former times.   16) ibid:– land of Gavinna and her fathers: ‘The Land of My Fathers’ is the Welsh national anthem. It was composed by Evan James and his son James James. In Welsh it is called ‘Hen Wlad Fu Nhadan’. See Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 22, p281.  17) ibid:– the Master’s teachings and stories … to visit the upper realms: Examples of such visits are found, firstly, at M 49, ‘The Discourse on an Invitation to a Brahma’, where the Buddha pays a call on the Brahmā Baka, to help relieve him of a wrong view, the deity having formerly been a teacher of the Buddha in a previous life.  Another example is found at D 11.67-85, ‘The Discourse to Kevaddha’, where a monk skilled in meditation goes, eventually, up to the Heaven of Maha-Brahmā to ask a question that he cannot answer himself.  In neither instance do the visitors to those upper realms experience extreme passing of time in the human world.   18) ibid:– in your etheric bodies: This is a Western term for what is known as ‘sukhumarūpa’ in Pali meaning ‘subtle body’. Other related terms are ‘mano-maya-kāya’ or ‘mind-made body’ and ‘obhāsa-kāya’, a ‘body of light’, which the Buddha used to project an image of himself, in order to offer teachings to his disciples in remote places.  In the Tibetan tradition the term ‘saṃbhoga-kāya’ has some equivalence to these qualities named in the Pali. It is defined as a ‘body of bliss’ and it is used in celestial manifestations. The ‘nirmāna-kāya’ means the physical body.   19) p269:– concentrated on their breath: This type of meditation practice is common in the Southern Buddhist world. It is called ‘ānāpanasati’ or ‘mindfulness of in-and-out breathing’.   20) ibid:– Vasabha and Kesini emerged: Such deep and extensive times spent in complete absorption are well known, even in modern times; for example, both Great Master Hsu Yün and his disciple, Master Hsüan Hua were well-known to have these abilities. Also Dipa Ma, a lay woman practitioner who lived in Calcutta, was fully capable of such absorptions.   21) ibid:– the two of them sitting face-to-face … for months: There is an account, in the Chinese records of one Great Master, describing how ‘the happiest time of my life’ was sitting face-to-face with a monk friend, in samadhi like this, for forty-two days.

344 
22) ibid:– Kesini had grown some more grey hairs: As above, (at note 17 of this Chapter) the canonical accounts do not mention an experience of vast amounts of time passing for the physical bodies (rūpa-kāya) of those visiting the higher realms in their sukhumarūpa, or subtle body.   23) p274:– Look, stranger: Several lines in the following passages are derived from the poem Look, Stranger! by W.H. Auden, published in 1936 in his book of the same name, later entitled On This Island.   24) ibid:– in Gallia: The Central European area was not divided up into distinct nation states in the era of Krishna’s wanderings. ‘Gallia’ here roughly refers to the regions of France and Germany in the current age. Folk mostly seemed to live in clans and tribes, some nomadically, in this mid-iron age, pre-historic time.   25) ibid:– pigyn hendaid: This is the modern Welsh for ‘great-grandfather magpie’.  26) ibid:– now with him for over fifty Rains: This would be a long time to look after an iron bowl and to keep it in good condition, whilst using it every day.   27) p275:– matter we are all fashioned from: In one Celtic creation myth it states:  Once upon a time, when there was not time, no gods or humans walked the surface of the land. But there was the sea, and where the sea met the land, a mare was born, white and made of sea-foam. And her name was Eiocha.  Not far from where the land met the sea, a tree grew, a strong and sturdy oak. On the oak grew a plant whose seeds were formed of the foam tears of the sea. To sustain her, Eiocha ate the seeds, those white berries, and they were transformed within her. Eiocha grew heavy with child and gave birth to the god Cernunnos. So great was her pain in childbirth that she ripped bark from the tree and hurled it into the sea. The bark was transformed by the sea and became the giants of the deep.  Cernunnos was lonely and he saw that the giants of the deep were numerous, so he joined with Eiocha and of their union came the gods Maponos, Tauranis, Tentates and the goddess Epona.  Eiocha soon tired of the land, being a creature of sea-foam, and she returned to the sea, where she was transformed into Tethra, goddess of the deep water, also known as Tethys.  (ochsmrsg.weebly.com)

345 
28) p276:– Do good, refrain from harm: This is part of the ‘Rule of Discipline Exhortation’ one of the earliest teachings of the Buddha. It was first given to a spontaneous gathering of 1250 Arahants at the Bamboo Grove, near Rājagaha.   29) ibid:– The best way to evade the King of Death: This is the method of meditation described by the Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara (Guan Shi Yin) in The Shurangana Sūtra, Ch. 3, p256 (BTTS/DRBU, 2009). This method is named there by the Buddha as ‘the easiest way to reach enlightenment’, amongst those described to him by the twenty-five Bodhisattvas who visit him during that particular teaching.   30) ibid:– within the bounds of his discipline: The Buddhist monastic Rule forbids the handling, storing or controlling the use of food that one might later consume. One is to be fully dependent on unsolicited free will offerings, that have been out of one’s hands from the get-go.   31) ibid:– it was an inner sound: This sound goes by many names in different traditions. See Inner Listening, by the author, pp49-57.   32) p277:– like a diamond someone had sewn into your clothes: This comes from a parable in the Lotus Sūtra, Ch. 8.  33) p278:– the process of spontaneously appearing: This is frequently the way in which beings are described if they have arisen in the Pure Abodes. That such beings appear ‘spontaneously’ means there is no parentage of any kind, they simply manifest, fully grown and cognizant in one of those Abodes.   34) p279:– the intermediary state: In Pali this is called the antarābhava; in Tibetan such transitional dimensions are known as bardos.  ===*=== *
