# Chapter 17: Scandal in Savatthi  1) p147:– The court was convened: It is clear that there were formal judicial procedures in the time of the Buddha and in those regions. For example, at Par #2 in the Bhikkhu Pāṭimokkā, court cases over property and objects are mentioned several times, see The Buddhist Monastic Code, Vol I, pp54, 64 & 72. In the Bhikkhuṇī Pāṭimokka the nuns are explicitly forbidden to launch a legal case against any householder or wanderer, this is Saṅg #1 in the Bhikkhuṇī Pāṭimokkā. Lastly, at A 10.176, it is mentioned that, ‘If called to a town meeting, a group meeting, a gathering of relatives, to a guild meeting or royalty, if asked as a witness, “come and tell what you know”: if they don’t know, they say “I don’t know”; if they know, they say, “I know”.’  2) p148:– dressing in an unadorned and modest fashion: The custom then, as now in the Southern Buddhist countries, is to wear white, or white and black, undecorated clothing when visiting monasteries or attending Dharma teaching events, such as retreats. Customarily the body is also kept covered, from neck to ankles and wrists, by such plain clothing in order to maintain modesty.   3) ibid:– within the monasteries … any caste, any station in life: In Buddhist monasteries, rank and social power are put aside. The illiterate villager might thus sit beside, or even in front of, a regional governor or a local wealthy matriarch. Not always(!) but often this is the case.   4) ibid:– Sukhavati: Means ‘The Abode of Happiness’.   5) ibid:– Sattuka and Kalidanta: Sattuka was the name of a bandit that was spotted on the way to his execution by the laywoman Bhadda-Kuṇḍalakesā – ‘Bhadda with curly hair’. She fell in love at that first sight of Sattuka and begged her father to bribe the guard and let her marry him. Sattuka later hatched the idea to take her jewels and push her off the Robber’s Cliff but, through quick thinking, she turned the tables and pushed him off instead. She became an Arahant nun eventually, being acknowledged (ironically) as ‘foremost in swift intuition’. Her story is found at Thig 107-11. ‘Kalidanta’ means ‘Black-tooth’.   6) p150:– The words would not come: Devadatta had already lost his previously extensive super-normal powers, as evidenced at CV 7.2.1: ‘As soon as the thought that “It is I who ought to lead the Bhikkhu-Sangha” arose in his mind, Devadatta was deprived of his psychic powers.’ So this blockage is more because of fear of his teacher than from Devadatta’s super-normal interference.

317 
Chapter 17: Scandal in Savatthi  1) p147:– The court was convened: It is clear that there were formal judicial procedures in the time of the Buddha and in those regions. For example, at Par #2 in the Bhikkhu Pāṭimokkā, court cases over property and objects are mentioned several times, see The Buddhist Monastic Code, Vol I, pp54, 64 & 72. In the Bhikkhuṇī Pāṭimokka the nuns are explicitly forbidden to launch a legal case against any householder or wanderer, this is Saṅg #1 in the Bhikkhuṇī Pāṭimokkā. Lastly, at A 10.176, it is mentioned that, ‘If called to a town meeting, a group meeting, a gathering of relatives, to a guild meeting or royalty, if asked as a witness, “come and tell what you know”: if they don’t know, they say “I don’t know”; if they know, they say, “I know”.’  2) p148:– dressing in an unadorned and modest fashion: The custom then, as now in the Southern Buddhist countries, is to wear white, or white and black, undecorated clothing when visiting monasteries or attending Dharma teaching events, such as retreats. Customarily the body is also kept covered, from neck to ankles and wrists, by such plain clothing in order to maintain modesty.   3) ibid:– within the monasteries … any caste, any station in life: In Buddhist monasteries, rank and social power are put aside. The illiterate villager might thus sit beside, or even in front of, a regional governor or a local wealthy matriarch. Not always(!) but often this is the case.   4) ibid:– Sukhavati: Means ‘The Abode of Happiness’.   5) ibid:– Sattuka and Kalidanta: Sattuka was the name of a bandit that was spotted on the way to his execution by the laywoman Bhadda-Kuṇḍalakesā – ‘Bhadda with curly hair’. She fell in love at that first sight of Sattuka and begged her father to bribe the guard and let her marry him. Sattuka later hatched the idea to take her jewels and push her off the Robber’s Cliff but, through quick thinking, she turned the tables and pushed him off instead. She became an Arahant nun eventually, being acknowledged (ironically) as ‘foremost in swift intuition’. Her story is found at Thig 107-11. ‘Kalidanta’ means ‘Black-tooth’.   6) p150:– The words would not come: Devadatta had already lost his previously extensive super-normal powers, as evidenced at CV 7.2.1: ‘As soon as the thought that “It is I who ought to lead the Bhikkhu-Sangha” arose in his mind, Devadatta was deprived of his psychic powers.’ So this blockage is more because of fear of his teacher than from Devadatta’s super-normal interference.

318 
 7) p151:– according to your own discipline: This is indeed the case, as spelled out in the Bhikkhu Pāṭimokka. See, for example, Par #3, in The Buddhist Monastic Code, Vol I, pp79-94.  8) ibid:– Accordingly, you will go through the city: This description is based on the commentary to Dhp 306, as found in Buddhist Legends, Vol III, p191.  9) ibid:– Who, kindly, did not try to chat with him: This approach was used and expounded by the late Barry Kapke, also known as Kondañña, who was a Buddhist massage therapist and body-worker in the San Francisco area. The three principles of his method were:  1) Don’t push, just use the weight of your own body;  2) Don’t try to help, but don’t turn away;  3) Don’t diagnose, just be aware.  For more on these approaches, see Don’t Push Just Use the Weight of your own Body by the author, Amaravati Publications (2016).   10) ibid:– a low, cord-strung bed: This is called a ‘charpai’ in India. It is commonly used all over the sub-continent.   11) p152:– manussa … puggala … Manussa Realm: These terms are standard usages from Buddhist psychology and cosmology. The Manussa-loka is one of the Five (or sometimes Six) Realms, the others being: the Deva Realm, the Animal Realm, the Hungry Ghost Realm, and the Hell Realm. The extra ‘sixth’ is that of the Asura Realm, the Angry or Jealous Gods.    This last Realm has an ambiguous nature, sometimes being considered a sub-set of the Deva Realm and sometimes seen as part of the Unfortunate Realms, constituted by the Animal, the Hungry Ghost and the Hell Realms; see for example, Three Worlds According to King Ruang, p49.  12) p154:– Elders such as Maha-Moggallana: The Buddha’s second Chief Disciple, after Sāriputta. Mahā-Moggallāna was the foremost in psychic powers, after the Buddha himself. When blasted by a fiery nāga, Nandopanada, and surviving, the Buddha declared that only he himself or Mahā-Moggallāna would have been able to withstand the dragon’s flame. The story is found in the Mahavaṁsa 35.4, ‘The Taming of Nandopanada’.   13) ibid:– I have a good memory: Like Sāriputta, Ānanda had no psychic powers but possessed many other noble attributes. For example, Ānanda was ‘foremost’ in: 1) Those who are learned; 2) with a good memory; 3) with a quick grasp; 4) those who are resolute; 5) being a personal attendant.

319 
14) ibid:– He chooses not to intervene: That said, on occasion the Buddha would detect some ripening spiritual potential in someone, that appeared in his meditation, and then he would show up close to where they were living and then see how things unfolded. Examples of this process are with Aṅgulimāla, at M 86, and with the brahma god Baka, at M 49; similarly, in the Dhammapada Commentary to Dhp 203, (in Buddhist Legends, Vol III, pp64-76), it describes how the Buddha, ‘perceiving that [a certain poor man] possessed the faculties requisite for the Fruit of Conversion’ i.e. Stream-entry, went all the way from Sāvatthī to Ālavi, which was nearly 140 miles, just to help that one poor farmer, who had lost an ox, who had arrived at the teaching venue but not had something to eat, and was consequently weak.   15) p155:– Krishna lost his ability to see us: As in Mara and the Mangala I, he regained these after leaving the knacker’s yard, at the end of Ch. 20, p261.   16) p156:– The Master came here two sun-turnings after the enlightenment: This is according to the generally accepted timeline of the Buddha’s life. The First Rains he spent in the Deer Park of Isipatana, near Varanasi; the Second Rains he spent at the Bamboo Grove, near Rājagaha after which he responded to the invitation, brought by Kāḷudāyi, to visit Kapilavatthu. This is described at Thag 527-33.  17) p157:– Please forgive me: The exchange here is still followed to this day in the Southern Buddhist world, as a way of clearing the slate after any length of time spent together, or even as a gesture of respect on an Elder’s birthday or such significant occasions.   18) ibid:– the Tathagata works by allowing: As above, in note 14 of this Chapter. Good examples of this ‘three warnings’ mode, that were ignored and with painful consequences, were with Bhikkhu Nāgasamāla, on the road to Rājagaha, (at Ud 8.3) and with Meghiya in the Mango Grove (at Ud 4.1). These stories are found in The Life of the Buddha, pp79 and 130-32.   19) ibid:– He has wedded his heart to: As mentioned at S 17.31-36; these six suttas describe how ‘dreadful are gain, honour and praise … Because his mind was overcome by gain, honour and praise, Devadatta: 1) provoked a schism in the Sangha; 2) his wholesome root was cut off; 3) his wholesome nature was cut off; 4) his bright nature was cut off … Just as a plantain, a bamboo or a reed yields fruit to its own downfall, so Devadatta’s gain, honour and praise gave rise to his own downfall … Just as a wild dog becomes even wilder when bile is sprinkled on its nose, so too as long as Prince Ajātasattu goes to attend on Devadatta … only decline can be expected of Devadatta with respect to wholesome states, not growth.’

320 
 20) ibid:– When we see our transgressions as such: This statement is made numerous times by the Buddha. For example, at M 140.33, which, incidentally, is the sutta that forms the opening mise-en-scène for The Pilgrim Kamanita – the chance encounter between the Buddha and a wanderer who had gone forth in the Buddha’s name, on his own initiative, but who had never met the Master previously.   21) p158:– Gayasisa, that is where I shall reside: This was indeed where Devadatta departed to when he had caused the schism. The story is found at CV 7.4.1, also in The Life of the Buddha, pp269-71.    Chapter 18: Krishna’s Change of Heart  1) p159:– malas tangled about his neck: a ‘mala’ is a rosary garland. In the Buddhist world such a rosary most commonly has 108 beads or stones, this being considered an auspicious number.  2) ibid:– Maha-kasapa … famous for … personal standards of renunciation: Amongst the list of those disciples ‘foremost’ in various qualities, Mahā-Kassapa was named as: ‘Foremost among those who expound the ascetic practices,’ (A 1.14.1).  3) ibid:– Devadatta having received great amounts of royal patronage: This is mentioned, for example, at S 17.36, ‘Now on that occasion Prince Ajātasattu was going to attend upon Devadatta morning and evening with five hundred carts [full of offerings], and an offering of food was conveyed to him in five hundred pots.’ In the Canonical records, Devadatta was not known as especially ascetic until he proposed his Five Points.   4) p160:– Devadatta only raised those points in order to split the Sangha: This is mentioned in the story at CV 7.3.14, and recounted in The Life of the Buddha, pp266-69.  5) ibid:– the big lie: An approach most famously, in Europe at least, and tragically employed by the Nazi Party and its predecessors, to stigmatize and oppress Jewish people. ‘The Jewish question’ or ‘the Jewish problem’ was widely promulgated as an idea in the late 19th and early 20th Centuries, culminating in the mass slaughter of Jewish peoples – along with countless others in similarly oppressed groups – prior to and during the Second World War.

321 
6) ibid:– Yes, he has a back that pains him: This is referred to in many places in the Pali Canon. For example, at M 53.5, where it states, ‘Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused and encouraged the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu with talk on the Dhamma for much of the night, he said to the Venerable Ānanda, “Speak to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the disciple in higher training who has entered upon the Way. My back is uncomfortable so I will stretch it.”’ The Pali for the latter phrase is ‘Piṭṭhi me āgilāyati’. It is also found at: A 10.67, A 10.68, D 33.1.5, S 35.243 and at CV 7.4.2 when Devadatta mimics the Buddha with unexpected consequences.   7) ibid:– Twenty-seven Rains have passed since she gave the prophecy: As in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 26, p355.   8) p161:– Sense-desire … ill-will, views and opinions … doubts, the conceit of identity … desire for defined being … ignorance: These are the seven Latent Tendencies or ‘anusaya’ in Pali.  In that language they are, in the same order: 1) kāma-rāga; 2) paṭigha; 2) diṭṭhi; 4) vicikicchā; 5) māna; 6) bhava-rāga; and 7) avijjā. These are unskilful habits of mind that can ripen as ‘defilements’ (kilesa), and then lead to the ‘outflows’ (āsava) and the ‘floods’ (ogha), where those tendencies take shape as even more intense and destructive unwise speech, action and attitude.   9) ibid:– Upon a time: This whole narrative comes from Jāt 422, it is found in The Jātaka, Vol III, pp272-76.  10) ibid:– The First Age: In Buddhist mythology, during the time after the beginning of a new universal period, as beings appear in the material world, they have very long lifespans. For example an ‘Incalculable Aeon’, mentioned as the lifespan of Maha-Sammata, is 10140 human years. (See above, Ch. 7, note 20).  This account is an abbreviated, and slightly adapted, version of Jāt 422, the English translation by H.T. Francis and R.A. Neil having some apparent inconsistencies.   11) p165:– His head slipped below the earth: In the original story, King Apacara met a much more dramatic end after the seventh lie: ‘Then the earth opened and the flames of Avīci [Hell] leapt up and seized him.’   12) ibid:– various sprites: Such beings are, for example, mentioned at Ud 4.4, where Ven. Sāriputta compliments his friend Ven. Mahā-Moggallāna’s advanced psychic powers, ‘Wherever you saw a yakkha, I could not even see a mud sprite. The Pali for this being is

322 
‘paṃsupisācaka’; ‘paṃsu’ meaning ‘dust, dirt or soil’ and ‘pisāca’ being ‘a sprite, an imp or goblin’. They are also mentioned in a list of different types of entities at D 2.20.   13) p168:– their breath had natural invigorating, curative powers: As in Mara and the Mangala I, Ch. 23, pp300-01.   14) ibid:– There are these two extremes: This passage is indeed adapted from the ‘Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma’, the Buddha’s first discourse, (found at S 56.11) and it is indeed frequently recited in the monasteries, temples and in homes of the Southern Buddhist world.   15) p169:– Ananda, being quick on the uptake: As above, Ch. 17, note 13.   16) ibid:– He offered it with both hands to the Master: In Asia this is the customary, polite way for a junior or younger person to present an object to an elder, a senior, or by a host to a guest.     Chapter 19: Pujika’s Delight  1) p171:– a small village, called Katara: In current times this village is called Katra, it is in in Uttar Pradesh, near the town of Balrampur.   2) ibid:– the monastery of the female community was close to the walls of Savatthi: After the rape of the Arahant nun Uppalavannā, the Buddha stipulated that the bhikkuṇis should not live in forests but should establish their dwellings close to the centres of population, for safety of the women’s communities. The story of that tragic incident is found at Vin iii 35, in The Book of the Discipline, Vol I, pp53-4. The prohibition against living in the forest is found at CV 10.23, The Book of the Discipline, Vol V, pp384-5.  The site of the bhikkuṇu-pasaya – the nun’s monastery close to Sāvatthī – is reckoned to have been close to the eastern gate of the city, not too far from the Eastern Park monastery, donated to the monks’ community by the great lay-disciple Visākhā. See above, Ch. 9, note 8.  3) ibid:– Pujika had made it her daily custom: Most of the following scenario is derived from the story of Patipūjikā, as found in the commentary to Dhp 48, as above.

323 
4) p172:– palm-toddy: This is an alcoholic drink derived from the sugar of the palm tree. It is still very popular in South and South-east Asia today.   5) ibid:– the green rice to come in the Rainy Season: In North-east Thailand this, the very first ripe heads of the rice-crop, are made into very popular sweets. It is called ‘crazy rice’ – kau mau – because the desserts are so delicious that mindfulness is easily lost and one eats far too much of them.   6) ibid:– She’s a veritable Sita: Sitā was the famously faithful wife of Rāma in Indian mythology. She remained loyal to him in the midst of great challenges until the end. The Rāmāyaṇa recounts the details of the tale.   7) p173:– he was able, somehow, to draw himself in: This ability to reduce one’s impact on the people one is with is referred to in Chapter 10 of the novel Bel Canto, by Ann Patchett. One of the characters, Carmen, who initially disguised herself as a youth, demonstrates this ability.   She taught him how to get from place to place in the house in plain sight of everyone and yet no one saw them because she was teaching him to be invisible. It was learning humility, to no longer assume anyone would notice who you were or where you were going. It wasn’t until she began to teach him that Mr. Hosokawa saw Carmen’s genius, because her genius was to not be seen. How much harder that would be for a beautiful young girl in a house full of restless men, and yet he found that she drew almost no attention at all. She had managed to pass as a boy, and, more impressively, had managed to make herself utterly forgettable after she had been revealed as a beautiful girl. When Carmen walked through the room without wanting to be seen, she hardly moved the air around her. She didn’t sneak. She did not dart to hide behind the piano and then a chair. She walked through the middle of the room, asking for nothing, keeping her head level, making no sound. In fact, she had been teaching him this lesson since the day they were first in the house together, but it was only now that he could understand it.  8) ibid:– Friends, I went to the Blessed One: The following is mostly derived from CV 7.4, and as recounted in The Life of the Buddha, pp268-72.  9) ibid:– ola leaf: A kind of long, thin palm leaf that, when dried, was used for making manuscripts and documents in South and South-east Asia for many centuries.

324 
10) ibid:– monks who were expert reciters: The division of a monastery into sub-sections in this way is mentioned in the origin story to Saṅg #8, where the assigning of lodgings is described thus:  Then the venerable Dabba, the Mallian, being so chosen, assigned one lodging in the same place for those monks who belonged to the same company. For those monks who knew the Suttantas he assigned a lodging in the same place, saying: “These will be able to chant over the Suttantas to one another.” For those monks versed in the Vinaya rules, he assigned a lodging in the same place, saying: “They will decide upon the Vinaya with one another.” For those monks teaching Dhamma he assigned a lodging in the same place, saying: “They will discuss Dhamma with one another.” For those monks who were musers [meditators] he assigned a lodging in the same place, saying: “They will not disturb one another.” For those monks who lived indulging in low talk and who were athletic he assigned a lodging in the same place, saying: “These reverend ones will live according to their pleasure.”  The Book of the Discipline, Vol. I, p273, I.B. Horner trans., PTS, 1949.  11) ibid:– the Vajjian Confederacy: This country was an ‘aristocratic republic’ or ‘tribal league’ rather than a kingdom. Its capital was Vesāli.  12) ibid:– more than a hundred of them: In the Pali original it states there were five hundred but this is a very generally used term to mean ‘a lot’, as ‘10,000’ is often used in Chinese texts.   13) ibid:– The patimokkha had been held: This is the collection of main rules, 227 for the monks, 311 for the nuns, established in the Buddha’s time; attendance is indeed compulsory for all resident monastics. It is the one regular ceremonial procedure that is non-negotiable re participation throughout the monastic year.   14) p174:– At Gayasisa, some Moons later: As above, this scenario is derived from CV 7.4.  15) ibid:– Dharma seat: A raised and usually broad seat so that the one expounding the Dharma can sit with their legs folded and be above the assembled group who have gathered to listen. It serves the same purpose as a pulpit in a Christian church.   16) p175:– the lion’s posture: This is the manner in which the Buddha rested and he encouraged his students to use, in order to maximise mindfulness when sleeping. It is to: ‘lie on the right side, placing one foot on the other, mindful and with full awareness, setting in mind the time for wakening.’ It is mentioned, for example, at D 16.4.40, A 3.16.3, A 4.37.4 & A 4.246.3.

325 
 17) ibid:– a master of eloquent and analytical speech: In the list of ‘foremosts’ Ven. Sāriputta is mentioned first. He is named as the monk disciple, ‘foremost among those with great wisdom’.  18) ibid:– the path to Stream-entry … full fruition of that stage: The four levels of enlightenment, in the Buddha’s scheme of things, are each divided into two: ‘magga’, being on the ‘path’ to that level, and ‘phala’, realizing the ‘fruit’ of that level. This structure is the source of the phrase, in the daily chanting, of the qualities of the Sangha Refuge, ‘The four pairs, the eight kinds of noble beings.’  19) p176:– a vigorous walk of about twenty days: The distance from Gayasisa to Sāvatthī is about 310 miles or 500 km.  20) ibid:– He will inevitably go to the states of woe: In the Buddha’s teaching he names five ‘heinous acts’ which, if carried out intentionally, necessarily lead to a stint in the hell realms. The five are: 1) Killing your mother; 2) Killing your father; 3) Killing an Arahant; 4) Shedding the blood of a Buddha; and 5) Deliberately causing a schism in the Sangha. They are listed, as the ‘five lesions’ at A 5.129, the word for this being ‘parikupā’ meaning ‘something with an irritating nature, like an old wound’. The term ‘ānantarika kamma’ is more common, meaning ‘grave deeds that bring as their immediate result a rebirth in hell’. The five are also mentioned at A 6.87 & A 6.94.  21) ibid:– The great Arahant Elders Uppalavanna and Khema: These two great beings were the equivalent, on the women’s side, of Sāriputta and Mahā-Moggallāna – foremost in wisdom was Khemā, and Uppalavaṇṇā in psychic power.   22) p178:– hundreds of devas gathered: This scenario is, again, derived from the commentary to Dhp 48, as found in Buddhist Legends, Vol II, pp52-4.   23) p179:– We haven’t seen you since morning: This is the ending of the story which forms the Commentary to Dhp 48. It is notable that, almost uniquely in Buddhist cosmology and mythology, a being passes away, lives another life and then comes back to their previous place of birth with full knowledge of their history and also with the same physical features. We take this as the poetic license (although, of course, it might have happened that way!) of the author of the Dhammapada Commentary and we are happy to use the same mythic pattern here.
