# CHAPTER 23: THE BUDDHA IN THE SHADE   ollow along after the Master and get close to the King. You might be able to help,’ Dusaka’s expression was uncharacteristically grave as he said this.  They could all tell this was serious indeed.  Maggot and Ambaka chose to stay with Vasabha, along with Dusaka, Khujjuttara and Kesini since, now reconnected with her child after such a long search, Maggot could not bear to be apart, besides, it was uncertain if even the Master would be able to turn the King from his destructive course. Ambaka, still finding her feet and her flight as a deva, was similarly keen to stay close to this one who had been her sister, her rival, her murderer and her friend, in her most recent human life.  Thus it was that Bee and Gumbiya – now expanded to full battle-size – Ant and Ninka, and Rhamba and Salassa, took off at speed, racing to the north-east from Savatthi to see if they could catch the army in time and to do what they could to help avert disaster.   * * *  Krishna was puzzled. The journey on foot cross-country with the Master had been exhilarating – he had been amazed at how swiftly the Teacher could walk without ever seeming hurried – and the stretch this morning had been several leagues, so why were they sitting to rest under this bodhi tree, with its sparse leaves, this being the Hot Season, instead of the deep cool shade of the agèd banyan across the road and not more than a bowshot away? As usual Krishna came to his own conclusion, assuming there was some historical or mystical significance in the bodhi tree having been the type that the Buddha had been sitting under at the time of his enlightenment. This then led to some grumbling (internally) about attachment to perceptions and sentimental feelings that it seemed even the great Master was subject to. As these thoughts took shape, the Master turned to him and said:  ‘The leaves on this tree are scanty, this being the season for their falling, however this tree is just inside the lands of the Sakyans. That broad banyan across the way with its appealing shade, as deep as midnight in its inner reaches, sits within the borders of Kosala. It is better for our purpose that we rest here, to await the King and his army.’ Chastened, Krishna sat and listened to the gentle continuous shimmering sound of the bodhi-leaves as they shook in the warm breeze under the hills.

215 
CHAPTER 23: THE BUDDHA IN THE SHADE   ollow along after the Master and get close to the King. You might be able to help,’ Dusaka’s expression was uncharacteristically grave as he said this.  They could all tell this was serious indeed.  Maggot and Ambaka chose to stay with Vasabha, along with Dusaka, Khujjuttara and Kesini since, now reconnected with her child after such a long search, Maggot could not bear to be apart, besides, it was uncertain if even the Master would be able to turn the King from his destructive course. Ambaka, still finding her feet and her flight as a deva, was similarly keen to stay close to this one who had been her sister, her rival, her murderer and her friend, in her most recent human life.  Thus it was that Bee and Gumbiya – now expanded to full battle-size – Ant and Ninka, and Rhamba and Salassa, took off at speed, racing to the north-east from Savatthi to see if they could catch the army in time and to do what they could to help avert disaster.   * * *  Krishna was puzzled. The journey on foot cross-country with the Master had been exhilarating – he had been amazed at how swiftly the Teacher could walk without ever seeming hurried – and the stretch this morning had been several leagues, so why were they sitting to rest under this bodhi tree, with its sparse leaves, this being the Hot Season, instead of the deep cool shade of the agèd banyan across the road and not more than a bowshot away? As usual Krishna came to his own conclusion, assuming there was some historical or mystical significance in the bodhi tree having been the type that the Buddha had been sitting under at the time of his enlightenment. This then led to some grumbling (internally) about attachment to perceptions and sentimental feelings that it seemed even the great Master was subject to. As these thoughts took shape, the Master turned to him and said:  ‘The leaves on this tree are scanty, this being the season for their falling, however this tree is just inside the lands of the Sakyans. That broad banyan across the way with its appealing shade, as deep as midnight in its inner reaches, sits within the borders of Kosala. It is better for our purpose that we rest here, to await the King and his army.’ Chastened, Krishna sat and listened to the gentle continuous shimmering sound of the bodhi-leaves as they shook in the warm breeze under the hills.

216 
As the Master said this, an unusual scent was carried to them on the wind from the west. It was a rank and sharp smell, not of rot but of animal and human sweat and soil, oil and leather, and mixed with plumes of heat-raised dust. The army was coming.  Krishna looked to the Buddha, as if any confirmation were needed, and also to gain a sense of what they were supposed to do. As the son of a merchant and then a monk for most of his life, he was at a loss when it came to military questions.  To his surprise the Master’s first words were, ‘One can smell a marching army long before one can hear or see them.’ This piece of knowledge having come from his long training in arms and combat in the years before he left the palace in Kapilavatthu at the age of twenty-nine, as well as many previous lives as a military commander. ‘It will be some time before they reach this border.’  Krishna was reassured that they would have a little while before the encounter so he took the opportunity to ask why the Master had chosen to sit here where the sun was now baking hot and the shade offered by the bodhi-leaves so meagre.  ‘Venerable Sir, can I ask the reason why “it is better for our purpose that we sit here”? Is it because this is closer to the road? Or perhaps because the shade under yonder banyan is so dark and deep that we would not be seen there?’ His mind had been coming up with a few more ‘reasonable reasons’ in addition to his more critical ones.  ‘It is good that you ask for a reason, Krishna – that was something your father neglected to do when we met – but now is not the time to talk of it. Things will become clearer when the King arrives.’ They sat quietly beneath the tree. Still the only sound they heard was of bodhi-leaves a-quiver, as with gentle ease that somewhat foetid breeze stirred, that hot morning on the borders of Sakya.   * * *  When the columns of troops finally arrived, the Master’s practised eye told him that King Vidudabha had brought with him the vast majority of the army of Kosala. This was to be no empty threat or embassy for parlay; this young man was intent on destruction and was not leaving anything to chance by way of numbers. His troops outweighed those of the Sakyans by a great proportion.  The Buddha and Krishna sat together beneath the bodhi-tree, close by the side of the road. The vanguard of the army came into close view as they turned the corner at the base of the low hill that led to the border. As they slowly approached, by the time they reached the great banyan, it seemed that the Master had been recognized and word was being sent back through the messengers to the King, in the midst of the vast column of men.  The troops slowed and came to a halt as the King rode forward, now on horseback rather than an elephant for ease of mobility.

217 
This was the first time that Vidudabha had met the Buddha since he had seized power from the old king, his father. Mixed feelings raged within him: fear that his father’s great spiritual mentor and friend would castigate him for seizing power as he had, by subterfuge; anger that these monks were getting in his way as he went to wreak vengeance for the insult of the Sakyans; awe at the serene and peaceful power that the Master emanated; it was confusing but his years of princeIy training led him to dismount, hand his reins to a squire, then walk slowly to where the Buddha was seated.  The King’s mind was racing, it was obviously no accident or happenstance that the Buddha was sitting by the road, at the border, ostensibly waiting for him, but what should he say to him? ‘Get out of my way. I’m going to slaughter your family’? ‘Please can I have your blessing for what I’m about to do’? ‘Could you give me your advice on how best to deal with the Sakyans’? ‘You are one of them! Were you part of this appalling deception too? I should have you executed!’? ‘What a surprise to see you here, Venerable Sir. Has anyone offered you food today?’ As he knelt and paid respects to the Master in the traditional way, with three prostrations, his mind defaulted to the neutral subject of the weather.  ‘Venerable Sir, the day is so hot, why do you sit at the foot of this tree, with such sparse and scanty shade? Please, sit instead at the foot of that ancient banyan, just over there, which has thick leaves and a cool, dense canopy.’  The Buddha responded, ‘Be not concerned, great King. The shade of my kinsmen keeps me cool.’ He indicated the road ahead, to nearby Kapilavatthu, as if to underscore the fact that he was in the land of the Sakyans.  The King realized that this was a clear message. The peace-filled atmosphere, in such close quarters with the Master, stirred his heart and he knew, ‘The Teacher must have come here solely for the purpose of protecting his kinfolk. I cannot oppose him.’ For a moment he looked up into the Buddha’s face and saw there such an ocean of friendliness and grace that there was nothing else to say. He bowed again three times and took his leave; briskly mounting his horse he ordered the army to return the way it had come.    * * *  This exchange was witnessed by the kinnaris and their deva and yakkha friends, they having arrived too late to slow the advance of the army. Once they saw that the columns had turned around and were heading back to Savatthi, they repaired to the foot of the banyan tree to decide what to do.  ‘The Master’s words seem to have had a dramatic effect on Vidudabha but, as we all know, kings are a fickle bunch,’ Bee was in mutually-agreed charge of their expedition so all were listening closely. ‘We should not assume for a moment that His Serene Majesty won’t change his mind. In fact, we should assume that he will. So, what’s the best way to keep him on track, returning to Savatthi?’ She looked around the group for suggestions.

218 
Ant immediately piped up, ‘What about some dreams? Maggot’s good at that but I can do it too. Ninka’s probably even better,’ she was trying to help them to forgive and forget her partner’s deception of them all. ‘We could plant some dreams in the mind of the King, and a few advisors, about how the life of a warrior-noble king is so luxurious and enjoyable, endless fun, easy life in the palace, and that he could change his tactic and regard the slight by the Sakyans as a kind of emergency fund – he could demand tributes of gold from them, on account of the insult, at any time he likes in the future. How does that sound?’ ‘We could appear in it,’ offered Rhamba, ‘my brother and I, and provide some appropriate song and dance. What do you think?’ Salassa, the brother in question, smiled at the opportunity. ‘I’m happy to oblige.’ That night, with the army half a day’s march back in Kosala, they camped and rested since the drive to Kapilavatthu had been hard on the animals as well as on the troops. There was a spritely mood among the tents as conflict had been avoided and the food wagons were plentifully supplied.   King Vidudabha was deep in his cups, now being assailed by doubts as to whether he had made the right decision after all:– It had been so obvious when face to face with the Buddha.  Those mixed emotions were now back in force, despite him trying to drink them into oblivion; rage at the cruel disaster of his birth; shame at launching this campaign and then turning back after such a brief meeting with the Master; desire to impress the Royal court with his nobility and competence, after having unseated his father King Pasenadi from the throne; these chased each other around until, in the late watches of the night, sleep finally took him.    * * *  Bee, Ant and Ninka, and Rhamba and Salassa were pleased with their handiwork. They had woven images of great luxury and bliss into the dreams of the King – without too much of a specific story – displaying the life of a head-anointed warrior noble king as an endless feast with a sumptuous array of entertainments. They had planted dreams of a similar kind in the minds of his closest advisors, as far as they could tell, to allay any rumbles of criticism or shame with regard to the King’s less-than-auspicious birth.  ‘I was particularly impressed by that image you made, Ninka, of an older version of Vidudabha receiving trunks of gold from the abased Sakyan nobles,’ Bee chuckled. ‘That was neat. So he has a way to restore dignity.’ ‘And get some extra cash,’ chimed in Ant, ‘if he needs it.’ What the six friends did not know was that Mara, the Lord of Lies, was listening in with great personal interest to all this. Even as the self-congratulations were proceeding he made his way to the King’s tent, whilst sleep was still upon him, and inveigled a dream of his own creation into the King’s mind. He selected the faces of the Royal Court of Kosala, painting upon them expressions of

219 
disappointment, disgust, disapproval and some wry smirks. Mara then brought in his most rational and empathetic voice to say, ‘It’s all very well not to wish to oppose… a great holy man,’ his slight pause before choosing words to refer to the Buddha spoke volumes, ‘but to all intents and purposes, your honour,’ he leant heavily upon the word, ‘will be shredded… has been so already, if truth be told. But it’s not irreparable. It’s actually your duty,’ again he stressed the word, ‘to carry out your mission, just as it was the duty of Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra; Lord Krishna himself reassured him:    ‘How has this weakness taken you? From where  Springs this inglorious stalling, shameful to the brave,   Barring the path of virtue? Nay, Arjuna!  Forbid yourself this feebleness! It mars   Your warrior name! Cast off this fit of cowardice!  Wake! Be yourself! Arise and scourge your foes!’  ‘Lord Krishna also said to him, “Do not become a coward, Arjuna, because it does not befit you.” That’s applicable here too… no?’ The voice of Mara spoke clearly and convincingly.  King Vidudabha awoke at dawn with a surprisingly unfoggy head. He gave the order at once. ‘We march again to Sakya!’   * * *  The pattern repeated itself. The Buddha and Krishna were still seated beneath the same tree, just inside the border of the Sakyan kingdom. The King, fixing his mind on the idea of honour and duty, steeled himself as they approached the border of Kosala. He was determined not to be dissuaded again, sure that he would drive the army on to its goal of Kapilavatthu.  As they took the bend in the road and climbed the gentle slope, however, the rigid walls of certainty he had erected faded like morning mist and, as he came close to the Buddha, seeing him seated exactly as before, without a word his resolve was broken. He halted the troops with a gesture of his raised arm then simply announced, ‘About face! March!’ And the army retreated once more.  A second time Ant, Bee and their companions contrived to populate the King’s dreams with scenes that would encourage him in his choice and warn him of the dangers should his mind be inclined to change again. This time Gumbiya was brought in as a chief actor, displaying the threats of hellish torments in store for those who deliberately kill their fellow humans and other living beings.  The dreams they wove for Vidudabha and his courtiers were vivid and terrifying, and once again they were proud of their handiwork, but once again the Evil One was lurking close at hand, unbeknownst to the companions.

220 
Again, Mara crafted a dream to counteract the message of the six friends. This time he brought into being the face of an ancient sage, calling himself ‘the worshipful Vajashravas’. He began, ‘Some people assert that divine punishment threatens the one who kills. I declare this is nonsense. These are fairy tales conjured up by fearful rulers who wish to keep their subjects submissive. These are stories told by parents to force their children to behave as they would wish.  ‘What is a “warrior-noble” if they do not fulfil their duty to wage war? And how can war be fought without lives being taken?  ‘If that is the holy duty of a head-anointed warrior noble king, how could such threats of punishment be real? These are, in truth, only fancies, phantoms conjured up to frighten children, and the cowardly ignorant weaklings who are afraid of taking decisive action. Come, Great King, you will be famous! Now, begin the fight!” Again Vidudabha awoke and turned his army around.    * * *  None among the foot soldiers or the cavalry, or even in the waggon-train with the food supplies, dared to crack a joke about the repeated ‘about-faces’. The memory of Prince Jeta’s head falling and rolling in the dust, and the thud of his body as it hit the ground, were still vivid in the minds of many, and the story of it had spread to those who had not seen it themselves. The King did not have a sense of humour – at least nothing of that side of him was ever shared in public – so a wisecrack about ‘seeing a lot of North-east Kosala’ or suchlike was not something anyone wanted to risk.  For the third time they took the bend in the road and climbed the low hill. King Vidudabha now rode at the front of his troops and his jaw was set, rigid and resolute in purpose.  Once again, despite his grim determination to stick to his plan, as he drew close he saw that the Master was still in his place under the thin-leaved bodhi-tree, with his dark companion beside him. Sweating and tense he rode up the slope, repeating internally his commitment to deliver justice to the Sakyans without regret or remorse.  Each step of his horse drew him closer and, yet again, his rage could not sustain itself, the litany of wrongs began to sound petty and childish in his head, the warmth of the Buddha’s great compassion flowed through his being and, almost without willing it, he reined his horse to a halt and turned around again. This time, by now the third reversal, a few sideways glances were risked amongst the troops. Speculation was rife as to how many more times they would be toing and froing up this road.  As these marches and reversals had been proceeding, the Buddha and Krishna had maintained their vigil beneath the sparse shade of the bodhi-tree. In the

221 
early mornings Krishna and the Master had walked for alms-round in the nearby village but for the rest of the days and the nights they had held their post.  Krishna now understood why the Master had chosen this tree, and how to stay here was an unequivocal message to the King. A message he had received but seemed to be repeatedly forgetting. He also noticed that the Master would sometimes wince in the heat of the day and, after Krishna asked if anything was wrong, he replied that he had a slight headache. On hearing this Krishna quickly realized that suggesting that they move to the other, shady tree, or trying to find medicine in the village, would not be agreed to.  This had been the most wonderful opportunity – to have travelled alone with the Buddha as his attendant, and now to have spent these important days with him – this was the chance of a lifetime.  As he saw this occasional pained expression on the face of the Master, he longed to help and so he considered how he might get Vidudabha to go back to the city of Savatthi once and for all. Without asking the Buddha what he thought of the plan, and without asking what the Master had in mind for them on the morrow, Krishna took off after dark and followed the road south-west.  He arrived at the camp and was, as he had expected, stopped by the guards but he was easily able to convince them that he was the dark monk who was beside the Buddha as his attendant when they were sitting under the tree – many of the soldiers recognized him by now. He asked if he could have an audience with the King as soon as possible. After some discussion he was led to the grandest of the tents in the camp. Around them was the clamour of voices over cook-fires, flagons and crock-jars, as well as the ringing crickets of the forest night.  Krishna had decided that maybe the best thing for the young King was to tell him the full story of his mother’s origins, as far as Krishna knew it, and to introduce himself as the King’s grandfather. This idea being based on the principle that ‘the truth shall set you free’. So, once knowing all about his origins, the King’s heart would be more at ease – this was the hope that had hatched in Krishna’s mind, ignoring the fact that he had also been sitting in the Hot Season sun for three days and that his thinking might be more than slightly addled. Mara had seen an ideal opportunity, once again.  A courtier ushered him into the tent, after having received the go-ahead from His Serene Majesty. The King was plainly in his cups once more. ‘So, why do you want to see me? Eh!? To mock me as Vidu the Fay and the Indecisive? Eh? What do you want?’ The King was both aggressive and fragile in his manner. Krishna cleared his throat.  ‘Your Majesty, Great King, I come to inform you of some truths that I hope will be a balm to your heart and to help settle…” Krishna hunted for the best words, ‘the current situation.’ He could not easily read the expression on the King’s face – was it irritation? Interest? Insult? He decided to plough on.  ‘The long and the short of it is that I am not just a dark-skinned monk who is the attendant of the Master, I am also your grandfather.”

222 
At this moment the King was absently looking for a surface to place his drinking vessel upon. The last words caught his attention and his blue-green eyes flared, fixing Krishna like a gimlet.  ‘What?! You claim to be my grandsire? How so!?’ Krishna sank lower in the small chair he had been offered. ‘Many years ago, before I joined the Order of the Buddha, I met an unusual being, a kinnari, and we became enamoured of each other. I was a callow youth and she was much older but had the appearance of one my age.  ‘To cut a long story short we became a couple and had a child, that child is your mother, Queen Vasabha. That is how I am your grandfather.’ ‘This is outrageous nonsense! I should have your head at once for this insolence. Are you saying that my grandmother was an animal!?” His face was flushed and his eyes ablaze as he said this.  ‘Well, I wouldn’t call a kinnari an “animal”.’ Krishna began, but realized quickly that being pedantic about names and designations would not be helpful. ‘She was an earth-deva. That’s why your mother has some unusual qualities – does she not always have a beautiful fragrance?’ The King grunted agreement.  ‘And does she not have a gentle glow, when it’s dark? And don’t you have some of those attributes too, Sire?’ ‘S’true – that’s why I’m known as Vidu the Fay.’ The King became reflective for a moment. “So, where was she born? In Kapilavatthu?” ‘No Sire, she was born in Ghositarama, Ghosita’s Monastery in Kosambi.’  ‘Why was she born in a monastery?’  ‘That’s because I was a novice monk at the time.’ ‘You were a novice? Weren’t you supposed to be celibate, in that Order of yours?’ Krishna, again cautious not to get into pedantry and say that there wasn’t actually a rule against cohabiting with a deva at that time, opted for simply acknowledging, ‘I was not a very well-behaved novice.’ He looked at the mat-strewn floor of the royal pavilion, then risked a glance at Vidudabha.  The reflective mood was gone and the King looked even more enraged than before. ‘You mean to tell me that, not only was my mother a kitchen slave but that she was born from an illicit union of a shameless monk and a forest creature?! And you tell me this in order to console me?! Get out of my sight, grandfather,’ he spat the word, ‘before I take your head off myself. General!’ He called for Digha-Karaniya, who was leading the troops. ‘We break camp now and march by night – there will be no reversal this time.’   * * *  Krishna rushed the few leagues back to the border, his way guided only by the moon and stars, and then the lightening of the sky in the east. When he reached

223 
the Buddha, the Master was already packed for the road. Krishna was breathless and desperate, but it seemed that, once again he was too late.  ‘There is nothing more we can do here. The Tathagata has exercised his influence three times, if someone presses on beyond those three, then it is out of the Tathagata’s hands. Come, let us go cross-country, to the River Aciravati.’ The army moved through the night as well, reaching the edge of Kapilavatthu at sunrise. On account of the many appearances of the Kosalan troops on the road over the last few days, the Sakyans were prepared for trouble and, as news reached them earlier that Vidudabha had seized the throne from King Pasenadi, it was not difficult to surmise that he had found out about the deception of his mother and that he was on the warpath for vengeance.  All the warriors of Kapilavatthu stood ready, having been on the alert for days. As the ranks of the Kosalan army formed on the fields before the city walls, the Sakyans considered how to show their strength yet, still keep to their preferred standard of non-violence, Mahanama, ruler of the Sakyans, said, ‘We, the kinfolk of the Enlightened One, are unwilling to slay our enemies, rather we are willing to die instead of taking their lives. We are nonetheless trained and skilful; we are expert archers. We will not take the lives of others, since that is now unlawful for us, instead we will demonstrate our skill in archery and put this army to flight by showing our superiority in the field.’ Mahanama declared this all with a clear and resounding, battlefield voice.  The two armies stood face to face, the smaller force of the Sakyans against the walls of the city; the vastly greater forces of Kosala arrayed before them. The Sakyans strung their bows and, aiming with supreme care, darkened the sky with their arrows. The Kosalan forces stood their ground and every single arrow passed between their shields and their flanks with not a single man or horse or elephant being struck.  If this was supposed to impress King Vidudabha it failed as a plan completely. He noted the precision with which the arrows had been fired, turned to face the Sakyans once more and quickly issued the order, ‘Kill them all, man, woman and child, even infants at the breast. Save only Mahanama and whatever nobly born Sakya maidens that can be found.’ General Digha-Karaniya was pleased at the decisiveness of the King, after all his hesitancy.  He roared the order, ‘Forward! No quarter! No mercy! Kosalans, attack!’   * * *  The Kosalan forces scythed through the ranks of Sakyans like the mowing of ripe corn and the city gates were breached in minutes. All the townsfolk were rooted out and slaughtered in the streets and squares.  The King strode proudly into the Santhagara, the audience hall where he had sat and where his insult, this ineradicable stain, had been discovered. His heart was closed to any moral sensitivity other than that rising from his rage and wounded

224 
pride. He had the highest ranking Sakyans lined up against the walls of the hall and their throats were slit as one. Only King Mahanama was left alive. As the blood flowed over the stone slabs of the hall Vidudabha ripped off the front of Mahanama’s smock, soaked it in the pools of blood and declared while wiping the throne with exaggerated gestures, ‘I said I would wash the chair in the lifeblood of the deceitful Sakyans and so have I done. I have been true to my word unlike some others.’ He glared at Mahanama, then walked slowly out into the daylight. Thus was the stock of the Sakyans uprooted by Vidudabha.   * * *  The army looted the city in summary fashion and was soon ready to travel back to Savatthi once more. The King kept Mahanama close to him and relished his conversations with the now-debased Sakyan, gloating unabashedly over the slaughter and degradation he had wrought. He was looking for some humility on the part of Mahanama who was now completely in his power.  On the morning of their first day on the road Vidudabha invited Mahanama to have breakfast with him. The food was laid out in a shady spot close by a lake, still quite full despite it being the Hot Season. Even though he had just seen his entire clan destroyed on account of their overreaching pride, still Mahanama could only think, when receiving the invitation, ‘Members of the kshatriya caste, the warrior nobles, would rather give up their lives than eat with he sons of slave-women.’ So, by way of an excuse, he said, ‘Dear grandson,’ for he knew nothing about Vasabha’s having been adopted, ‘I am grimy after a night in the pens. I would like to bathe before we eat.’ ‘Very well, grandfather,’ he smirked, ‘go and do what you need to.’ Meanwhile Mahanama was thinking, ‘If I refuse to eat with him, he’ll kill me. It’s better if I die by my own hand.’ Then he went to the lake and, by screening himself behind some bushes, he drowned himself and was long dead before anyone found his body.  The King was infuriated by this escape, and he suspected that it was for exactly the reason that Mahanama did it, underscoring the pride of the Sakyans and his own fixed predicament of birth.  Once Mahanama’s body had been fished from the lake, the army started south-west again, and proceeded slowly through the day. The sun was hot and the animals were now extra laden with the booty from Kapilavatthu. When they came to a halt to camp for the evening, Vidudabha was reminded of his order to round up the young maidens of Sakya and to keep them as captives.  He ordered these girls to be brought to him and, once they had all been gathered outside his pavilion, he emerged, wiping his mouth from a snack. There were between two and three hundred young women clustered together. They were grubby from the road and from rough handling by their captors, and some were

225 
bloodstained from the slaughter of their families. Nevertheless, they all stood proudly and did not seem the slightest bit intimidated by the situation.  ‘Daughters of Sakya, you will all now be my Royal Concubines; consider yourselves greatly favoured.’ The young King smirked again relishing his absolute power.  ‘We won’t be possessed by the son of a slave girl,’ said one of the taller of the group.  So, far from meek compliance he was being met with disrespect and audacity, again.  ‘Does this idiot speak for all of you?’  The response was loud and widespread that she did.  ‘There’s not even one of you who chooses to live in luxury rather than die out here in the woods, to be skewered by a sword and die in a ditch?’ His harshness carried an unwanted note of imploration, almost begging, for a moment. There was silence, decorated only by the ringing of cicadas and crickets and the soft hoot of an owl.  ‘So be it.’ He turned to the captain of the guard, ‘Count them now and then kill them, and bring me their right hands. I want to make sure every single one is dead.’ ‘What should we do with the bodies, Sire?’ the captain asked. ‘Why, dig a pit and throw them all in.’  * * *  The six companions had witnessed the end of the march to Kapilavatthu but could not stand to be close to all of the screams of pain and the bloodshed of the massacre. In shock they sought out the Master and Krishna; the companions stayed close by as they made their way through the woods and fields. In their pauses the Master kindly gave them teachings, as he did Krishna, to comfort them and give perspective on what had just happened. He explained that even a fully enlightened Buddha sometimes does not have the power to sway someone in their intent. Similarly how life is not under personal control, no matter how absolute one’s authority seems to be.  After a day or two the Master halted close to the dry river-bed of the Aciravati, which usually flowed strongly and consistently by the city of Savatthi. They were a few leagues from the city still. They made a camp in the forest by the bank of the river, with the Master stating, for his own reasons, ‘This will be a good place.’  Before long the smells, sounds and sight of the Kosalan army became apparent. The river-bed was bone-dry and wide and flat, and since the banks were thickly wooded, King Vidudabha announced, ‘We will pitch camp here, it’s as if the ground was cleared for us.’

226 
A few of the seasoned members of the troops glanced at each other warily but no one dared to say this was a bad idea, and very risky. The King and his less-experienced companions were delighted at the choice, ‘We even have soft sand to lie on – this is luxury!’ The entirety of the army thus lay down to rest in the bed of the River Aciravati. During the night a few of the soldiers were bothered by ants and could not rest. So they shook their uniforms out and climbed the bank and found a good-enough spot to rest, up on top of the slope.  Far into the night the rumbles of thunder and lightning were heard in the distance. A downpour began where the army was sleeping but it had been preceded by a downpour up-river, and high in the hills. A flash flood of gigantic proportions burst down the river-bed. It was a wall of water racing too fast for any to escape its wrath. Men, horses, waggons, elephants – all were washed away, in the chaotic maelstrom of people and wood and metal, harnesses and weapons, everything was smashed to pieces, torn apart and not a living being survived. All became food for fishes and turtles, their remains carried by the flood as far as the estuary and the sea.   * * *  The few soldiers who were up on the bank, having been moved by the ants, looked on the inundation in horrified awe, powerless to offer any aid. They thanked the six-footed friends who had been the cause of their survival. They were, in fact, not far from where the Buddha and Krishna had made their camp so, once the flood had passed its peak and the sudden shock of it all was abating, the Master asked Krishna to go and invite the soldiers to join them. Bee and Gumbiya, Ant and Ninka, Rhamba and Salassa were all gathered close by too, not wishing to be far from the blessèd presence of the Buddha at a terrible time like this. They had been close to the 10,000 people being killed in Kapilavatthu and now 10,000 soldiers and their camp-followers had been wiped out by the forces of nature too.  The Master welcomed the three soldiers and Krishna gave them a mat to sit on. It turned out that each of these three had not been involved in the execution of the Sakyans. ‘We wangled the job of lookin’ after the ’orses – didn’t want to do no killin’ – good fing if y’ask me.’ The others nodded in agreement.  The Master advised them that it was on account of good karma they had created to have been the only ones to escape the torrential flood. While he was offering them some cheer, they having lost so many friends in the disaster that had just happened, he noticed that Krishna was looking filled with despair, heartbroken once again. He turned to him and raised an eyebrow.  ‘What grieves you, in this moment, Krishna?’ His voice as kindly and reassuring as ever.  ‘I can’t believe I was so stupid. If I had not gone to the King and told him about me, us, his grandparents, he wouldn’t… I had the thought that the truth would help set him free of his insecurities. I thought he’d be proud to have a deva as

227 
a grandmother. He called her “an animal”’ – how could he!? She’s an angel, a goddess.’ Krishna wept and the other kinnaris, Bee and Ant, swooped down from the branches where they had settled to comfort him, hug him from either side. He could feel something there but sobbed on.  ‘I’m such an idiot. I never learn!’ ‘Krishna, your intentions were good, have no doubt of that, but the Evil One took an opportunity, seeing you were tired and addled from the heat. Your mind was under his malign influence at that moment so you failed to ask my advice and you plunged in with your wish to convey the truth.  ‘A wise one always speaks the truth; however, they will only speak on something if it is beneficial, not if it is harmful or of no value; whether it is pleasant to hear or painful to hear, a wise one will know the right time to utter such speech. In this case it was true, and could have been beneficial at some future date, but that night was not the right time. So now it’s for you to acknowledge that mistake and to endeavour to do better in the future. Life is uncertain:    ‘Even while a person is gathering flowers,   And is absorbed in pleasure,  Death comes and carries them off  Even as a mighty flood overwhelms a sleeping village.’  Krishna’s heart was immeasurably warmed by this; and he felt comforted too by the presences beside him. The moonlight was bright and he thought he saw red on his left and garnet on his right. Something shifted in him.  ‘Ant? Bee? Is that you? Are you here too?’ The hazy figures nodded, and his heart swelled again.  ==*==
