Knowing the World 
Teachings on the Nature of  Mind 
and the World
by 
Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo
For free distribution only
1st Edition 2013 Copyright by Wat Pah Nanachat, Bung Wai,
Warin Chamrab, Ubon Rachathani 34310, Thailand
Front New.indd   1Front New.indd   1 2013-05-16   10:37:43 AM2013-05-16   10:37:43 AM

Sabbadanam dhammadanam jinati
‘The Gift of  Dhamma Excels All Gifts’
Anumodana to All the Sponsors
Cover Design and Typesetting by Nalin
Photo Credits to Sai, Lasantha & Dilup
Information about the 
Ajahn Chah Tradition
for more teachings of  the Ajahn Chah Tradition
in English (and other languages) please see:
www.forestsanghapublications.org,  www.ajahn-chah.org,
www.watpahnanachat.org,  www.watnongpahpong.org.
Front New.indd   2Front New.indd   2 2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM

Contents
Foreword       
Knowing the World       page  1
About Luang Por Liem      page  25
Front New.indd   3Front New.indd   3 2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM

Foreword
Within this little booklet are teachings on the nature of  the mind 
and the world given by Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo. During a 
visit to Sri Lanka in March, 2013, Luang Por had this Dhamma 
discussion with the resident monastic community at Na Uyana 
Forest Monastery. The sincere interest in practising Dhamma and 
developing meditation led to practical and profound teachings on 
training the mind and understanding the world: 
 
“....The guests that come to the monastery are only 
visitors, just like these visiting mental states that arise in 
our minds. Some make us laugh, some we delight in, while 
others bring up aversion and disappointment. When we 
see them from non-delusion, then we see it all as maya — 
as illusion and trickery, a system of deceiving....Know 
how to abandon the world. Know how to put it down.”
Luang Por explains that what we understand as the world is a 
misunderstanding. As a consequence of  delusion we are overwhelmed 
with craving and attachment. Attaching to mental states and mind 
objects as ‘me’ and ‘mine’ makes us a victim of  delight and aversion. 
This illusion of  ‘self’ and ‘belonging to self’ arises from feeling and 
craving:
“....what we call the ‘Eight Wordly Dhammas’ arise from 
our sense of self-importance. Delight is a lokadhamma — 
this is sukha, or what we call happiness. Aversion is a 
lokadhamma, it’s dukkha — we don’t like it and we’re 
unhappy. See these lokadhammas as simply nature — 
things come, things go. The guests come and they go — 
Front New.indd   4Front New.indd   4 2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM

it’s not their residence. For what do we go delighting and 
getting angry about?....‘Rupa, vedana, sañña, sankhara 
and viññana — having arisen they cease’. Seen in this 
way, everything is empty.”
Luang Por is urging us to investigate just what is the nature of  these 
visiting mental states? What is the nature of  these ﬁ ve khandas? 
Coming and going and arising and ceasing is the nature of  this 
world — Who has control and over what? Through understanding 
the nature of  the mind and the nature of  the world one arrives at:
“....knowing and seeing the mind as it really is. That’s 
the so-called mind-moment of insight — seeing that ‘the 
citta is just the citta’, or ‘the mind is simply the mind’....If 
we set the mind free from delighting — abandon craving 
and attachment — then there’s nothing there. As I see it, 
this is the normal state of the mind....Neither happy nor 
sad. Just nature pure and simple. This is the normal state 
of the mind which gives rise to peace.”
The mind and the world belong to nature — empty of  self  and what 
belongs to self. This natural approach to understanding Dhamma 
through training the heart and mind is an essential feature of  the 
Luang Pu Chah way of  practice. Through diligence and sincerely 
practising Dhamma-Vinaya one gets the taste of  ‘path and fruit’ 
for oneself  — the vimuttirasa, the taste of  freedom.  Luang Por 
Liem, as a close disciple of  Luang Pu Chah, has faithfully followed 
in his footsteps this direct path to living realization.  Now as an 
inspiring example of  Dhamma-Vinaya himself  Luang Por Liem 
offers his teachings and service to the Sangha and the Sasana.  May 
all who aspire to know and see the nature of  the heart and mind 
— to know and see the nature of  the world, diligently apply these 
practical and profound teachings. We have Luang Por’s assurance 
that:
Front New.indd   5Front New.indd   5 2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM

“...Those who do so will come to see the value and beneﬁ t 
for themselves through their own practice.” 
With Prosperity in the Dhamma,
The Translators
Wat Pah Nanachat, May 2013
Front New.indd   6Front New.indd   6 2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM2013-05-16   10:37:47 AM

Knowing the World
Teachings on the Nature of  Mind and the World 
A Dhamma Talk and discussion with the monastic community of  monks, 
novices, nuns and lay-meditators at Na Uyana Forest Monastery, Sri 
Lanka, on the evening of  March 16th, 2013.
U
sually, when we gather together like this 
or meet for devotional puja we begin with 
some chanting. In our chanting we praise 
and show our reverence for the tiratana — the Triple 
Gem. This revering the virtues and qualities, the 
gunadhamma of  the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha 
inspires our going for refuge. The Triple Gem is 
the real treasure, or the real inheritance for those of  
us who are determined to follow in the ‘footsteps 
of  the Enlightened Ones’. We do the chanting and 
devotional puja for re ﬂ ecting on this. One of  our 
reﬂ ections speciﬁ cally refers to the noble qualities 
of  the Sangha: 
“Supatipanno bhagavato savaka sangho.
Ujupatipanno bhagavato savaka sangho.
Ñayapatipanno bhagavato savaka sangho.
Samicipatipanno bhagavato savaka sangho.”
[“They are the Blessed One’s disciples who have practised 
well. Who have practised directly. Who have practised 
insightfully. Those who practice with integrity.”]  
main New3.indd   1main New3.indd   1 2013-05-16   10:39:30 AM2013-05-16   10:39:30 AM

2 Knowing the World
These four attributes, or ways of  referring to the 
Sangha, are like the ‘footsteps of  the Enlightened Ones’. 
We show our reverence and respect for these virtuous 
qualities of  Sangha which follow on from the Noble 
Triple Gem.
Within these qualities are the virtues we aspire 
to develop in ourselves through good conduct and 
practising Dhamma. This is a kind of  developing which 
proceeds to lift us up and lead us onwards to the state 
of  completeness and perfection. However, the extent to 
which it is thus fulﬁ lling depends on our commitment to 
the practice. We can say that all these virtues we aspire to 
develop converge in the quality of  sallekha, or effacement. 
Sallekha is the wearing away of  kilesas — the abandoning 
of  deﬁ lements leading to freedom from dukkha. The heart 
free from kilesas experiences 
a peaceful sense of  seclusion, 
a calm and cool mind. It thus 
makes us a true ‘ ﬁ eld of  merit’ 
for anyone who encounters us. 
‘Samananan ca dassanam ’ — the 
sight of  a samana, ‘a peaceful one’  
is indeed a blessing, something 
which is good.
Now this good opportunity we all have to further 
develop ourselves should really be taken up in a 
wholehearted way. We who have genuine respect for 
noble virtues will naturally apply ourselves to sincerely 
practising Dhamma-Vinaya. Those who do so will come 
to see the value and bene ﬁ t for themselves through 
their own practice. For all of  us Dhamma friends here 
main New3.indd   2main New3.indd   2 2013-05-16   10:39:39 AM2013-05-16   10:39:39 AM

Knowing the World  3
tonight we might say we ‘live in the cool shade of  the 
yellow robes’. We have a most suitable situation for doing 
whatever needs doing to diligently bring our Dhamma 
practice to fruition.
So this evening I respectfully extend my greetings 
to all of  you Venerable Ones here. You who are ﬁ rmly 
determined in heart and mind to practising Dhamma 
in this sincere way. On account of  this I anumodana — 
I express my joy and appreciation. Now I open up the 
opportunity to all of  you, if  you have any questions 
regarding what might be bene ﬁ cial for your practice, or 
if  you have anything in general you would like to ask. 
***
Question: Luang Por, please allow us to respectfully ask 
a question. Some of the meditators practise very hard 
trying to remove de ﬁ lements and improve mindfulness, 
but it’s very dif ﬁ cult for them. Developing the mind 
through meditation is very dif ﬁ cult for them. Could 
Luang Por, our Venerable Teacher, please explain why 
this is difﬁ cult for them?
main New3.indd   3main New3.indd   3 2013-05-16   10:39:39 AM2013-05-16   10:39:39 AM

4 Knowing the World
Answer: Regarding the developing of  our Dhamma 
practice, it’s important not to have craving or desire as part 
of  that process. We must avoid having craving or desire 
in the mind when we take up the practice. Our primary 
task is to become established as one who is free from 
heedlessness — one who is appamado. You can compare it 
to planting a fruit tree. We begin with a fruit tree sapling 
and a well-chosen place for planting. Then we dig a hole, 
provide the right mix of  soil and fertilizer and plant the 
sapling tree. Next we give the right amount of  water and 
sunlight, taking care to optimise growing conditions. In 
addition we need to protect the sapling from harmful 
insects and other dangers. Now, after having provided the 
optimum causes and conditions, the growth and maturity 
of  the fruit tree is something we cannot determine for 
ourselves. We can’t force it to grow in any way. As long 
as we have done our duty well by optimising growing 
conditions, then the fruit tree will grow in balance with 
nature and mature accordingly. In the meanwhile, we 
continue to protect it from insects and other dangers or 
obstacles to growth. It will grow in accordance with and 
to whatever extent there is this balance of  nature in the 
causes and conditions. Eventually our mature fruit tree 
will ﬂ ower and bear fruit. So regarding our development 
in Dhamma practice, we have to consider it in this way.  
Venerable Ananda, who was himself  the Buddha’s 
younger relative, also served as the Buddha’s upatthana 
monk, his faithful attendant. After the Buddha’s ﬁ nal 
passing away at parinibbana, he was still not yet perfected 
regarding his attainment as a fully enlightened arahant. 
But Venerable Ananda was encouraged by the Buddha’s 
prediction that after his parinibbana Ananda would in this 
main New3.indd   4main New3.indd   4 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

Knowing the World  5
very life indeed realize that 
attainment. However, as the 
First Sangha Council to codify 
the Dhamma-Vinaya was approaching he still had not realized arahant. So in order to 
enter that First Sangha Council assembly as a Fully Enlightened One, Venerable Ananda put forth great effort in 
his practice to realise that goal. But even as he put forth 
great effort, the very obstacle to realisation was his desire 
for the goal. It was only when he had ﬁ nally given up and 
abandoned that desire that his mind experienced a kind 
of  emptiness that opened the doorway for the real coolness to enter his heart. So regarding this craving and desire, we have to know it as an obstacle for our Dhamma 
practice which makes it develop slowly. We have to do the 
practice without being driven by craving and desire.
***
Question: Luang Por, in your biography (No Worries, 
2012) it says that when you ﬁ rst arrived at Ajahn Chah’s 
monastery he taught you the brahma-viharas. I was 
wondering what Ajahn Chah’s instructions were? How 
did he teach you the brahma-vihara meditation? 
Answer: The brahma-viharas are the four ‘Divine 
Abidings’ of  loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic 
joy and equanimity. They are one attribute or one way of  
describing the virtues and qualities of  the Noble Ones. But 
main New3.indd   5main New3.indd   5 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

6 Knowing the World
in the way Luang Pu Chah ﬁ rst taught me this, he actually 
called them the appamañña-dhammas — the ‘Boundless 
Qualities’. For example, one way of  understanding the 
metta appamañña-dhamma  is this state of  having lovingkindness without attachment to any particular individual 
or any particular place. If  it is just ordinary brahma-vihara 
metta regarding particular individuals, then it’s more like 
affectionate love with attachment. The Lord Buddha, 
while still living the lay-life as a prince, upon hearing 
that his royal wife had given birth to a son exclaimed: “A 
fetter has been born to me!” So you see, this is the kind 
of  love with attachment. Is it different from the kind of  
metta without attachment? When understood in this way, 
the brahma-viharas are virtues of  the Noble Ones and we 
call them the appamañña-dhammas. 
Actually, Luang Pu Chah spoke in a way 
which was leading away from worldliness and 
the unenlightened state. He didn’t speak using 
the language of  puthujjanas, the unenlightened 
ones. He simply spoke in a way that led the 
mind to true peace and seclusion. Consequently, 
Luang Pu Chah’s teaching encouraged in us 
a sense of  responsibility to do the practice 
properly. This is how I saw it. What he said 
would elevate the level of  our sati. He kind 
of  cautioned us or reminded us how to have 
mindfulness regarding the practice. So it’s 
similar to what the Buddha said: “The Buddha 
only points the way”  (MN 107).  But the task 
for the one actually doing the practice — that’s 
another story.
main New3.indd   6main New3.indd   6 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

Knowing the World  7
***
Question: I ask permission from Venerable Bhante, our 
Venerable Teacher, and from all the Venerable Ones here 
to ask my question. My question is: Can our Venerable 
Teacher please explain how you understand what is 
‘path-consciousness’, or magga-citta, and what is ‘fruitconsciousness’, or phala-citta? And the second question 
is: What is ‘total-nibbana’, or parinibbana? Thank you 
very much.
Answer: Nibbana — nibbana is the ending of  kilesas. The 
ending of  greed, aversion and delusion. We can say that 
this is one attribute or one quality of  Dhamma. Nibbana 
is the ending of  craving and desire because all craving 
and desire has been abandoned. Delight comes from 
desire. Satisfaction comes from desire. Aversion and 
dissatisfaction come from desire. This craving and desire 
is essentially bound up with feeling — sampayutta — and 
is a consequence of  ignorance or faulty understanding. 
The Noble Arahants encourage us with this re ﬂ ection: 
“rupa, vedana, sañña, sankhara and viññana — having arisen 
they cease”. These ﬁ ve aggregates of  form, feeling, 
perception, formations and consciousness are simply of  
a nature to arise and pass away — just that much. Seen in 
this way, everything is empty.
As for magga-citta and phala-citta: Through watching 
and carefully guarding our mind we come to a state we 
call ‘puu ruu ’. This Thai word ‘puu ruu ’ means knowing 
and seeing the mind as it really is. But can you actually 
see yourself  in this way if  there are still obstacles in your 
main New3.indd   7main New3.indd   7 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

8 Knowing the World
mind or de ﬁ lements blocking 
your seeing? Because usually as 
puthujjanas we still have obstacles 
and blindness — the greed, 
aversion and delusion which 
are clouding and polluting our 
minds. It’s like water. If  water 
has green substance mixed in 
with it, we don’t say, “What’s this green substance in the 
water?” Rather we just call it: “green water.” Or if  it has 
red substance in it we say: “That’s red water.” Actually, 
what we are seeing and referring to is the substance in the 
water. So regarding these kinds of  citta or states of  mind, 
they are actually different levels of  someone seeing their 
own purity. When there are obstacles, you won’t see it. 
When the obstacles are gone you see it clearly. That’s the 
so-called mind-moment of  insight — seeing that ‘the citta 
is just the citta’, or ‘the mind is simply the mind’.  
***
Question: Venerable Ajahn, as the abbot of a monastery 
a monk has to deal with a lot of people, both monks and 
lay-people. Some of them are greedy, others are angry 
and some of them are deluded or even crazy. How to 
deal with these people? And how, as an abbot or a senior 
monk in a monastery, to let one’s mind remain calm and 
cool? So that is my question.
Answer: This is something that actually everyone has to 
deal with. The Thai word for abbot is ‘ jao-awat’. What it 
main New3.indd   8main New3.indd   8 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

Knowing the World  9
literally means is: ‘jao’ is the lord or the owner, and ‘awat’ 
comes from the Pali word avasa which means a residence 
or dwelling place. So we could say that jao-awat means the 
‘lord of  the residence’ or the ‘owner of  the dwelling place’. 
Now whoever is to be the lord of  the residence has to 
know that dwelling place well. But just what is this dwelling 
place we must know well? Rupa, vedana, sañña, sankhara and 
viññana  — this is our real residence. The more we abandon 
our delusion regarding our real residence, the more we 
develop upekkha and abide in equanimity. 
The guests that come to 
our monastery are agantukas 
— only visitors, just like these 
visiting mental states that arise 
in our minds. Some make us 
laugh, some we delight in, while 
others bring up aversion and 
disappointment. When we see 
them from non-delusion, then we see it all as maya — as 
illusion and trickery, a system of  deceiving. The delusion 
and illusory nature of  the world are like a theatre which 
tricks us into getting happy, excited and carried away. As 
we read in the Buddha’s teachings, once he said: 
“Etha passathimam lokam, cittam rajarathu pamam;
yattha bala visidanti, natthi sangho vijanatam.”
[“Come look at this glittering world, like unto a royal 
chariot; the foolish are immersed in it, but the wise do not 
touch it.” (Dhp. 13, 171)] 
main New3.indd   9main New3.indd   9 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

10 Knowing the World
The Buddha urged us all to see the world in this way. 
If  we see it with delusion, then we’ll see the world as 
delightful, sparkling and desirable. But for those who know 
the world in line with Dhamma, will they go searching for 
anything substantial in it? Know how to abandon the world. 
Know how to put it down. There is an old Northeast Thai 
expression which says: “The one who is the loser, or the 
one who knows how to surrender, that one is a monk or 
a Venerable One. And the one who wins — the winner is 
mara, because a winner has enemies.”
The lokadhammas, or what we call the ‘Eight Wordly 
Dhammas’, arise from our sense of  self-importance. 
Delight is a lokadhamma — this is sukha, or what we call 
happiness. Aversion is a lokadhamma, it’s dukkha — we 
don’t like it and we’re unhappy. See these lokadhammas 
as simply nature — things come, things go. The guests 
come and they go — it’s not their residence. For what do 
we go delighting and getting angry about? All we really 
need is what’s sufﬁ cient for us to do our samana duties 
well — that’s enough. 
The lokadhammas are the dhammas which bind up 
and shackle the world. The Lord Buddha sat above them. 
We read this story when we study the scriptures. Before 
his attainment of  anuttara-sammasammbodhiñana, on the day of  his 
Supreme Enlightenment, the 
Buddha received eight bunches 
of  Kusa grass from the Brahman 
Sotthiya (SnA.II,391). Taking 
the grass he proceeded to make 
a seat to sit on. Our traditional 
main New3.indd   10main New3.indd   10 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

Knowing the World  11
interpretation of  this story is that these eight bunches 
of  Kusa grass represent the eight worldly dhammas that 
the Buddha rose up above. What are these eight worldly 
dhammas? They are the four pairs of: gain and loss, fame 
and obscurity, praise and blame and more generally we 
have sukha and dukkha, or happiness and suffering. If  we 
can really see these eight worldly dhammas for what they 
are, then just this is enough for understanding what keeps 
us shackled in the world. These are the worldly dhammas 
which bind up and shackle the world.
The kicca-vatta, or the ‘Fourteen Monastic Duties’, 
form one chapter of  the Vinaya discipline which we are 
responsible for training in as monastics. One of  these 
kicca-vatta is called the avasika-vatta, or the duties of  the 
resident monastics regarding their residence. But actually 
it doesn’t refer to any one monastic in particular. It just 
refers to anyone who is residing there and knows the 
place well. Such a person we could call the abbot or the 
jao-avasa, the lord of  the residence. Even if  it’s a dog who 
lives there and knows the place well, we could call it the 
‘lord of  the residence’. 
There is a story about a wise old monk. He had a 
way of  teaching people who were lost in their own selfimportance. This old monk had a dog in his monastery 
and he called his dog ‘Sompan’.  Sompan is yet another 
Thai word for abbot — we should understand that all 
these names are just conventions. If  a guest who had selfimportance came to the monastery and said: “Where’s 
sompan, where’s the abbot?” This monk would point over 
there and say: “There’s sompan, there’s the abbot.” And 
that person would go and see that it’s just a dog and get 
main New3.indd   11main New3.indd   11 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

12 Knowing the World
offended, thinking that the old monk was teasing him. So 
it was a skilful means for reducing ditthi-mana — the sense 
of  self-importance and conceit — and also for teaching 
the nature of  conventions. It is important for us too not 
to get lost in these conventions. 
This Thai word for abbot, sompan, comes from the 
Pali word sambhara. It literally means ‘the one who carries 
the burden’. Actually all of  us here are abbots and we’re 
all carrying around this burden of  rupa, vedana, sañña, 
sankhara and viññana. When we start to feel how heavy it 
is we want to put it down. This sambhara — we have to 
put it down. Just put down the burden. I live over there 
in Thailand. I’m not really the lord of  the residence. This 
body, this rupa-khanda doesn’t belong to me. And whatever 
place we call our country actually belongs to nature. If  we 
set the mind free from delighting — abandon craving 
and attachment — then there’s nothing there. As I see 
it, this is the normal state 
of  the mind. Neither good 
nor bad. Neither heavy nor 
light. Neither black nor 
white. Neither happy nor 
sad. Just nature pure and 
simple. This is the normal 
state of  the mind which 
gives rise to peace.
[Luang Por Liem invites Tan Ajahn Jundee to say a few words. He is 
a senior disciple of  Venerable Ajahn Chah with 39 vassa as a monk. 
He has been the abbot of  Wat Pah Ampawan, Mango-grove Forest 
Monastery, in Thailand for more than 25 years now.]
main New3.indd   12main New3.indd   12 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

Knowing the World  13
Luang Por, I respectfully request 
permission to speak. Respectful 
greetings to the Sangha here. 
As for myself  and my status 
here today, I’m what’s called a 
‘paccha-samana’, or an attendant 
monk following behind Luang 
Por Liem. Now Luang Por has 
invited me to say a few words. By 
giving me this opportunity to speak, maybe I can add 
a little something to our understanding. These are just 
some thoughts of  mine and perhaps it’s not all correct. 
Nevertheless, I can say something for you to consider.
Especially regarding this question of  being an abbot 
— as Luang Por was explaining sompan literally means ‘the 
one who carries the burden’. If  we don’t understand this 
situation, then we do end up carrying everything around 
and it does indeed become a heavy burden. The monastery 
is heavy, the lay-people are heavy, the material things are 
heavy — everything becomes really heavy. Luang Pu 
Chah used to warn us about this. When he would send 
his monks away to other branch monasteries for the vassa 
Rains Retreat he would say to them: “Be careful you don’t 
turn into the ‘abbot’ — the sompan — because that’s the 
gateway to hell.” One way of  understanding this is that 
when our mind-state degenerates into a state of  suffering 
and negativity then it comes closer to the hell realms. For 
the one who takes everything up as a burden, it’s easy 
to as if  ‘fall into hell’. If  we don’t yet have some ﬁ rm 
foundation in our Dhamma practice which we can rely 
on in dif ﬁ cult situations, then anything can turn into 
a hell realm. The lay-people, the monks, the material 
main New3.indd   13main New3.indd   13 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

14 Knowing the World
things in the monastery — anything. And this shows that 
attachment and sense of  self  are becoming involved and 
taking over. 
I live over there in Thailand and I’ve 
been an abbot for over 25 years now. 
I’ve been through just about everything. 
I’ve been accused, I’ve been criticized 
— all kinds of  things. If  we’re not solid 
in our practice and able to patiently 
endure dif ﬁ culties, then there’s no way 
we’ll survive. Just as Luang Por was now 
explaining, it’s essential to understand 
these eight worldly dhammas. As long as 
we know them for what they are, then we 
won’t go picking things up whereby they 
turn into burdens. 
Metta is another essential dhamma we must rely upon 
for wellbeing. Just now the questioner mentioned how 
some people who come to the monastery have greed, 
some have anger and some are deluded or even crazy. 
This is just the nature of  people. If  we understand this 
then there’s no real problem, there’s nothing really there. 
If  we don’t understand this, then everything can become a 
burden. But it’s especially important with difﬁ cult people 
that we are established with metta-dhamma, this quality of  
loving-kindness which works wonders.
I’d like to refer again to that old Northeast Thai 
expression about surrendering that Luang Por had 
mentioned: “The monk or the Venerable One in you will 
arise when you surrender.” I’ll give you an example from 
main New3.indd   14main New3.indd   14 2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM2013-05-16   10:39:40 AM

Knowing the World  15
my own life. It was my second year at Wat Pah Ampawan, 
the monastery where I live in Thailand. At that time I 
was still a new abbot and didn’t yet know much about 
anything. A problem arose and I had no idea what was 
behind it. One day a group of  lay-people from the village 
came to the monastery. They were very angry and accused 
me of  misbehaving. Although the accusations were false 
and aggressive, I kept up the metta with them. They were 
using very harsh language and words that I wouldn’t even 
want to repeat here. But I’ll give you one example. They 
were using a Thai expression like: “You’re such a greedy 
pig of  an abbot!” And I really didn’t understand why they 
were saying it because I hadn’t been greedy like that.
Actually it turned out that one group of  monastery 
supporters had put up markers to indicate the monastery 
boundaries. There were basically two groups of  laypeople: the group of  local villagers who supported the 
monastery and wanted us to be there, and the other group 
that didn’t want us to be there. And it was this group that 
was angry about monastery boundaries being put up. But 
I hadn’t been involved — it was the group of  
monastery supporters who had done it. So I 
just smiled and said: “Look, don’t worry. Say 
whatever it is you have to say and I’ll just listen 
to everybody.” As I was hearing everybody, they 
were getting more and more angry and heated. 
And they actually had weapons, they had knives 
and long swords. By now the one group of  laypeople was ready to physically harm the other 
for this dispute over land. So when I saw that, I 
simply said: “Look, this has gone far enough. If  
you act now following on this anger then you’ll 
main New3.indd   15main New3.indd   15 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

16 Knowing the World
regret it a lot later. But if  you stop now, you still stand a 
chance.” That’s all I said. I just warned them like that and 
walked away to go sit in the meditation sala. After sitting 
there in the sala for a while, I saw them coming over to me 
with their swords. I thought: “Oh no, now they’re coming 
to kill me.” But actually they came into the sala, put down 
their weapons and said: “Ajahn, thank you for saying that. 
We could have killed somebody just now and we would 
have regretted it.” 
So as it turned out, the situation wasn’t such a big 
ordeal. But if  I hadn’t had some good foundation in 
practice, then it could have turned into a bigger problem. 
As Luang Por was just explaining, this being an abbot or 
a sompan can mean ‘the one who carries the burden’. If  
we’re not yet ﬁ rmly established in our practice, then it will 
be difﬁ cult. We really have to ﬁ nd ways to not grasp and 
cling to these things as ‘me’ and ‘mine’. In other words, if  
we just don’t pick it up and carry it around, then it’s not 
really going to be a problem. If  we know how to let go 
and abandon situations as soon as they arise, then we stay 
normal. It’s natural that mental states come and 
go — it works the same way in us as in others. If  
we understand that it’s really a trick of  the kilesas, 
then we need not take it on as a burden. As Luang 
Pu Chah used to say: “Whatever burden other 
people are carrying around, don’t go making it 
your burden.” I really like this saying. If  they want 
to carry around a burden then that’s their business. 
But as for us — just don’t pick it up and remain 
calm and cool. So these are just a few re ﬂ ections 
that I offer for your consideration.
main New3.indd   16main New3.indd   16 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

Knowing the World  17
***
Question: Luang Por, please allow me to ask a question. 
Could you brieﬂ y explain how hard you put forth effort 
to develop your practice in the early years? This will 
be very bene ﬁ cial for our newly ordained venerable 
monastics and new meditators to hear how you put forth 
effort in the beginning of your practice.
Answer: The changes in our lives are just natural because 
nature changes. We begin our arising in the world with 
the little body of  a baby. As time passes by and we grow 
up, even that process of  growing up is actually the body 
declining, changing and becoming otherwise. 
So at ﬁ rst, of  course, I never thought that I would 
become a monk. But this was also to change. Initially, 
living in society we have to work hard to develop ourselves 
and get it right. As time passed by I tried to do my duty 
well, and learned more and more what my role in life was. 
On the one hand, from the point of  view of  the world, it 
is normal and customary for young people to get married 
and raise a family, following on from their 
hopes and wishes. But this was not to happen 
to me. Now on the other hand, there is the 
point of  view of  those who want to follow 
in the footsteps of  the Lord Buddha. I could 
see that following the way of  the world was 
the way leading to non-freedom. It was the 
way leading to bondage and con ﬁ nement, 
like being in prison. 
main New3.indd   17main New3.indd   17 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

18 Knowing the World
 Having had this initial insight, I decided I needed 
to grow further in knowledge and understanding. So 
I renounced the world in order to train myself  and 
discover the full meaning of  it. I took up the way of  
training for one who sees the danger and disadvantage 
in samsara, this ‘cycle of  birth and death’. We usually just 
call it ordaining, or becoming a monk, or renouncing the 
world. But it wasn’t as if  I was straight away able to give 
up everything. My mind still had the usual obstacles in 
it, so I determined to ﬁ nd out why. For the most part 
I didn’t study externally. The place to study was right 
here within myself, learning how to make my mind pure. 
Purifying all aspects of  my conduct in order to become a 
samana, to become beautiful in the spiritual sense. I made 
it an all-around training in Dhamma-Vinaya. If  I was as 
yet unable to accomplish some particular practical skill, 
then I would train further right there.
One way of  training I used in learning how to purify 
myself  was the dhutanga-vattas. These are the austerities, or 
the ascetic practices established by the Buddha for ‘going 
against the stream of  craving’. They are especially useful 
for confronting and ‘burning up’ feelings which arise on 
account of  experiencing unfamiliar and 
challenging situations. For example, the 
Buddha allowed us and advised us to 
eat just one meal a day. When I ﬁ rst 
took up this practice — oh! it was so 
difﬁ cult. I wasn’t familiar with it at all. 
Before ordaining I had eaten at least 
three times a day. But the purpose of  
these dhutanga trainings is to go against 
the stream of  our familiar comforts and 
main New3.indd   18main New3.indd   18 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

Knowing the World  19
conveniences. This tends to stir up feelings, which show 
up where the craving is hiding. If  we don’t go against the 
stream, then we’ll never know.
 So out of  respect for this dhutanga 
training I took up the practice of  eating 
one meal a day. At ﬁ rst I was very hungry 
and it was so unpleasant. Agitation, 
concern and anxiety would arise and I 
would often lose heart and feel that I 
just couldn’t do it. Actually, this is a big 
danger. As mentioned in the discourse 
where the Buddha teaches the dangers 
for newly ordained monastics, it can be 
disastrous (MN 67).  Initially eating just 
once a day brings up agitation, and in 
a few hours you’re hungry again. Hunger is a kind of  
dukkha. But when this kind of  dukkha arises we must 
avoid encouraging and developing it. Out of  respect and 
love for these rules and principles we have to contemplate: 
“What is hunger? — What is thirst?” Over time as my 
body adapted all these concerns and agitations faded and 
the feelings of  hunger reduced. As the Buddha teaches, 
one of  the dangers for newly ordained monastics is this 
inability to endure feelings of  hunger. Initially, until 
we adapt, we may have to rely on patient endurance to 
overcome this danger.
As time passed by — with the ayu-sankhara life 
principle gradually wearing away — I g ained more and 
more experience. However, I could see that my mind was 
still corrupted with kilesas. I felt like a lotus still mired 
in the mud of  raga, dosa and moha — still stuck in the 
main New3.indd   19main New3.indd   19 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

20 Knowing the World
swamp of  greed, aversion and delusion. But actually, if  
I hadn’t seen these kilesas there, then I wouldn’t have 
kept practising. If  I hadn’t seen the impurities still in the 
mind, then I wouldn’t have known how it needed further 
purifying. So I continued on diligently practicing the 
dhutanga-vattas with a sense of  urgency to purify the mind 
of  deﬁ lements.
All of  us here, out of  respect for the Noble Dhamma 
— the Noble Teachings of  the Lord Buddha, should 
endeavour to diligently practice this Dhamma-Vinaya 
well in accordance with our ability. Having ordained as a 
bhikkhu or a monastic into this well proclaimed Doctrine 
and Discipline, we can say we ‘live in the cool shade of  
the yellow robes’. We should frequently remind ourselves 
that the world regards us pujaniya-puggalla — those who 
are worthy of  great reverence and respect. But we should 
beware not to see this as personal 
respect. Rather these yellow robes 
are the ‘Banners of  the Arahants’, 
and the faithful are bowing to the 
ariyavamsa — the great lineage 
of  Enlightened Ones. As for us 
personally, all we have is this patikula 
rupa-khanda, these dirty bodies of  
ours. If  we can see it in this way, it 
helps to humble the heart and free it 
from sensual desire and craving.
So these are some reﬂ ections on how I initially began 
developing my practice of  Dhamma-Vinaya. At the very 
least we are able to cultivate a certain wholesome pride 
and good feeling that we’re not living a disgraceful or 
main New3.indd   20main New3.indd   20 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

Knowing the World  21
worthless life. But actually, moreover than that, when 
we diligently practise like this we are following in the 
footsteps of  the Noble Ones.
The Venerable Ratthapala was one endowed with 
great faith in the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha — a real 
saddha-carita. This quality of  having great faith is indeed 
a spiritual virtue. But in addition to this, Venerable 
Ratthapala had a special view on the world which helped 
him to abandon desire and eliminate 
craving from his heart. Perhaps we’ve 
all studied the Ratthapala Sutta (MN 82).  
First he pointed to the world and said: 
“Any world is unstable, it is swept away.” 
Again he pointed and said: “Any world has 
no shelter and no protector.” And again 
he said: “Any world has nothing of  its 
own — one has to leave all and pass on.” 
Finally he said: “Any world is incomplete, 
insatiate, the slave of  craving.” 
These reﬂ ections point us to abandoning craving for 
the world and putting it down. If  you can do this much, 
then the maccu-raja — the ‘Lord of  Death’ — cannot ﬁ nd 
you. So I see the world in the same way as Venerable 
Ratthapala did. All the wealth and treasure, material things, 
this body — rupa-khanda, dhatu-khanda — nothing lasts. It’s 
all simply an expression and manifestation of  change and 
decay. Keep abandoning delight and aversion from your 
mind. See everything as not your self  or belonging to you. 
We have no real power or control over our life or the world. 
This nature of  things is an attribute of  Dhamma. We must 
be diligent in withdrawing our infatuation and intoxication 
main New3.indd   21main New3.indd   21 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

22 Knowing the World
with the world. Keep letting go of  deﬁ lements as soon as 
they arise. This will keep the heart and mind calm and cool, 
leading it to peace. So this is just the way we have to do it. 
***
[Concluding remarks by Venerable Ariyananda Mahathero, acting abbot 
of  Na Uyana Forest Monastery, Sri Lanka.]
From Luang Por and all the Venerable Sangha here I request 
permission to speak. Today our time has passed already. 
For two hours now we have been discussing Dhamma. We 
have heard many valuable teachings. I feel our Venerable 
Teacher’s Dhamma will be very bene ﬁ cial for all the 
venerable monks, nuns and lay-devotees. Our Venerable 
Teacher has been focusing on how we can develop our 
practice, such as through developing calmness, in order to 
reach real happiness. These teachings are very bene ﬁ cial 
for us. Especially when, for example, sometimes we are 
meditating or practising and, for one reason or another, 
our conﬁ dence can decline. But when we see this kind of  
Venerable Teacher, and we hear this kind of  Dhamma, 
again our con ﬁ dence increases. Such valuable Dhamma 
can again give us energy to keep practising. So with much 
appreciation, we are very grateful to our Luang Por for 
delivering these Dhamma teachings.
main New3.indd   22main New3.indd   22 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

Knowing the World  23
At one point it occurred to me that maybe we have 
been working our Luang Por too hard, because he has 
been giving many Dhamma sermons. Now for today, 
this is the third Dhamma Talk and also there have been 
a few Dhamma discussions. That is a full schedule for 
the whole day for Luang Por and all the Venerable Ones, 
and it may be tiring for them. The last 
few days have also been the same as 
today. But through it all Luang Por didn’t 
show any tiredness. For this we are 
very happy. He feels that whatever the 
schedule is we should follow it. I recall 
one occasion when even I was very tired, 
but Luang Por continued on to complete 
the programme. In this way also Luang 
Por can inspire in us this arousal of  
energy and endurance. These factors are 
very important for us to develop in our 
meditation. Sometimes, for one reason 
or another, some laziness arises and we 
feel that we cannot continue practising. 
Maybe it’s due to painfulness in our body, 
for example. But when we recollect these 
kinds of  teachers, then we again get 
energy to continue practising.
So on behalf  of  Na Uyana Mahathera (Venerable 
Ariyadhamma Mahathero), the Na Uyana Venerable 
Sangha of  monks and nuns, and also the lay-devotees 
and faithful lay-supporters, we respectfully invited our 
Venerable Luang Por and his attending Venerable Ajahns 
to come visit us here in Sri Lanka and they kindly accepted. 
We are very thankful to Luang Por for coming and helping 
main New3.indd   23main New3.indd   23 2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM2013-05-16   10:39:41 AM

24 Knowing the World
our Buddha Sasana (Buddhist Religion) and our Buddhist 
tradition. We offer our highest reverence and respect for 
the saddhamma sermons he has delivered here. We wish 
our Luang Por to live more than 120 years to support the 
Sasana. But please understand, with this kind of  Venerable 
Teachers, if  they live long or not, it’s not for their sake but 
for the sake of  the Sasana. The Sasana is shining when 
these Venerables are there. Also if  there are any noble 
wishes that the Luang Por has, may all those noble wishes 
be fulﬁ lled.
And from our Na Uyana Sangha and community, 
and all the lay-devotees and faithful lay-supporters, we 
respectfully wish Tan Ajahn Jundee, Tan Ajahn Satien, 
Venerable Ajahn Siripañño and Venerable Ajahn Kevali 
further good practice, 
good health and long life 
to support the Sasana. 
Also on behalf  of  the 
Na Uyana Sangha we 
would like to ask for 
forgiveness if  there 
was any discomfort or 
inconvenience regarding 
our organization and 
hospitality during the event of  your visit. We please ask 
for forgiveness from Luang Por and the visiting Sangha. 
We again wish Luang Por and the Sangha to live long to 
support the Sasana.
***
main New3.indd   24main New3.indd   24 2013-05-16   10:39:42 AM2013-05-16   10:39:42 AM

Knowing the World  25
About Luang Por Liem 
Luang Por Liem Thitadhammo is a Buddhist monk 
in the Thai Forest Tradition. He was born in Sri Saket 
Province in the Northeast of  Thailand on the 5th of  
November 1941. After higher ordination at twenty years 
of  age, Luang Por practiced in several village monasteries 
throughout the Northeast. With a growing interest in 
Dhamma-Vinaya and practising meditation, he joined the 
Forest Tradition in 1969.
He took up the training under Luang Pu Chah, who 
was later to become one of  the most famous monks of  
the Thai Forest Tradition. Living under Luang Pu Chah’s 
guidance in Wat Nong Pah Pong, Ubon Province, Luang 
Por Liem soon became one of  his closest disciples. During 
that time Luang Pu Chah’s reputation 
and inﬂ uence continued to grow and 
spread throughout the world. After 
Luang Pu Chah became severely ill in 
1982, he entrusted Luang Por Liem to 
lead the monastery. Shortly thereafter, 
as Luang Pu Chah’s illness prevented 
him from speaking, the Sangha of  Wat 
Nong Pah Pong appointed Luang Por 
Liem to take over the abbotship.
He fulﬁ ls this duty up to the present 
day, keeping the heritage of  Luang Pu 
Chah’s Dhamma and characteristic 
ways of  monastic training available 
for monks, nuns and lay disciples. He 
also provides leadership and support 
main New3.indd   25main New3.indd   25 2013-05-16   10:39:42 AM2013-05-16   10:39:42 AM

26 Knowing the World
for Wat Pah Nanachat,  Luang Pu Chah’s International 
Forest Monastery for training monks using the English 
language. For the Sangha at Wat Pah Nanachat, Luang 
Por Liem is not only a dearly respected teacher and guide 
in the monastic life, but has for the last seventeen years 
also conducted every monastic ordination ceremony as 
the preceptor.
  Luang Por Liem has twice been honored with 
honorary monastic titles from His Majesty the King of  
Thailand. He is currently known as Tan Chao Khun Phra 
Rachabhavanavikrom. In recent years, many invitations 
for teaching Dhamma from all around the world have 
brought Luang Por Liem to visit the many international 
branch monasteries of  the Ajahn Chah tradition. This 
recent visit to Sri Lanka signiﬁ es the growing relationship 
between the Thai and Sri Lankan Forest Traditions. In 
addition it contributes to upholding and propagating a 
genuine path of  practice for Awakening to the world 
over.
***
main New3.indd   26main New3.indd   26 2013-05-16   10:39:42 AM2013-05-16   10:39:42 AM