## Samadhi and Kammatthana

The practice of samadhi is the one in which we are developing the tools to liberate ourselves, even if only temporarily, from the negative emotions that so often cloud our minds. We develop the effort, and develop the sense of knowing and wakefulness, together with the breath - being totally awake and aware for the duration of one in-breath and one out-breath, and then starting again. Being totally awake, totally aware for one in-breath and one out-breath, and starting again, again and again. Recognising when the mind is drifting - drifting into thought, drifting into dullness, and re-establishing attention. This is the basic work that we have to do. There are no shortcuts. There’s no way around this. It’s difficult because we’ve neglected it in the past. It’s not impossible, but it’s hard work.

There’s another word: kammatthana. Kamma means ‘work’ and thana is ‘base.’ So your meditation object is your kammatthana. It’s where you do your work. It’s tough, you know, because you’re going against the grain. You’re developing new habits, and old habits die hard. But look closely and see the extent to which you suffer unnecessarily in life simply because you’ve never done this work. We are rarely able to recognise when we’re starting to get tense, anxious, fearful, angry, hurt, and so on. We’ve never developed a repertoire of skilful means to deal with negative emotion. If we never develop tools and a repertoire of skilful means to create, sustain, and bring to maturation wholesome dhammas, then we’re always going to be a victim of circumstance. There’s never going to be any true spiritual independence in our life. Our wellbeing is always going to depend upon circumstance, depend upon people, depend upon this, depend upon that. No true inner freedom or liberation.

The Buddha says we can find an inner refuge in which we become like an island unto ourselves, like a mountain which is unmoved by wind and rain and weather. This kind of stability and integrity of mind is not found by turning our backs on certain experiences and trying to create some special blissed-out state. If you practice meditation because you’re fed up with life, or you’re fed up with yourself, and you just want to go somewhere else where you don’t have to put up with all this stuff, then you’re already on the wrong path. That is the practice that may lead to heaven. But it’s not the practice for liberation.

You might be able to enter some heavenly realm where you can just close your eyes and feel good for a while, but the ability to do that is conditioned by health, by external circumstances and so on, and it’s not something we can ultimately rely upon. The immediate understanding of things as they are, of highs as highs, lows as lows, thoughts as thoughts, perceptions as perceptions, this is where the stability comes. We begin to see things less as solid entities, we perceive less in terms of personalities and people, and more and more in terms of a stream, a conditioned flow of phenomena.

Sometimes we read dhamma books and they say, ‘There’s no self. There’s just forms, feelings, perceptions, and mental consciousness arising and passing away.’ It can all sounds so mechanical and a bit off-putting. We’re not being presented with an obviously enticing realization. Its certainly not as attractive a picture as those found in the words of the works of the great mystics in theistic traditions. But our great teachers stress just how normal how obvious this all seems when the mind is clear of obscurations. Everything is just like this. I remember feeling that Ajahn Chah didn’t seem an abnormally wise or peaceful person, at least as far as I understood those terms. It was rather that he seemed completely normal and everybody else seemed more or less skewed and distorted.

Anatta - people write long books about it and it’s really hard to understand. But if you’re just willing to come into the classroom, into the present moment, then ‘Ahhh, it’s so simple. Isn’t there something more to it than this? It’s just quite normal.’ But it’s the normal that we overlook. As I said at the beginning, the most profound things are the simplest, the most down to earth. As one teacher said, more marvellous than developing a psychic power to fly through the air, is the ability to walk normally with mindfulness and awareness.