## Conclusion

started off with a story, and I would like to end with another one. It is a story about a teenage boy who got in with a bad crowd, one devoted to wildness, drinking drugs and so on. In this group there was one lad, an orphan, who was more violent and more extreme than anyone else. In the course of a fight this vicious lad killed the new member of the group. As a result he was arrested and eventually sentenced to a long term in prison.

In the courtroom, at the sentencing, the mother of the teenage boy who’d been killed was extremely overwrought and very angry. She felt that the prison sentence given to the murderer of her son was far too lenient. She completely lost control and started screamed at this boy, ‘I’ll kill you! I’m going to kill you!’

So the lad went to prison and since he didn’t have any family, and no real friends, he had no visitors.

Some months passed, and then one day he was told that he had a visitor. He went out wondering who it could be. You can imagine his shock when he saw that his visitor was none other than the mother of the boy he’d killed. What to say to her? It was a very weird and awkward meeting. After some tense words the woman left - but she came back another day. She came again and again and became a regular visitor over a period of years. A relationship developed which became warmer and warmer until eventually the young man changed himself. He became a model prisoner and was let out on parole much earlier than might have been expected.

Of course, on leaving prison he didn’t have anywhere to go and the woman said, ‘You can come and live with me. You can come and live with me as if you were my son.’ So he did.

One day they were sitting at their kitchen table and the woman said, ‘Do you remember in the court when I screamed out I was going to kill you?’ He said, ‘Yes, how could I forget? But that’s all in the past now. Don’t worry about it.’ She said, ‘Well I’ve done it. I’ve had my revenge.’ He said, ‘What do you mean?’

‘After the trial I spent a long time thinking about it and I realised it wasn’t you who killed my son, it was the evil in your heart. I didn’t need to kill you. If I was going to have my revenge I would have to kill the evil in your heart. That’s why I started to visit you and give you my love and kindness and understanding over a period of many years. Now I see you and I’m very proud of you and I don’t see that anger and hatred and violence in you at all. I’ve killed it. I’ve killed it with my love, and now I’ve had my revenge.’

I really like this story. It’s a very practical, down-to-earth expression of wisdom. Seeing that there are not ‘these people’ who do things, but there are negative emotions on the rampage because people have never developed the dhamma. They have never developed this liberating practice of generosity, precepts, meditation - of learning, of looking, of enquiring, of challenging one’s assumptions and one’s way of looking at things. They have never developed this wakefulness, this ability to learn what’s what in life rather than just believing what we’re told.

When this woman, through this traumatic experience, really looked at the cause of the terrible thing that happened to her, it wasn’t this bad person, it was the anger and the hatred and the violence in his heart. The more we move away from this kind of ‘person’ base, this way of looking at things in terms of personalities and people, and look more and more at what’s really going on, then some really revolutionary liberating effects can be felt . And we can be our own guinea pigs. We learn about the human condition most effectively by looking at our own condition. We’re a human being, and we want to learn about greed and non-greed, hatred and forgiveness, delusion and wisdom. We learn best by looking within. We learn how to protect the mind from harmful qualities and how to deal with those that have arisen We learn how to create noble qualities and how to nurture those that have already arisen. It’s a wonderful path that we can all follow. I certainly feel very honoured and wonderfully blessed to be able to follow in the Buddha’s footsteps in this way. I hope that all of you too can benefit from the peace, wisdom and compassion of the Buddha’s teachings.