## Mindfulness of the Present Moment

(Baanaree, Bangkok, 9th November 2009)

I’d like to begin by telling a short story concerning a very diligent scholar. This man put great effort into studying the scriptures, and the Suttas, and the commentaries, and the sub-commentaries, and the sub-sub-commentaries. He was always looking for the one special profound teaching which would unlock the inner chamber of his mind and reveal the true splendour of the Dhamma. He became greedy for knowledge and for some special information. He was always on the lookout to find some new source of knowledge with which he was unfamiliar.

Then one day, when he was already middle-aged, he heard of a wonderful master who lived in a tree in the middle of a very dense forest in a remote mountain range. He decided to leave home and endure whatever great hardships the journey required in order to study some special profound presentation of the Dhamma which he had never heard before.

He set off on his journey and he climbed mountains and crossed rivers and trekked through thick malarial forests and eventually he came to a huge tree. The monk was sitting up above in a tree house (or tree kuti). The scholar bowed three times and said, ‘Master, I have come a very long way with great difficulties. Please give me the profound essence of the Buddha’s teachings.’

The monk looked down on him and chanted this verse in Pali -

Sabba papassa akaranamkusalassa upasampadasacitta pariyodapanametam buddhanusasanam

- which translates as, ‘The not doing of all evil (or all unwholesome things); the perfection of wholesome dhammas; the purification of the mind - this is the teaching of all the Buddhas.’

And the scholar...his face fell. He said, ‘But master, even a child of five has heard that verse.’ The teacher said, ‘Yes, but even a man of fifty finds it difficult to practice.’

The profound teaching is whatever you can’t do yet. It’s not something that’s always intellectually difficult, but it’s profound if you haven’t yet penetrated it, you haven’t yet reached it. Indeed, it’s often the simplest and most straightforward teachings which are the most effective and produce the most meaningful change in our lives. This is a point to observe about the Dhamma - that the study and the practice of the Dhamma changes you. It leads somewhere. In the Pali it is called ‘opanayiko’ that is it leads onwards - or it leads inwards, depending on how you translate the term.

In contrast, accumulating normal worldly knowledge often leads to an increase of complexity. Perhaps we can take knowledge from here and there and put it all together and come up with something new that somebody hasn’t thought of before, but whether it actually leads onwards or leads inwards is questionable.

The practice of Dhamma, the Dhamma itself, is something which stands up to scrutiny. It’s something which invites investigation, invites scepticism, invites questions - delights in them. This is not a teaching in which we adopt a certain book and use its teaching as a code by which we translate the meanings of experience, and take refuge in the sense of security that comes from having a book that explains everything. In Buddhadhamma we’re encouraged to be brave enough to challenge ourselves, challenge what monks say, challenge the things that we read. As we practice more and more, we have this confidence that the Dhamma stands up to intense scrutiny and intense investigation.

There is a principle, a simple rule of thumb which I’ve always found very useful in deciding what is true and what is false - if something is false, the closer you look at it the more diffuse, the less clear it becomes. Whereas if something is true, the closer you look, the clearer it becomes.

So the teachings of the Buddha need to be brought within, need to be looked at closely and put to the test.

In some ways, Buddhism is similar to a science. In scientific discourse it’s important that something can be proved experimentally before it can be taken on as a theory. But not every law or scientific theory can be proved by everyone, simply because so much scientific research uses technology which is extremely expensive. If you don’t have the financial resources, no matter how clever, how smart you are, you can’t ever prove that theory for yourself without access to that technology. Similarly, in Buddhadhamma, although theoretically you can prove the truth of all the teachings (or the core teachings, at least), it is dependent on having a mind which is sufficiently mature to act as a vessel for dhamma. Most importantly the mind needs a certain sense of stability and clarity.

In contrast with most of the major world religions which I would characterize as belief systems, I’m fond of characterizing Buddhism as an education system. But if Buddhism is an education system, then where is the classroom? The answer is— in the present moment.

You embark upon this education system when you develop the ability to be awake and aware in the present moment.

The word ‘Buddha’ means ‘the awakened one’, or means the quality of wakefulness. That is the essence of practice on every level - the ability to be awake. I’m sure you’ve had an experience of suddenly waking up in the middle of the night. Maybe there’s been a bang or some disturbance, and all of a sudden you’re wide awake. You haven’t yet thought anything. There’s no conceptual thought in your mind, there’s just this clear bright clarity of wakefulness. In Buddhist practice, that’s the kind of state of mind which you are trying to develop more systematically, so that an alert clarity becomes part of your way of living in the world.

Being mindful in daily life is one of those phrases that you hear an awful lot and sounds quite attractive, but it’s very difficult to do. Perhaps some of you will say it’s too difficult in a very busy city and living the kind of lives that you do. But I have a simile here that I’d like to share with you, which may be useful. Consider a woman who has a small child. There are very few mothers, no mothers, that could be totally focused on their child twenty-four hours a day. They have other duties to perform. But a mother who is working at home - it might be cleaning, or cooking, or working on the computer, or writing, or whatever - would at the same time always have a sense of exactly where her child is, whether the child is safe or in danger, whether the child is happy or sad, and exactly what is going on with her child - even though to an observer she would seem to be doing something else altogether.

I think that the mother’s awareness of her child is analogous to the kind of awareness of mind that one seeks to develop in everyday life - that sensitivity to the changes that are going on throughout the day. The short-term changes, the fluctuations of thoughts and feelings, and the more subtle moods which fluctuate throughout the day, or throughout a week even. This is where we begin to study and learn and practice the Buddha’s teachings more and more effectively.