## Opening up to the Truth of Things

It’s quite natural for most of us to consider the world divided into two things; the things we like, and the things we don’t like. Although we may not like to consider it so bluntly, a great deal of our lives even as adults is taken up with trying to maximize the experience of things we like, and trying to minimize contact with things or people that we don’t like. Our sense of ease in life is often measured by our success in that endeavour. We think, ‘Oh, things are wonderful these days. I don’t have to work with anybody I don’t like. I don’t have to do the things that I don’t like. I can do what I want when I want.’ Of course this is one of the reasons why wealth and money are so coveted, because it does give us the power to set up conditions for ourselves in which we can, to a certain extent, reduce or eliminate the necessity to experience things and people we don’t like, and to maximize the experience of things and people we do like.

But in the end it’s a frustrating way to live our lives, because even if we are experiencing a lot of things that we like, the intensity of pleasure that we receive from them is not stable. Anything that is pleasant is subject to the law of diminishing returns. You get a certain amount of pleasure out of it the first time, and then after a few times you don’t get so much pleasure, so you have to increase the stimulus to get the same amount of pleasure. This goes on and on. In the coarsest expression of this, people who take drugs find a certain level of drug taking gives them the feeling that they crave, then after a while they have to increase the dose.

This dynamic not restricted to drug use. It’s the story of the whole sensual realm. Our nervous system cannot stand too much pleasure. Our bodies need change. We can’t sit still for more than a few seconds at a time without having to move the body slightly. So the search for ‘the pleasant’ always has a certain admixture of pain. The shadow of separation always hangs over our pleasure.

In romantic movies and books the young couple looking up at the full moon in the garden say, ‘I wish this night could last forever!’ Why say that? You would only say that if you knew that it’s not going to last forever. There’s a sense that even when things are wonderful, in the back of our minds we’re thinking, ‘It’s all downhill from here. It’s probably never going to be any better than this.’ That sense of exhilaration (‘Wow! This is the best it’s ever been!’) is very hard to separate from that flickering, sad thought, ‘Yes, but it’s never going to be any better than this, and perhaps it’s never going to be as good as this again.’ It’s just normal, isn’t it? It’s just a normal part of life.

Of course, when separation does take place, often it’s a shock. People say, ‘I just never thought that would ever happen.’ Why not? Why is it so impossible to imagine? Every kind of separation takes place all the time, all around us. But part of our strategy for dealing with that decline of pleasure and happiness and fulfilment and that shadowy sense of pending separation and pain and grief is that we just try to shut our minds down - don’t think about it. ‘I don’t want to think about that. It’s morbid. That’ll just make you depressed. Look on the bright side of life.’

The idea in Buddhism is opening up to the truth of things, both the side we find pleasant and the side that we find unpleasant. The moment we start to censor our experience, when we say, ‘I only want to think about this’, or, ‘that just makes me anxious, that just makes me fearful’, you are creating paper tigers in your mind and you give energy to those negative qualities. By not thinking about these things you defeat the purpose you set out to achieve.

Being in the present moment is not a goal in itself, and it‘s not about being blissed out. Being in the present moment is just basic mental health. It’s the conditioning factor for growth in Dhamma in order to really know what life is all about - not as a philosophy, not as a complex intellectual structure, but as direct experience. What is body? What are feelings? What are perceptions? What are thoughts? What is sense-consciousness? Not as some elaborate abhidhamma exercise, but as a direct experience.

Being in the present moment is a revolution in our way of living life. We begin to notice the process-nature of experience, rather than obsessing about the content of experience. The emphasis shifts naturally. We find things arising by themselves. For instance, you experience a yawn or a sneeze as something that just arises. You don’t decide to sneeze. You don’t decide to yawn. It just happens. And so, in the same way, do thoughts, feelings and emotions.

And this is the weird thing - intention, thought, and feeling arise first, and the one who is thinking and feeling arises subsequent to the thought. From a philosophical point of view this could be debatable, but this is something we can observe very clearly by being in the present moment. Common sense says that first there is someone who is thinking, and then you have a thought. Is that what really happens? Have you ever developed a clarity, stability, a sharpness of mind with which you can really look directly at what is going on? Some of our most cherished assumptions are overturned quite radically when we’re willing to do that, to really look and see what’s going on here. It’s liberating.