# A Body of Wisdom

The environment that supports your aspiration, Goodwill and intelligence Is your own living body.

If you cultivate standing, you might choose to maintain this posture for half an hour or even an hour. However, what standing brings to the forefront of attention are themes of embodied meditation that, once established, can be accessed in the other bodily postures. I would add that, although I’ve given a lot of attention to the bodily and energetic aspects of meditation (essential assets for health and well-being), the ultimate aim of the practice is to free the heart. In this respect, we cultivate energy in order to release stuck emotive reflexes that are proliferated on and acted out by the conceiving mind. Accordingly, however you meditate, the standard is always to step back from, moderate and skilfully direct that thinking mind. This process is facilitated by an attentive heart.

For its part, the sensitive body is more than a workshop; because of the connection between its reflexes and feelings and those of the heart, it’s a partner. Therefore, if we meditate in a way that’s guided by that connectivity, the practice can dissolve the psychological attachments and neurological stress that impair our lives. Then the body feels spacious and balanced, and the the heart rests in pure awareness.

Commenting on the value of this embodied practice, the Buddha said:

‘Just as anyone who extends their awareness over the great ocean includes within it all the rivers that flow into that ocean; so too, anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body includes in that all the skilful states that lead into realization.’

MIDDLE LENGTH DISCOURSES: 119.22

In this section I’d like to elaborate on some key points in this practice.

##### Environment

The first theme that I’d like to enlarge upon is that of the environment of meditation practice. Although a quiet place is the standard location, by ‘environment’, I mean something more inclusive.

In practising mindfulness of body, the full environment is the body in a living connection with the ground beneath and the space around it. The obvious reason for this is that whether one is in a room or in a forest, this connection keeps you stable, unhurried and open. In meditation, this foundation gives you perspective on your inner, intimate environment. Furthermore, after a period of meditation, we will arise within this full living environment, so it’s good to have established an orientation that is more truly connected to your heart than a point on a map - or the ongoing array of sights and sounds - can ever be. And finally, as your practice clears the turbulences and blind spots in your inner environment, benevolent energies, attitudes and behaviour can come forth to benefit the larger world you live in. So for good or for bad, the inner and outer environments are connected. Directly knowing that gives you an aware and responsive life.

The first factor of your environment - ground - speaks for itself. Without having a firm ground, there’s no baseline and no way of steadying and contemplating energies and moods. This need for ground is so fundamental that people will attempt to find ground in a belief, an ideology, an opinion or even a football team in order to give an orientation to their lives. However, in embodied meditation you can find a stable base for orientation in a way that doesn’t conflict with that of others, doesn’t have to be sustained by desire or belief, and is right beneath your feet.

This is also the case with sitting meditation - but in that posture, it’s possible to disconnect and drift down the corridors of the mind. With standing, you definitely are somewhere, and yet it’s universal: wherever you are, there’s something firm beneath you. It’s a given, and it’s essential. When you get in touch with that, your need to hold on to fidgety distractions, or ideas about yourself and others drops away. And with deeper reflection that, you get interested in bringing your personal world into harmony with the shared Earth that you’re alive in.

As for space; more than having physical room, it’s a felt sense, a sign of non-intrusion and non-obstruction. This is a fundamental need. Because of this need, people purchase large houses surrounded by fences and gates. Others live in caves. However, it takes embodied space to remove the pressure of time, of the need to be busy, and of your own doubts and concerns. You don’t get away from all that by living in a mansion - and a cave only gives you a respite at best.

Embodied space is always here: without it you’d be crushed and unable to feel. Like ground, it’s a gift. But our hearts and minds disconnect from it, and in the absence of spaciousness we get overwhelmed, tense, unreceptive, and resort to opinions, routines and plans to feel secure. Then whenever there’s an afflictive mood, the common reflex is to either act upon it, or cut off the feeling, get thinking, and get busy. None of these reflex strategies enable us to step back from our mind-states, release their pressure and consider a suitable course of action. This is because there’s no space within which to operate.

What is needed then is to be aware of space as a sense of absence of pressure and compulsion. Space doesn’t even hold onto itself; qualities can arise and move through it, and it is refreshed by natural rhythms such as breathing. This is connected space; it’s not the dissociated space of not feeling anything.

In connected space, our entire body feels that openness, and it can drop any sense of being on guard or unwelcome. The connection occurs through responding to that reflex of ‘stuck, oppressed, compelled’ with a focus on the embodied experience of space and openness. When you can sense space, linger on it, and let the heart pick up that sign. A spacious heart feels it has some ground; there’s trust and an allowance to make mistakes and work things out as you go along. Accordingly, the mind feels there’s time to reflect deeply and not jump to conclusions. Bringing that into the world is a blessing for any living being you meet.

Why do we cut off this sense of connectivity? In brief, we give up our ground and space. Our emotional conditioning may well carry aspects of a non-welcoming, insensitive or even abusive social dynamic. We don’t always get the encouragement to feel our own ground and be spacious – sometimes it’s quite the opposite. If we grew up involved in such situations, we incline to one or both of two things: one is to develop a shield, and the other is to compulsively conform to others’ wishes.

The shield strategy develops a casing of constricted energy around the body and heart as a defence, and as a way of not feeling. Goodbye, space! It then becomes natural to compensate for that loss of sensitivity and joy by spending much of the time going into one’s head with media saturation, planning, theorizing, fantasizing – and so on.

Compulsive conformity, or habitual acquiescence, sets the heart to orient around what it imagines other people would like one to do or be. One’s sense of worth is then dependent on other people’s approval. And much of the time, we imagine that they could, or do, disapprove! So we drop ground and space and get compulsively active to win that approval. Without that we feel lost, empty, and ungrounded. We imagine this disconnected state to be our basic state, even our self, and so we criticize ourselves for being like that — so we feel agitated and distract ourselves. (And criticize ourselves for that.)

This state of isolation can be so habitual that it denies that we have or deserve the gift of ground. Instead, we feel we have to win it or hang on. The heart may also resist spacious openness because that reveals the discomfort that the closed state was shutting off. Openness therefore needs support; the support of being grounded. Of course openness has to be moderated: a specific situation may not be safe, and you should protect your boundaries. But boundaries need to be established and mediated by careful attention, not as a default closure, day and night, that cuts off living connectivity.

This process of establishing a living connection to ground and space is therefore a crucial one. Obviously, there is an ongoing need for a non-judgmental and heart-based awareness - but to awaken the heart and bring it into play takes some skill. What encourages this process and helps one to move through these boundaries is an embodied and soothing rhythm - of breathing, or walking (or embodied voice, i.e. chanting). Rhythm is what keeps the connection to ground and space alive and intimate. Breathing in particular can take us through the boundaries of defence, or of the inferred lack of worth and lack of welcome that instigated those boundaries in the first place. Attuned to this, one can extend awareness through the body and heart and into a warm and open stability. As you integrate that, remember you’re not inside a body; even though you can detect energy there, like awareness, that warm energy can spread through the world around and within you.

Make a point of enriching the environment!