# Take a Stand

Can you take a few minutes to simply stand here?

‘Standing on your own two feet.’ Think about it: stability, confidence, simple dignity. The phrase is used as a metaphor, but actually it’s more than that. If you want to get a break from a scattered mind and stressful moods, it could be as easy as literally standing on your own two feet. Furthermore, if you’d like to meditate, but feel challenged by the idea of sitting still with nothing to do for more than five minutes … some standing could be a manageable way to get started on the road to inner balance. It gets you grounded. And if you already do like to meditate, standing could be a way to relieve some bodily discomfort and widen your practice in unexpected but effective ways.

I’m certainly not against seated meditation - it’s just that the seated form presents issues in terms of discomfort, and through its passivity. The discomfort in the knees and back for bodies that have become used to, and even shaped by, sitting in chairs commonly distracts attention from settling and clearing the mind. On the other hand, if you do get comfortable, it’s easy then to drift into thoughts and daydreams. Then meditation becomes a tedious process of repeatedly trying to establish a focus. Also, with sitting, your weight rests on your bottom and your thighs - which are not designed to be sensitive to the ground, nor are they required to maintain balance.

When seated, the feet and the knees - those parts of your body that help you to feel grounded and balanced - are switched off. With standing however, the body automatically focuses on establishing groundedness and balance: your feet and legs come into alignment with the spine in a relaxed but alert way. And that of course affects your mind. It relaxes the mind while encouraging attentiveness to how the body stands as an interconnected system. Therefore, your mind comes out of its preoccupations and also isn’t easily invaded by what’s going on around you. Because of all this, fifteen minutes or more of standing can be a useful prelude to a period of sitting meditation, or a clarifying practice in its own right.

Because standing fast-tracks balance, connectivity and wholeness, it’s useful to practise this in any ‘pause moments’ in the day. Waiting for someone? Cool the impatience by standing in a conscious and balanced way. Getting stressed in the office? Take a three-minute break from the desk, stand, let stress drain into the ground. Feeling nervous before addressing a group? Stand balanced sensing the soles of your feet for ten seconds. After all, you’re going to stand up at some time - why not make it a useful skill?

The instructions below guide you through the process of establishing a good standing position and cultivating awareness of it. In so doing, a range of default restrictions are released and the body settles into something quiet and wonderful. This gives you the benefit of an unconstricted mode of attention, and a handle on your nervous and emotional reflexes (‘sankhara’ in Buddhist texts). By calming and insightfully penetrating these, standing meditation supports stability, ease - and liberation.