# Inquire, Learn and Integrate

You won’t find peace in the world; But if you practise peace, You’ll be able to bring it into everything you meet.

##### Life works best as an offering

Meditation practice requires the bodily, conceptual, and heart-based intelligences to work together. As a standard, the advice is to simplify the activity of conceptual intelligence to that of placing a thoughtful listening onto an aspect of body or heart. And to then sense how that feels, or what response arises.

Some details to consider are:

With what attitude and energy do you place your attention?

Where do you place it?

How carefully do you linger and listen?

What do you do with the feeling or response that arises?

These points, if carefully addressed, will lead to the wisdom of realization, the liberation of heart. Meanwhile they instigate the development of wisdom in terms of practice: you get insight through reviewing what these questions are pointing to. These two aspects of wisdom work together: every insight furthers or reveals the Path. We need right attitude and energy in order to direct and sustain wisdom. Here, the attitude is to attend deeply to how things are with no aim other than that; no do I get this?’ or ‘And next’. If those attitudes arise, attend deeply to how they feel and affect you. No judgment, just let your awareness cover and settle into the energies of these attitudes. In order to do this, energy has to be sustained but not intense. That is, any mental drive has to be moderated by the steadying effect of the breathing body. This process also increases the listening skill of the heart, and gives it time to learn and integrate.

##### Tips on learning

As to where you place attention: the simple answer is to place it where you can get a steady focus, one that brings forth skill. Here again the body provides many easy-access points; unfortunately, some of these are painful feelings! Struggling with pain isn’t going to encourage persistence, so the pragmatic advice is to widen attention to cover the entire body - because then the uncomfortable parts will only occupy a percentage of the total input. It’s likely that as you do that, the firm and balanced embodiment that this sets up first eases discomfort, and subsequently allows one’s attention to dwell upon the interconnected energies that run through the body.

When the heart senses that network, it bonds to it - because this is its home base. Then, just as when you’re absorbed in a movie, you don’t notice the stiffness in your legs, so, when the heart absorbs into embodied energy, it doesn’t notice physical discomfort. Either that, or it begins to spread easeful energy through uncomfortable areas.

Linger and listen. This implies an open steady receptivity - energy can be calmed and tracked by mindful awareness. As you sense the energy in an area - that is, the foot, leg, hand or throat (etc.) feels fuller and livelier - give attention to that, and span the area with awareness, detecting the edge of the area. That edge may extend. If it does, follow where the energy goes. It may not correspond to your idea of where you want it to go or even your idea of your body’s anatomy. That is, you might detect energy shifting in your leg and moving down into your foot - at the same time as there is a warming, easing effect in your abdomen. You may find that some release in your jaw sends energy down your arm into your fingers. These shifts are generally not volcanic; they may be like whispers and echoes, tiny twitches or slow trickles. They may have warming or cooling effects, they may move around a point or they may spread and span an area. Over time, the felt boundaries within the body dissolve and the entire form becomes subtle and spacious; your body becomes a stream of qualities that arise and pass.

In the course of this, afflictive emotions, doubts, worries and difficult states may arise; they can be released by meeting their energies and connecting them to more spacious areas. Herein a full and compassionate awareness has to preside over your response. Not all states want to be released at first; they need to be felt and accepted.

What supports this is the relinquishment of the sense of identity that opposes or interferes with what’s happening. This felt identity - one that doesn’t want, or is ashamed and tired of, the negative state - can be detected in terms of attitudes. These may be: 7 shouldn’t be this way’, or, ‘I’m stuck with this; it’s because of that.’ Their heart-tones carry intensity and pressure. The first step then, is to sense these psychological forms and meet the energies that they bring in an open and interested way. Then one’s awareness will enter the afflictive state with right attitude and open energy. So: listen beneath the voices of the mind and meet the energies; then extend that listening awareness to include body and heart.

What supports difficult memories, restless moods and obsessive thoughts is a constricted state of awareness. However, if that constricted awareness, or resistance, is directly and openly met as a tight energy rather than wrangled with or brooded over, it finds release.

Understanding follows - all of this stress was a tangle not an identity. Stress gets released into openness.

##### Integrate

What occurs then isn’t really a matter of doing, it’s of undoing. And yet a transformation takes place. Where before one was held by anxiety, there is confidence; where there was the pressure to perform, there is joy in action; where there was the need to suppress anger and irritation, there is the space to let disappointing experiences pass through.

This enables you to live with integrity. You learn to bring your awareness to meet the world as it arises in your awareness; to make your aware presence an offering rather than a need to find something. Then you will act and speak (or refrain) with great heart. Unlike ’myself, great heart/aware presence is a living experience, not an object stuck in one’s mind; therefore, one’s actions and speech will be freed from the shadow of self-consciousness. In this way, aware presence becomes the basis for never-departing benevolence.