# Dying to the World

Maechee Training

Those who are ever vigilant, who discipline themselves day and night and are ever intent upon Nibbāna – their defilements fade away.

– Dhp 226

## Introduction

Some five years after his enlightenment, the Buddha established an order of female monastics known as bhikkhunīs. The Theravada branch of this order flourished in India and Sri Lanka before falling into a period of decline and finally becoming extinct around 1000 CE, after an illustrious 1,500-year history. In light of the Buddha’s stipulation that Ordination required induction into a pre-existing community of bhikkhunīs, revival of the defunct order was deemed impossible.

There is no evidence that the Bhikkhunī Order ever established a significant presence in Southeast Asia. Without a bhikkhunī lineage to perpetuate, the Buddhist cultures of that region eventually saw the emergence of indigenous, female renunciant orders. References to white-robed maechee (‘holy women’), in the kingdom of Siam may be found in the seventeenth-century accounts of Dutch and French travellers, at which time they seemed to have become a well-established feature of the society.[1]

For women with a monastic vocation and an aspiration to realize liberation, the maechee form is far from ideal. The maechees’ relatively basic moral code – they live by the Eight Upāsikā Precepts – means that they cannot draw upon the sophisticated support and protection for their practice that is provided by the Bhikkhunī Vinaya. Maechees are not alms-mendicants, and the lack of a tradition directly traceable to the Buddha has meant that their order has never enjoyed the same respect and prestige in society at large as the Bhikkhu Sangha.

Nevertheless, over the centuries there seems no doubt that a great many women have led happy and fulfilling lives as maechees. During the twentieth century, a number of them, most notably Luang Pu Mun’s disciple Maechee Gaew, gained great renown for their spiritual prowess. Others have excelled in the study of Pali and the Abhidhamma[2]. The establishment of a national maechee organization in the 1960s, together with advances in maechee education and training over the past decades, have done much to raise standards throughout the country.

Over the past several years, an international movement to revive the Bhikkhunī Order has gathered pace with a new generation of scholars asserting that there are legitimate grounds on which the traditional objections to revival may be dismissed. These arguments have not, however, been considered convincing enough by the elders of the Thai Bhikkhu Sangha to sanction any change in their opposition to the movement, and as yet, no strong lobby has emerged to persuade it to change its mind. At present, the form that female monasticism in Thailand will take in future decades is difficult to predict.

## Forest Nuns

### The First Maechees

Not long after the founding of Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por Chah gave permission for the establishment of a maechee community. By doing so, he sought to provide a training within existing norms for women with a monastic vocation which would provide them as much support as possible for their progress along the path to liberation.

Luang Por treated the maechees as forest ascetics: they were expected to live a very frugal life, get up at 3.00 a.m. every morning for a session of chanting and meditation and to eat only one meal a day like the monks. Significantly, Luang Por referred to the maechees as ‘samaṇas’, a term of great respect usually only applied to monks. He encouraged them to constantly remind themselves that they were samaṇas and to act accordingly.

Everyone here – monks, novices and maechees – are samaṇas. Everyone should know the duties of a samaṇa, and not get caught up in either of the two extremes of fruitless asceticism or sensual indulgence.

Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the vigorous style of practice developed by Luang Por at Wat Pah Pong – a sort of take-no-prisoners campaign against the defilements – extended to the maechees. They were given no exemptions and shared all the privations of the monks. Maechee Boonyu reminisced:

“One of the maechees had stomach pains and headaches. She wanted to go to see a doctor. Luang Por didn’t give permission. He said, ‘Sit and look at it. Concentrate on the area that hurts. If your head aches, then concentrate on your head until it splits apart. When you’ve got no head left, there’ll be nothing to hurt.’ That’s how it was in those days. We endured to that extent. It was no use crying out to see a doctor.

“When there was nothing to eat with the sticky rice, we would just dip lumps of rice in salt or fish sauce. Luang Por said, ‘Don’t get attached to the taste of the food. Don’t give it any consideration. Look on food as medicine. Eat enough to maintain your body for the coming day.’ So we taught ourselves that food was just medicine, and we came to truly believe it to be so. We believed in Luang Por’s words, and we developed in the Dhamma. Our bodies and minds were light; there were no obstacles throughout the day. It was easy to practise. That’s how he taught us, and as a result we could let go. It was marvellous. Each one of us tried to follow what he taught us, to be tractable and not stubborn in our ways.”

Luang Por created a unique vinaya for the Wat Pah Pong maechees. He supplemented the basic Eight Precepts, which they received at their Ordination, with a number of the ascetic dhutaṅga practices kept by the monks, and a detailed set of monastic regulations. Although this vinaya still fell far short of that of the bhikkhunī, it provided a strong foundation for practice and let the maechees feel a wholesome pride in themselves as monastics with a distinctive culture and form.

There were, nevertheless, many challenges for the maechees to overcome that the monks were spared. Their duties in the kitchen consisted of activities so closely associated with their former lives that they could easily act as an obstacle to developing a sense of themselves as renunciates; the maechees’ possession of small sums of money (usually offered to them by family members and lay supporters for personal needs) also undermined their feeling of having completely left the lay world. But these limitations of the form were generally given little thought by the maechees. They were grateful for what was being made freely available to them: the chance to train in a monastery under the guidance of a great master. It was a wonderful opportunity, and they tried to make the best of it.

### Debt of Gratitude

A notable feature of the maechee communities in Isan forest monasteries is how often they include the mother and perhaps one or two sisters of the abbot. Monks have long sought to express their debt of gratitude to their parents by encouraging them when widowed and when all their children have grown up, to adopt the monastic life. By this means, they honour the well-known words of the Buddha:

Even if one should carry one’s mother about on one shoulder and one’s father on the other, and while doing so should live a hundred years. And if one should attend to them by anointing them with salves, by massaging, bathing and rubbing their limbs, and they should even void their excrements there – even by that, would one not do enough for one’s parents, one would not repay them.

But, O monks, one who encourages his parents lacking in faith, settles and establishes them in faith; encourages his parents deficient in virtue, settles and establishes them in virtue; encourages his stingy parents, settles and establishes them in generosity; who encourages his unwise parents, settles and establishes them in wisdom – such a one, O monks, does enough for his parents; he repays them and more than repays them for what they have done.

– AN 2.31-32

The spiritual welfare of Luang Por’s mother, Mae Pim, was a constant concern to him. During his years as a tudong monk, his regular visits to his home village were, above all, opportunities to give guidance and instruction to her. It must have been of considerable satisfaction to him that it was she who led the delegation which came to visit him in Amnat Charoen in early 1954, bearing a request that he establish a monastery in Pah Pong forest.

It is not known whether Mae Pim’s move into Pah Pong was in response to Luang Por’s suggestion or at her own request. What is known is that soon after the Sangha was settled into the new monastery, huts were built in the central area near the kitchen for Mae Pim and two companions. The arrival of the three elderly women did not, however, signal the beginning of the Wat Pah Pong maechee community as such. Although the women kept the Eight Precepts of the maechees, they did so informally. At this early stage of development of Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por was still finding his way as the leader of a monastic community, unwilling, as yet, to take on the extra responsibility of establishing and leading a community of nuns. In fact, Luang Por harboured serious misgivings about the whole idea of monks and maechees living together in the same monastery.

### A Proposition

A rather exceptional woman made Luang Por change his mind. Pim Utaigorn[3] was a fifty-year-old villager who became a regular at the monastery on Observance Day. She was determined to become a maechee. Luang Por was impressed by her faith and sincerity but, at first, refused her requests for Ordination. Then, one day, he made her a proposition. At the back of the monastery, in the southwest corner, she could have a kuti built and live there. It would mean dwelling alone in an isolated clearing in the middle of a thick forest generally believed to be haunted. If she could endure it, Luang Por told her, he would ordain her. If she really wanted Wat Pah Pong to have a nuns’ community, then she must start it herself. It was a daunting challenge, not least in light of the debilitating fear of spirits that almost all people of her culture felt in the forest at night. But Pim Utaigorn accepted the offer with gratitude and overcame all obstacles in her path with a quiet, unfussed assurance.

Pim lived in a small hut built for her by her family. She planted chillies, salad greens and papayas, to supplement the alms-round rice that the monks sent to her every morning. She spent many hours a day practising sitting and walking meditation. Luang Por became satisfied that she had the qualities that would make her a good senior nun. In 1956, he formally ordained Pim Utaigorn[4], Mae Pim and the two other older women as maechees and established a boundary for the new Maechee Section covering an area of some thirty acres.

A daily schedule was established that closely followed that of the monks. At 3.00 a.m., nuns would chant and meditate together. At dawn, they would begin to prepare food from the garden they cultivated for the Sangha’s daily meal. After the meal, they would have free time to practise meditation or attend to personal projects until a work period at 3.00 p.m., followed by bathing, walking meditation and the evening session of chanting and meditation. On every Observance Day, the nuns would practise throughout the night.

The news that a maechee community had been formally established at Wat Pah Pong produced a steady stream of applicants. Luang Por began accepting more candidates from the growing waiting list. Initially, he kept to a policy of taking only older women, but in 1959 another milestone was passed when Boonyu Pimwong, aged 24, and Kham Khenprakhong, aged 23, were allowed to join the community on a probationary basis. After the requisite time had passed smoothly, the two women were formally accepted as maechees and went on to become stalwarts of the community for the next fifty years.

Maechee Pim’s devotion to meditation was an inspiration to the burgeoning community. Her frugality became legendary. One nun remembered that when food was scarce, she would prefer to let others have what was available, while she would simply roast sun-dried leftover rice with a little salt and eat it out of an old metal dish. When helping out with group activities, Maechee Pim’s head would always be slightly bowed, maintaining sense-restraint and abstaining from pointless chatter. At one time, the nuns remembered her levelling off the top of a termite mound near her kuti and surrounding it with a ring of thorny branches. She explained that she was experiencing some drowsiness in her meditation. This was to be her new meditation seat.

### Maechee Boonyu

The lives of maechees usually take place out of the limelight, and few details of their experience and practice find their way into the public realm. Fortunately, when Maechee Boonyu passed away in 1996, a funeral volume was published. It included a short biography that offers an intriguing glimpse of an inspiring woman.

Over the years, amongst the small group of senior maechees that led the community, Maechee Boonyu became acknowledged as the first among equals. In many ways, she was an archetypal Isan woman of her generation: competent, resilient, an apparently tireless worker with a rock-solid moral core and a no-nonsense kindness. She had first shown a precocious maturity as a small child. All Isan children would be expected to participate in the family work, but when her father was bed-ridden by a large abscess on his leg, the seven-year-old Boonyu was given the onerous task of caring for him. The rest of the family were needed in the fields, and she was the only available nurse. She took to it without complaint. For many months, she was her father’s constant companion, cooking for him, washing his clothes, wiping him down and keeping the abscess clean.

As she grew up, Boonyu was known as a gentle person who disliked conflict, but every now and again, a more resolute side of her character was revealed. She was renowned in the village for the time she apprehended a chicken thief by hiding by the family chicken coop and hitting him over the head with a piece of timber as hard as she could (‘more than once’, she admitted) as he made his escape.

She liked to go to Wat Pah Pong on Observance Day and spoke often of one day becoming a nun. In her free time, she would go to the Maechee Section and help out with odd jobs or teach some of the less literate maechees to read the chanting book. She rejected all suitors.

The turning point came one day when she attended the weekly all-night practice session in the monastery with her mother. She was feeling drowsy that night, but was shaken awake when Luang Por started to expound upon an old Isan saying: ‘A child is like a noose around your neck; a spouse is like rope pinning your arms behind you; wealth and possessions are like shackles around your legs.’ As Luang Por expanded on the sufferings inherent in the household life, it was suddenly and completely clear to her. As she realized that she was still free of these traps, she breathed a sigh of relief. From that moment, her determination to become a nun became assured, and before long she was one.

Life in the monastery was not easy for the young Maechee Boonyu. At first, her health was poor. At one point during a serious illness, an elder sister came to visit, and in trying to persuade her to disrobe, quoted an old saying about monastics and illness, the gist of which was those who haven’t accumulated enough merit before ordaining will not survive the rigours of monastic life. It seemed, she said, that Maechee Boonyu was clearly one such person. If she didn’t return to lay life, she could die. Maechee Boonyu replied that she was going to die sooner or later anyway, wherever she lived. But whenever the day of her death did arrive, she was determined to meet it in the monastery, and as a nun. Which, decades later, loved and respected, she did.

### Dependent Autonomy

The Maechee Section at Wat Pah Pong was completely segregated from the monks’ area and surrounded by a fence. It consisted of kutis (somewhat closer together than the monks for safety), a Dhamma Hall for group chanting and meditation, and a kitchen with a vegetable garden and an orchard. After the death of Maechee Pim in 1965, the day-to-day affairs of the maechee community were left in the hands of a committee which consisted of Maechee Boonyu, the head nun, and four other senior figures, but was ultimately under the authority of Luang Por.

Once a month, Luang Por would meet with the committee. These meetings allowed him to offer its members advice and encouragement and to deal with practical matters. He would listen to senior maechees’ questions and worries and advise on such matters as principles of leadership, how to promote harmony in the group and how to encourage the younger nuns. Sometimes, the maechees remembered long afterwards, he would inspire them with stories of the great bhikkhunīs at the time of the Buddha.

In 1964, Luang Por established a code of regulations for the maechees. These regulations were read out to the community of maechees after evening chanting on Uposatha Day, the twice monthly occasion on which the monks gathered for the recitation of the Pāṭimokkha discipline.

### Regulations of the Maechee Section, Wat Nong Pah Pong

It is forbidden at all times for maechees to gather together in groups in order to socialize and indulge in idle conversation.

Communal activities such as eating the daily meal, washing up, sweeping, bathing etc. should be performed in concord, in an orderly fashion and with mindfulness.

Maechees should keep the area surrounding their kuti clean, by regularly sweeping it and keeping it free from ants and termites.

Maechees should be frugal in eating, rest and conversation. Maechees should not be outgoing and exuberant.

On receiving gifts, maechees should share them in a just and appropriate way.

When a maechee is ill, her fellow maechees should help to nurse her with loving-kindness.

Maechees should determine that their actions of body, speech and mind directed towards fellow maechees whether face-to-face or behind their backs, be guided by loving-kindness.

Maechees should pay respect to each other according to seniority.

Maechees should keep all their precepts purely, and not make themselves objects of aversion to their fellow maechee.

It is forbidden for any single nun to govern the community of maechees or establish new regulations on her own authority (and with wrong view).

A maechee who is aware of a problem should quickly inform the head of the Sangha.

A maechee wishing to go out of the monastery for any purpose must first inform the head of the (bhikkhu) Sangha.

It is forbidden for a maechee to claim rights over a kuti whose construction she has sponsored.

It is forbidden for a maechee to receive guests of the opposite sex in her kuti, except in certain cases of illness.

It is forbidden for a maechee to display or promote things unconnected with Dhamma or Vinaya for the sake of gain. Such behaviour is wrong livelihood and is harmful to the Buddhist religion.

It is forbidden for maechees to put themselves at the service of householders. To do so does harm to them.

Maechees should seek harmony through shared Right View. They should not quarrel with others under the influence of wrong views.

It is forbidden for maechees to maintain contacts with monks, novices, other maechee or laypeople, either within or outside the monastery, except for necessary reasons connected with Dhamma.

It is forbidden for maechees to be involved in fund-raising activities.

It is forbidden for any male over the age of 12 to spend the night in the Maechee Section, except when unavoidable.

Anyone wishing to ordain or to stay in the Maechee Section must be accompanied by a guardian as a reference, and have a reasonable number of sponsors.

The majority of these regulations were adapted from those drawn up by Luang Por for the monks, which he, in turn, derived from the Vinaya training rules. They did much to provide behavioural norms for the maechees that, in most respects, were in line with those of the monks. A few of the regulations, however, – such as [13] and [19], for example – reflect the fact that maechees, unlike the monks, were not required to give up the use of money.

The consequences of transgressing these regulations is not made explicit. In fact, this lack of clarity is inevitable given the rather loose terminology of some of the points; point [4], for example, is more of a general exhortation against extravagant behaviour rather than a rule. It seems reasonable to assume that by confining himself to a glowering, ‘Transgressors will be dealt with accordingly’, Luang Por sought to give himself the flexibility to deal with problems on a case-by-case basis.

Familiar themes dominate the regulations: harmony, order and discipline, sense-restraint, mutual warmth and respect, contentment and fewness of wishes. The regulations enjoin a high standard of conduct, intimidatingly so in some areas. They played a large part in giving the Wat Pah Pong maechees an identity as ‘forest nuns’, and, in particular, ‘Wat Pah Pong forest nuns’. They provided the foundation on which to base a training that gave the same importance to attention to detail in daily life that characterized that of the monks.

Sangha regulations formed the bedrock of the Wat Pah Pong culture, providing norms to which newcomers were expected to adapt. A probationary period for women aspiring to become maechees allowed them to train by the standards that would be demanded of them as Wat Pah Pong nuns. Those unwilling or unable to live by such a code left before ordaining, thus minimizing the disruption to the community.

As the majority of women who applied to become maechees at Wat Pah Pong did so out of faith in Luang Por, there was always a possibility that some might dismiss the authority of the leaders of the maechee community (‘You are not my teacher!’). The code of regulations, endorsed as it was by Luang Por himself, made the job of the senior maechees easier. It provided ready proof that they were not bent on imposing their own will on the community, merely implementing the wishes of Luang Por and the Sangha.

### Governance

Although he delegated the daily administration of the Maechee Section to the senior maechees, Luang Por’s presence was felt strongly by everyone. The mere words, ‘I will put the matter to Luang Por’, uttered by one of the senior maechees, was powerful enough to dissolve all but the most intractable of problems. Maechee Boonyu, looking back in the late 1980s, said that serious conflicts in the community were rare, but when something did arise, it was always a great comfort to her to know that, if the matter could not be resolved, Luang Por would be there to help her:

“Luang Por said to me if things get too much for the senior maechees, if people are being difficult and stubborn, then you can come and ask for my assistance … We senior maechees acted like elder sisters looking after their younger siblings. If someone deviated from the way of practice laid down in the regulations or from our instructions, we would admonish them. If they still didn’t mend their ways after two or three warnings, then we would have to inform Luang Por, who we relied upon as our patron and protector. And so we managed. Otherwise, we wouldn’t have survived.

“I wasn’t the only one in charge. ‘Senior Maechee’ is just what people call me. I’ve never had absolute power; I’m not a dictator or anything like that. We have a committee of four or five maechees, and if someone is behaving badly, then it’s a matter to be discussed by the whole committee. At that time [before Luang Por’s illness], if we all agreed, then the matter would be taken to Luang Por. He wouldn’t immediately accept our side of the story though. He would conduct his own investigations.

“When Luang Por came, he wouldn’t just lay down the law or take anyone’s side. He would usually give a Dhamma talk in a relaxed natural manner on a subject unconnected to the problem of the difficult nun. After he’d finished, he would drink some water and then discuss various bits of business in his easygoing way. Then out of the blue he would say, ‘Oh and Maechee So-and-so, how are you? How is your practice? Don’t go giving headaches to the senior maechees, will you?’

“Generally, he spoke in a way that ‘neither bruised the lotus nor muddied the water’. Whether they were right or wrong, he wouldn’t hurt peoples’ feelings needlessly. But sometimes, he would have to speak directly in order for people to recognize their mistakes, so that they would become more aware and amend their behaviour in the future.”

But, as Maechee Boonyu recalled, when Luang Por was stern, it would have a considerable impact:

“Anyone of a sensitive disposition would be still feeling it for two or three days afterwards, even if they hadn’t been the one he told off.

“Everybody was afraid of him. Of course, it wasn’t as if Luang Por ever hit anybody or even used harsh words, but I only had to mention his name and disputes would fizzle out. If Luang Por was due to give a talk in the Maechee Section while there was a problem going on with one of the maechees, that nun would assume that I’d told Luang Por all about it beforehand. Her head would ache, she’d feel like she needed to go to the toilet. It’s hard to say why the reaction would be as severe as that – but it was.

“Luang Por would be very calm and his discourse would be mildly spoken. But – who knows why? – the maechee would be terrified. And yet if you were to ask any of the maechees privately what they felt about him, they would all say that Luang Por was wonderful, and that there was no place like Wat Pah Pong. You see? It’s too subtle to put your finger on. To me, the way he ran the Maechee Section was a marvel.”

## Venerable Father

### Gruff

Maechee Boonyu recalled how Luang Por could be especially gruff when maechees asked permission to visit their family:

“He would say, ‘What for? Are you homesick? How long have you been here now? The Buddha never visited his home the whole time he was searching for enlightenment; you’ve only just ordained and you want to go there already.’ If he gave permission, he’d say, ‘Go empty-handed, come back empty-handed. Don’t carry a basket-full there and a basket-full back.’ On the nun’s return he would ask her, ‘How was it? The same way you left it? Did you bring a basket-full back with you?’ He was talking Dhamma language. He meant memories and attachments. If the nun didn’t understand, she’d say, ‘Just a few onions and some garlic, Luang Por.’

“Sometimes, he’d ask one of the older maechees, ‘How many times did you go home last night?’ – meaning how often did her mind go. If the nun didn’t understand, she’d say she hadn’t been at all, and he’d reply, ‘You just didn’t see it go.’ ”

Ajahn Jun often acted as Luang Por’s attendant on his visits to the Maechee Section.

“Luang Por was especially careful in his relations with women. Although he’d never had the experience of running a household, he ran the monastery in an exemplary way. There were never any scandals. There were no serious disputes. He was always on his guard. Whether through action or speech, he never gave any of the maechees the opportunity to become close to him by any means whatsoever.

“Luang Por upheld the eight garudhammas[5]. When he spoke to a nun, he didn’t look at her face[6], and he never indulged in worldly, flirtatious speech that might have led her to lose respect.”

More than any other group of his disciples, the maechees tended to hold Luang Por in awe. The monks felt this awe too – and many felt it strongly – but their daily contact with Luang Por and their status as fellow monks, gave it a more nuanced character. The lay disciples also felt the awe, but it was felt more intermittently, as the greater part of their daily lives was bound up with family and work. For the maechees, Luang Por was the reason for the life they led; they looked to him as their father, their teacher, their benefactor. They saw him rarely, and then, only on formal occasions, but they felt his presence everywhere. Most, moreover, took it for granted that he knew, through his psychic powers, everything that went on in their lives and minds (although they admitted wryly that, being human, this belief did not stop negative emotions flooding through them from time to time).

Although Luang Por was supportive in times of genuine crisis, he was also careful to avoid appearing too easily available when problems arose that he wanted them to learn to deal with themselves. Ajahn Jun recalled that one day, while a nun was practising walking meditation, she had an extremely realistic vision of a huge snake wrapping itself around her body. Unsurprisingly, she fainted. A fellow maechee, discovering her lying prostrate on the walking path, called for help. More maechees rushed forward, and, as the reviving nun blurted out the story of the monster snake, a minor panic ensued. Two of the senior maechees rushed over to Luang Por’s kuti to request his assistance: the nun was very distressed – would he please come to see her straight away? Without expressing the slightest concern, Luang Por said, ‘Maybe she’s already dead. Look after her for now, and I’ll come over later on.’ Many hours after the incident, when the excitement had died down, he paid his visit.

### Kindness at a Distance

Luang Por had seen monasteries consumed by sexual scandals; he was determined to prevent the same thing happening at Wat Pah Pong. The strict segregation of the monks and maechees he insisted upon was based on his understanding of how the most innocent of relationships could, in an unguarded moment and against all the better judgement of either side, develop into something more serious. His solution was, figuratively, to keep everyone well away from the edge of the cliff.

Although the policy of separation meant that the maechees saw little of Luang Por, and they would undoubtedly have appreciated seeing more of him, they did not expect it. They had little sense of entitlement, having grown up in a world in which the separation between monks and women, whether lay or ordained, was a given.

Generally, the only time the maechees would enter the main area of the monastery was early in the morning, while the monks were on alms-round. The maechees, eyes downcast, would walk through the forest to the kitchen where they would help to prepare food. As soon as the meal was over, they would return to the Maechee Section. If, for some reason, maechees should meet a monk on a path, monastic etiquette required them to squat down with hands in anjali and look studiously at the ground until the monk, also studiously looking elsewhere, had passed. The absence of even a hint of sexual scandal at Wat Pah Pong over the years did much to consolidate its good reputation. But newly arrived monks like Ajahn Jun could experience something akin to a culture shock.

“When I first came to live at Wat Pah Pong, I didn’t know the customs and conventions. I passed a group of maechees and greeted them loudly, ‘Hello there, what are you all up to?’ The maechees looked very shocked and rushed off into the forest. I was baffled. I thought, ‘What is it about forest monasteries? The monks and novices ignore you; even the maechees won’t speak to you.’ Somebody must have told Luang Por that the new monk was doing a lot of improper things, like talking to maechees. The next day he explained things to me, and so after that I understood the way things were done.”

As time went on, a number of Wat Pah Pong branch monasteries opened maechee sections, and these were run on the same principles as the one at Wat Pah Pong, although much smaller monasteries usually required some relaxation of the segregation policy. To guard against any risk of impropriety, a Sangha regulation was subsequently laid down restricting the establishment of maechee sections to those monasteries in which the abbot had spent at least twenty years in the robes.

By the beginning of the 1980s, Luang Por’s health was in serious decline, and his visits to the Maechee Section became more irregular. With his influence waning, problems in the maechee community began to increase. Some of the maechees felt a sense of loss and concern for the future. On one occasion shortly before his illness, he explained to them:

I stay aloof from everyone, aloof from all the maechees who come to live here. Everyone is free to speak to me, but I don’t speak to everyone. Even so, I feel an inner accord with all of you – it’s called ‘Dhammic love’. It’s not a worldly type of love where you have to keep saying nice things to each other all the time, but one in which any problems that arise are discussed in an appropriate way. There are some of you here that I’ve never spoken to at all. Don’t think it’s because you are maechees. These days, the monastery is very large and there are monks and novices that I’ve never spoken to individually; it’s difficult for one person to oversee such a big community. That’s why, as far as possible, it’s important that everyone takes responsibility for themselves and their practice.

### No Favourites

Luang Por had noted how in other monasteries competition for the teacher’s attention amongst the resident maechees could lead to jealousies that undermined the harmony of their community. He maintained a strictly impartial stance towards them. Many of the maechees were especially impressed by how he refrained from singling out his mother for any special attention or privileges.[7] In the culture in which they lived, the willingness to treat one’s mother as just one member of a larger group was seen as an unusual achievement.

This impartiality was not a blanket indifference. On the contrary, as Maechee Boonyu recalled, Luang Por showed a consistent concern for the welfare of every one of the maechees:

“The monastery was still quite unknown then, and not many people came to offer food. Usually, the only fruit we’d have would be the small amount that came from the maechees’ garden. One day, a group of laypeople came to help with a work project. One of them planted a pineapple shoot near the kitchen, and it grew up into a pineapple – very big it was too, like the ones that nowadays they bring up from the southeast. Pineapples were rare then. Every day, when we went to the kitchen we’d look at the pineapple and be thinking how big it was becoming, and wondering what Luang Por would have done with it when it was ripe. All of us were looking forward to taste it because we’d never eaten a pineapple before in our lives. Then one day the pineapple disappeared. ‘Oh no’ I wailed in my mind, ‘Where’s it gone?’ ”

Maechee Boonyu found out the next morning. The pineapple had appeared in the kitchen neatly cut into fifteen equal pieces, one for each of the eight monks and seven maechees in the monastery. Luang Por was not idealistic about sense-restraint. For monastics training themselves to detach from sense pleasures, enjoyment outlives indulgence and is supplanted by equanimity through insight, not by acts of will. For almost all the members of a monastic community subsisting on a bare diet, a slice of an exotic fruit is a treat. Luang Por did not condemn it as worldly foolishness and was content to ensure that everyone in the community, including the maechees, had an equal share in this treat. It was this kind of consistent but understated consideration – one that belied his forbidding demeanour – that endeared him to the maechees.

Luang Por’s concern for the maechees was clearly apparent to the monks, not least through his regular exhortations on the fair distribution of food. He would remind them to always bear in mind the hard work and sacrifice of the maechees that made possible the meals they ate, and to make sure that there was always sufficient food sent back to the kitchen. He said that it would be very bad kamma if they took so much that those who had prepared the food went without.

The emphasis on fairness and impartiality extended to all of the requisites. Maechee Boonyu recalled the distribution of cloth:

“Luang Por would distribute the cloth himself. After he’d arranged a pile for each nun, the bell would be rung, and the maechees would go up to the raised platform in order of seniority and take her cloth. Afterwards, we’d compare the number of pieces, the quality of the cloth, its fineness or coarseness. They would all be exactly the same.”

### To be a Maechee

Women applying to join the maechee community at Wat Pah Pong were required to undergo a vetting procedure, with senior family members expected to act as sponsors and guarantors of their good character. The most basic criteria for acceptance into the community was that the woman should not be pregnant, and this was a chief reason why women accepted into the community would be expected to undergo a probationary period as a laywoman. The probationary period also provided an opportunity for the senior maechees to observe the applicants’ conduct and personality at close quarters and to judge their suitability. The exacting daily schedule and strict regulations played a major role in weeding out the unsuitable candidates. Women applying to join the maechee community at Wat Pah Pong were not expected to make commitments as to the length of time they would remain. Some became maechees for a limited period – perhaps a month – some intended to spend the rest of their lives in the monastery and left after a few days, and then there were those that came for a short time and ended up staying for the rest of their lives.

Most of the maechees, like the monks, came from peasant farming backgrounds and were used to an active, practical life. They usually found the forest monastic life in which formal meditation periods alternate with the mindful performance of communal tasks such as sweeping, cleaning, cooking and tending the garden, provided a good balance. For those who felt that enlightenment was still far away, accumulating merit through wholesome activities provided a reassuring compensation for the frustrations of meditation.

Growing vegetables and preparing food constituted the maechees’ primary contribution to the overall functioning of the monastery. As the number of monks and nuns increased to almost a hundred, it became a major daily effort. The work was done in noble silence, punctuated only by unavoidable orders or requests. Subtle points of etiquette concerning such matters as the use of pots and the frequency of hand washing helped to keep the nuns grounded in the present moment. Cleanliness was an important object of mindfulness for everyone. The maechees also contributed to most of the major work projects that took place in the monastery over the years. Perhaps their proudest achievement was the firing of the many thousands of bricks that the monks used to construct the monastery wall.

### Tudong

At Wat Pah Pong, the maechees were expected to keep many of the dhutaṅga ascetic practices incorporated into the monks’ training. They ate only one meal a day in a single vessel (in their case a white enamel bowl). Every Observance Day, they abstained from lying down and spent the night meditating. Many of them took on special practices, such as fasting or keeping silent, in order to accelerate their efforts in meditation.

Although it was not considered safe or socially acceptable for maechees to go wandering through the countryside on tudong like the monks, Luang Por did give the more senior nuns opportunities to practise in wild, lonely areas. With the opening of Tam Saeng Pet monastery in 1969 and Wat Kheuan the following year, the Sangha acquired large, remote properties where Luang Por would sometimes give permission for groups of maechees to live out in the forest under their glots and come face to face with their fears of spirits and wild animals.

Living under a glot in the forest without the protection afforded by a kuti was a daunting challenge, and only the most mature of the nuns were given this opportunity. On her first such expedition, Maechee Jun, one of the senior maechees, recounted with amusement how she’d been terrified throughout the night by the eerie sound of what she was sure was a malevolent spirit. The next day she was the object of some gentle teasing when she found out that what she had been listening to was, in fact, the plaintive sound of a female civet cat abandoned by her mate.

But once the maechees had overcome their initial fears of the forest, they found, like the monks, that life under such conditions gave rise to an alertness and enthusiasm for practice that was profoundly energizing.

### Admonishment

One of the guiding principles of monastic life laid down in the Vinaya is that every monk and nun should make themselves open to admonishment from all other members of their community. But mutual admonishment is not an easy ideal to live up to. In Thailand, the cultural emphasis on preserving social harmony through non-confrontation makes it particularly difficult. Nevertheless, Luang Por would often speak on this topic.

One year, during the Rains Retreat period, Luang Por instructed the maechee community on this principle in detail. By this time, his health was in decline, and he had been unable to visit the Maechee Section as often as he had in previous years. He emphasized the importance of each maechee learning how to admonish themselves as a foundation for admonishing others. They had to learn how to teach themselves, how to take care of their minds.

Before admonishing anyone else you should admonish yourself. Why? Because if you don’t, and that person doesn’t accept your admonishment, then you may lose your temper. You have to put yourself in a good frame of mind first. Then if she scolds you or abuses you, you won’t let it affect you; you know you’ve done the right thing. If it’s necessary to admonish someone and they take it well, then that’s good, but if they don’t, then that’s their affair, not yours.

If the person you admonished criticizes you, then listen to what they have to say. If she says, ‘You’re just jealous of me’, ask yourself whether it’s true. Investigate it. If it’s not, then she’s got it wrong and that’s her responsibility. Your practice is to let go, to learn to see everything in terms of Dhamma.

Those who received admonishment were to constantly train themselves to be open to the words of others, even if they seemed unfair or inaccurate. Learning how to deal with praise and blame was an essential element of the path to wisdom.

You need to learn how to take responsibility for your speech and actions. Then, if you act with a good intention and you’re accused of acting with an impure intention you can be at ease, because you know your own mind, and you know for sure that it’s not true. The Buddha taught us to have mindfulness at all times. When you’re going to say something, do you have a good intention? What’s the purpose of your words? You have to be aware of your actions. Then, when someone says you spoke improperly, you don’t get upset because you considered well before speaking those words: you know your intention was good, and the person who says you did wrong is mistaken. You are at ease.

Are you as good as they say? You have to know yourself. Don’t believe anyone else. Watch out. They say you’re bad, that’s someone’s words. They say you’re good, and it’s just words. It’s not who you are; only you know that.

We come here to let go. If someone gives you an admonishment, then receive it with a ‘Sādhu!’, glad that you’re getting it for free. Whether you’re in the right or the wrong – listen. It’s through listening that wisdom can arise.

He illustrated his advice with his own interpretation of a Zen training method:

The Zen masters teach their students to reduce conceit and views. There’s not much study involved. If students start to nod while they’re sitting in meditation, the teacher hits them on the head with a long stick. The student says, ‘Thank you sir, for being so kind as to hit me on the head with your stick. It reminded me of what I’m supposed to be doing. Thank you, sir.’

Can all of you maechees living here thank each other for admonition? Give it a try; it takes wisdom. If any of you get drowsy during meditation, have Maechee Khamfah hit you over the head with a stick – and then say, ‘Thank you.’ Could you do it? Understand this point.

The maechees were to see how valuable it was to receive admonishment, and how fortunate they were to be in a situation where they could receive it.

All of you have an advantage over me. I invite you to admonish me if I do something wrong, but it’s difficult for you; nobody does it, because I’m the teacher and you don’t dare to. That’s why practice as a senior monk is so hard. Sometimes the teacher does something wrong, and everyone just lets him carry on doing it without him realizing it’s wrong. It’s difficult for a teacher to find someone to teach him. But all of you are lucky. If you do something wrong, somebody tells you straight away. It’s a really good thing; don’t think negatively about it. Try to see that practice is exactly about things like this. If you let go, if you put something down, it comes to a halt, it’s no longer heavy. It is the attachment that is heavy.

### Dhamma Teachings

The Dhamma teachings Luang Por gave to the maechees were little different in substance from those that he gave to the monks. Although he might emphasize Right Speech and various community values a little more at the beginning of talks to the maechees, the essence of the instruction he gave was the same. The more profound teachings were given freely. In fact, monks who accompanied Luang Por when he went to teach the maechees would say that the talks he gave on these occasions were amongst the best they’d ever heard. A passage in which Luang Por related to the nuns one of his favourite stories gives the flavour of these talks:

One of the Supreme Patriarchs went on a trip to China, where he was presented with a beautiful tea cup. The patriarch had never seen anything so beautiful. He started thinking about how he’d show off this gift to all his lay supporters when he got back to Thailand. But as soon as he took the cup into his hands, he started to suffer. ‘Where shall I put it down? Where shall I keep it?’ He became afraid of breaking the cup.

Once the tea cup was in his shoulder bag, he constantly reminded his attendant, ‘Be careful with that shoulder bag; the tea cup is fragile. Be careful!’ It was nothing but suffering for him. The patriarch had been having a good time before that. The suffering began as soon as he received the tea cup – that’s when it became heavy. Sitting on the plane back to Thailand, he would fret whenever the novice went near the shoulder bag, ‘Be careful! It’s fragile.’ If a layperson came close, it was, ‘Be careful with that shoulder bag!’ He suffered all the way back to Thailand because he thought the tea cup belonged to him. The suffering came with the attachment.

One day much later, back in his monastery, a novice picked up the cup to have a look at it. The cup slipped through his hands and broke. The Supreme Patriarch exclaimed with joy, ‘At last! I’ve been suffering over that cup for years!’

It’s the same with the five aggregates (khandhas). They’re heavy; throw them away. Throw away form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness. Don’t take any of them as self or as belonging to self. They are merely form, merely feelings, merely perceptions, merely mental formations and merely consciousness – that’s all. Don’t grasp on to any of them. Seeing their true nature is liberation. We’ve been attached to conventional realities, but when we see the five aggregates for what they are, then everything flips over, and there is freedom from the conventions. When we put down the burden of the five aggregates we feel lightness. This is what I’d like you all to understand.

Like the monks, the maechees talked amongst themselves of how Luang Por always seemed to address exactly the issues that they were facing in their practice and wanted to ask him about. As Maechee Boonyu recalled, when he taught the Dhamma, it was clear to them that he genuinely believed in their capacity to liberate themselves from suffering, and he wanted to help them in every way he could.

“He taught us to abandon craving, not to attach to an idea of self, to see impermanence. We practised as he recommended, and we saw the truth of what he taught. I determined to follow his teachings and saw that they were the path to liberation from suffering. He taught us not to be deluded by the physical body, to let go, to abandon attachment, to put things down. I was inspired by his teachings, I fully accepted them and practised accordingly, and had no thoughts of returning to the world.

“When he came to give a talk, if there were a lot of newly ordained maechees present, he’d speak on a basic level: about not arguing or contending, knowing the meaning of the precepts. On the intermediary level, he’d talk about training to abandon greed, hatred and delusion, attachment to views and conceit, how to practise once our precepts were purely kept. On the highest level, he’d talk about what you’d see and what you’d experience when you practised; he’d talk about the purpose of becoming a nun, about the highest goal of a monastic’s life. He would talk about Nibbāna and anattā, and there being nothing worth attaching to. Sometimes he might ask an older maechee, ‘Do you know what the state of your mind will be at the point of death?’ He taught us to know the knowing in the knowing. Not the knowing of heat and cold, of pleasure and pain, of day and night, but the knowing in the knowing.”

### The Duty of a Samaṇa

On one occasion, while addressing the maechees, Luang Por returned to an old and potent theme: how to make the most of monastic life; how to live as a true samaṇa. Progress in Dhamma began with the cultivation of a sense of urgency.

‘The days and nights are relentlessly passing.’ That’s what it says in the books … ‘What are you doing right now?’ … What does it mean to you to be a maechee?

If you say that you’ve come to abandon defilements, then do you know what the defilements are? Can you recognize the unwholesome qualities in your mind? Are you abandoning defilements? Are you resisting them?

What are you thinking right now? What are you doing? Are you thinking wisely? Or foolishly? Are you thinking jealous thoughts? Angry ones? Is there desire in your mind? Examine the present moment.

Luang Por said that now that they had left the lay life, the Buddha was asking them questions. He was asking, ‘Are you conducting yourself like a samaṇa yet?’ ‘Are you speaking like a samaṇa?’ ‘Do you eat like a samaṇa?’

He warned them against living heedlessly. Living too comfortably was an obstacle to practice. He said that the way of the samaṇa is to put constant effort into abandoning greed, hatred and delusion. It is through that effort that the samaṇa earned the respect and support of lay Buddhists. But if lay Buddhists did praise their practice, they should treat those words of praise with caution. If they were not true, then after hearing those words of unearned praise, they should put forth the effort to become worthy of them.

Luang Por said that the reason people don’t let go of defilements is that they haven’t seen the suffering inherent in them, and so are reluctant to abandon their attachment. Greed, hatred and delusion arise in our minds because of our wayward thinking. A person with wrong view will not find peace even in the most conducive environment. Wrong view always brings suffering in its wake; only Right View leads to peace. Peaceful states of mind developed in one holding wrong views will never lead to wisdom. Only the calm informed by Right View can support insight into the way things are.

He stressed that it is Right View that enables a samaṇa to know how to adapt: to know how to live in a large community, how to live in a small community, how to live alone. When Right View has been developed, living in a large community feels no different from living alone. The harmony of the group is a vital, supportive factor for practice. Chanting together, meditating together, working together – all foster the harmony of the group. When other maechees act poorly, he said, then be aware that this is because their Dhamma practice is not yet strong enough to overcome their defilements. Some have deeply ingrained bad habits; they have never created the conditions for wisdom and letting go in the past. Make allowances for them.

You’ve still got defilements; you’ve still got craving. So, you try. You increase the number of practices you’ve taken on. You examine your body, speech and mind every day. Where are the shortcomings? You extend the bits that are too short. Whatever’s too long, you cut it off.

1 “They listen to sermons every day and they spend much time praying in the temples. Their principal activity is to serve the monks, prepare their food and to supply their needs by continual almsgiving. They visit the poor and the sick and devote themselves assiduously to rendering to their fellow-creatures all the good offices that charity can inspire. They enjoy all the same privileges as the monks and are no less respected. Everybody bows down to them and they bow only to monks and pagodas. They are called ‘nang chy’, which means ‘holy woman’. They have a place set aside for them in the pagodas and at the great ceremonies. They are much in demand for the funerals of mandarins, to which they go in order as if in a procession, and their attendance at these ceremonies is always liberally rewarded.” (The Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam by Nicolas Gervaise, 1688.)

2 The body of texts that systematizes the teachings found in the Buddha’s discourses.

3 No relation to Luang Por’s mother.

4 Future mentions of ‘Maechee Pim’ will refer to Pim Utaigorn.

5 Rules laid down by the Buddha to define the relationship between bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs.

6 It was considered inappropriate for a monk to make eye contact with a woman.

7 A notable exception to this came with the elaborate funeral that Luang Por arranged for Mae Pim upon her death in 1974, which featured many days of merit-making activities dedicated to her.