# Lifeblood

Luang Por and the Vinaya

Not despising, not harming, restraint according to the code of monastic discipline, moderation in food, dwelling in solitude, devotion to meditation – this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

– Dhp 185

Vinaya is the lifeblood of the Dispensation.

– Vin-a 1

## Introduction

Whereas ‘Dhamma’ (Sanskrit: ‘Dharma’) is a word familiar to Buddhists of all traditions, ‘Vinaya’ is much less so. That this should be the case is worthy of remark given the central importance attached to Vinaya by the Buddha himself, as clearly demonstrated by his frequent references to the body of his teachings by the compound term ‘Dhamma-Vinaya’. At the end of his life, refusing requests to appoint a successor, the Buddha instructed his disciples:

After my passing, the Dhamma-Vinaya which I have taught and explained to you shall be your teacher.

– DN 16

So what exactly does ‘Vinaya’ refer to? In essence, Vinaya refers to the Buddha’s teachings aimed at creating the optimum external conditions for the study, practice, realization and propagation of Dhamma. As the degree to which these conditions may be promoted in society at large is limited, the Vinaya is to be found most clearly in the training rules, injunctions, procedures, protocols and conventions prescribed by the Buddha for his monastic order to live by and gathered together in the texts known collectively as the Vinaya Piṭaka.

Etymologically, ‘Vinaya’ is derived from words meaning ‘taking out of/away from’. The practice of Vinaya seeks to lead individual practitioners away from actions and speech that will conflict with, or undermine, their practice of Dhamma and to lead monastic communities away from conflict and disharmony. Although Vinaya finds its apogee in the regulations governing monastic life, it is also found on a more general level in teachings aimed at lay Buddhists, including those explaining the path factors of Right Action, Right Speech and Right Livelihood.[1]

The decision by the Buddha to place such emphasis on Vinaya may be traced back to the days following his awakening. It is said that on reviewing the path to enlightenment, the newly awakened Buddha considered it to be so demanding that he was unsure as to whether anyone else in the world could follow it to its conclusion. Although he subsequently became reassured of the existence of ‘those with little dust in their eyes’, the Buddha’s sense of the difficulty involved in transmitting the Dhamma did not leave him. He realized that his disciples would need every assistance possible, and that a monastic order could provide supportive conditions to a degree that household life, with all its demands and temptations, could rarely hope to.

In the Sangha, he sought to create a way of life that would minimize the conditions that retard progress on the path and maximize the conditions conducive to it. Members of the Sangha would not need to make compromises with the expectations and prejudices of society at large. Monastics could live within communities made safe and stable by agreed and impeccable standards of conduct, dwelling together with wise teachers and like-minded friends. In a tranquil environment, free of the daily struggle for subsistence, monks could learn how to transcend their addiction to the sensual world and put forth undistracted effort for enlightenment.

Vinaya was the practical means by which these goals were to be achieved. In the first several years after the Buddha’s enlightenment, it simply constituted a set of behavioural norms (e.g. refraining from all sexual activity, from receiving money, from eating in the evening). The commentarial texts report that the monks were all of considerable spiritual maturity and were sufficiently motivated to uphold this informal code by their devotion to the Buddha and by their own sense of right and wrong.

After twenty years had passed, however, the Sangha had grown considerably. It now contained many unenlightened members and warning signs had appeared of an impending erosion of standards. In response – and on an ad hoc basis, responding to problems as they arose – the Buddha began to introduce training rules (sikkhāpada) divided into different categories, which included penalties for transgressions ranging in severity from confession to expulsion. By the time of the Buddha’s death, these training rules numbered 227 and were known collectively as the Pāṭimokkha. The Pāṭimokkha is the formal code of conduct for Buddhist monastics and has lain at the heart of the Vinaya ever since.

As the Sangha grew in size, the Buddha also began to elaborate upon the protocols and procedures that he wished to define the more complex communal life that was evolving. The Vinaya texts passed down to us thus include, in addition to the Vibhaṅga which deals with the Pāṭimokkha, a large number of supplementary allowances and prohibitions which are gathered together in the Khandhakas. These un-numbered injunctions are not divided into categories, and transgressions of them are almost all simply referred to as ‘acts of wrongdoing’ (dukkata). These injunctions outnumber Pāṭimokkha training rules many times over, and arguably do more to create the distinctive way of life and culture of the modern Thai forest monasteries.

Over time, a huge body of interpretations and extrapolations have accumulated around the Khandhaka injunctions. Most of them have become norms accepted by the Thai Forest Tradition, although there are certain variations from lineage to lineage and from teacher to teacher. From this point on, this whole body of practices will be referred to as ‘observances’, a translation of the Thai ‘korwat’.

The following description of the training in the Vinaya undergone by the Sangha of Wat Pah Pong reflects this division between Pāṭimokkha training rules and auxiliary observances, taking each as a major section heading. It also includes an account of the dhutaṅgas, or ascetic practices, as a third major section, for the reason that although these ascetic practices were originally intended by the Buddha to be voluntary undertakings, a number of them have been rendered compulsory elements of the Wat Pah Pong training regime.

## Pāṭimokkha: The Core of the Vinaya

We will be consummate in moral conduct. We will be consummate in the Pāṭimokkha. We will dwell restrained in accordance with the restraint of the Pāṭimokkha. We will be consummate in conduct and resort, seeing danger in even the slightest of faults. We will train ourselves by undertaking rightly the rules of training.

– MN 6

The Buddha listed his reasons for establishing training rules:

for the excellence of the Sangha

for the comfort of the Sangha

for the suppression of the evil-minded

for the comfort of the well-mannered monks

for the restraint of the corruptions in the present

for protection against corruptions in the future

for inspiring faith in the faithless

for increasing faith in those that have faith

for the persistence of the True Dhamma

for the furtherance of Vinaya.

– Vin recurring AN 10.31

The significance given by the Buddha to this formalization of Vinaya may be judged by the vital link he revealed between the Pāṭimokkha and the longevity of the teachings. Speaking as the latest of a lineage of Buddhas stretching back into the incalculable past, he said that a pattern could be discerned in the relative length of time the teachings of previous Buddhas had survived. While those of Vipassī, Sikhī and Vessabhū were relatively short-lived, he said, those of Kakusandha, Konāgamana and Kassapa lasted for a long time. The reasons for the disparity were not only that those of the second group were ‘untiring in giving abundant Dhamma teaching to disciples’ but also because ‘the training rules for disciples were indicated and the Pāṭimokkha was appointed.’ The Buddha summarized this observation with a simile: the teachings were preserved by these measures in the same way that flower petals threaded onto a length of cotton twine could be prevented from blowing away in the wind.

In Theravada Buddhist cultures, the Sangha has been venerated as the model Buddhist community designed by the Buddha himself and revered for providing moral, intellectual and spiritual leadership to society since its inception. Whereas the Buddhist world has never lacked a core of exemplary and inspiring lay practitioners, it has always been the prevailing view that most of those who have realized the higher fruits of the Buddhist training have done so as monastics. Being seen as the institution in which the vast majority of the most renowned Buddhist scholars and practitioners throughout history have chosen to spend their life, the Sangha retains a great prestige.

The Vinaya has always been the defining feature of Sangha life, the visible embodiment of its guiding ideals, and the guarantor of its stability and integrity through the ages. In essence, entering the monastic order has meant committing oneself to the study and practice of Dhamma within the framework of the Vinaya.

At least, that has been the ideal. It is true that the inseparability of Dhamma and Vinaya – most simply of the inner and the outer elements of the Buddha’s path of liberation – has always been one of the fundamental tenets of Theravada Buddhism. Nevertheless, in practice, the degree to which that relationship has been maintained in monastic communities over the centuries has fluctuated widely. The Bhikkhu Sangha is probably the oldest surviving institution in the world today, and inevitably, golden ages have alternated with periods of decline. In Thailand, it was in the early twentieth century, with the appearance of the lineage founded by Luang Pu Mun, that the principle of Dhamma-Vinaya as a single integrated entity was put back at the very nub of monastic training. And it was this approach to the path of practice that so inspired Luang Por Chah when he paid his respects to Luang Pu Mun in early 1948.

It was an approach that signalled a radical departure from the prevailing norm in Isan at the time. When Luang Por was growing up, entering the Sangha in rural Northeast Thailand did not usually entail either a commitment to striving for enlightenment or even an adherence to the Vinaya. Monastic life in a village monastery was much more likely to entail embarking on a simple, virtuous existence consisting of a superficial study of the texts, combined with various priestly duties. Luang Por became a monk in his local monastery because there was no obvious alternative, and, for all of its faults, he would have considered that, for a person of his interests and aspirations, it was the most obvious place for him to be.

It has always been taken for granted in Buddhist cultures that a young man who possesses a strong spiritual vocation, and who is free of ties and responsibilities, will enter the Sangha. By leaving the household life, he will gain the opportunity to make a wholehearted commitment to the study and practice of the Buddha’s teachings. If someone is free of family responsibilities, then why, the argument goes, would they not choose to live in the way that the Buddha himself recommended? Why live as a householder and handicap oneself unnecessarily? Ordination was Luang Por’s first declaration of intent on his path to liberation.

Unsurprisingly, his aspirations could not be satisfied with life in a village monastery for long. Becoming a tudong monk at the beginning of 1947 was in many ways his true Going Forth; it was a departure by which he left behind forever a monastic system in which the Vinaya was only cursorily upheld and formal meditation a peripheral activity at best. Significantly, his wish upon leaving was not only to find a master of meditation, but also one who could instruct him in the Vinaya. Already, he saw the two linked together ‘like the back and palm of his hand’. He recognized from the beginning of his quest that without the clear-cut boundaries provided by the Vinaya, sensual desires might well have swept him off the path altogether.

Later, when he began his own monastic community, the Vinaya was central to Luang Por’s vision. He saw it as playing a vital role on both the communal and the individual levels. Communally, a scrupulous regard for the Vinaya helped to maintain an atmosphere of mutual respect, harmony and camaraderie. On the individual level, the practice of restraint within the boundaries of the Vinaya cultivated the inner virtue of sīla which together with the training of the heart (samādhi) and wisdom (paññā) constituted the Buddha’s path to awakening.

The individual dimension was key. Monks were expected to be able to constantly call training rules to mind in relevant situations, thus systematically, over time, creating new skilful habits of conduct and speech. Precise and detailed instructions for dealing with the material world grounded monks in the present moment. The recollection of precepts at the moment when the intention to transgress had arisen allowed them to stop, awaken to the significance of their intentions and refrain from unwise actions. It wasn’t easy. But for those who persisted, practising in this way freed their mind from guilt, anxiety and regret, and gave them the sense of well-being and self-respect that formed the indispensable foundation for the development of samādhi and paññā. In a passage from the Parivāra:

Discipline is for the sake of restraint, restraint for the sake of freedom from remorse, freedom from remorse for the sake of joy, joy for the sake of rapture, rapture for the sake of tranquillity, tranquillity for the sake of pleasure, pleasure for the sake of concentration, concentration for the sake of knowledge and vision of things as they are, knowledge and vision of things as they are for the sake of disenchantment, disenchantment for the sake of release, release for the sake of knowledge and vision of release, knowledge and vision of release for the sake of final Nibbāna through non-clinging.

– Vin Pv 12.2

Luang Por believed that, as members of the Sangha, it was a monk’s duty to give great respect to the practice of the Vinaya. Disrespect towards it meant disrespect towards the Buddha himself, its creator. And if a monk treated the Buddha with disrespect, then how could he hope to progress in Dhamma?

### Luang Por speaks about the Vinaya

Our practice here has its foundation in the Vinaya, together with the ascetic practices and the practice of meditation. Being mindful, being restrained within the various monastic regulations, up to and including the 227 rules in the Pāṭimokkha, is of immense value. It makes life simple and peaceful: we don’t have to be anxious about how we should behave. We’re free of worry and instead have a peaceful life governed by mindfulness.

The Vinaya enables us to live together in unity; the community runs smoothly. Outwardly everyone looks and acts in the same way. The Vinaya and morality are a firm stairway leading to profound levels of concentration and wisdom. By proper use of the Vinaya and the ascetic practices, we make our lives simple and limit our possessions. Here we have the complete practice of the Buddha: refrain from evil and do good, live simply keeping to basic needs, purify the mind. In other words, be watchful of your mind and body in all postures: sitting, standing, walking or lying down – know yourself.

Remember: the essence of the Vinaya is watching intention, examining the mind.

The practitioner must have mindfulness, and must be reflective. In your speech and in all your physical actions – touching things, picking them up or whatever – you should first be thoroughly clear about what you are doing and why. Mistakes occur when your mindfulness is weak, or when you are not paying attention to what you are doing.

Although it can feel as if the Vinaya is harassing you, it has immense benefit. You should know all the training rules. If there are any that you don’t know about, then find out from someone who does.

A monk who doesn’t keep the Vinaya and who doesn’t meditate can’t live together with one who does – their paths will diverge.

Study [the training rules] until you understand them, reflect on what you’ve learned and then memorize it. Every now and again, come and pay respects to the teacher and clear up your doubts. He will explain the finer points. Keep studying until you truly understand the Vinaya.

Take care of the rules as a gardener takes care of trees: without discriminating between big and small.

You have to be meticulous with the Vinaya, and if you don’t practise it in a heartfelt way, then you will meet difficulties. Those who are restrained within the bounds of the Vinaya feel as if nothing could endanger them, but nevertheless, they are constantly on their guard.

### Doubts

As a young monk, Luang Por developed a keen interest in the Vinaya. He soon graduated from studying the basic textbooks to the Pubbasikkhāvaṇṇanā, a nineteenth-century compendium of dense Sri Lankan commentaries that was considered the main resource for serious Vinaya practitioners.[2] He made copious notes and kept a notebook filled with the factors determining transgressions of every rule in his shoulder bag. In later days, speaking of the energy and dedication he brought to his Vinaya studies, he recalled how he would sometimes pick up his books at six in the evening and not put them down until the following dawn when it was time to prepare for the daily alms-round. His understanding of the Vinaya deepened during his wandering years as he began to meet other monks committed to living by the training rules and was able to engage them in discussion about more abstruse passages in the texts.

However, on embarking upon a study of Ven. Buddhaghosa’s great fifth-century CE work Visuddhimagga (The Path of Purification) – the pre-eminent commentarial text of Theravada Buddhism – Luang Por experienced a crisis of faith. In poring over the section of the book dealing with morality, it seemed to him that the huge number of minor observances listed in the text, made the Vinaya, if taken in its entirety, a system too complex to live by. To Luang Por, this was a devastating conclusion; it struck at the very core of his vocation. Years later he recalled wryly, ‘I thought my head would explode.’

To Luang Por’s mind, devotion to the Buddha’s Vinaya followed naturally from devotion to his Dhamma. The two were inseparable. Luang Por wanted to keep every rule, and keep every rule perfectly. But now it seemed that no matter how much effort he put forth, however sincere he might be, that was not possible.

A simple conviction kept the worst of the doubts at bay: the Buddha, the greatest of teachers, was a pragmatist. He would never have prescribed standards of behaviour impossible for his disciples to live by. Luang Por felt stuck – as if he’d come to a dead end – and yet he believed there was a way out, and he was determined to find it. It was for this reason that when he went to pay respects to Luang Pu Mun, the first questions he chose to ask were not about meditation, but about the Vinaya:

I said, ‘Venerable Ajahn, what should I do? I’m new to the practice and I don’t know how to proceed. I have a lot of doubts. I still don’t have a firm foundation.’

He said, ‘What is the problem?’

‘Well, while I was trying to find a way forward in the practice I started to read The Path of Purification. It made me feel that it’s all beyond me, that no human being has the capacity to practice in that way. It’s just too difficult; it’s impossible to be mindful of every single one of those rules.’

And Luang Pu Mun said to me, ‘It’s true that there are a lot of observances; but in essence, there are few. If you were to try to keep every single training rule mentioned in that book it would certainly be a difficult task. But actually, the Exposition on Sīla is just that – an exposition, one that describes the workings of the human mind. Through training your mind to have a wise shame (hiri) and fear of consequences (ottappa), you will be naturally possessed of restraint and care with regard to the training rules. As a result, your desires will be reduced and your mindfulness will be stronger. Whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down you’ll be intent on maintaining a complete and constant mindfulness. Vigilance will appear in your mind.‘

This approach to the Vinaya was a revelation to Luang Por. It was not, he understood Luang Pu Mun to be saying, that you were to disregard the training rules in favour of a more general development of awareness, but that mindfulness grounded in a thorough knowledge of the training rules must be based upon the correct attitude towards them.

It was a theme that Luang Por was to emphasize repeatedly in his own teachings. As was Luang Pu Mun’s injunction:

“Whatever comes up that you are unsure about – stop. If there’s no alertness in your mind, then don’t do it, don’t say it. For instance, you wonder, ‘Is this an offence or not?’ As long you still don’t know whether it is or not, then don’t act upon that intention, don’t speak with it, don’t transgress.”

Luang Pu Mun advised Luang Por that in times of doubt it was correct to seek out teachers and listen to what they had to say. Nevertheless, he should bear in mind that the words of others could never truly bring those doubts to an end. Every unskilful action is prompted by an unskilful intention; unless an inner restraint is developed, doubts about conduct will never go away. The key point was, he said, ‘whether the mind fully accepts the wrongness of wrong actions and the rightness of right actions.’

Luang Por summarized the teaching that he received from Luang Pu Mun as follows:

This teaching he gave me was an important one: it’s not that you can ‘raksa’ every single training rule. It’s enough to ‘raksa’ your mind.[3]

This did not mean that Luang Por ascribed to the view that practising mindfulness was a sufficient practice in itself. When informed of the view that a mindful monk would be naturally virtuous, he replied:

That’s true but it’s not right. It’s right but it’s not true.

In other words, it was putting the cart before the ox. Whereas it may be true that unshakeable mindfulness protects a monk from unskilful intentions, it is also the case that very few monks possess that level of mindfulness. The pressing question is how that protective mindfulness is to be cultivated in the first place. Luang Por held that the recollection of training rules was one of the most important means of cultivating mindfulness laid down by the Buddha himself.

In the Aṅguttara Nikāya[4], the Buddha gives a list of eight criteria that may be used to decide whether or not a teaching is in harmony with the Dhamma-Vinaya. Luang Por had adopted this list in his own studies, and the inspiration he found in the words of Luang Pu Mun was strengthened even further with the recognition that they were completely congruent with the eight factors:

As I sat there listening I saw that it agreed with the teaching of the eight criteria for deciding what is truly the teaching of the Buddha.

Whatever teaching does not lead to the accumulation of defilements, or the binding to suffering, but leads to detachment from craving, fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, putting forth effort, being easy to support – that teaching is the true teaching of the Buddha.

### Hiri and Ottappa: the two guardians of the world

Hiri and ottappa were two virtues that Luang Pu Mun singled out as fundamental to growth in Dhamma-Vinaya. Of the various renderings of these words in English, ‘shame’ and ‘fear’ are the most common, while more recent attempts have included ‘conscience’ and ‘care’. The lack of consensus amongst translators points to the difficulty in finding words for these qualities free of Judeo-Christian connotations alien to their original meaning. Perhaps the distinguishing feature of these two terms is that they involve no idea of a ‘shameful’ or ‘bad’ self, only of ‘shameful’ or ‘bad’ actions. Hiri and ottappa may be seen as emotions that arise naturally when unwise actions are seen in their true light.

In this book, ‘hiri’ is rendered as ‘wise shame’ and ‘ottappa’ as ‘wise fear of consequences’. The prefix ‘wise’ is intended to emphasize that these two virtues are positive emotions that may be cultivated by means of wise consideration (yoniso manasikāra). Regularly recollecting one’s goals and aspirations, one’s status and responsibilities, enables the mind to recognize any actions and speech in conflict with them, resulting in a shrinking away from those actions (the texts compare it to a feather shrinking away from a fire). This is called ‘wise shame’. Regularly recollecting the consequences of actions in light of the law of kamma results in a rational fear of unwholesome actions: ‘wise fear of consequences’.

Wise shame, wise fear of consequences – that’s all you need. When you’re about to do something, and you’re not sure whether it’s right or wrong, wise shame arises and you don’t do it. It doesn’t matter whether, in fact, it is right or wrong, you desist for the time being. Whatever you’re uncertain about, don’t do it, don’t say it. Check with the teacher first.

This is the common ground of all the Vinaya rules: cultivating wise shame and wise fear of consequences with regard to all bad kamma. It reaches the point that the intention to kill a mosquito feels the same as the thought to kill a human being.

If a mosquito bites you, and you scratch the itch and unintentionally kill the mosquito, then there’s no kamma involved. But its death reminds you to be more mindful in future. And not to be heedless – you have to add that point. You look after the Vinaya at this one point of wise shame and wise fear of consequences, and it will encompass every training rule. Just make sure you have wise shame and wise fear of consequences … and that’s the Dhamma.

### No more will to transgress

On one of the very rare occasions that Luang Por referred to his own spiritual attainments, he told the Sangha at Wat Pah Pong that after many years of application, his own study of the Vinaya had ended with the realization that the volitions necessary for transgression of training rules were no longer present within him. It was impossible for him to act in an unwholesome manner. He repeated the insight that he had gained from his time with Luang Pu Mun:

This is an important point: the only true conclusion to the study of the Vinaya comes from within.

Luang Por’s declaration that the intention to transgress was no longer present in his mind makes immediate sense if all the Vinaya rules were concerned with curbing the expression of unwholesome impulses. But a number of training rules proscribe acts that are not inherently immoral – eating after midday is an obvious example. Why then, would a monk’s inner purity inevitably result in him scrupulously adhering to training rules not directly related to the arising of greed, hatred and delusion in his mind? It is a point that illuminates the understanding of the Vinaya found in Luang Por and his fellow teachers of the Thai Forest Tradition.

Their view is based upon the fact that the Vinaya has been passed down from the Buddha himself. One who requests entry into the Sangha applies for permission to live his life according to the Buddha’s Vinaya. In effect, through faith in the Buddha’s wisdom, without picking and choosing, he is promising to respect all of the rules constituting the Vinaya. Transgressing a training rule may then be seen as reneging on a promise, and it is this volition to betray a commitment that no longer arises in the enlightened monk’s mind.

Secondly, in a seminal passage in the Suttas[5], Ven. Mahā Kassapa declines the Buddha’s invitation to relax his ascetic practices in his old age. He explains to the Buddha that he wishes to be a good example to younger monks and to future generations. It was this same motivation that guided the great arahants in their scrupulous adherence to the training rules.

The position that precepts can be abandoned after enlightenment is one which has been rejected by all the great masters of the Theravada tradition. They have taken pains to avoid sending the message that one who has attained a certain level of insight is now beyond the training rules. The danger they have seen in the view that rules are only for those that need to keep them is that it would undermine the harmony of the Sangha produced by a common practice of the rules. It might easily lead to corrupt or deluded monks claiming exceptions to group standards of behaviour based upon false attainments. With over-estimation of attainments having always posed a challenge to meditating communities, a system in which no monk may claim an exemption to the training rules provides safety to all.[6] Those monks who have mistakenly believed themselves to have reached a level of enlightenment are thereby protected from creating bad kamma. Their students are prevented from facilitating such behaviour through faith in their teacher and thus creating bad kamma themselves.

Luang Por led by example. He sought to set the tone in the monastery by maintaining an impeccable standard of conduct. On every full moon and dark moon day, the Sangha of Wat Pah Pong gathered together for its most important recurring ritual: the recitation, by one of its members, of the 227 Pāṭimokkha rules. Before entering the Uposatha Hall, the monks were required to split into pairs to confess to their partner offences against the Vinaya they might have committed during the previous fifteen days. Only thus purified might they attend the recitation. Luang Por, although free of transgressions, would always perform the ritual. After the recitation, he would give an exhortation to the Sangha that would emphasize the role of moral conduct in the path to enlightenment.

### Caging the tiger

To newly ordained monks at Wat Pah Pong, the Vinaya could feel like a heavy burden. Some said they felt as if they could scarcely lift a finger without breaking some training rule or other. Monks could feel intimidated by the sheer number of the rules; there seemed to be so many to bear in mind at every moment. Compounding the discomfort caused by the constrictions of their new life, few monks were completely free of odd moments of regret for old habits and pleasures. Luang Por would tell his disciples to be patient, that the discomfort was a natural reaction. Restraining themselves within the boundaries of the Vinaya, he said, was like caging a tiger. Initially, the caged tiger rages at the bars, but it gradually gets used to its confinement and accepts the situation. The tiger, he said, was like the defilements:

It’s not your mind that is suffering; it’s the defilements that are agitated. Be patient.

On another occasion, he compared defilements and conceited views to an infection in a wound, and the Vinaya as like an instrument that probes the wound (often painfully) to clean out the foreign matter in order that healing may take place.

### Wise use

At Wat Pah Pong, conducting oneself within the boundaries established by the training rules was taught as a means to promote mindfulness and social harmony. But, like any tool, there was always the possibility that it could be used unskilfully and create more harm than good. The biggest danger in emphasizing the Vinaya was that it could be grasped at as an end in itself. Being ‘strict’ could become a fetish, and a cause of spiritual pride. Luang Por cautioned the monks:

The Vinaya will cause you all kinds of distress if you don’t know how to use it properly.

He would frequently remind the monks that they must use mindfulness and wisdom to protect their practice of the Vinaya from conceit and the craving for identity. He warned them about holding tenaciously to particular interpretations of training rules or of using Vinaya practice as a means to exalt oneself and denigrate others:

The Vinaya is a tool to use for your own cultivation. It’s not a weapon to be used to criticize or find fault with others. No one can do your practice for you, and neither can you do theirs for them. Just be mindful of your own conduct.

He would tell monks to give 90% of their attention to their own conduct and only 10% to others. Getting angry with monks who were not respecting training rules was to miss the point of the Vinaya altogether. Obsessive doubts and anxiety about transgressions were other traps to avoid. With so many training rules – and with such a large number of them complicated by mitigating and aggravating factors – it was unsurprising that monks often fell prey to doubts about the integrity of their Vinaya practice. If a monk was not diligent in his study or did not refer doubts to a knowledgeable elder, there was always room for uncertainty. If the monk was of a worrying disposition, he would suffer considerably.

Sometimes a craving for purity led to an obsession with perceived impurity. Every now and again, a monk would adopt unrealistically strict interpretations of the Vinaya rules and drive himself to distraction at his inability to keep to them. He might even decide to give up the training altogether, fearful of the bad kamma created by living the monks’ life badly. In Luang Por’s discourses on the Vinaya, a certain hapless monk called Dam often played a cautionary role:

Some monks read the commentarial texts and start thinking they’re committing offences every minute of the day. This is a sign of a lack of wisdom. I’ve spoken to you before about Mr Dam from Bahn Tung who was a monk here for three years. While he was practising walking meditation, the thought would come up in his mind that he’d committed an offence. He’d go over to a monk practising walking meditation nearby and ask if he could formally confess the offence. Then he’d go back to his own walking path, walk a few steps more, and then think, ‘Oh no! That’s an offence too!’ He’d spend his whole time, going back and forth, confessing offences to this monk and that. It started to drive him crazy … Other monks avoided him. The more he studied the Vinaya, the worse he got; his mind was in turmoil, doubting every possible aspect of the Vinaya. Three years in robes and he had nothing to show for it, other than a mind full of doubts.

Mr Dam, crippled by his doubts, eventually left the Sangha. Luang Por would point out that, in such cases, disrobing was the predictable result of monks believing in the stories they created from their doubts.

### Intention

Intention[7] is the key determining factor in almost all of the offences listed in the Vinaya. But given that in times of stress, awareness of intention is usually impaired, even the most upright monk could be assailed by doubts about his actions after the fact. Luang Por would counsel monks tormented in this way to know doubt as doubt, know it as a conditioned mental state, understand its nature. If the doubt persists, and if the Vinaya teachers agree that there are good grounds for it, then he should confess the offence.

In certain cases of ‘criminal’ neglect, intention is not the decisive factor. A monk who inadvertently drinks alcohol, for instance, is deemed at fault for not paying sufficient attention to the fluid he has been offered before drinking it. A lack of respect may also be decisive. Luang Por once gave an example of a shameless monk who eats something believing the time to be after the twelve o’clock noon limit, only to discover that, in fact, it is not yet noon. Has he committed an offence? Although he has not committed the offence of ‘eating at the wrong time’, Luang Por explained that he is considered to have committed a lesser offence of wrongdoing:

The offence lies in losing track of the time, not reflecting thoroughly, being heedless and unrestrained.

For the diligent monk, respect for the rules and commitment to the training should always take precedence over comfort and ease. Luang Por gave the example of a monk, far from the monastery, who is tempted by an offering of semi-raw fish – an Isan delicacy:

You’re on tudong, and during alms-round a donor puts some fish wrapped in leaves in your bowl. It’s all you’ve got to eat with the rice. But when you sit down to eat and open up the wrapping, it turns out that the fish is virtually uncooked, and so you put it aside.[8] You’d rather eat plain rice. You don’t dare to transgress; the mind sees [the fault]. When you reach this level, keeping the Vinaya becomes easier.

Luang Por related to his disciples how he’d dealt with his own crisis of faith as a young monk:

When I saw the faults in my behaviour, in my practice, in my teachers, in everything, I was so upset I almost disrobed. I felt hot, I couldn’t sleep. It was really bad kamma. The kamma lay in the doubting speculation. The more I got caught up in the doubts, the more I meditated, the more effort I put forth. I kept working away at whatever point my mind was stuck on. As a result, wisdom arose and changes steadily occurred.

Formerly, I hadn’t known anything about offences of wrongdoing, wasn’t interested in any of that. But when I really understood Dhamma and held to this way of practice, then offences of wrongdoing became, to me, like expulsion offences.

### Vinaya instruction

Formal instruction in the Vinaya at Wat Pah Pong was intensified in the three-month Rains Retreat. Every evening, after the period of chanting and meditation, Luang Por would read from, and comment upon, the Pubbasikkhāvaṇṇanā.

I still take the Pubbasikkhā as my reference in training the monks and novices. I read it out to the Sangha for many years. In those days, I’d sit on the Dhamma seat and teach until at least eleven or twelve o’clock at night; some nights until one or two in the morning. The monks were interested, and it was a training in listening and then taking away what you’d heard to study and reflect upon it. If you just listen, I don’t think you can understand in depth. After you’ve listened, then you have to go through the points and analyse them until you understand.

The monks and novices may well have been interested in the Vinaya, but the late night sessions could be gruelling, especially at the end of a long day. In time-hallowed fashion, Luang Por’s explanations of the rules would be interspersed with colourful anecdotes, many of them humorous, to keep his audience alert.

Many of the monks and novices also had their own copies of the first of the three-volume Vinaya Mukha commentary, composed by the Supreme Patriarch Phra Vajirananavarorasa in 1913. It provided a much more stream-lined presentation of the Vinaya and formed a major element of the Nak Tam Dhamma exams curriculum. But although the Vinaya Mukha helped to provide a basic grasp of the Vinaya, Luang Por encouraged study of the Pubbasikkhā. On one occasion, he advised:

The best thing is to have your own copy and to study the Vinaya by yourself in your kuti. When you have some free time, look at the text and keep considering the meaning. Then come and listen to the explanations and reflect on them at length. When you don’t understand something, come and ask the teacher and he will give you advice.

Luang Por explained that the Vinaya consists of a complex system of conventions to be memorized, contemplated and then applied with mindfulness and wisdom. Proficiency in use of the training rules was to be gained through consistent practice and by learning from experience. The Vinaya did not provide a cut-and-dried instruction manual for a monk’s daily life.

It’s extremely subtle and you won’t be able to draw upon your memory of the rules quickly enough. There’s so much detail to learn that it takes a long time of in-depth study with the teacher and steady practice.

Conforming to training rules and monastic observances led to a reduction in the time that might otherwise have been consumed by petty matters, and to increased efficiency in conducting the affairs of the Sangha. This was especially true when they were accompanied by a strong common dedication to practice.

A large number of monks doesn’t have to lead to sloppiness and disorder. It’s like a millipede. A millipede has lots of legs and looks awkward, as if the legs should get all snarled up. But in fact, because there is a rhythm and order to its movements, the millipede walks around without difficulties. It’s the same in Buddhism. If you practise like true disciples of the Buddha, it’s easy. That means practising well, practising directly, practising in order to be free of suffering, practising with integrity. Then if there are hundreds of monks, or even thousands – no matter how many there are – it doesn’t matter, because they all form into one harmonious whole.

Recollection of the Vinaya gave them the opportunity to become aware of old habitual reactions and worldly desires, and to let them go. In many cases, the role of the Vinaya was to simplify and clarify choices by providing boundaries for action. These boundaries were to stay firm, even when the motivations pressing for them to be ignored were wholesome ones. Monks were not taught to repress their compassion in favour of rules and regulations, only that they should learn how to express that compassion within the boundaries provided by the Vinaya.

### Testing

Luang Por’s senior disciples were fond of reminiscing about the ways in which he would use the Vinaya rules to test their alertness. While out walking in the middle of the day, for instance, he would often place a folded bathing cloth on his head for protection against the sun. The Vinaya allows a monk to cover his head only if his teacher is already doing so, and seeing Luang Por covering his head, other monks would gratefully follow suit. On some occasions, after a certain time had elapsed, Luang Por would discreetly remove the cloth from his head and after a while look behind to see if the other monks had done likewise. Those who had not would be admonished for daydreaming or, at the very least, receive one of his famous withering stares.

### The Practice of the Vinaya

The rules of the Pāṭimokkha are treated in the Vibhaṅga in great, sometimes exhaustive detail. The exposition of each rule includes a word-by-word analysis and a number of leading cases. Nevertheless, certain grey areas remain, for which there can be no unchallengeable interpretations. In certain cases, the spirit rather than the letter of the training rule prevails. For example, the rule prohibiting the consumption of alcohol is extended to cover other addictive drugs. In cases where the explanation of a rule contains ambiguous words or phrases, or leaves open possible loopholes, monastic groups usually come to their own agreements on correct practice. Luang Por was noted for establishing conventions at Wat Pah Pong aimed at promoting mindfulness rather than convenience. The ‘Great Standards’ requires monks to decide on the suitability of any new item not covered in the Vinaya Piṭaka by deciding whether it is most akin to the things that the Buddha prohibited or to the things that he permitted. Based on this criterion, driving a car, for example, is prohibited, while travelling by plane is permitted.

### Taking what is not given

There are four expulsion offences (pārājika) listed in the Pāṭimokkha.[9] A monk who commits any one of them loses his monkhood the moment he does so and cannot rejoin the Sangha at a later date.

It is just as a man, head cut off, cannot survive without it … a withered leaf removed from its stem can never become green … a solid block of stone broken in two cannot be returned to oneness … a sugar palm tree cut off at the crown is incapable of further growth.

– Vin Mv 1.65

A dedicated monk who begins to suspect that he might have committed an expulsion offence suffers intensely. ‘Am I really still a monk?’ is one of the most stressful thoughts that a monk may have to endure. The fourth expulsion offence, which involves lying about one’s spiritual attainments, gives monks most grounds for doubt. But the second pārājika, ‘taking what is not given’, may also keep a monk awake at night.

In this rule, the value of the appropriated object affects the severity of the offence. If the object is trifling – worth less than one ‘pāda’ – the text awards a lesser offence, falling short of expulsion. But, in today’s world, how may the value of one pāda be estimated? Although a commentarial text defines a pāda by its weight in gold, simply calculating the current value of the same weight of gold (as many monastic communities do) requires ignoring the role gold now plays in the international economic system. Today’s market-based value is both inflated and variable. Of the leading cases in the texts in which monks were found guilty of stealing, a pāda seems to be quite a small amount of money, but no exact standard can be deduced from the examples. If a monk has taken anything at all that does not belong to him, the gnawing doubt that accompanies his remorse, is whether or not the item taken merits expulsion.

Luang Por dealt with this ambiguity by adopting the position of the Pubbasikkhā, which simply translates the ancient Indian pāda as the Thai baht (they are, in fact, the same word). When the Pubbasikkhā was first published in the mid-nineteenth century, a baht could buy a cow, and thus the translation raised the bar for an expulsion offence very high. But by the mid-1950s, a baht had lost much of its value and was worth less and less as time went on. In opting for this convention, Luang Por effectively established a ‘zero tolerance’ approach to dishonesty. By doing so, it might be objected that he was distorting the Vinaya by abolishing de facto the lesser offence of petty theft.

Luang Por’s position was that a monk prepared to steal even the most trifling of items had no place in his monastery. Theft of a minor item would lead to expulsion from Wat Pah Pong, not necessarily from the Sangha. If a monk were to commit a theft of a small item and be sure in his mind that he had not committed a pārājika offence, he could simply leave the monastery and go elsewhere. He was the owner of his kamma. Luang Por did not insist that his interpretation was the only correct one, but that it was the standard of honesty that he expected his disciples to live by.

As a training of the mind, this interpretation of the rule encouraged monks to give a great deal of care and attention to their dealings with the material world. They knew that a moment of heedlessness might mean hours or days of mental agitation. A monk taking a box of matches from the altar, or even a single match, was expected to inform another monk before doing so. As a secondary benefit, the slight embarrassment of having to inform another of one’s smallest acts of consumption did much to nourish the spirit of frugality in the monastery.

### Offering

The fortieth training rule in the ‘Confession’ (Pācittiya) section of the Pāṭimokkha deals with the way in which a monk may receive food and medicines. It stipulates that he must accept such offerings either directly into his hands, into a vessel or onto a cloth that he is holding. For the offering to be deemed legitimate, the donor must be within arms-length of the monk.

But grey areas remain. What is the correct procedure, for instance, if a monk touches food in the mistaken belief that it has already been offered to another monk? On realizing his error, may he ask a layperson to formally offer the food and make good his error? Or is this food now ‘unallowable’? On such matters the text is silent. At Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por established a regulation that a thoughtless monk who touched a vessel containing un-offered food was forbidden from eating any of its contents. Once, however, the vessel had been properly offered, the rest of the Sangha could partake. If the monk repositioned or merely lifted the vessel from where it had been placed, then no monk could partake of the food. This ruling expressed a common theme: given an ambiguity in the text, Luang Por would establish a convention that punished heedlessness and promoted mindfulness.

As Luang Por became more famous, weekends would often see people from the local town of Warin, from the city of Ubon and even from other parts of Thailand come to offer food for the Sangha’s daily meal. But in the early years of Wat Pah Pong, when the village communities supporting the monastery were poor and Luang Por was still relatively unknown, the diet was austere. Nevertheless, every now and again, a lay donor from the city would arrive with a big pot of curry and other choice items of city food. For the Sangha, it was a treat. On one notorious occasion, after a monk picked up a big pot of curry mistakenly assuming it to have already been offered, Luang Por had the pot sent straight to the novices and nuns. For the monks, it was a practical teaching on the consequences of heedlessness that they did not soon forget.

### (Not) relating to women

Given that celibacy is one of the defining features of Buddhist monasticism, it is unsurprising that sexual misconduct accounts for some of the most serious transgressions against the monastic code. The Vinaya outlaws every imaginable kind of sexual activity, and the texts go into remarkably candid (even comic) detail in their efforts to clarify the extent of the prohibitions. Sexual continence is not seen as an end in itself, however, but as an important element of the training. Through abstaining from all overt expression of sexual desire, monastics give themselves the opportunity to isolate sensual craving as a conditioned mental phenomenon, to recognize its inherent unsatisfactoriness and to discover the means of freeing themselves from its dominion.

Monastic sex scandals make the front page of Thai newspapers. In Buddhist lay communities, nothing excites gossip as readily; nothing destroys faith in a monastery so easily. At the same time, the good name of the Sangha being very much tied to its sincere commitment to renunciation of worldly pleasures, nothing enhances the reputation of a monastery as surely as an absence of such scandals. Luang Por was well aware that a mendicant order can only flourish when it commands the goodwill and respect of the lay community, and he went to great lengths to prevent any kind of sexual impropriety from occurring in his monastery. He was remarkably successful. Now in its seventh decade, Wat Pah Pong has remained untainted by even the rumours of scandal.

Luang Por’s method was a simple one: as far as possible, he prevented any social contact between junior monks and nuns or laywomen. The separation between monks and nuns at Wat Pah Pong was absolute – they might as well have lived in separate worlds. His logic was that most serious transgressions occur when a monk allows minor transgressions to become habit and to acquire a feeling of normalcy. Gradually, the point at which the monk begins to feel that he is acting inappropriately recedes. The slippery slope leading to overt sexual misconduct opens up before him. Don’t allow the more innocent exchanges to take place, Luang Por reasoned, and you cut off the problem at its root.

Certainly, Luang Por’s most resolute and uncompromising side came to the fore in his attitude towards this area of the training. He felt that, in his own personal struggle with sexual desire, it was his devotion to the Vinaya that kept him in robes and allowed him the space in which to develop the meditational prowess and insight that allowed him to eventually transcend it. Nothing, Luang Por had observed over the years, could pull a young man out of the monkhood as easily as sexual desire, and for this reason, he would allow nothing to unnecessarily provoke it. Talking to young monks, he would echo the Buddha’s words to Ven. Ānanda:

Cut if off right at the start. Don’t see them. If it’s necessary to see them, then don’t talk to them. But what do you do if you have to talk to them? Be very mindful. That is the way to practice towards women. All it needs is for your eyes to meet hers, and that’s it – you can be utterly smitten for a month or two months, perhaps until you die.

‘Dying’ here meant to disrobe. Protecting one’s monkhood was considered a life or death struggle. The tone of these admonitions was often fierce, but leavened with a wry humour when Luang Por would skewer the most embarrassing thoughts that could pop up in a lustful mind:

And when she’s gotten up from her seat, and you can even be aching to go over there and touch the seat she’s been sitting on – that’s what the Buddha called craving.

To anyone unfamiliar with the struggles of a monastic life, Luang Por’s approach might seem draconian. But it was based on an appreciation of how an infirm mind can dwell on the smallest exciting memory. Losing mindfulness in conversation with a young woman could deal a heavy blow to a monk’s meditation.

She’s gone, and you can still see her face. It’s a lingering vision. You sit alone with her, and she tells you all about herself; and three years later, you can still hear her words in your ears, in your heart. It’s a disaster. Don’t socialize with women. It’s dangerous.

Luang Por himself provided an impeccable example. He would never be alone with a woman under any circumstance. He received guests below his kuti in an area open to the central part of the monastery on three sides. He would only speak to a woman with at least one monk, novice or layman present as a companion. This restraint was not solely due to his respect for the Vinaya and the wish to be a good example to his students. Although Luang Por’s own actions, speech and mind might be beyond reproach, he could not assume the same for every person that came to see him. In his position, it was imperative that he protect himself from giving anyone prejudiced against him the slightest grounds for slander or innuendo.

### Pavāraṇā

One of the policies that distinguished Wat Pah Pong from most other monasteries in Thailand was Luang Por’s refusal to sanction any kind of fund-raising scheme. He believed that if the Sangha practised well, any funds genuinely needed by the monastery would appear by themselves in due course. Appealing for donations was both unnecessary and unbecoming.

He would often say that he disagreed with the common view that the word ‘bhikkhu’ was derived from ‘beggar’. Monks should never perceive themselves as beggars, he said, because if they do, it will feel natural to make requests. Luang Por would point out that the Vinaya does not allow healthy monks to beg, ask or even so much as hint for anything save drinking water from anyone other than blood relatives or other laypeople who have offered ‘pavāraṇā’.

An offer of pavāraṇā (literally: invitation) occurs when a layperson formally announces to a monastery or an individual monk that he or she wishes to extend an open invitation for requisites. Pavāraṇā is most commonly financial: it might, for example, consist of an offer to pay for a monk’s travel or medical costs. Pavāraṇā might also be an offering of skills, such as carpentry, plumbing or cooking. Pavāraṇā may be limited by the donor to a particular service or be open-ended; it may or may not have a time limit. An unlimited invitation, considered the most meritorious type, usually taking the form: ‘I would like to offer you a permanent pavāraṇā for anything you need.’ Luang Por explained the principle in the following way:

You can make the pavāraṇā verbally: ‘Venerable Sir, I offer you an invitation for the four requisites.’ It can be for life if you want, or for five months, a single month or just for seven days. Make pavāraṇā for important things like bus or train fares … things that lie within the scope of the four requisites, like medicines … But make sure that you only offer pavāraṇā to a suitable monk. Don’t make the invitation to a monk who doesn’t know anything about the Vinaya – or before long, he might ask for so much you find yourself completely broke.

You may say to the monk, ‘I and my family would like to offer you pavāraṇā for as long as life lasts. Please feel free to ask for any appropriate requisite at any time. If I am not available, you may make the request to my wife or children.’ An unlimited invitation like this is a truly excellent means of spiritual enrichment. Without you doing anything at all, the merit (puñña) steadily accumulates. It is a very good thing to do.

While the offer of pavāraṇā could render undiscerning households vulnerable to abuse of their generosity, the pavāraṇā protocol also protects householders. In Buddhist cultures such as Thailand, lay Buddhists find it very difficult to refuse a request from a monk, even if they feel uneasy about it. When householders are aware that a monk soliciting donations from them without prior pavāraṇā is, in fact, breaking a Vinaya rule, they can refuse without fear of bad kamma. Indeed, they realize that to concede to the demand would be encouraging the monk in improper behaviour.

Luang Por strived to be a good example. In the early days of Wat Pah Pong, when conditions in the wat were spartan, he refused to take advantage of the allowance to request support from family members. At Wat Pah Pong, monks were not allowed to accept personal pavāraṇā. But sooner or later, most monks left on tudong or established branch monasteries, and he made sure they were prepared. Again and again, he instructed the monks to be circumspect in accepting any kind of pavāraṇā:

Even if laypeople offer pavāraṇā, you should imagine yourself in their position. They have families to take care of and making a living is hard. None of you have ever had to bring up a family. Do you know that sometimes people don’t have a single penny in the house? Even if they do offer pavāraṇā, you have to look at the cause, the time and the place. Don’t assume that once they’ve made the offer, the moment the thought comes into your head that you need something, you can go and ask them for it. That’s how unnecessary things begin to seem necessary; you become inconsiderate and start following defilement and craving. It is laxness, and it will lead to your downfall.

Concern for the laypeople was not Luang Por’s only consideration. Individual pavāraṇā can create a bond between monk and donor that has detrimental effects on the monk’s practice.

Wherever you are, be like a forest bull; don’t be a village bull. A forest bull is free. Nobody puts a rope through its nose and leads it about. A village bull is tied to a stake. Wherever you go, don’t let laypeople support you so well that you get attached to it. Don’t let them tie you up like a village bull. Live freely like a forest bull, free to stay or go.

### Money

The eighteenth rule of the ‘Forfeiture-Confession’ (Nissaggiya Pācittiya) section of the Pāṭimokkha prohibits monks from accepting gold and silver or any medium of exchange, and from assuming ownership over funds held for them. Today in Thailand, it is rare to find monks outside of the Forest Tradition who strictly uphold this training rule.[10] Disregard for it is undoubtedly one of the major causes of corruption throughout Theravada monastic communities. Rivalries and jealousies amongst monks, worldliness, and conspicuous consumption may all be laid at its door.

Luang Por believed that it was the renunciation of money and of the power and temptation that came with it, that guaranteed the integrity and longevity of the Sangha. He found the general disregard of this rule to be shameful. On one occasion, Luang Por was informed that a large sum of money had been discovered in the kuti of a suddenly deceased senior monk in Bangkok. He commented that he could think of no greater disgrace, no greater betrayal of one’s monkhood, than that of hoarding a cache of money, and having it discovered on one’s death.

Luang Por’s policy with regard to financial offerings was hardline. He steadfastly refused to allow donation boxes in the monastery. He believed that monks should be completely disinterested in financial matters and utterly uninvolved with them. He regarded donation boxes as a subtle request for funds, and therefore unethical.

Maechee Boonyu remembered:

“When laypeople offered money, there would be a steward present to receive it so that Luang Por didn’t need to be involved. If the steward was going to ‘eat’ any of it, then he could do so until he vomited. Sometimes the steward wasn’t there and, in that case, the donors would place the money in the donation book. Luang Por completely ignored it. Sometimes money would disappear from the donation book. He’d never conduct any kind of investigation to try and find out who had taken it, even to ask if anyone had seen anybody suspicious around the kuti. All he would say was that they must have needed it.”

The refusal to use donation boxes was one aspect of Luang Por’s legacy, at least, that his disciples felt unable to preserve. As Thailand has grown steadily more prosperous over the past thirty years, the number of donations flowing into monasteries has increased proportionally. In response to this – and after a heated debate – the Wat Pah Pong Elders agreed to allow donation boxes in all affiliated monasteries, but with the proviso that they should be as discreet as possible. Lay donors had to be confident that their donations were reaching their intended recipients.

During his first few years as a monk in village monasteries, Luang Por followed the prevailing custom of receiving and using money. But as he pursued his studies of the Vinaya, he found he could no longer justify this practice to himself. The day he renounced the use of money was one of the turning points in his monastic life.

For over two months of the Rains Retreat I couldn’t make up my mind. Then, one day towards the end of the retreat, I took the money out of the pouch − there was a few hundred baht in it − and decided that the time had come. The moment I made the decision, I felt a sense of ease. The next morning, I took the pouch full of money to a friend, a scholar monk, and tossed it over to him where he was washing his face. ‘Take it’, I said, ‘and use it in your studies. Don’t worry about me, I’ve given it up. I made the decision last night. Please be my witness: as long as I live, under no circumstances whatsoever will I ever touch money again.’ And I’ve kept my word.

Monks who came to visit Wat Pah Pong were often inspired by the idea of giving up the use of money, but fearful that they would be unable to survive without it; their monasteries had no central fund for Sangha use. Luang Por would begin by speaking to them in purely pragmatic terms:

Wherever our monks go, we don’t have money for bus fares, but people offer us lifts. It’s better than carrying money around. If you don’t have money, it’s not that you won’t ever be able to go anywhere. It’s even better than before. If you don’t have a bus fare – start walking. It won’t be long before someone offers you a ride.

Having put their minds at rest over the practicality of renouncing the use of money, Luang Por explained that lay Buddhists are inspired by monks who refuse to use money and regularly offer assistance to them. Giving up the use of money would not leave them without basic requisites; it would allow the symbiotic relationship between monastics and laity, conceived by the Buddha, to assert itself.

But the advantage of giving up the use of money went beyond the practical. By renouncing the use of money out of respect for the Buddha’s wishes, monks received considerable spiritual gain. If they trained themselves to never ask for anything, always being willing to go without, then they were cultivating cardinal monastic virtues of contentment and fewness of wishes.

At one time, a monk who came to stay at Wat Pah Pong argued with Luang Por about the use of money. He said it was true he held money, but there was no fault involved because he used it without attachment. Luang Por replied to him dryly:

If you can eat a crate of salt without getting a salty taste in your mouth, then maybe I’ll believe you.

The Vinaya prohibitions regarding the acceptance and use of money form part of a complex set of rules and protocols established by the Buddha to govern the Sangha’s dealings with the laity. The Buddha allowed the appointment of a lay steward to accept monetary donations and for monks to inform the steward of any needs that would require use of them. The most important feature of the arrangement was that monks could only remain free of transgression against the Vinaya by not assuming power over the money or considering it as belonging to them. They were to consider the money as a fund that, at least technically, still belonged to the donor, and they would continue to do so until it was spent. At Wat Pah Pong and other monasteries in Thailand where the rule was scrupulously upheld, donations would consist of the offering of a slip of paper – a ‘pavāraṇā slip’ – informing a monk or the Sangha that the donor had offered a fund for such and such a value for requisites, while the money itself would be deposited with the lay steward.

All donations made at Wat Pah Pong went into a central fund. Nobody, including Luang Por himself, had a personal bank account. The account, in the name of the monastery, was administered by a small committee of lay supporters, with the secretary of the committee keeping Luang Por informed of income and expenditures. When funds were needed for a particular project, Luang Por would inform the secretary, and the committee would arrange the necessary withdrawal from the bank.

While many of the rules concerning money, cloth and lodgings are found in the Nissaggiya Pācittiya section of the Pāṭimokkha, most of the rules that define the monk’s way of life are found in the subsequent section of the Pāṭimokkha called Pācittiya. These include refraining from taking all life, digging in the earth, sitting and speaking alone with women and eating after noon. Transgressions of training rules excepting the most serious category requiring penance and rehabilitation (saṅghādisesa), are confessed and purified before the twice-monthly recitation of the Pāṭimokha through the following formula:

“Friend, I have fallen into an offence of such-and-such a name. I confess it.”

“Do you see [the offence]?”

“Yes, I see it.”

“You should restrain yourself in the future.”

The preceding sections have offered a few mere glimpses of Pāṭimokkha training rules and how they were practised at Wat Pah Pong; a more complete exposition lies beyond the scope of this book. Attention must now be turned to the observances that supplement them.

## Observances: Adding Layers

It is perhaps surprising that the majority of the conventions that inform a monk’s daily life are found in the protocols, allowances and injunctions of the Khandhakas rather than in the rules of the Pāṭimokkha proper. For example, the highly detailed procedures for formal meetings of the Sangha – including the Ordination and Uposatha ceremonies – appear in the Khandhakas, as do the steps to be taken in dealing with disputes. The Khandhakas contain most of the instructions regarding a monk’s relationship to the four requisites: robes, alms-food, dwelling place and medicines. Most of the fine points of monastic etiquette are also to be found here.

A fourfold division of the monk’s training in moral virtue appears in the commentarial tradition. While the first of these deals with restraint within the boundaries laid down in the Pāṭimokkha, the remaining three – the virtues of sense-restraint, of pure livelihood and of wise use of the requisites – are primarily in the Khandhakas. Another set of practices given particular emphasis in the training at Wat Pah Pong, known as the fourteen duties (kiccavatta), is also detailed in the Khandhakas.

The Pāṭimokkha is mostly concerned with unskilful actions and speech that monks should avoid; the skilful actions and speech that they should cultivate in their place are usually only implied. In the injunctions found in the Khandhakas, there is a much greater balance between things to be avoided and those recommended or acknowledged as legitimate by the Buddha’s words, ‘Monks, I allow you …’ The number of injunctions is so considerable that once when asked how many there were altogether, Luang Por replied, ‘Zillions!’

Given that so many injunctions are mentioned in the texts, and that not all of them are free of ambiguity, it is understandable that variations of emphasis and interpretation appear even within the Thai Forest Tradition. Whereas a lay observer might see these differences to be minor, they can feel significant to the monks, as they contribute to their sense of lineage.

There are, for example, two ways in which Wat Pah Pong monks may be distinguished visually from other forest monks. Firstly, they shave their heads twice a month rather than the usual once (the Vinaya only specifies a maximum allowable length of head hair). This more frequent shaving derived from Luang Por’s view that by the end of a month, a monk’s hair could be almost as long as a layman’s and looked unseemly. Secondly, Wat Pah Pong monks wear the lower robe in a unique way, rolling rather than folding the cloth[11] (the Khandhaka text is unclear on the method of wearing this robe). This style was a result of Luang Por’s conviction, born of his studies, that the monks of old wore their lower robes in such a way. Luang Por adopted these two practices for himself, and when he established Wat Pah Pong, they became standard for the Sangha. As a by-product, these small but distinctive variations from the norm strengthened the sense of identity amongst Luang Por’s disciples.

An idea of the comprehensiveness of the monastic observances may be gained by focusing on some of the practices prescribed for use of the bowl and robe. A monk possesses eight basic requisites: the three main robes, an alms-bowl, a cloth waistband, a needle and thread for mending robes, a razor to shave head and beard, and a water filter. Of these eight, it is the bowl and robes that have come to be emblematic of the monk. The monk appears to the world with a shaven head and clad in simple, unadorned robes that signify his renunciation of physical adornment. He carries a bowl signifying that he is an alms-mendicant, one who has surrendered all control over his physical well-being to the kindness of others.

The sheer number of the training rules and observances governing a monk’s relationship with his bowl and robes, keeps it in the forefront of his mind. By having to turn his mind to them again and again as objects of mindfulness, he cannot help but develop, over time, a keen sense of respect and appreciation for them. He can never become complacent in his use of his bowl and robes.

### Robes

Practices relating to the robes demonstrate the way that the observances dovetail with the Pāṭimokkha. Training rules govern how a monk may acquire cloth and how long he may store it before making it into a robe. One rule stipulates that a monk must never be physically separated from his three robes at dawn. As a result, the awareness of the location of his three robes (he only wears all three at the same time on formal occasions or on alms-round) gradually becomes a part of the monk’s consciousness. A monk must also swiftly patch any hole in his robe. To encourage diligence, Luang Por taught that any hole ‘large enough for a rice grain to pass through’ should be dealt with on the day that it appeared. Observances, meanwhile, provide guidelines for the making of the robe, and the right way of wearing and taking care of it.

Luang Por expected all of his disciples to learn how to cut, sew and dye their own robes. He considered the making of robes an essential element of the forest Sangha tradition. It was strictly forbidden for monks to accept gifts of ready-to-wear robes purchased from a shop; accepting such robes was seen as undermining a core tradition. He taught that making one’s own robes promoted a spirit of care, self-sufficiency and wholesome pride in the robe. Wearing commercially produced robes, on the other hand, led to heedlessness and a lack of respect for this core requisite, exalted in the texts as ‘the banner of the arahants’.

Only after a monk had patched his robe over and over again, would he pluck up the courage to ask Luang Por for permission to make a new one. If permitted, his next stop would be the monastery cloth store where he would request a bolt of white cotton cloth.

Cutting the cloth for a Buddhist monk’s robes is straightforward. Each robe consists of a simple rectangle of cloth. While the lower robe is often made of a single piece of cloth, the upper robe and the outer robe each consist of a number of smaller rectangles sewn separately and then joined together. A pattern of bars and cross-bars is sewn onto the cloth, the design of which the Buddha is said to have based upon the appearance of the rice fields of Northeast India. This pattern divides robes into seven or nine major sections. A wide hem is then sewn on all the way around the robe. Tags are sewn into the robe at the corners and neck of the two larger robes. These help to hold the robe together neatly when the monk wears it covering both shoulders on the occasions, such as alms-round, when he leaves the monastery. In the early days at Wat Pah Pong when the monks sewed by hand, making robes was a communal activity. After some years, pedal sewing machines began to be offered to the monastery, allowing each monk to sew his own robe.[12]

After the monk has cut and sewn the white cotton cloth, he gives the new robe its distinctive ochre colour with a dye produced by boiling chips of the heartwood of the jackfruit tree. Once the monk has completed the dyeing, he stores the robe carefully until the next suitable occasion at which he may formally request his new robe from the Sangha. Having received the Sangha’s blessing, he recites the words relinquishing his old robe (he may only possess one of each of the three main robes) and then, reciting another Pali formula, ‘determines’[13] the new robe for use. His final task – a reminder not to become attached to the beauty of the new robe – is to make upon it (these days usually with a ballpoint pen) a small ritual disfigurement.

The robe needs much careful attention. Having no fixing agent added to the dye, a new robe’s colour tends to run easily when, for example, it is sweated on or – disastrously – rained upon. The astringent properties of the jackfruit dye allow a weak solution of the dye to be effective in washing robes. In fact, it is the only viable washing agent; detergent must be avoided as it drains the colour and makes the robe smell unpleasant. For the first couple of months, the new robe must be washed with an amount of water just sufficient to moisten the whole robe, without any excess, to prevent loss of colour. While drying the robe, it must be constantly moved up and down on the clothesline to prevent too much unfixed colour dripping downwards to the hem, and to make sure that the clothesline leaves no mark on the robe.

One of the less popular observances, one that Luang Por inherited from Luang Pu Mun, required Wat Pah Pong monks to wear all three robes whenever they left the monastery. This required the two-layer outer robe being worn on top of the upper robe – reassuringly warm on winter mornings but an extremely uncomfortable experience in the hot season. It was a common sight in March and April to see monks returning from their alms-round at seven in the morning, their robes already patched with sweat.

If a monk complained about how many observances there were to bear in mind, Luang Por explained that they were the means by which mindfulness was grounded in the body in daily life. More than that, he would explain, they acted as a buffer preventing unwholesome mental habits and behaviours from taking root in the monk’s life. A precise attention, respect and care for possessions did much to keep the mind in a wholesome state.

Don’t think it’s a minor matter. Do you see those mangoes? The fruits are very small; but in future they will be big. The big grows from the small. When you get into bad habits, it’s disastrous.

There were also rules and observances governing the use of other allowable items of clothing and general use. The monks wore a simple shirt-like piece of cloth called an angsa – another rectangle of cloth which was draped over the left shoulder and attached under the exposed right arm by a tag. A bathing cloth was worn beneath the lower robe. This piece of cloth would be kept on while bathing from the communal water jars and washed out afterwards. A monk possessed two of these cloths and alternated their use. In the morning, the fresh, newly washed cloth served to dry the bowl after the meal. A square sitting cloth would be used in all formal situations.

### The alms-bowl

In the Buddha’s time, monks’ bowls were generally made of clay. A moment of carelessness was all it took for one to break, and many injunctions were laid down to minimize the occasions when that might occur. Although by Luang Por’s day the majority of bowls were made of iron and these days they are mostly stainless steel (far more durable than the monks who eat out of them), the original rules are still carefully observed. Nowadays, the purpose is not to protect the monks’ bowls so much as their mindfulness.

Luang Por taught the monks that they should handle their bowl as if they had the Buddha’s head in their hands. They were to be circumspect before picking up or putting down the bowl. This was more than a mere ritual: although iron bowls were much more resilient than clay bowls, carelessness could easily lead to chipping the bowl’s surface and the prospect of rusting. A bowl was never to be put down onto a hard surface. If placed on a raised surface such as a bench, the bowl had to be placed far enough from the edge that it might not be inadvertently knocked to the ground. No hard object was to be placed inside the bowl unless wrapped in cloth.

Lemongrass or taew leaves were to be used to wash the bowl. The monk was to wash it in silence and with full attention. Kneeling down, he was to wipe the bowl with a cloth, and then place it on its bamboo stand in the sun for a few minutes to ensure that it was bone dry. The bowl was to be kept in the monk’s kuti in a respectful place (if not underneath the small shrine, then near the point at which he placed his head when sleeping), and with the lid slightly open so as to allow the air to circulate through it and prevent the accumulation of unpleasant odours.

Luang Por emphasized how important it was for postulants and novices to learn the correct procedures by watching the more experienced monks. He himself, would constantly monitor the monks’ practice of the observances, and any carelessness he noticed would be referenced in his next Dhamma talk. To prevent these constant reminders from becoming too tiresome, every now and again he would draw upon his fund of humorous anecdotes to enshrine the points he wished to make in an easily remembered and enjoyable form. One such story concerned an unfortunate monk’s adventure with a rat.

There was once a certain monk who liked to keep his fresh bathing cloth (used to dry the bowl after washing it) in his alms-bowl. One day, rather than mindfully leaving the bowl lid just slightly ajar, he pushed it open carelessly, leaving a wide gap between the bowl lid and the bowl. In the middle of the night, a rat climbed into the bowl and went to sleep on the soft cloth bed it found there. The next morning it so happened that the monk overslept. He woke to realize that dawn had passed: it was already time for alms-round. Afraid of being late and having to fast until the following morning, he threw on his robes as quickly as he could. He grabbed his bowl and rushed out of his kuti to catch up with the other monks.

He made it to the edge of the village, breathless, just in time to take his place in the row of monks. But as he opened his bowl to receive the first offering, the startled rat jumped from its bed, out of the bowl and into the midst of the line of ladies squatting on the ground holding their plates of rice. There was panic, and there were shrieks, and then there were giggles. Once calm had been restored, the village women put their rice in the monks’ bowls. It was only as he left the first line of donors behind that the monk realized that his bathing cloth was still at the bottom of the bowl, now covered with sticky rice.

Luang Por constantly pointed to a link between an intelligent attention to the monastic observances and etiquette, and the development of more subtle, wholesome qualities. The principle he propounded was, in essence, that if monks looked after the spiritual pennies, the pounds would look after themselves. Develop a habit of care and precision in external matters, and the same habit would begin to flourish in the inner world.

### Requesting requisites

All the offerings received by monks at Wat Pah Pong were relinquished to a central store. When a monk needed a requisite – new torch batteries, soap, toothpaste or razor blades – he would request it from the monastery storekeeper, who was usually, and not coincidentally, one of the gruffest and most intimidating monks in the monastery. The storekeeper was empowered to refuse to hand over requisites if there was evidence that monks were using them extravagantly. Frugality was considered a hallmark of the true forest monk and was much praised by Luang Por. The recollection that all of their possessions were gifts of faith, to be used with a clear awareness of purpose, featured in the verses chanted by every monk in the morning and evening services.

One monk recalled:

“During the time that I lived with Luang Por, there weren’t any shortages of the important requisites, but the distribution of them was very strict. If your robe wasn’t falling to pieces, you weren’t given permission to change it. It was a little more relaxed for senior monks, but for the junior monks and novices or visiting monks, it was especially strict. Luang Por emphasized that we train to be moderate in our needs, and he lived no differently than anyone else. He wore the same quality robes, and there was nothing much to distinguish his kuti’s furnishings from anybody else’s. Even though his family lived close by, he never asked them for anything for himself. Whatever he was offered, he shared with the Sangha.”

This communal system was aimed at promoting fairness and equality in the use of requisites, and Luang Por saw it as vital to the maintenance of social harmony. By forbidding monks from accepting offerings, even when specifically intended for them, he did much to prevent jealousy and competition for lay support amongst his disciples. As the number of branch monasteries increased, surplus requisites were funnelled to them, preventing Wat Pah Pong from ever becoming too luxurious as its fame and attendant wealth increased.

The advent of stainless steel bowls in the mid-1970s created a fresh object of desire for younger members of the Sangha. The new bowls, free from the threat of rust, were easier to look after; they were much lighter than the old iron bowls, and they seemed cool and modern. Almost everybody wanted one. But if a monk made a request to replace his old bowl, out of a hope for an upgrade to one of the new stainless steel bowls rather than from genuine need, he would come to regret it. In such cases, Luang Por was known to order that the monk be given the ugliest, second-hand iron bowl in the store. On one occasion, a monk must have been unable to conceal his chagrin at this turn of events because Luang Por, observing him, said, ‘The only ugly thing here is the greed you’ve shown.’

Monks’ cravings for a particular type of cloth, a particular kind of alms-bowl, a crocheted alms-bowl cover or even a particular brand of spoon may seem bizarre at first, and then, even a little sad. It prompts the question: what is the value of renunciation of worldly possessions if the renunciant merely transfers his attachments to more humble objects? Surely, attachment is attachment whatever its object. And if that is so, aren’t monks deceiving themselves?

Luang Por did not consider a drastically simplified lifestyle to be liberating in itself; he knew well enough that the tendency towards attachment is far too strongly embedded in the unenlightened mind to be so simply bypassed. But a life pared back to essentials did play an important part in the training he was providing. Firstly, because it was a key element in sustaining the distinctive culture and identity of the renunciant forest monk. Secondly, because the nature of attachment – its impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality – is revealed far more readily when focused on a few simple objects than when dispersed amongst the wide variety of desirable things available in lay life. Thus, Luang Por constantly urged monks to keep reviewing the nature of their relationship with the requisites and to be alert to the arising of defilement, in order to give them a perspective on these attachments. For the monks who followed his advice, coarse attachments to good quality requisites tended to fade away quite quickly. After a few years, most monks would look back at their robe or bowl obsessions with self-deprecating good humour.

Reflections on the responsible use of the requisites were a staple of Luang Por’s regular pep talks to the monks. ‘Householders make their living with the sweat of their brow, through trials and adversity; and they still give up a portion of their income to buy food and other requisites for the Sangha.’ If you took that for granted, he said, if you took it to be your right and used their offerings selfishly or mindlessly, you were creating very bad kamma indeed.

### A constitution

Of all the observances that were woven into the daily life at Wat Pah Pong, a number of them were key in defining the Wat Pah Pong culture and principles of training. Once the monastery had been firmly established, Luang Por formalized these observances – drawn from Pāṭimokkha training rules, Khandhaka observances, as well as Thai monastic tradition and personal experience – into a list of Sangha regulations. Over the following years, this list, neatly framed, would hang on the walls of the Dhamma Halls of every monastery affiliated to Wat Pah Pong. It ensured a uniformity of practice amongst monasteries far apart from each other and given a fair measure of autonomy. Falling away from this standard endangered the monastery’s affiliation.

### Sangha Regulations

It is forbidden for monks and novices to make requests from anyone other than blood-relatives, or from those who have offered a formal invitation (pavāraṇā). It is forbidden to have connections with laypeople or ordained members of other religions that are hostile to Buddhism.

It is forbidden to talk about the ‘low arts’ or study them, to predict lottery numbers, make ‘holy’ water, act as a doctor or an astrologer, or to make and distribute amulets and lucky charms.

Unless completely unavoidable, it is forbidden for a monk with less than five rains to travel alone. If a junior monk must make a journey, he should be accompanied by a monk with more than five rains.

Monks should always confer with the Sangha or the senior monk before embarking on any personal projects. Only when it has been agreed on as in accordance with Dhamma and Vinaya should steps be taken. Monks should not act upon their own authority.

Monks should be content with the lodging allotted to them. They should keep it clean and sweep the paths leading to it.

Monks should attend to the activities of the Sangha in harmony, meeting and dispersing in unison. Monks should not make themselves an object of the Sangha’s antipathy by being deceitful, by seeking to evade admonishment, or by making excuses for errors.

Idle chatter is forbidden during alms-round, and while washing bowls, sweeping the monastery, hauling water, bathing, preparing the dining hall, washing robes, or listening to Dhamma talks. Monks should pay attention to whatever task they are working on.

After the meal, monks should help to sweep the dining hall and clean up before bowing to the Triple Gem in unison and taking their belongings back to their kutis in a peaceful manner.

Monks should be frugal in their needs for conversation, eating, sleeping and outgoing exuberance. Monks should maintain a vigorous wakefulness. They should help to nurse sick monks with loving-kindness.

It is forbidden for monks to receive money or to have anyone receive it for them. It is forbidden to buy and sell things or to barter.

All gifts offered to the Sangha should be kept in common. When a monk is in need of anything, let the Sangha supply him appropriately.

It is forbidden to gather together in groups and socialize, whether by day or night, in a public area or in a kuti, except when necessary. Even in such a case, do not be one who takes pleasure in society and revelry.[14]

Receiving or sending letters, documents or parcels must be announced to the Sangha or to the senior monk. Only after receiving permission can the article be received or sent.

Monks or novices wishing to come and practise in this monastery must have a letter of permission from their preceptor or previous teacher and must have first transferred their affiliation in their monks’ identity book.

Visiting monks and novices should show their monks’ identity book to the Sangha or senior monk on their arrival. They may stay for no more than three nights unless there are necessary reasons to stay longer.

The Sangha reserves the right to deal accordingly to transgressors of these regulations.

Issued on the second of October, 1957 Phra Ajahn Chah Senior Monk

### The daily schedule

The Discourse on Non-Decline

As long as the monks assemble often and hold frequent assemblies, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks meet in harmony, adjourn in harmony, and conduct the affairs of the Sangha in harmony, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks do not decree anything that has not been decreed or abolish anything that has already been decreed, but undertake and follow the training rules as they have been decreed, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks honour, respect, esteem and venerate those monks who are elders, of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and guides of the Sangha, and think they should be heeded, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks do not submit to the power of any arisen craving that leads to renewed existence, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks are intent on forest dwellings, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks each keep firmly in mind: ‘If there are any well-behaved fellow monks who have not yet come here, may they come; and may the well-behaved fellow monks who are already here dwell at ease’, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

As long as the monks remain steadfast in these seven principles of non-decline, and as long as these seven conditions endure among the monks, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.

– DN 16 AN 7.21-23

Luang Por was deeply influenced by the Discourse on Non-Decline. Its principles may be recognized as underlying much of the training system that he developed. The first point prompted the emphasis on group practice that distinguished Wat Pah Pong from most other forest monasteries. Group meetings, group work periods and group meditation sessions lay at the heart of the daily schedule at Wat Pah Pong. Monks were regularly reminded of the importance of punctual attendance at group activities, all of which were announced by the ringing of the monastery bell.

The rigorous daily schedule was designed to ensure a continuity and consistency of effort on the part of the Sangha members. It opposed laziness and complacency. It supported those who lacked the maturity to develop their meditation practice alone in their kuti. It also provided a means of filtering those with genuine commitment from those without it. Nobody hoping to enter the Sangha and enjoy a life of leisure would choose to live at Wat Pah Pong.

### Early Rising

The day began at 3.00 a.m. with the sound of the monastery bell. Luang Por instructed the monks to get up the moment they heard the bell, to perform their morning ablutions, gather their robes and bowl, and get to the Dhamma Hall as quickly as possible. Some of the more diligent monks would get up even earlier and already be in the hall, sitting in meditation, when the bell began to ring.

Communicating the daily schedule was not the bell’s only function. Luang Por also saw it as a teaching tool. Monks were taught that by getting up the moment they became conscious of the sound of the bell, without second thoughts, they were developing a firm and resolute habit of mind. Monks who overslept and came late to the Dhamma Hall, having endured a few emphatic words of admonishment (‘disgraceful!’, ‘unacceptable!’), would be told to consider it a warning sign. If the bell and the social pressure of group sessions were insufficient to motivate the monk to practice, then how would he sustain his sitting and walking meditation when alone in his kuti? ‘Come night’, Luang Por growled to one monk, ‘and all you’ll want to do is sleep.’

One monk remembered:

“If there was anybody already meditating when you arrived at the Dhamma Hall, then you had to be careful not to let your flip-flops make a ‘thwacking’ noise as you approached. If you had hard objects in your shoulder bag – like a mug, a spoon or a fruit knife – then you had to keep them wrapped in a face-cloth so they wouldn’t knock together as you walked in. You had to enter the hall so softly and silently that people meditating there wouldn’t be aware of it.”

While most of the more senior monks were dedicated enough to get up at 3.00 a.m. every day and meditate alone in their kutis through to dawn, few of the younger members of the community, particularly the teenage novices, could sustain such a practice for very long. For them, the support of the group was vital. Initially, some of the newer members of the community attended the early morning sessions more through a mixture of pride and fear than by devotion to the training. But as time went on, giving in to the schedule usually forged good habits that gradually became second nature. Luang Por encouraged the senior monks, who might have preferred to spend the time in solitude, to attend early morning sessions as a gesture of support for the younger ones, to be a good example and to maintain the harmony of the Sangha.

### Morning Session

The morning meditation was followed at 4.00 a.m. by a period of chanting. It began with a detailed recitation of the virtues of the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha and was supplemented by a selection of daily reflections and longer chants that would be varied throughout the week. Regular chants included: an analysis of the physical body in terms of thirty-two constituent parts; a reflection on old age, sickness, death and the law of kamma; a recollection of the correct way to make use of the requisites; a reflection on loving-kindness; and a dedication of merit.

In the early 1970s, Luang Por authorized the adoption of the Pali-Thai chanting manual newly produced by one of his great contemporaries, Ajahn Buddhadāsa. This manual contained excellent translations of the Pali texts which alternated with the original in a concise and rhythmic manner; each line of Pali being followed by its corresponding line of Thai. Especially impressive were translations of key passages from some of the most important discourses in the Pali Canon, including those explaining the Eightfold Path and Dependent Origination. Another chanting text dealt with the reflection on the four requisites:

Wisely reflecting, I use the robe, only to ward off cold, to ward off heat, to ward off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, burning and creeping things, only for the sake of modesty.

– MN 2

Chanting acted as a ritual expression of the unity of the community by requiring that monks learn how to listen to each other and blend their voices together. Its value as a meditation lay in the fact that mindfulness of the sounds and meaning of the chanting provided a path into wholesome states of mind more accessible to the younger and more restless members of the Sangha than sitting meditation, particularly so early in the morning. It also provided the means to overcome the sloth and torpor that was always the enemy of monks who tried to cut sleep down to the minimum. Chanting was also considered to be auspicious in itself. Since the time of the Buddha, the sound of his teachings chanted with devotion, was believed to give joy to celestial beings (devas) and to generate a potent spiritual energy. Physically, however, chanting could be an uncomfortable experience. The morning and evening devotional chants require that the monk sits on his haunches with his weight distributed between knees and toes. For one unused to this posture, after a few minutes the pressure on the toes becomes excruciating and heat builds up throughout the body.

Although chanting books were available, Luang Por urged his disciples to memorize as many of the chants as they could. By doing so, they were able to build up an inner repertory of the root teachings and reflections both in Pali and their own tongue. It was not unusual for a line from one of the chants to suddenly appear in a monk’s mind at an exactly appropriate moment during the day, allowing a release of some attachment or a surge of well-being. There were many chants to learn. Apart from those that featured in the morning and evening services, monks and novices were expected to memorize the Paritta verses chanted for blessing and protection on auspicious occasions, and the Mātikā verses chanted at funerals.

With the conclusion of morning chanting, the monks practised sitting meditation for the last few minutes until the end of the session at 5.00 a.m. After paying homage to the Triple Gem, the monks would file out to the dining hall directly behind the Dhamma Hall where they would sweep and wipe down the floors and benches with damp cloths, set up their places for the meal and get ready for alms-round. The younger monks and novices would help the older monks by preparing their robes and then, squatting down at their feet as they put them on, join the tags at their bottom corners.

### Alms-round

The daily alms-round is one of the ascetic practices encouraged by the Buddha that was compulsory for all healthy monks at Wat Pah Pong. A monk who missed alms-round through oversleeping or laziness was expected to forgo his daily meal. The importance that Luang Por gave to alms-round was seen by all in his own devotion to the practice. In later years, despite the deterioration of his health and his reliance on a walking stick, he refused to completely abandon it. While the monks were making their way to local villages, he would walk slowly to the Maechee Section at the western end of the monastery and receive alms from the nuns.

There were seven alms-round routes, one for each of the seven surrounding villages. The walk to and from the villages was on average about five kilometres. Two of the villages, however, required a walk of some eight kilometres. Monks on the longer routes would leave as soon as the sky changed colour (usually shortly after 5.00 a.m.); the rest left a while later. Thus the time when monks entered the village – later in the winter, but usually around 6.00 a.m. – was more or less uniform. Most of the monks would have returned to the monastery by 7.00 a.m.

Some monks preferred a long walk in the morning, others a shorter one and they were free to choose the routes that suited them best. The monks could walk to and from the village at their own pace, but would form into a single file – the order of which was determined by seniority – before beginning the alms-round itself. A monk unable to join the alms-round for any reason was expected to let others know in advance. It was important that monks arrived at the village more or less together. A group of monks having to stand at the edge of the village for a long time waiting for stragglers to arrive before forming the alms-round line was considered unsightly.

The monks always followed the same route through the village. As they entered it, the regular donors would be standing outside their houses, bamboo containers of sticky rice in hand. The women would have been up since first light cooking rice on their charcoal stove, and they would have been enjoying a few minutes chat with their neighbours, waiting for the monks to arrive. Often, the women would bring one or more of their children or grandchildren out with them, in order to teach them how to offer food and pay respects to the Sangha. In some households, it was the man of the house who put the food in the monks’ bowls; and in others, it was one of the children.

The Vinaya forbids monks from begging for food from laypeople. Monks on alms-round walk silently and in single file, stopping only to allow those wishing to offer food to do so. A strong ritual element to the alms-round is present throughout. Generally, no greeting or conversation is involved. The monks avoid eye contact with the donors and do not say thank you; it is understood that they are providing an opportunity for the donors to make merit by practising generosity.

In the villages surrounding Wat Pah Pong, the majority of villagers, squatting down out of respect, would simply drop a small lump of sticky rice into each monk’s bowl. Some people might offer bananas, rice sweets or dried fish as well, but only the wealthiest families could afford to do so on a regular basis. A gift of a few lumps of sticky rice was something even the poorest family could afford. It made the alms-round an occasion when every household in the village could tangibly contribute to the well-being of the Sangha and feel a sense of participation in the life of their religion.

Alms-round also played a central role in fostering a warm relationship between the local villages and the monastery. Although they seldom spoke to each other, a sense of familiarity and warmth between monks and laypeople would develop over a period of months and even years.

That alms-round is not solely concerned with the gathering of alms is indicated by the old Thai monastic idiom referring to it: ‘prot sat’, or ‘saving sentient beings’. Seeing the monks’ restrained and dignified demeanour first thing in the morning is intended to uplift the minds of the donors and remind them of the moral and spiritual values they revere. This idea – that monks’ demeanour on alms-round could be inspiring to laypeople and even lead them to a new or increased faith in the Dhamma – goes back to the time of the Buddha. The story of the meeting between Ven. Assaji, one of the first group of great, fully enlightened monks, and Sāriputta, the ascetic who would go on to become one of the Buddha’s Chief Disciples, was one of Luang Por’s favourites.

It doesn’t take a lot to proclaim the Dhamma. Some of the Buddha’s disciples, like Ven. Assaji, hardly spoke. They went on alms-round in a calm and peaceful manner, walking neither quickly nor slowly, dressed in sober-coloured robes. Whether walking, moving, going forwards or back, they were measured and composed. One morning, while Ven. Sāriputta was still the disciple of a brahman teacher called Sañjaya, he caught sight of Ven. Assaji and was inspired by his demeanour. He approached him and requested some teaching. He asked who Ven. Assaji’s teacher was and received the answer, ‘The Revered Gotama.’

‘What does he teach that enables you to practise like this?’

‘Not so much. He simply says that all dhammas arise from causes. If they are to cease, their causes must cease first.’

Just that much. That was enough. He understood. That was all it took for Ven. Sāriputta to realize the Dhamma.

Monks, of course, did not always live up to these ideals. Appropriate behaviour on alms-round was a recurrent theme in Luang Por’s Dhamma talks. On one occasion, he upbraided a group of heedless young monks and novices for walking out of the monastery like, ‘a bunch of boisterous fishermen going out to catch fish’. He would point out the value of alms-round to all involved, monks and laypeople, and he advised monks disturbed by this kind of misbehaviour:

Don’t talk with the garrulous ones. Talk with your own heart a lot. Meditate a lot. The kind of people who enjoy talking all day are like chattering birds. Don’t have anything to do with them.

Put your robes on neatly and then set off. As soon as you get into your stride, you can start memorizing the Pāṭimokkha. It makes your mind orderly and bright. It’s a sort of handbook. The idea is not that you should get obsessed with it, simply that once you’ve memorized it, the Pāṭimokkha will illuminate your mind. As you walk, you focus on it; and before long you’ve got it, and it arises automatically. Train yourself like that.

Alms-round performs another important function for the Sangha. It constitutes the monks’ most tangible practice of Right Livelihood – the fifth of the factors of the Eightfold Path. By going on alms-round, monks procure the requisites they need to maintain their health and strength in a way appropriate to samaṇas: not making demands from laypeople or seeking to coerce them in any way. The Buddha once instructed his disciples:

‘We will not exhibit any impropriety or do anything inappropriate for the sake of alms-food. Not gaining alms-food, we will not be agitated. Gaining alms-food, we will consume it without being enslaved by it, without being infatuated with it, without committing any offence, seeing the dangers and discerning the escape.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves.

– SN 16.1

There are additional benefits. Firstly, alms-round provides good physical exercise: a walk of between two and ten kilometres in sometimes trying conditions. In the hot season, a monk with a completely empty stomach, returning to his monastery as the sun rises in the sky, carrying a large metal bowl full with some four of five kilos of sticky rice will have had a vigorous workout. Alms-round gives many opportunities for the cultivation of patience and endurance. Some routes entail walking barefoot along rough gravel roads that demand considerable fortitude. Alms-round is not cancelled due to bad weather, and in a rain storm, the umbrellas the monks carry only save them from a soaking in the absence of wind.

Emerging from the forest and entering a village provides many challenges to a monk’s self-possession. He may feel his eyes and ears being pulled one way and another as he walks along. For this reason, alms-round provides him with a daily test of the strength of his powers of sense-restraint. For advanced meditators, it may also provide potent triggers for insight. Occasionally, monks at Wat Pah Pong who had meditated on the nature of the physical body to a profound level would experience spontaneous visions of alms-givers as moving skeletons, leading to a further deepening of their meditation. Others gained a new understanding of Dhamma from such experiences as the sight of old and sick people, the sounds of a young couple arguing violently, or the screams of a pig about to be slaughtered.

At the very least, alms-round provides the monk with a daily reminder that he is dependent on others for his living. It helps to prevent him from taking his daily meal for granted. He knows that every grain of rice he eats has been produced through the blood, sweat and tears of others. Monks, fresh from spending the early hours of the day in meditation, can be so sensitive to the kindness of the donors that profound feelings of love and compassion arise in their mind. It reminds them that, throughout their moral and spiritual struggles, there are people who wish them well, who see the value of what they are doing and want to support their work. Luang Por would say to the monks, ‘There’s so much Dhamma to be learned on alms-round.’

### Mealtime

Monks at Wat Pah Pong would take their one daily meal in the monastery dining hall, situated immediately behind the Dhamma Hall and oriented along the same east/west axis. It was a severe-looking structure: a long, thin concrete box roofed with galvanized iron. Stretching along the inside of both long walls, and below a line of small, barred, glassless windows, were platforms some seventy centimetres high and a metre and a half wide, comprised of sturdy wooden benches pushed together into a continuous line. Along these, the monks sat according to seniority, facing outward across the aisle. Luang Por himself sat on a detached platform at the narrow top end of the hall, his gaze encompassing both rows of monks stretched out in front of him. Nobody in the hall could forget even for a minute that they were in Luang Por’s direct line of vision.

The monks sat on their brown cotton sitting cloths with their bowls, stripped of their crocheted woollen covers, resting on their squat bamboo stands at one side of them. The covers, neatly folded in the prescribed way, were placed behind them. Each monk would have his shoulder bag, also folded in the prescribed way, set back near the wall. In front of it, arranged in a neat line, stood the monk’s aluminium water kettle[15], metal mug and spittoon.

Luang Por taught that the food received on alms-round should be considered as a gift to the Sangha as a whole; the monks who received it were merely acting as the Sangha’s individual representatives. On their return to the monastery (after washing their feet outside the dining hall and either folding their outer robes or airing them in the sun), the monks would tip the food in their bowls into big enamel receptacles that were carried around by the postulants. The monks were allowed to keep as much sticky rice as they needed. This they moulded into a ball and placed in the bottom of their bowl. The rest of the food was taken to the kitchen for sorting and preparation by the maechees and the local villagers who had come to participate in the meal offering.

Once prepared, the food would be wheeled over from the Wat Pah Pong kitchen in a handcart and the pots placed on the floor in front of Luang Por in two sets, one for each side of the hall. Then, all but the most senior monks would get up from their seats and formally receive the food from a postulant or layman. After Luang Por had been offered his choice of food, they then proceeded to distribute it into each monk’s bowl. Efficiency and impartiality were the goals of the distribution. Monks had no control over the volume or kind of food that went into their own bowl, except for the dishes they distributed themselves. Unsurprisingly, certain monks could sometimes be seen trying to commandeer dishes which they particularly enjoyed or for which they harboured a particular aversion; others made firm determinations to resist the temptation.

Returning to their seats after the food had been distributed, some monks might be observed glancing into their bowls and suppressing a sigh at the sight before them: all the different dishes thrown together inside, perhaps something sweet floating in an oily, spicy curry, and other items completely submerged. They would put the lids back on their bowls and sit quietly until Luang Por led them in a short chant of appreciation and blessing for the donors. Following this, they would remove the lids from their bowls and contemplate the food. They were taught to remind themselves that they ate merely as a means of keeping their body healthy and fit for the work of Dhamma practice. They were to avoid gluttony and to refrain from indulging in the pleasant feelings that naturally arose while eating. After a short time, Luang Por would then take his first mouthful. As soon as he did so, the two monks at the head of each row followed suit. Then, the next two monks started to eat and so on all the way down to the end of the long line.

In the dining hall, the monks focused their attention on being as silent as possible. Big pots, small pots, kettles, spittoons – everything had to be handled with delicacy and care. While eating, monks had to be careful not to make chomping or slurping sounds (or ‘capu-capu’ and ‘suru-suru’, as the Pali has it). A monk who allowed his metal spoon (the only eating implement allowed) to scrape against his bowl would earn an admonitory grunt from Luang Por.

The method of distribution of the food was fast, practical and a powerful tool for overcoming attachment to its flavour; but it did lead to waste.[16] In later years, particularly, there was usually far too much in the bowl to eat, increasing the challenge to know when to stop. Overeating could cast a dull, heavy shadow over the whole day, as one monk remembered from his own early struggles:

“He taught us to eat moderately. He told us to estimate when we were three mouthfuls short of being full and then to stop and drink water until we felt full. He said, ‘If you eat too much, after the meal you’ll be dull and sleepy and disinterested in meditation.’ He was right. If you eat too much you feel bloated, and you don’t feel like practising walking meditation. You’re still on your way back to your kuti, and already thoughts of a nap are coming into your mind.”

When all the monks had finished their meal, Luang Por would ring the small bell beside him, the entire community would bow three times together and then exit the dining hall carrying their bowls and stands, with spittoons in the lids, in the specified way being careful to avoid any clanking of hard surfaces. Outside, on the long porch area, they would take off their robes, fold them mindfully, and take their bowls to the bowl-washing area at the edge of the forest where there were water jars and a deep rubbish pit. The bowls were laid on bound grass circles and washed with leaves (in later years, detergent) as stated above.

After the bowls had been washed, dried, aired in the sun for a few minutes and covers put on, the monks would don their robes once more and return to their seats in the dining hall where Luang Por would still be sitting. Often, laypeople who had come to offer food would be taking this opportunity to speak with him. Some days, he might give a discourse, on others, make announcements, but more often than not, he would ring a small bell once more and the monks would bow three times to the Buddha image, three times to Luang Por and then return to their kutis. There they would clean their teeth, sweep the area around their kuti, put their robes up to air on a line and start to practise walking meditation.

### Afternoon Schedule

Monks were free to structure the middle hours of the day as they saw fit. Apart from being time to deepen their meditation practice, it was also used for seeing to various personal chores. Most monks would take a short nap around midday. At 3.00 p.m. the monastery bell would be rung and all the monks and novices would leave their kutis with their brooms and make their way to the central area in order to sweep the fallen leaves. This was also the time to sweep and wipe down the floors in the Dhamma Hall, dining hall and Uposatha Hall. Sometimes Luang Por would lead the monks in a longer work project such as building or repairing kutis. But the daily tasks consisted of hauling water and sweeping leaves.

Ajahn Jun recollected the benefits of the routine:

“At three o’clock, the bell would be rung and we’d come together to do the daily chores. Some monks would sweep and wipe down the Dhamma Hall and dining hall, others would draw water up from the well for drinking and general use. A group of monks would carry the water in old oil drums to the toilets and to Luang Por’s kuti, to the bowl-washing area, to the laypeople’s toilet block. We’d also clean the toilet blocks. Luang Por said that cleaning toilets was fitting work for monks, work hard to find – why should we be averse to it? Lay visitors don’t clean the toilets, it’s the responsibility of the resident monks. More than that, Luang Por would say, it’s good practice: doing something we don’t want to do, wearing away the defilements.”

As always, the emphasis was on harmony and the cultivation of good friendship. Working together was as much a means of nurturing the sense of community as group meditation and chanting. One day Luang Por instructed the Sangha:

When you’re working or doing the daily chores, don’t be deceitful or devious. Don’t think it’s a good thing if you can get away with doing less than your share – that’s defilement … Know your mind, keep abreast of its movements, and then your actions will have no unpleasant consequences and your life will be of benefit to the religion (Sāsana). Look inwardly at your mind and outwardly at your actions so that you can protect them both.

Monks were cautioned not to let their personal affairs take precedence over group activities. When the bell was rung, everyone was expected to immediately put down whatever they were doing and make their way to the central area. It was through this punctuality and steady commitment to group chores that the harmony of the Sangha was grounded. ‘Be alert to what needs to be done’, ‘Be observant’ – these were constant exhortations. The senior monks had an important role to play.

If the senior monks let things go, then so will everyone else. How can the younger ones be expected to know what to do? Who will they take as their example? If something needs to be seen to and is neglected, then lazy habits grow and grow.

Occasionally, after the daily work period, at around five in the evening, a novice might bring out a big aluminium kettle filled with a hot sweet drink made from the cooking and straining of ‘allowables’ such as bael fruit, tamarind or ginger. In later more prosperous days, cocoa or coffee became popular. Once a week or so, there might be samor or Indian gooseberry – bitter laxative fruits (sanctioned by the Vinaya for consumption in the evening) – which were eaten with salt and chillies. Not at first glance an obvious object of desire, these were considered a treat, and many monks would consume them avidly. Every once in a while, teenage novices and young monks would go on a myrobalan binge, resulting in a night of purging diarrhoea which the afflicted accepted with considerable stoicism.

The behaviour of the teenage novices became more of an issue for the Sangha during the 1970s when Luang Por gave the opportunity for significantly more of them to ordain. Life in the monastery was not easy to adapt to, and the occasional excessive reactions to all the restrictions on their behaviour were unsurprising. Mostly these incidents involved food and drink. After the evening kettles of sweet drink had been passed around twice, most of the monks would head off to the well for their evening bath. The drink remaining in the kettles and about to be tipped away could be a strong temptation for those remaining. Every now and again, someone would decide that it would be a shame to see it all go to waste. One such occasion earned a sharp rebuke from Luang Por:

Think about that time when we were building the Uposatha Hall and some coffee was brought over. Afterwards, I heard some people complaining, ‘Ohhh! Enough! Enough! I’ve had so much I feel sick.’ That’s a truly disgusting thing for a monastic to say! Drinking so much you feel like vomiting. Seven or eight cups each. What were you thinking of? It’s taking things too far. Do you think you became monastics in order to eat and drink? If it was some kind of competition, it was an insane one. After you’d finished, the cups were left out in a long line and so were the kettles. Nobody did any washing up. Only dogs don’t clean up after they’ve eaten.

Luang Por was insistent that the consumption of any drinks and medicinal fruits in the monastery be restricted to an agreed time and place, and open to all. A monk who received some individual gift from his family would be encouraged to relinquish it to the kitchen. Private parties in monks’ kutis were absolutely forbidden. Luang Por saw small private gatherings as leading to cliques within the monastery and to heedless behaviour:

You get together eating Indian gooseberries or lumps of palm sugar or whatever and you get chatting and before long you’re off, right around the world. You start talking about worldly subjects and before long you’re on to disrobing, and what you’ll do after you’ve left the monastery. You’re noisy and boisterous, and in all your high spirits you forget your responsibilities as monks.

### Evening Chanting

The monks would bathe every day at one of the designated open bathing areas distributed through the forest. Each monk would take his own bar of soap and sluice his body with well water scooped with a plastic dipper from one of the large earthenware jars. After bathing, the monks would practice walking meditation until the bell rang for the evening session. In the early days of Wat Pah Pong, sessions would include a talk from Luang Por almost every night, but in later years as his health declined, Luang Por’s addresses to the Sangha were less frequent. Ajahn Sukchai said:

“Luang Por emphasized the chants because he wanted us to take them away and meditate on them … He always seemed so enthusiastic about teaching us; he really wanted us to benefit from the practice. It was like we were metal he was hammering out flat on the anvil; or like wood he was hewing down to the right size for sawing. He put so much into teaching us. Whoever couldn’t take it, left. He wouldn’t coddle anyone. He wanted us to be well trained. During the day, he told us not to read books but to memorize chants … and then to meditate, sitting and walking. He didn’t want us to socialize, to sit around chatting in a noisy boisterous way.

“The evening session would end at nine or ten o’clock, sometimes eleven and everybody would go back to their kutis and carry on with their practice. Luang Por said we shouldn’t sleep before eleven o’clock. On Observance Day, everybody would determine not to lie down for the whole night. We would meditate together at the Dhamma Hall with the laypeople until three in the morning and then start the morning chanting.”

### No exceptions

Despite being a gifted orator and giving far more formal instruction to his disciples than was common in the Forest Tradition, Luang Por gave first priority to leading by example. He was careful about setting precedents. It was clear that he sought to provide a model for all his disciples to bear in mind when they became leaders in their own right. Ajahn Jun recalled that, at one point, the monastic community became worried about Luang Por’s health. In addition to leading the Sangha in every group activity, he also attended to many extra duties as the abbot and had little time to rest. But when the Sangha formally invited Luang Por to take a break from group activities whenever he wished, he refused. He said that he would participate for as long as he was able. He wanted no special privileges; he needed none. The unspoken words that everyone heard were: ‘If I can attend all the sessions with all my responsibilities, then all of you certainly can.’ When Ajahn Sumedho (his first Western disciple) arrived, Luang Por made it clear that he would not be given any special treatment:

I’d never seen a Westerner before; I didn’t know him. I’d just heard that his country was a wonderful place. But I hadn’t seen it; I’d just imagined what it must be like. When he asked to live here, I started to feel a little uneasy. I was worried, you see. Why? Because he had been used to a comfortable and convenient life; how was he going to endure the difficulties of living in the forest like this? But he said he could do it, and so I made a condition: I said he could stay, but I wasn’t going to give him any special treatment. At home, he used to eat bread and milk and cheese to his heart’s content, but I wasn’t going to provide those things for him.

Needless to say, Ajahn Sumedho arrived at Wat Pah Pong without the slightest expectation that the monastery would provide him a daily ration of cheese sandwiches and a glass of milk. But he did accept Luang Por’s point that he must conform to the way things were done and not expect any special privileges. The practice was one of going against the grain of old habits and desires, and of learning how to adapt wisely to situations.

The Vinaya, and the observances in particular, allowed people of different personalities and from different backgrounds to live together with remarkably little friction between them. Practice of the observances gave new members of the Sangha a sense of ease in monastic life. While their meditation practice might still be in its infancy, the diligent practice of the observances gave them a wholesome pride in their monkhood. Luang Por explained how keeping the observances was empowering:

Once, a long time ago, I was up north of here staying with some elderly monks. They were Luang Tas – they’d only been ordained for a couple of years – and by then I’d already been a monk for ten years. While I was there I put a lot of effort into practising the observances. I helped those old monks with their robes and bowls, with emptying spittoons, all kinds of things. I didn’t think I was doing anybody any favours; I considered that I was practising my observances. I thought that even if nobody else practises these observances, I will; the profit is mine. It made me feel a good, wholesome pride. On the Uposatha Day I’d sweep the Uposatha Hall and put out water. The other monks didn’t know these observances and so weren’t bothered about them, and I didn’t say anything. I felt that wholesome pride when I performed the duties, and when I practised sitting or walking meditation I felt good, meditation went well. I felt energetic because keeping the observances is energizing.

Outwardly composed, inwardly bright and wakeful: this was the ideal that the monks in training at Wat Pah Pong were to work towards. By orienting monks’ minds in very precise ways towards the immediate physical and social environment, the observances helped to reduce the dangers of serious meditators falling prey to self-absorption. Luang Por did not want a training that produced an elevated, other-worldly narcissism. Taking on responsibilities and making sacrifices for the common good had to balance the periods of formal meditation practice.

Wherever in the monastery something needs doing, if you know how to do it, then see to it. If you find something dirty and untidy, then sort it out straight away. Not for anyone else’s sake, or to make a good name for yourself, but for the sake of your practice. When you have that motivation, cleaning things is like sweeping dirt out of your mind. Whenever there’s some heavy work to be done, then everyone should lend a hand. Nothing takes very long if the whole Sangha helps out.

Luang Por was especially critical of monks who shirked their share of community work, and took advantage of the hard work of others:

At one time, I was living with a large group of monks. On robe-washing day, I’d go out to chop the jackfruit chips and prepare the water. As soon as the water was boiling, a few of the monks and novices would arrive, do their washing and dyeing, and then disappear. They’d leave their robes out on the line and go back to their kuti for a nap without ever helping to put things away or wash things out. They thought they were onto a good thing, but in fact, what they were doing was the crassest stupidity. Think about it: your friend does the work and you reap the fruits without doing anything to help him. Absolutely nothing good will come of that kind of behaviour. If monks neglect their duties and think that the less work they can get away with doing the better, then they will not be able to live in the community.

It’s like two oxen pulling a cart. The cunning one gets harnessed right in front of the yoke and leaves the other one to struggle up front. The ox near the yoke can go all day without getting tired. It can keep going or it can rest, it can do whatever it likes because it’s not taking any weight and not expending any energy. With only one ox pulling it, the cart moves slowly.

### Bowing

Expressing devotion to non-material realities, such as wisdom and compassion, by bowing to material forms expressive of them – Buddha images in particular – is an ancient Buddhist practice. The nature of the bow varies somewhat throughout the Buddhist world. In Wat Pah Pong, a precise version of the Thai style of bowing was taught. It begins with adoption of the kneeling posture. Hands are brought prayer-like to the chest, briefly raised to the forehead, and then placed flat on the floor about twenty centimetres apart, palms downwards. The forehead is lowered to touch the floor between the hands, eyebrows in line with the tips of the thumbs, elbows close to knees, forearms flush with the floor. After a slight pause, there is a return to the initial kneeling position, and the movement is repeated twice more. Three bows: one for each of the three refuges.

Bowing can be a very satisfying practice, and yet, at the same time, it can easily be treated as a perfunctory ritual. For dedicated practitioners, the sensation of the forehead pressing against the floor may have such a profound emotional effect that they feel tears of joy.

Bowing became one of the defining features of the training at Wat Pah Pong. Luang Por and his disciples bowed a great deal – far more than was usual in Thai monasteries (monks in the city sometimes referred to it as ‘that monastery where they bow all the time’). For Luang Por, bowing was both a short ritual reminder of the guiding ideals of Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha, and a practical tool for grounding awareness in the present moment. In most monasteries, monastics bow to the Buddha on formal occasions such as during the morning and evening services, or on paying respects to a senior monk. Luang Por taught, in addition, that his disciples should bow every time they entered or left a building and every time they approached or took leave of a senior monk. Monks at Wat Pah Pong could expect to bow over a hundred times a day. Bowing as a means to regularly re-establish mindfulness was a practice Luang Por had learned as a young monk from Luang Pu Kinaree, and one on which he laid great store:

Bowing is very important. Although it’s only a physical gesture, it’s a part of the practice. You should bow in the correct way, and when you’re in a group, bow at the same time as everyone else. Don’t arch your body. Don’t hurry too much. With body straight, slowly incline the head downwards until your forehead touches the floor. Place your elbows about three inches from the knees. Bow slowly, mindful of the body.

Bowing helps to cure conceit. You should bow often. As you prostrate three times, keep in mind the qualities of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha.

Don’t make the mistake of watching how others bow. If young novices are sloppy or the aged monks appear unmindful, that is not for you to judge. People can be difficult to train. Some learn fast, but others learn slowly. Judging others will only increase your pride. Watch yourself instead. Bow often, get rid of your pride.

When you hear the monastery bell ring, bow before you leave your kuti. On the first bow, sincerely recollect the virtues of the Buddha; on the second bow, sincerely recollect the virtues of the Dhamma; and on the third bow, sincerely recollect the virtues of the Sangha. Then slowly walk out of your kuti. If, when you arrive at the central area to help with the sweeping or some other group activity, you realize that you forgot to bow, then go back to your kuti and bow. Train yourself until bowing become second nature to you. When the work is over and you go back to your kuti, then bow again. Bow before you start to meditate, bow before you leave your kuti. Don’t let this practice slip; continually maintain it … If you go to urinate or defecate or to have a bath, then on your return, bow. Develop this practice until you remember it wherever you are. As soon as you sit down, you bow. With a mind of faith, bowing down while recollecting the virtues of the Triple Gem, can cause the hairs to stand up on the back of your neck, and for you to feel thrilled by rapture.

### Respect for elders

In the Discourse on Non-Decline quoted above, the fourth of the factors predictive of the non-decline of the Sangha is listed as respect for elders. Luang Por, always with an eye on the long-term welfare of his monastery, made this a key feature of Wat Pah Pong culture, and he considered it a vital element in sustaining the kind of social harmony appropriate to a community of samaṇas. Over the course of time, friendships and occasional enmities rose and fell away within the community in the natural way. But by insisting that monks always relate to each other strictly within the boundaries provided by monastic etiquette, Luang Por did much to prevent significant cliques and divisions from developing in the monastery. Bowing played a central role. The requirement that on formal occasions monks bow to all other monks senior to them, gave Sangha members a constant reminder of the principle that considerations of seniority always took precedence over personal likes and dislikes.

In addition to this, whenever a monk entered into a formal conversation with another monk more senior than he,[17] he was taught to keep his hands together in the prayer-like anjali for the duration of the conversation. Such a practice was a great help in ensuring that any words spoken were mindful, polite and appropriate. The Thai language itself supports such right speech. In conversation, word choice is often determined by the relationship between the speakers. The specific words and phrases denoting respect to elders were always used in speech between monastics. Honorifics were never omitted.

An objection is sometimes made that these social conventions muddy the waters between internal feelings of respect and external expressions of it. But does not a fixed respectful attitude, irrespective of true feelings, encourage hypocrisy? It was not seen in that way. The principle that Luang Por constantly drew upon in his training at Wat Pah Pong was that wholesome actions, performed again and again as observances, promoted correspondingly wholesome mental states. Thus, by acting in a respectful manner again and again, wholesome thoughts and perceptions were promoted and prioritized, while the unwholesome ones were marginalized.

In fact, many of the protocols guiding the relationships between junior and senior members of the community would already have been familiar to monks when they entered the Sangha at Wat Pah Pong. Over the course of hundreds of years, certain features of monastic etiquette have been adopted by Thai society as the gold standard for good manners. This is particularly true with regard to the showing of respect to elders. Mindfulness of physical space and relative position is an immediately obvious expression of these protocols. In Wat Pah Pong, a junior must never stand above a senior who is sitting down nor walk close by him without acknowledgement. If the senior sitting down is his teacher, the student needing to pass squats down and continues by on his knees, head inclined. If the monk sitting down is senior to him but not his teacher, he inclines his head as he walks by – making himself smaller.

A junior monk never touches one senior to him on the head. He never reaches above the senior’s head without first asking permission. He always sits on a lower seat. In any formal setting, he never speaks without first asking for permission. If the senior is his teacher or is a revered Sangha elder, he bows three times every time he enters and leaves his presence. To a young man joining the Sangha at Wat Pah Pong, most of these conventions would have appeared to be refined versions of behaviours that were already second nature to him.

### Nothing so bad

Indeed, Ānanda, it is not possible that a monk who delights in company … will ever obtain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment.

– MN 122

One succinct teaching that Luang Por’s disciples had drummed into them from the beginning of their monastic life and came to sum up the values of Wat Pah Pong was:

Eat little. Sleep little. Talk little. Practise a lot.

The dangers of gossip and frivolous speech crop up, either directly or indirectly, in a number of the Sangha Regulations. Luang Por maintained that practice would only really develop when monks were ready to face up to suffering and learn from it. Idle conversation was a prime means by which monks sought to suppress or distract themselves from suffering. That was not its only drawback. The topics of idle conversations stirred up the defilements of all involved. Socializing for frivolous purposes often led to dissension, and it undermined the harmony of the Sangha.

Of all the detrimental activities that I’ve seen since I’ve been living in the forest, none is worse than monks gathering together for frivolous conversation. This has the most harmful results. But it’s also the thing that monks and novices find hardest to abstain from. It’s right here that things go wrong. I don’t see it having any benefit: it damages your practice, your work. It’s unfitting and after it’s over it gives rise to remorse. There’s nothing good about it. This is where things have gone wrong in the past – right here. When you get together like this, then your speech becomes exaggerated, you start talking nonsense, laughing and teasing each other – all kinds of foolishness appear.

In a group, you start joking and playing around, then your mind becomes agitated. You don’t realize how loud your voice is because you have no self-awareness, you’re lost in the pleasure of it all. It’s right there that you need to be mindful, not just when you’re by yourself. When you’re alone, you don’t need so much mindfulness; but in a group, you need a lot. With groups of monks, groups of novices, groups of laypeople – that’s where you need to be mindful, not getting carried away by your mood. Keep returning to your meditation object at regular intervals. In company, your practice needs to be on a very high level.

On another occasion, Luang Por spoke of the state of mind of the practitioner and how it is reflected in his outer demeanour:

If, through this training, your mind has become lucid and calm, you will become more aloof from your friends, you won’t want to socialize. If people come round to see you, you’ll find it an annoyance … The Buddha said that a group of tens of thousands, or hundreds of thousands of enlightened beings can dwell together without making any noise. A hundred or two hundred real practitioners living together, and there’s no sound of frivolous conversation.

### Censorship

A number of observances and monastic regulations supplemented the training rules regulating monks’ contacts with laywomen. A junior monk’s conversations with laywomen were restricted to family members. Speaking with any woman, including his own mother, a monk would first have to ask for permission, and to speak in a public place with at least one other male present. Luang Por viewed the sensual cravings of young monks as open wounds that were in the process of slowly healing. Contact with laypeople in general, and women in particular, was seen as unnecessarily exposing the wounds to the possibility of infection. Ajahn Jundee remembers:

“He stressed that having a lot of contact with laypeople was a cause of decline … Monks of my generation would be in the monastery two or three years before they had a conversation with laypeople. Sometimes my sister came to visit, and we would be too scared of Luang Por to say much to each other. It was even worse if you requested permission to go home to visit your family. ‘Why?’ he would ask in a very stern voice. He was so intimidating that you didn’t ever want to ask again. If you wanted to visit your home, you needed a very good reason.”

Female visitors to the monastery were to be received in a public area. It was absolutely prohibited for women to visit monks at their kuti. Luang Por explained how these rules protected the reputation of the monk:

If you have guests – whether it’s your mother or younger sister or whoever – then meet them at the dining hall. If someone comes asking after a particular monk, no matter who it is, invite them to go and wait there. Why aren’t you allowed to receive guests at your kuti? Because if a woman comes to visit you, how is anyone to know she’s your sister or your mother? How is anyone else to know that it’s not your ex-wife or old girlfriend?

To a modern eye, Luang Por’s attitude may seem overly paternalistic. But paternalism was precisely the point. Monks voluntarily entered into a father-son relationship with the teacher, and by doing so, ceded to him the right to make such judgements concerning their spiritual welfare. Luang Por’s deep knowledge of the workings of the mind made him keenly aware of how strong and deceitful the mental defilements can be. It took only a moment of heedlessness for old unskilful habits, as yet untamed, to overwhelm a monk’s ideals and aspirations, and cause lasting damage both to his own welfare and reputation, and to that of the monastery. Given what was involved, over-vigilance, like the over-engineering of a load-bearing structure, was the wisest policy.

The strictures on contact with laypeople extended to correspondence:

When you receive a letter or when you’re going to send one, inform Ajahn Chu or Ajahn Liem. What have you written? Read it out to one of them. When a letter arrives, give it to one of them to read first. What kind of letter is it? What’s it about? Is a young woman writing to you? Is it a sensible letter? Are you in touch with the communists? Are you smuggling in secret agents? Observe whether your correspondence leads to growth in the Dhamma or decline.

### Ceremonies I: Asking for forgiveness

Luang Por used many of the simple rituals found in the Vinaya texts to promote the values of harmony and good friendship in the Sangha. Of those that regulated the relationships between teacher and student, senior monk and junior monk, that of ‘asking for forgiveness’ was the most personal.

Before leaving the monastery for an extended period – to go on tudong, for example, or to take up residence at a branch monastery – a monk, wearing his main robe with right shoulder exposed and outer robe folded neatly over his left shoulder, would approach Luang Por. In his hand, he would be bearing a small tray neatly arranged upon which were candles, incense, flowers, and toothwoods that he had carved himself. After bowing three times, and then sitting on his haunches, hands in anjali and intoning the traditional Pali phrases, he would formally request forgiveness for any inappropriate actions of body, speech and mind, intentional or unintentional, public or private, that he might have committed during the period he had spent under Luang Por’s guidance.

Luang Por would first utter the Pali phrase offering forgiveness to his disciple and then, in turn, would ask for forgiveness from him in case he had inadvertently caused him distress. Then Luang Por would give a blessing followed by a Dhamma teaching. It was a ceremony that cast an uplifting seal on the preceding period. It gave the student (who might otherwise be too much in awe of Luang Por to request a private interview) an intimate meeting with his master that he would remember wherever he went in the future. If the monk harboured any regrets or fears that he might have committed some bad kamma while living with Luang Por, his mind would be put to rest by the words of forgiveness.

This ceremony was not restricted to marking the end of a period of teaching from Luang Por himself. His disciples who entered a formal training relationship with the abbot of a branch monastery were required to follow the same practice. It was considered the correct way for monks to take leave of each other. The ceremony was also performed by the whole Sangha before the beginning of a retreat period – a kind of clearing of the air, the declaration of a new beginning.

Luang Por also encouraged monks to use the ceremony as a skilful means to resolve the bad feelings that could occasionally arise between them and to make formal amends for bad behaviour. A monk does not ask forgiveness of a monk junior to him in this formal manner, it was always the junior monk that asked forgiveness of the senior (if a senior monk feels it necessary to apologize to a junior monk, he does so informally). In cases where there were hurt feelings on both sides of a dispute and the junior monk did not feel that he had done anything wrong, he would, nevertheless, be the one encouraged to swallow his pride and ask for forgiveness. Assuming the blame in this way, he handed the more senior monk an opportunity to be magnanimous, to accept his own contribution to the problem without losing face. This brief ceremony provided a surprisingly effective template for monks to use in putting grievances behind them.

Ajahn Liem, the monk Luang Por hand-picked to be his successor as abbot of Wat Pah Pong, reflected on the understanding of the ceremony of asking for forgiveness that he had learned:

“The sages consider asking forgiveness as a way of erasing bad things from the mind. Sometimes, through heedlessness or carelessness or through lack of understanding, we might have unwholesome thoughts towards our teacher. When we want them to fade away and disappear from our minds, then we perform this ceremony in order to cut off any kammic consequences.[18] It’s of great benefit to Dhamma practitioners because it stops worry and agitation from overwhelming the mind. It brings to an end any suspicion and mistrust. You feel clear and bright. Your mind is at ease whether you continue to live with the teacher or go elsewhere. Asking for forgiveness is a beautiful custom. At times, even enlightened beings ask for forgiveness, in order to be a good example to their disciples and to future generations.”

### Ceremonies II: Asking for dependence

A junior (navaka) monk – one who has been ordained for less than five years – must ‘take dependence’ on a teacher. He does so by means of a short ceremony during which he makes the request: ‘May the Venerable Sir be my teacher. I will live in dependence on you.’ When the teacher replies in the affirmative, the student chants:

‘Mayhaṃ bhāro; aham’pi therassa bhāro.’

‘May you be my burden. May I be your burden.’

Through this ceremony, the monk formally declares himself willing to be trained and to be open to admonishment. Only after the initial five-year training period is over, does the monk earn the privilege to live independently of a teacher.

The ceremony is repeated by the whole monastic community at the beginning of the annual three-month Rains Retreat. First, the community formally asks for forgiveness from the teacher for any transgressions they may have committed against him during the preceding months. Then they renew their request for dependence upon him for the coming retreat. The teacher gives a blessing to his disciples and then an exhortation. On one such occasion, Luang Por taught:

You have now requested dependence. It’s as if you have nowhere to live or your home isn’t big enough … and you ask to live in somebody’s house and become their dependent. There is advice that you need to take and certain duties that you must perform out of respect for the owner of the house. One of these duties here is that on every occasion that I teach you, you take my words away and reflect upon them and then practice accordingly. My duty is to assist you all with your material needs and to teach you the Dhamma and various observances.

So, from this day onwards, our relationship will be that between teacher and disciple. As teacher, I give you Dhamma, reflections, perspectives, knowledge and so on in a fitting measure. As you have asked me for dependence, I am happy to grant this and have no qualms about it. If we look on each other like father and son, then our relationship will be one of mutual trust.

The Buddha taught us that if we go to a monastery and it seems to be a suitable place, then on the first or second day, whenever there is a convenient occasion, we seek permission from the teacher to stay on for a while longer or ask for dependence from him straight away. Then you can say, ‘If the Venerable Abbot should see my conduct or manners to be at fault or inappropriate, then I invite you to please, out of compassion, admonish me. I will take away what you say and reflect on it accordingly.’

This is a truly excellent thing to do. If you don’t do that, then the teacher doesn’t know what he can say to you. He doesn’t know whether or not you’re willing to be admonished, whether you’d be upset by anything. So, inviting admonishment is important; it signals respect. When a teacher such as myself hears that invitation, he feels reassured. If the disciple does something wrong, then the teacher knows that he can say something; he feels encouraged to give guidance and teaching. There are no qualms or uncertainties in his mind. Asking for dependence creates a closeness between teacher and student. The disciple opens himself up, humbles himself, and a deep mutual understanding can develop.

According to the Discipline, a monk with more than five rains is expected to have gained sufficient knowledge of the Dhamma and Discipline to live independently of a teacher if he wishes. He should know what is an offence and what is not, what is a heavy offence and what is a light one, and the way to atone for offences committed. Not all those who have been monks for five years have, of course, gained this level of maturity. In such cases, Luang Por would have them continue under dependence until he was convinced they did. He also observed that even if it is no longer compulsory, a monk who is ‘restrained and composed, respectful, heedful’ may choose to request dependence anyway, ‘like a grown-up son whose own hair has gone grey, but whose deference to his parents never wavers.’

### The fourteen duties

As the word ‘injunctions’ suggests, the Vinaya texts collected in the Khandhakas are concerned not only with ‘acts of wrongdoing’, but also with duties and responsibilities that were to be ‘enjoined’. One hallmark of the training at Wat Pah Pong was the importance given to the practice of a set of fourteen of these duties or kiccavatta. Luang Por held that they promoted the individual monk’s development of mindfulness, circumspection, thoroughness and attention to one’s responsibilities, at the same time as nurturing the harmony and integrity of the Sangha. These duties are as follows:

The duties of a visiting monk on arrival at a monastery.

The duties of resident monks towards visiting monks.

The duties of a monk on leaving a monastery.

The method of showing appreciation of merit.

The duties in the dining hall and when receiving a meal outside the monastery.

The duties on alms-round.

The duties of a forest-dweller.

The duties towards the dwelling place.

The duties in the fire-house.[19]

The duties in the toilet.

The duties of a disciple to his preceptor.

The duties of a preceptor to his disciple.

The duties of a disciple to his teacher.

The duties of a teacher to his disciple.

### Duties towards the teacher or preceptor

Of these duties, a detailed explanation of just one pair – the duties of the disciple towards the teacher or preceptor[20] – will give some idea of their sophistication.

You should all take an interest in the various duties, such as those towards the preceptor or teacher. These duties bind us together and create a sense of community and harmony. They enable us to show our respect in a way that’s been considered auspicious since the time of the Buddha.

The teacher-student relationship laid down in the texts is governed by the idea of mutual responsibility. The teacher performs his responsibility to the student by teaching him and acting as a good example; the student performs his duty to the teacher by dedicating himself to the study and application of all that he has been taught and by performing various services for him. At Wat Pah Pong, the role of personal attendant was highly coveted, and the attendant was regularly rotated in order to prevent jealousy.

Attendance on the teacher is a unique kind of Dhamma practice: essentially, the monk takes the teacher’s daily needs as his object of mindfulness. It is a practice that calls for devotion, patience, endurance, alertness, sensitivity and intelligence. The system by which junior monks take turns to act as the teacher’s personal attendant has many beneficial effects, both for the teacher and the student. The student gains an opportunity to see the teacher’s way of practice at close quarters, to be inspired by him, to develop a bond with him and to overcome his shyness in asking for personal guidance. At the same time, the teacher gets to see the disciple at close quarters and to observe his general demeanour, his mindfulness, the attitude he brings to his duties and his general character – all of which aid him in teaching his disciple in the most effective way.

The extent to which the duties to the teacher are performed is influenced to a certain degree by the age and personality of the teacher. There is less to do for a healthy teacher in his forties than for a frail one in his seventies. Some senior monks insist on receiving the bare minimum amount of service, and on looking after their own affairs. Generally speaking, teachers would prefer to perform themselves many of the duties that their attendants perform for them. But they submit to the conventions out of respect for the Vinaya and for the benefit of the attendant.

With certain modifications, the practice taught at Wat Pah Pong (closely based upon the original prescriptions in the Khandhakas[21]) is as follows. Early in the morning, the attendant makes his way to the teacher’s kuti and announces his arrival with a polite cough. The first duty of the morning is to prepare water for the teacher to wash his face and brush his teeth, and then to offer him a towel to dry his face. Next, the attendant offers the teacher’s lower robe to him (he has been sleeping in his bathing cloth) and then his upper robe. As they walk to the Dhamma Hall, the attendant, who carries the teacher’s outer robe and shoulder bag, walks ahead. In the Dhamma Hall, he takes the sitting cloth from the shoulder bag and spreads it out neatly, and then places the teacher’s folded outer robe by its side. At the end of the morning session, the attendant picks up the shoulder bag and sitting cloth and takes them to the dining hall.

Next, the attendant prepares the teacher’s seat in the dining hall, by neatly laying out the water kettle, spittoon, lap-cloth, stainless steel spoon[22] and toothwood. He prepares the alms-bowl by detaching it from its bamboo stand and by rinsing it with water. He then takes the teacher’s upper and outer robes and lays them out together, ready for the teacher to put on, tags already tied. The attendant carries the teacher’s alms-bowl to the edge of the village before offering it to him. As soon as the alms-round is over, he requests the bowl and carries it back to the monastery ahead of the teacher. On arrival, he removes his own upper and outer robes, and empties his and the teacher’s alms-bowl into a large enamel bowl which is taken by a postulant to the kitchen. Then he waits at the footbath outside the Dhamma Hall in order to wash and dry the teacher’s feet. He helps the teacher out of his robes, and if they have become stained with sweat, he puts them on the line to air.

As soon as the teacher has finished his meal, the attendant asks permission to wash his hands. The teacher holds his hands over the spittoon, and the attendant pours water over them and dries them with a towel; he then offers him a toothwood. Following this, the attendant cleans up the teacher’s seat and takes his bowl and spittoon away to wash, after which he takes the teacher’s bowl back to his kuti where he stores it next to his own.

If the teacher is receiving guests during the day, the attendant monk sits quietly at his side and offers any assistance that might be needed. If it is very hot, for example, or there are mosquitoes, he may fan the teacher. If he wants to open or close a window, he must ask permission. When the teacher has company, he does not interrupt or speak unless he is spoken to. If women come to see the teacher, he is always present to ensure that the teacher is never alone with a woman. He acts as the teacher’s secretary, reminding him of any upcoming appointments. He may arrange a refreshing drink for the teacher if he has been teaching for a long time. He makes sure that the teacher takes any medicines he has been prescribed at the proper time. If he notices that the teacher is tired, then he tries to find a polite way to encourage guests to leave and allow the teacher time to rest.

The attendant monk keeps the teacher’s kuti clean, seeing that it is swept and wiped down regularly. Every day he sweeps the area around the kuti, the walking meditation path and the path leading to the kuti. He makes sure there is a constant supply of water in the earthenware jar for bathing and in the water kettle for drinking. He regularly puts bedding out in the sun to air. Pillow cases and blankets are regularly washed. He either makes necessary repairs to the kuti himself or informs the Sangha of what needs to be done. He keeps the toilet spotless. He makes sure that soap, toothpaste, etc. do not run out.

The attendant monk is responsible for washing the teacher’s robes. He does not abandon them on the clothesline but watches over them until they are dry and then folds them neatly and returns them to the teacher’s kuti.

The attendant monk prepares a fresh bathing cloth, towel and soap for the teacher’s evening bath, which may either take place at a large earthenware jar in the open or in a bathroom. If the weather is cold or the teacher is ill, the attendant may arrange for some hot water to be prepared. Elderly monks sometimes sit on a chair while bathing; others stand, tipping water over themselves with a dipper from a jar. The attendant monk helps to soap the teacher’s feet, legs and back. He does not touch the teacher’s head. He asks permission before his first touch of the teacher’s body. Some teachers do not like to be helped with their bath, in which case the attendant stands to one side, holding the towel and fresh robes, or he may take the opportunity to wipe down the teacher’s sandals. After the teacher has dried himself, he wraps the towel around his waist and the attendant squats down and tugs the wet bathing cloth down and puts it in a pail of water in order to be washed out. He hands the teacher a clean bathing cloth and lower robe. Afterwards, he collects the teacher’s robes and shoulder bag and takes them to the Dhamma Hall in preparation for the evening session in the same way as he did in the morning.

Last thing at night, the attendant prepares the teacher’s bed. He makes sure there is fresh drinking water, and if the teacher is elderly and there is no toilet in the kuti, he places a spittoon by the bed (which he will empty in the morning). In the cold season, he lays out blankets. If the kuti lacks mosquito screens, he prepares the mosquito net. If he has the necessary skill, he may offer the teacher a massage. Finally, when all the teacher’s needs have been met, the attendant bows three times and leaves him to rest.

For a number of years, the monk considered to be foremost in the practice of service to the teacher at Wat Pah Pong, was Ajahn Ruangrit.

“In those days, Luang Por would usually go to bed in the early hours of the morning and would get up at about five. I would offer him water for washing – hot and cold – and toothwood. To begin with, I’d just offer some water for him to wash his face and rinse out his mouth, but in later days, I’d ask to take his false teeth away to clean. As for helping him put on his robes, washing them, applying medicinal cream to his body, making his bed and so on – if you could do a good job, he’d let you do it. If you did it awkwardly, he’d rather you didn’t bother – sometimes he’d throw you out. He wouldn’t like to tell people to do personal things for him. He’d never tell you to clean his false teeth for him or empty the spittoon full of his urine; nor would he tell you to wash his feet or wash his robes; he would never say anything like that. But if any of his disciples were devoted to him and wanted to perform the duties towards the teacher as are laid down in the texts, and that monk had a certain competence, then he would give permission.”

A great contemporary of Luang Por Chah, Luang Por Lee, gave one of the most memorable accounts of service to the teacher. The precision, the attention to detail expected of him, would be recognized by any of the disciples of Luang Por Chah.

“To be able to stay with Luang Pu Mun for any length of time, you had to be very observant and very circumspect. You couldn’t make a sound when you walked on the floor, you couldn’t leave footprints on the floor, you couldn’t make a noise when you swallowed water or opened the windows or the doors. There had to be a science to everything you did – hanging out robes, taking them in, folding them up, setting out sitting mats, arranging bedding, everything. Otherwise he’d drive you out, even in the middle of the Rains Retreat. Even then you’d just have to take it and try to use your powers of observation.

“Every day, after our meal, I’d go to straighten up his room, putting away his bowl and robes, setting out his bedding, his sitting cloth, his spittoon, his tea kettle, pillow, etc. I had to leave everything in order before he entered the room. When I had finished, I’d take a note of where I had placed things, hurry out of the room and go to my own room, which was separated from his by a wall of banana leaves. I had made a small hole in the wall so that I could peek through and see both Luang Pu Mun and his belongings. When he came into the room, he’d look up and down, inspecting his things. Some of them, he’d pick up and move; others, he’d leave where they were. I had to watch carefully and take note of where things were put.

“The next morning I’d do it all over again, trying to place things where I had seen him put them himself. Finally, one morning when I had finished putting things in order and returned to my room to peek through the hole, he entered his room, sat still for a minute, looked right and left, up and down, all around – and didn’t touch a thing. He didn’t even turn over his sleeping cloth. He simply said his chants and then took a nap. Seeing this I felt really pleased that I had attended to my teacher to his satisfaction.”

### Lodgings

‘We will be content with any lodging whatsoever. We will speak in praise of being content with any lodging whatsoever. We will not exhibit any impropriety or do anything unbefitting for the sake of a lodging. Not gaining a lodging, we will not be agitated. Gaining a lodging, we will use it without being enslaved by it, without being infatuated with it, without committing any offence, seeing the dangers and discerning the escape.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves.

– SN 16.1

Most of the kutis at Wat Pah Pong were offered by lay supporters and their families. For the local villagers, raising the money to build even a modest wooden kuti was a once-in-a-lifetime act of merit-making, and one that would give them joy for the rest of their lives. Monks were taught to honour the generosity of their kuti’s donor by looking after it with great care. Neglect of this responsibility was liable to expose the guilty monk to a blunt admonishment.

There is no Sangha police force to keep order in a monastery. No corporal punishment is meted out to poorly behaved monks. When standards in the monastery dipped, Luang Por’s appeals were generally to wise shame. Luang Por would point out the conflict between the actions that he was criticizing and the standards expected of one who was subsisting on the generosity of others and had made a commitment to a high level of morality and a rigorous training. Often, he would make comparisons with the great masters of old. On one occasion, towards the end of his teaching career, the state of the monastery toilets prompted a talk[23] so hard-hitting that, afterwards, it had the more senior monks reminiscing about the good old days:

During the sixth reign[24], Chao Khun Nor of Wat Tepsirin was a royal page. When the King died, he became a monk. The only time he ever left his kuti was to attend formal meetings of the Sangha. He wouldn’t even go downstairs to receive lay guests. He lived in his kuti and slept in a coffin. During his entire monastic life he never went on tudong. He didn’t need to – he was unshakeable. All of you go on tudong until your skin blisters. You go up mountains and then down to the sea, and once you get there you don’t know where to go next. You go blindly searching for Nibbāna with your mind in a muddle, sticking your nose in every place you can. And wherever you go, you leave dirty toilets behind you – too busy looking for Nibbāna to clean them.

In his seamless approach to the training, neglect of the toilets was not a small matter. It was an indication of a worrying lack of mindfulness and responsibility that could not help but infect the other areas of the monks’ practice.

Don’t turn a blind eye to the state of the kutis that you live in and the toilets that you use every day. Laypeople from Bangkok, Ayutthaya, all over the country, offer funds for our needs; some send money in the post for the monastery kitchen. We are monastics, think about that. Don’t come to the monastery and become more selfish than you were in the world – that would be a disgrace. Reflect closely on the things that you make use of every day: the four requisites of robes, alms-food, dwelling place and medicines. If you don’t pay attention to your use of these requisites, you won’t make it as a monk.

In the old days, there were no water toilets; the toilets we had then weren’t as good as the ones we use today. But the monks and novices were good and there were only a few of us. Now the toilets are good but the people that use them are not. We never seem to get the two right at the same time.

People bring new toilet bowls to offer. I don’t know whether you ever clean them or not, but there are rats going into the toilets to shit, and geckos. Rats, geckos and monks – all using the place together. The geckos never sweep the place out and neither do the monks. You’re no better than they are. Ignorance is no excuse with something like this.

The situation with regard to dwelling places is especially bad. The kutis are in a dreadful state. It’s hard to tell which ones have got monks living in them and which are empty. There are termites crawling up the concrete posts, and nobody does anything about it. It’s a real disgrace. I went on an inspection tour shortly after returning to the monastery and it was heartrending. I feel sorry for the laypeople who’ve built these kutis for you to live in.

Everything you use in this life are supports for the practice. Ven. Sāriputta kept wherever he lived immaculately clean. If he found somewhere dirty, he would sweep it with a broom. If it was during alms-round, then he’d use his foot. The living place of a true practice monk is different from that of an ordinary person. If your kuti is an utter mess, then your mind will be the same.

Taking care of the buildings in the central area of the monastery was not only a duty, but also a means to propagate the Dhamma. By living frugally, practising contentment, and maintaining high standards of cleanliness, monks could inspire the laity without saying a word.

Make this a good monastery. Making it good doesn’t require so much. Do what needs to be done. Look after the kutis and the central area of the monastery. If you do, laypeople who come in and see it might even feel so inspired by religious emotion that they realize the Dhamma there and then. Don’t you feel any sympathy for them? Think of how it is when you enter a mountain or a cave, how that feeling of religious emotion arises and the mind naturally inclines towards Dhamma.

### Think about the laypeople

The Buddha made it clear in a number of his discourses that, while the merit accruing to those that make offerings to the Sangha depends to a large degree on the purity of their own intentions, it is also affected by the mindfulness and integrity of those monks who make use of them.

Therefore, monks, stir up energy to gain what has not yet been gained, to attain that which has not yet been attained, to realize that which has not yet been realized [thinking]: ‘In this way our Going Forth will not be barren, but fruitful and fertile. So too, the alms-food, lodging, and medicinal requisites we use will bring those who have offered them great fruit and great benefit.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves. Perceiving one’s own benefit, monks, one should exert oneself heedfully. Perceiving the benefit to others, monks, one should exert oneself heedfully. Perceiving the benefit to both, monks, one should exert oneself heedfully.

– SN 12.22

When admonishing the Sangha, Luang Por constantly encouraged them to remember the sacrifices being made for them by the lay supporters and their duties towards them. Referring to an extravagant use of cloth he said:

If the laypeople were to see, just think how disheartened they’d be. ‘No matter how poor we are, whatever the hardships might be, we still manage to buy cloth to offer to the monks. But they’re living like kings. Really good cloth without a single tear in it is thrown away all over the place.’ They would lose all their faith.

He was not above a certain amount of emotional manipulation. In a culture in which demonstrating appreciation for the help one receives in life is given such emphasis, these kind of reminders were extremely powerful. Again and again, the message that he drummed into his disciples was: you are all living here supported by the faith and generosity of lay Buddhists. It is your responsibility to honour that faith by practising with sincerity. Not doing so is creating very bad kamma indeed.

### Optimum consumption

One of the most important skills monks at Wat Pah Pong were expected to develop in the first years of their training was the ability to judge ‘the right amount’ – not too much and not too little, the optimum amount – when consuming the requisites. Reflections on wise use of the requisites were included in the morning and evening chanting sessions to provide regular reminders. Too much of anything meant sensual indulgence and the accumulation of defilement; too little was a fruitless asceticism. The task was to find the golden mean. It wasn’t easy, and every now and again, junior monks could feel a sudden surge of resistance. If anything was likely to lead to a fierce Dhamma talk from Luang Por, it was heedless use of the requisites.

If the food left over in your bowl is enough to provide at least three or four laypeople with a meal, then things have gone too far. How is someone who has no sense of moderation going to understand how to train his mind? When you’re practising sitting meditation and your mind’s in a turmoil, where are you going to find the wisdom to pacify it? If you don’t even know basic things like how much food you need, what it means to take little, that’s really dire. Without knowing your limitations, you’ll be like the greedy fellow in the old story who tried to carry such a big log of wood out of the forest that he fell down dead from its weight.

How much is enough? Is this too much? Is this too little? These were questions that monks were to ask themselves constantly with regard to their use of the requisites. The ability to recognize the optimum amount in any situation and to keep to it, together with sense-restraint and wakefulness, were declared by the Buddha to be the three ‘apaṇṇaka’ or ‘always relevant’ virtues; and they were a favourite basis for Luang Por’s Dhamma talks to the Sangha.

### You aren’t what you eat

Vegetarianism can be a vexed subject in Buddhist circles. In Theravada Buddhism, eating meat is considered unobjectionable as long as one has not killed the animal oneself or played a direct part in its death. The Buddha did not forbid monks to eat meat[25] dishes provided they were sure that no animal was killed specifically to provide those dishes for them. A key ideal of the mendicant lifestyle is that monks should be easy to look after, grateful for whatever they are offered and not fussy about food. If a layperson puts meat into a monk’s bowl on alms-round, the monk is expected to accept it out of respect for the act of generosity; whether or not he eats it is up to him.

The Buddha considered vegetarianism in the Sangha to be a matter of personal choice and refused to make it compulsory. There is evidence in the Discourses that, on occasion, he himself consumed meat (most famously the pork dish that he accepted from the blacksmith Cunda, which was the immediate cause of his death). Luang Por adopted this even-handed stance towards vegetarianism. He himself ate meat as did most of his disciples.

In the 1980s, a sect appeared in Thailand which set great store by vegetarianism and sought to proselytize its views. It translated passages from Mahayana Buddhist polemics on meat eating and proclaimed that monks who ate meat were breaking their precepts. Some monks at Wat Pah Pong, influenced by these pamphlets, renounced eating meat. Subsequently, a certain amount of tension developed between those in the monastery who ate meat and those that did not. Luang Por was asked for his view. His chuckling reply was that neither group was more virtuous than the other; the difference between them was like that between frogs and toads:

If someone eats meat and attaches to its taste then that is craving. If someone who doesn’t eat meat sees someone else eating it and feels averse and angry, abuses or criticizes them, and takes [what they see as] their badness into their own heart, then that makes them more foolish than the person they’re angry with. They’re also following craving.

Luang Por said that monks were free to decide for themselves as to whether or not they ate meat; but whatever they decided, the most important point was that their actions be guided by Dhamma rather than attachment:

If you eat meat, then don’t be greedy, don’t indulge in its taste. Don’t take life for the sake of food. If you’re a vegetarian, don’t attach to your practice. When you see people eating meat, don’t get upset with them. Look after your mind. Don’t attach to external actions. As far as the monks and novices in this monastery go, anyone who wants to take on the practice of abstaining from meat is free to, anyone who just wants to eat whatever is offered can do that. But don’t quarrel. Don’t look at each other in a cynical way. That’s how I teach.

Liberation, he told them, was not dependent on what kind of food they put in their body. It was the result of the training of the mind.

Understand this: the true Dhamma is penetrated by wisdom. The correct path of practice is sīla, samādhi and paññā. If you restrain well the sense doors of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and mind, you will be at peace and the wisdom that comprehends the nature of all conditions will arise. The mind will become disenchanted with all loveable and attractive things, and liberation will occur.

Regarding the debate as to whether the historical Buddha ate meat, he considered the whole argument to be based on a false premise:

In fact, the Buddha was neither a meat eater nor a vegetarian.

The Buddha was beyond these kinds of discrimination. As one completely beyond all defilement, it was incorrect to see him as a person who ate this or that kind of food. Ultimately, ‘he was not anything at all’, and merely took nourishment into his body at appropriate times.

On another occasion, Luang Por related a cautionary tale about a monk who took up vegetarianism unwisely:

Eventually, he couldn’t manage it as he wished, and he decided that being a novice would be better than being a monk. He’d be able to gather leaves himself and prepare his own food. So, he disrobed and became a novice. Everything went as planned, but his defilements remained. He started thinking that being a novice meant that because he ate their rice, he was still dependent on other people; it was still problematic. He saw water buffaloes eating leaves and thought, ‘Well, if a water buffalo can survive on leaves, so can I’, without realizing the difference. So he gave up eating rice and ate only roots and leaves – seven or eight long peka pods at a go. But that wasn’t the last of it. Now he started thinking, ‘I’ve become a novice, and I’m still suffering. Maybe it would better to live as a postulant.’ And so he disrobed. Now he has completely disappeared; that was the end of him.

## The Ascetic Practices: Adding Intensity

Mention has been made above of the thirteen dhutaṅga practices. These are the ascetic practices which the Buddha allowed his monks to adopt, if they wished, in order to intensify their practice. The dhutaṅgas were practices aimed at ‘abrading’ or ‘wearing away’ the defilements by creating situations in which they were provoked and directly opposed. By the standards of the day, they were mild in nature. Certainly, they paled beside the physical challenges that the Buddha undertook prior to finding the right way of practice that led to his enlightenment. Wearing only tree bark or owl wings, for example, he had practised standing continuously in the open for long periods, using a mattress of spikes, making his bed in charnel grounds with the bones of the dead for a pillow. In one of the most vivid passages in the Suttas, the Buddha described the extent to which he took the practice of fasting:

Because of eating so little, my limbs became like the jointed segments of vine stems or bamboo stems. Because of eating so little, my backside became like a camel’s hoof. Because of eating so little, the projections on my spine stood forth like corded beads. Because of eating so little, my ribs jutted out as gaunt as the crazy rafters of an old roofless barn. Because of eating so little, the gleam of my eyes sank far down into their sockets, looking like a gleam of water that has sunk far down in a deep well. Because of eating so little, my scalp shrivelled and withered as a green bitter gourd shrivels and withers in the wind and sun.

– MN 36

The Buddha-to-be’s insight that however much pain lay in such asceticism there was no real gain, was a turning point on his path to enlightenment. He realized that it was, in fact, wisdom that freed the mind, and wisdom of a type that could not be developed in a weak, emaciated body. His rejection of prevailing modes of asceticism was a devastating one, because none of the proponents could accuse him of an opposition to it based on fear or lack of personal experience.

The ‘abrasive’ practices allowed by the Buddha did not emphasize feats of physical endurance based on the idea of erasing old kamma or of freeing the spirit from the prison of the body. They focused on exerting an intensified pressure on the attachments that condition suffering. The criteria for deciding whether a practice should be adopted or not was that it led to an increase in wholesome mental states and a decrease in unwholesome mental states. The Buddha praised those monks who took on these practices with the correct motivations: ‘for the sake of fewness of desires, for the sake of contentment, for the sake of eliminating defilements, for the sake of solitude, for the sake of simplicity.’ Although references to dhutaṅga practices are found in a number of places in the Buddha’s Discourses[26], they were collected into a group of thirteen in The Path of Purification as follows:

Section A: Concerning Robes

​1. Wearing rag-robes (paṃsukūla), i.e. robes made from cloth discarded on rubbish heaps or in cremation forests etc. ​2. Wearing only three robes: the upper robe, the lower robe, and the outer robe.

Section B: Concerning Alms

​3.  Going on a daily alms-round and subsisting on the food offered on it (not accepting supplementary food prepared in the monastery). ​4.  Accepting food from all houses without discrimination. ​5.  Eating one meal a day in one uninterrupted session. ​6.  Eating only from the alms-bowl. ​7.  Refusing extra food or second helpings after commencing the meal.

Section C: Concerning Dwelling Place

​8.  Dwelling in a forest. ​9.  Dwelling at the foot of a tree. ​10.  Dwelling in the open air. ​11.  Dwelling in a cremation forest. ​12.  Dwelling in whatever place is allotted to him.

Section D: Concerning Posture

​13.  Abstaining from lying down (nesajjika).

Adoption of the dhutaṅga practices was so much a vital part of the Isan Forest Tradition that its members often referred to themselves as ‘dhutaṅga meditation monks’. Four of the five practices of Section B above (practices [4]-[7]) were compulsory for all monks, as was acceptance of any dwelling allotted to them by the Sangha (practice ​[12]). Monasteries were established in forests, fulfilling practice [8] and often in cremation forests (practice [11]). These practices were all adopted by Luang Por when he established Wat Pah Pong. Of the remaining dhutaṅgas, Luang Por recommended monks undertake them as ways to intensify or revitalize their practice. When monks got into a rut and became depressed about their inability to overcome their weaknesses, dhutaṅga practices gave them new hope and energy. When monks became complacent or lost the edge to their practice, dhutaṅga practices brought up a new sense of commitment.

### Luang Por Speaks About the Dhutaṅgas

Sometimes, your sīla and samādhi aren’t enough. They’re unable to kill the defilements; they don’t know how. You need to introduce dhutaṅga practices to help. These abrasive practices are important; they scour away at the defilements; they help to cut off so many obstructions.

Try going to stay in a cremation forest. What is it like? Is it the same as living with the community? Right there – that’s the benefit of the dhutaṅga practices.

These practices are difficult to accomplish because they are the observances of the Noble Ones. They are the practices undertaken by a person aiming to become one of the Noble Ones.

What distinguishes the dhutaṅga practices is that, initially at least, they are not particularly peaceful.

When practitioners who have defilements take on ascetic practices they are agitated by them – and that’s the point. These are practices intended to bring things up. The Buddha was right: if your practice is cool and relaxed, then it’s incorrect because there’s no opposition, no conflict. These dhutaṅgas directly oppose the unenlightened mind.

When you take on the ascetic practices, you start to suffer because they counter the views and opinions of unenlightened people. A person without any wisdom won’t want to bear it, ‘I don’t want to practise like this. I am practising to realize happiness and peace. I don’t agree with practising in ways that make you suffer.’ That person doesn’t agree with eating in his bowl; he doesn’t agree with living on alms-food and so on because they are all difficult things to do. Only one with wisdom and real faith will be determined to develop these practices.

But for the practitioner who has attained the Dhamma, then these thirteen ascetic practices are comfortable, peaceful and serene. At this stage, it’s like a monkey and a human being. A human being walks into a forest and makes a commotion trampling over everything and destroying the peace. But a monkey let free in the forest finds it can move around easily and really enjoys it. The monkey likes the conditions because they suit the way it likes to live.

Dense, unenlightened people who are used to comfort – eating, sleeping and talking as they wish – really start to suffer when they have to come and live like this and practise in this way. But the Buddha taught that it’s this very suffering which is Dhamma. It is the fruit of practice.

So why do you see the fruit first? Suffering arises because you don’t see the cause. The suffering that arises is the Noble Truth of Suffering. It is a result. When suffering arises there is agitation, irritation and dislike. When the practitioner sees resultant suffering, then he must follow it up to see what it arises from and where.

### Rag-robes

There had been periods in Luang Por’s life when cloth had been in extremely short supply. At such times, he had made robes with cloth taken from corpses in cremation forests. The ceremonial cotton rope used to pull the hearse from the village to the forest provided him with thread. Luang Por once spoke of the benefits of wearing such robes:

We had to make all our own requisites. They may not have looked so good, but we were proud of them because they’d been produced by our own skill and effort. We’d sew robes by hand. By the time you’d finish, your thumb would be aching and swollen all over. There was no cotton other than the rope they used to draw hearses, and we’d go and look for it in cremation forests and then take it away and twist it into thread. The robes would be hardy and thick and heavy. Mostly we used paṃsukūla cloth, cloth that had been wrapped around corpses and then tossed into the forest. There would be dried blood caked on it and pus stains, and it would stink to high heaven. You’d have to take it away and wash it clean and then boil it, put it out in the sun and then dye it with jackfruit dye.

When you put it on, you’d feel that it had great benefit because it would make your hair stand on end and you’d be thrilled through and through; you’d feel a constant sense of dread. It made you diligent: diligent to practise sitting and walking meditation throughout the night without drowsiness, not wanting to sleep because of the fear, feeling stimulated and apprehensive. This kind of ascetic practice is useful; it wears away the defilements.

On one occasion, while following Luang Pu Mun on alms-round, Luang Por Lee recounts how they came across an old pair of trousers thrown away by the side of the road. He described feeling much surprised when Luang Pu Mun started to kick the trousers along in front of him:

“Finally, when he reached the fence around the police station, he stooped down, picked up the trousers and fastened them under his robes. I was puzzled. What did he want with old trash like that?

“When we got back to the kuti, he placed the trousers over the clothes railing … Several days later, I saw that the old pair of trousers had become a shoulder bag and a belt, hanging together on the wall. And a few days afterwards, he gave them to me to use. They were nothing but stitches and patches.”

### Food, inglorious food

All the monastics at Wat Pah Pong – monks, novices and maechees – were expected to keep the dhutaṅga practices of eating only once a day from a single vessel. Everything – rice, curries, salad greens, fruit, sweets – had to go into the alms-bowl. No food could be placed in the bowl lid.[27] No individual side-dishes were permitted. Luang Por reminded his disciples that all the different foods would soon be mixed up in the stomach anyway – so what was the problem?

For junior monks and novices, the natural hunger for food arising after a twenty-four hour fast, compounded by the sensual desire for tasty food, and the fear of not getting enough to sustain the body for the next day, could be a heady mix. It was an excellent opportunity to face up to greed and attachment. It was also the most stressful part of the day.

For the hour or so before the 8.00 a.m. daily meal offering, the monks were expected to sit in meditation at their allotted places in the dining hall. For many, it was a difficult time. They had been up since 3.00 a.m., had not eaten since the previous morning, and had just returned from a long walk. Drowsiness, especially in the hot season, was a common foe. Desire for food agitated many minds. But if anyone lingered outside the hall and indulged in hushed conversation to pass the time, the sound of Luang Por clearing his throat, was likely to be heard. It was a sound that would make the words die in their throats – ‘That sound had a great power to it’, said one monk, ‘It was like the roar of a tiger, and it terrified us.’

All food gathered on alms-round was considered to belong to the Sangha rather than the individual monk who had received it. On return to the monastery, monks would empty out their bowls, keeping only a ball of sticky rice for themselves. The rest of the food was sent to the kitchen where it was sorted and added to the side-dishes being prepared there.

During periods when food was scarce, newly ordained monks could sometimes find it hard to have to relinquish items that they had gathered themselves. It seemed unfair to some that when the food was distributed, ‘their’ item would rarely reach them at the end of the line. One particular monk took to concealing food inside his rice ball. One day he received a hard-boiled egg on almsround and instead of sending it to the kitchen he moulded his sticky rice ball around it. It so happened that on that particular day, Luang Por walked down the line checking the size of the monks’ rice balls. When he reached the devious monk’s bowl he stopped. The rice ball had cracked open revealing the boiled egg hidden within it. Luang Por said:

Whose ball of rice has laid an egg?

All eyes turned towards the monk, who was now sickly white with fear and embarrassment and beginning to shake. Luang Por did not say another word but silently walked back to his seat. Monks who were present at the time said that nobody ever tried the trick again.

On one occasion, Luang Por exhorted the Sangha:

We haven’t come here to practice for the sake of food. We haven’t come here to eat and sleep. We have entered the Sangha in order to practise the Buddha’s teachings. If all you want is to live comfortably and eat well, then it would be better if you weren’t a monk. You can do that as a layman; you don’t have to enter the monastic order. If you want to get something or do something or eat something, then you can just go ahead. It’s more convenient out there, you can be more comfortable, you can eat better. But if you consider it well, you’ll see that it’s a path that ends in tears. We’ve come here to follow the Buddha’s teachings. We’ve come because of our respect for the Buddha. If you think like that, the Sangha will live in harmony, and there will be no contention among you.

A popular practice adopted by many monks during the Rains Retreat entailed only eating food obtained on almsround and refusing all the side dishes prepared in the monastery kitchen. Luang Por explained why it was not the norm in the monastery, and why he allowed supplementary dishes to be prepared:

Some groups of monks go into the forest and keep the ascetic practice of only eating food offered on alms-round. But the only one who benefits from it is the most senior of them. On alms-round there are one or two items of food offered to go with the rice, not enough to go around, and they go into the bowls of the monks first in line. The teacher does well in that kind of ascetic practice. He can just carry his bowl off and have a good meal, while everyone else suffers. Laypeople want to offer their food to the Ajahn, and so the novice at the end of the line goes without. Our way of doing things here is meant to ensure that everything is shared equally.

### At the foot of a tree

Luang Por cautioned his disciples to avoid letting ideas of ownership arise with regard to their kutis, even if they had lived in them for a number of years. Kutis were Sangha residences, and Luang Por taught the monks that they must always look upon themselves as temporary occupants. When newly arrived in the monastery, monks were expected to keep the ascetic practice of accepting with good grace whatever kuti was allotted them, whether it suited them or not. When they left the monastery for more than a few days, even with the expectation of returning, they would be expected to remove all of their possessions from their kuti and make it available for others. On their return, they would have to accept whatever kuti might be available. If their old kuti was still empty, they might move back in. If not, they would have to live elsewhere.

Once the rains had stopped, the forest floor had dried out, and the first cool winds of the cold season had arrived, Luang Por would tell the monks to move down out of their kutis and put up their glots in the forest. It was the period of the year for practising the dhutaṅga practice of living at the foot of a tree. During this time, he would also send a few of the monks off to stay in nearby cremation forests, while those with more than five years seniority might ask to leave on tudong.

Living under their glots in the forest provided a means by which monks could check to see if they had become attached to basic comforts and the sense of safety they derived from their kutis. The kutis at Wat Pah Pong were mostly simple wooden huts without furniture of any kind; but being raised on stilts they caught the breeze and offered protection from snakes, scorpions and centipedes. Living at the foot of a tree was inconvenient and demanded a great deal of patience. But it was usually the irritating ants, termites and mosquitoes that disturbed the monks rather than the more dangerous creatures. At the foot of a tree, monks felt themselves vulnerable. At night-time, they became sensitive to the slightest sound around them. They were naturally alert. It was a state conducive to the development of meditation and good preparation for a future experience of a tudong walk.

### No lying down

The thirteenth ascetic practice is aimed at developing energy. A monk who undertakes it determines not to lie down for a certain period: perhaps two weeks, perhaps a month or even three months. Some monks keep the practice for a number of years. Those who undertake this practice sleep sitting up. They may determine at what level of strictness they want to practice: whether or not, for example, they will allow themselves to sit leaning against a wall.

At Wat Pah Pong, this ascetic practice was compulsory for the whole Sangha on every Observance Day – the half, full and dark moon days (approximately once a week). Although it was not a common undertaking, even in forest monasteries, Luang Por made not lying down (nesajjika) a signature practice. He saw great value in having his disciples push themselves beyond their comfort zone in this way. Each Observance Day, from seven in the evening until the following dawn, there would be a programme of chanting, meditation and Dhamma teaching. Luang Por would usually give a talk lasting some two or three hours, and then he would sit meditating in the hall right through the night as an example. He encouraged the Sangha:

If you can’t manage it today, then you must achieve it on another day. Even if you don’t make it cleanly or purely – you’re drowsy or lose your mindfulness at times – at least don’t lay down. It doesn’t matter if you doze off while you’re practising sitting, walking or standing meditation; it doesn’t matter how drowsy you get – that’s all quite natural. But please put a special amount of patience and effort and sincerity into your practice.

### Extra-curricular activities

Any monks wishing to take on an ascetic practice had first to receive permission from Luang Por. Sometimes they asked to undertake practices not found in the classic list. Amongst these, fasting and taking a vow of silence were the most popular.

Keeping silence was not a practice praised by the Buddha. Indeed, he forbade whole communities from taking vows of silence as he saw it as an obstacle to the development of Right Speech and to the governance of the Sangha. But there have always been Buddhist monks who have seen periods of silence as helping them to take a step back from unskilful habits of speech they have acquired and to become more aware of the intentions behind their words. They have valued the way that abstaining from speech also reduces the noise in the mind and turns the mind inwards. If Luang Por was convinced that the practice was appropriate for the monk wishing to undertake it and would lead to a strengthening of his meditation, then he would consent. During the Rains Retreat, Luang Por would sometimes make a period of silence compulsory for the whole Sangha, explaining that, as he was making himself exempt, the Vinaya rule prohibiting the practice was not transgressed.

The Buddha rejected fasting as a means of purifying the mind. He marked his abandonment of the tenets of the ascetic movements of his time by accepting a nourishing bowl of milk-rice from the milkmaid Sujāta. But although the Buddha stressed frugality, moderation and sense-restraint while eating, he did not forbid fasting altogether. In Wat Pah Pong, many monks experimented with it. Fasting, used wisely, can be a powerful tool for exposing attachments to sensuality and the body and to the fear of death. It is considered to be particularly helpful for giving monks assailed by lust at least a temporary respite from sexual desire. At best, it can give them an opportunity to rebuild their samādhi and gain a fresh perspective on their craving. For many monks, an occasional fast provides a break from alms-round and the daily meal offering – a few extra hours of solitude.

Luang Por allowed some monks to fast and forbade others. He emphasized understanding the intention to fast. His advice on this issue tended to vary according to time, place and person. If, for instance, a monk asked permission to fast and Luang Por saw that he had an unwise attitude – he wanted to do something special to distract from his inability or unwillingness to do the ordinary things; or he wanted to make a name for himself amongst his peers – then Luang Por would be discouraging. But on other occasions, if he felt that a period of fasting would be of benefit to a particular individual in developing patience or opposing defilement, then he would give permission. He pointed out the lack of continuity it sometimes entailed and how unwise renunciation could boomerang into unwise indulgence:

​[The value of fasting] depends on the individual. It’s difficult to lay down a definite rule about it … but putting everything into the practice doesn’t mean exhausting yourself. It’s about finding ‘just the right amount’, keeping the mind in balance … Some people can fast for fifteen days and spend the whole time doing walking meditation. But then when they eat, they can knock off five plates of greens and as much rice as they can get their hands on. That’s so excessive it’s amazing. But not in a good way.

He would remind his disciples that taking on such practices could be a good experience, but that it was the middle path that led to awakening:

You might be able to walk or float through the air and it wouldn’t be anything to do with practice. You could eat only seven mouthfuls of food every day and it wouldn’t be practice, because it’s not ‘the right amount’. These things don’t lead to enlightenment … Practice is a matter of being content and of few wishes – but enough wishes to keep you going. If you’re a little bit hungry, your mind is easy to teach; but if you’re really hungry, then it’s difficult to teach: it’s dull. Eat just enough to stay healthy.

Luang Por would also comment that reducing food intake to a minimum was a more effective boost to training the mind:

It’s like an elephant in a bamboo grove. If you want to ride on its neck, then you have to capture it and put a harness on it. Once it’s chained, then you give it something to eat, but not much. The elephant becomes fearful and hungry, and then, after a while, when it starts to lose weight, it lets you teach and train it. That’s how you domesticate a wild elephant. Once it’s trained, you can let it go free, even into the market. Train yourself in the same way.

On occasion, however, he would explain how the experience of fasting stood monks in good stead if they found themselves in remote areas with no village to provide alms-food and a long trek ahead of them. They were able to bear up because they knew what doing without food does to the body and mind. Those without such experience were more likely to be overcome by fear.

Luang Por had experimented with fasting himself. Sometimes he related his own observations to his disciples:

Sometimes, after fasting for three or four days you feel weary. The late afternoon is a crucial time and you almost give up, but then at night time you get another surge of energy from the coolness. The second phase is important as well – when to break your fast. It’s extremely difficult to decide on this point. You think, ‘Shall I keep going a bit longer? Or is this enough?’ Your mind is thrown into disarray. Sometimes, you look at your bowl and then you want to go on alms-round. ‘If I don’t go for another two or three days, will I be able to make it?’ And then your mind is off again and back to the question of: ‘Shall I go or shan’t I?’ It’s a difficult, troublesome time until you decide. ‘If I die, I die! I’m not going on alms-round today.’ And then you immediately feel stronger, and your weariness dissolves once more. That’s how the practice is established; it’s dependent on unwavering patience.

More than a week has passed and you still don’t feel hungry. You feel fine. You feel as if you could live without eating for an indefinite period – until death, if need be. Just one big stride and you’d be out of all this. It’s at this point that you need to be careful – very careful.

You look at the other monks and novices and it seems as if the whole wat is so busy. First thing in the morning they have to go on alms-round, and before long, they have to put food in their bodies; and not long after that, they have to empty it all out again. The next morning, they have to stuff more in, and then before long, they have to empty it out again and go out for more. ‘They’re crazy! We’re all such slaves of craving and defilements.’ At this point, some people decide to give up eating altogether; they think they’d be better off dead. This is a crucial moment. You see eating as a trivial matter. But such thoughts are too elevated. And it’s an elevation that’s upside down; it ends in derangement. You start blaming rice and fish. Rice grains start to look like maggots. You don’t want any to go into your bowl.

Luang Por repeated that meditators who deliberately pitted themselves against natural impulses under controlled conditions, could gain many insights. But constant vigilance was necessary to prevent them from falling prey to the pitfalls attendant on such practices. It was Right View that kept everything on track.

In summary, the Pāṭimokkha training rules, the observances and the ascetic practices dovetailed to create the distinctive features of monastic life at Wat Pah Pong. They were fundamental to the sense of community, of a shared culture and identity. But if Vinaya was the lifeblood of the monks’ existence, it was meditation that was its beating heart.

1 The terms ‘householder Vinaya’ (agārikavinaya) and ‘lay Vinaya’ (gihivinaya) are found, respectively, in commentarial references to the ‘ten wholesome paths’ (kusalakammapathā) and to the responsibilities of householders detailed in the Sīgālovāda Sutta (DN 31).

2 This book, published in 1860, was the work of Phra Amarabhirakkhita, one of the first generation of Dhammayut reformer monks.

3 The Thai verb ‘raksa’ has been retained here to keep the play on words. ‘Raksa’ can mean both ‘to keep’ (as in, ‘to keep precepts’ or ‘to keep one’s word’) and to ‘care for’ or ‘protect’.

4 AN 8.53

5 SN 16.5

6 However, there are non-offense clauses, for example, in cases of sickness or insanity.

7 Pali: cetanā. Also commonly translated as ‘volition’ and occasionally as ‘urge’.

8 Consuming raw meat or fish is prohibited.

9 In brief, these are: sexual intercourse; theft; taking human life; and falsely claiming spiritual attainment.

10 The rule has been a cause of contention for over two thousand years. Today, the main justification for disregarding it is the argument that life in the modern world makes keeping the rule impractical. Support for this position is found in the claim that, as the rule only expressly forbids receiving gold and silver, it does not apply to money as we know it today (however, as the definition of ‘gold and silver’ in the Vinaya text makes clear that the term includes ‘all mediums of exchange’, this is a problematic interpretation).

11 See A forest monk’s dwelling

12 In the last few years, sewing robes by hand has again become popular at Wat Pah Pong and its branch monasteries.

13 Determine (a robe): See Glossary, determine.

14 A prohibition against smoking and chewing betel nut was appended at a later date.

15 Water tanks collected rain water from filtered pipes connected to the guttering of the dining hall. These tanks provided the monastery’s supply of drinking water. Each monk had his own water-kettle.

16 These days, monks usually serve themselves from offered dishes of food arranged on a long table. The effort to reduce waste has taken precedent over the ascetic practice.

17 Strictly speaking, one monk is considered senior to another when he has more than three rains greater than him. In practice, Wat Pah Pong monks would defer, at least in formal situations, to any monk who had entered the Sangha before them, even if the interval was less than three years.

18 A reference to ‘defunct’ (ahosi) kamma which occurs when the conditions necessary for a kammic act to bear fruit in a particular way are removed.

19 A precursor of the modern sauna, used for medicinal purposes.

20 The duties of the student towards the teacher and the preceptor overlap a great deal. Here the explanation will refer solely to the teacher-student relationship as Luang Por did not become a preceptor until 1976.

21 Vin Cv.8.11-12

22 Many forest monks prefer to eat with their right hand.

23 Published as Toilets on the Path in The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah.

24 The reign of King Vajiravudh, 1910-1925.

25 Ten kinds of meat are prohibited: that of human beings, elephants, horses, dogs, snakes, lions, tigers, leopards, bears, and hyenas (Vin Mv.VI.23.9-15). Consumption of such meats was either socially unacceptable in the India of the Buddha’s time, or else considered dangerous to the consumer (apparently the odour that would be emitted by his body would tell wild creatures that he was an enemy).

26 viz. AN 5.181-90; Thag 16.7

27 Occasionally, on important Buddhist holidays, this practice might be relaxed. Small bowls of noodle soup or, in later days, ice cream, that were offered at such times did not have to be tipped into the bowl with the rest of the food. It was considered a special treat.