# Polishing the Shell

Monk’s Training

Abandoning the dark way, let the wise cultivate the bright path. Having gone from home to homelessness, let them yearn for that delight in detachment, so difficult to enjoy. Giving up sensual pleasures, with no attachment, let the wise cleanse themselves of defilements of mind.

– Dhp 87-88

Household life is cramped and dusty; life gone forth is wide open. It is difficult for a householder to lead the Holy Life as completely pure as a polished conch shell. Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.

– MN 112

Monks, there are ten dhammas which should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth. What are these ten?

‘I am no longer living according to worldly aims and values.’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘My very life is sustained through the gifts of others.’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘There is still more work to be done.’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘Does regret over my conduct arise in my mind?’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘Could my spiritual companions find fault with my conduct?’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will become separated from me.’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘I am the owner of my kamma, heir to my kamma, born of my kamma, related to my kamma, abide supported by my kamma; whatever kamma I shall do, for good or for ill, of that I will be the heir.’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘The days and nights are relentlessly passing; how well am I spending my time?’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘Do I delight in solitude or not?’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

‘Has my practice borne fruit with freedom or insight so that at the end of my life I need not feel ashamed when questioned by my spiritual companions?’ This should be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

Monks, these are the ten dhammas to be reflected upon again and again by one who has gone forth.

– AN 10.48

## Introduction

Luang Por Chah chose to live his life as a Buddhist monk. He received permission from his parents to enter a monastery at the age of nine, and apart from a brief period in his teens, he lived in monastic communities until his death at the age of seventy-four. The Sangha was his family, and, as a teacher, its welfare was his main pre-occupation. While he gave considerable importance to propagating the Dhamma in society at large, he did so only to the extent that it did not compromise his training of the monks and nuns in his monastery.

Luang Por considered that the longevity and good health of Buddhism in a society was ultimately decided by the quality of the monastic order. He spent much of his life providing a training for monastics that was intended to be true to the ancient principles, but that would, at the same time, also enable the Sangha to thrive in a Thailand that was rapidly changing. Perhaps most crucially, he sought to create a Sangha that was not overly tied to him as an individual but would still be able to thrive in his eventual absence.

When Luang Por established Wat Pah Pong in 1954, there were few precedents for him to draw upon, no clear-cut forest monastery template passed down by his teachers to conform to. Scarcely a decade had passed since Luang Pu Mun himself – the father of the tradition – had first spent two consecutive Rains Retreats in the same monastery. Nevertheless, it seems evident that Luang Por had been preparing for this new development in his life for some time, closely observing the way things were done in every monastery he practised in during his tudong years. He began with great confidence, establishing a monastery based broadly upon Luang Pu Mun’s monastery at Nong Peu, but also introducing certain adaptations inspired by practices he had seen elsewhere, and others from his own ideas. From the beginning, he showed a willingness to learn from experience and discard what did not work.

### Chaff From the Grain

One of the distinctive features of the Wat Pah Pong training was the unusually long time – in some periods almost two years[1] – that aspirants lived in the monastery first as postulants and then as novices before taking full Ordination. This was a radically different approach to that found in the village and city monasteries. Screening applicants for admission into the Sangha and requiring them to spend a probationary period as postulants may seem to be a matter of common sense, but it was virtually unknown at the time. In most monasteries, applicants could expect to be wearing a monk’s robes within days of walking through the gate, a custom that contributed significantly to low standards throughout the monastic order. A probationary period served to make Ordination seem more valuable. Luang Por expressed his view on the matter in a characteristically succinct phrase: ‘Easy to ordain, easy to disrobe. Difficult to ordain, difficult to disrobe.’

At Wat Pah Pong, those unsuited for monastic life usually left well before the ceremony of Ordination. New people were tested from the first day. A freshly arrived applicant for Ordination at Wat Pah Pong would spend the first few days in a state of some confusion, receiving little attention and sleeping at night on a rush mat at the back of the Dhamma Hall. Ajahn Tiang recalled:

“Luang Por would leave the newly arrived people alone. He didn’t speak to them apart from asking them how they were now and then. Whether they did things right or wrong he said nothing. He’d just leave them for about a week or five days or three days – depending on the circumstance – and then he would speak. I thought it was an excellent method to get an idea of the person’s intelligence. Was he aware of what was going on around him? Was he being observant? Or was he foolish, unobservant or impulsive? Once Luang Por had grasped his weak points, his basic personality, then he would start to teach and train him.”

Ajahn Jundee, one of those who passed through this process with distinction, saw others leave after a few days:

“Luang Por was unconcerned. His attitude was: whoever wants to come, let them come; whoever wants to leave, then let them leave. It didn’t affect him. I came as a layperson, and I was here for around ten days before anybody said anything to me. The monks and novices didn’t speak to me or teach me anything, or ask me to help with anything at all. I thought, ‘Why am I being left to my own devices like this? I’ve just been abandoned.’ Sometimes I started to feel miserable and considered going home. It seemed from the way that everybody was behaving that nobody was interested in me.”

Realizing that the onus was upon him to make the effort to watch those around him closely and copy them in whatever he could, Ajahn Jundee’s willingness to learn was noticed and his life in the monastery soon began to change for the better.

After some days, the applicant would be told that he could now shave his head, signifying an initial commitment to the abandonment of vanity and the practice of renunciation. He would then formally request the Eight Precepts and begin wearing the white lower robe and angsa of the postulant. From this point his training would begin. He would join in most of the Sangha’s communal activities, assist the monks, and start to learn the daily chants.

“I wanted to ordain quickly, but Luang Por explained about the training of new people, and it made sense to me … He was quite stern with my group … He said he wasn’t going to let us ordain easily. He would train us like soldiers. We had come to be soldiers of the Buddha, and we needed some basic training, like army boot camp. It might take many months or even a year if we weren’t any good … For those who badly wanted to ordain it took the wind out of their sails. In those days, he aimed at quality above all. He wasn’t bothered by the reactions of the people who came; he wanted to test their faith.

“The smarter people ordained more quickly because they were fluent, able to do everything in a neat, correct way. Others were there for a year or two and they still weren’t ready. If they could endure, they stayed; if they couldn’t, they left. He didn’t ever try to persuade anyone to stay … Some people would arrive saying they were tired of the world, they’d had their fill of it; but then they came up against the monastic regulations and a single day was enough. By the next morning they’d changed their minds and left. Although it was true they came with faith, they lacked wisdom. Some didn’t even pay respects before they left – they just ran away. Some people stayed a bit longer, shaved their heads and then left. I know so many people who were unable to endure it.”

Anyone who expressed desire or showed impatience in Luang Por’s presence could expect to pay a price. If a new member of the community wanted to ordain as soon as possible, the worst thing that he could do would be to request a date from Luang Por or (almost unthinkable except, perhaps, for one of the Westerners) to pester him. The question, ‘Luang Por, when will I be ordained?’ would be either completely ignored or dismissed with a, ‘Don’t bother’ or, ‘It’s not really necessary; just carry on as you are.’ Only when Luang Por saw that the eager aspirant was at peace with whatever his teacher decided, did he arrange for an Ordination. One of the most valuable phrases a new member of the community could learn at Wat Pah Pong was, ‘It’s up to you, Luang Por.’ It meant that he trusted Luang Por’s judgement and could be patient for however long it took.

### Going Forth

Novice Ordination has traditionally been the de facto option for males below the age of twenty, with men of twenty years or above taking full monk Ordination without becoming novices first. Luang Por was unusual in that, for a number of years, he required men of all ages to spend a period of months as a novice before becoming monks. It gave aspirants for monkhood the chance to develop a feel for Sangha life with many of the trappings of life as a monk but without the immediate pressure of having to conform to a large, complex body of training rules. Eventually, he relaxed this practice somewhat, but retained it for Westerners and elderly men who benefited from this gentle introduction to Sangha life.

The novice Ordination ceremony (pabbajjā; literally: ‘Going Forth’) is short. The aspirant receives robes from the teacher, makes his formal request to ‘go forth’, receives the Ten Precepts[2] from the teacher, and recites the list of the five basic meditation topics: hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth and skin. On one such ‘Going Forth’ ceremony, Luang Por gave the following instruction:

The only reason that I make it so difficult for all of you to enter the Sangha here is that I want things to be done well … Taking the time is the proof of your commitment. Some people want to become monks, but then when they find out that it takes a long time, they change their minds. Some bear with it, some leave and seek to become monks elsewhere. I have no objections to that. But what I have always insisted upon is that becoming a monk is not taken lightly.

As postulants, you’ve trained and prepared yourselves to become a monk. You’ve lived with the monks, learned how to offer things to them correctly, learned about the monk’s life, become acquainted with it. You’ve practised sewing and dying cloth, looking after robes and bowls. You’ve seen how the monks practice with regard to robes, alms-round, dwelling place, medicines … Now you must be willing to conduct yourselves in the same way. This is the foundation.

Now that you’ve learned the basics you can become a novice. I will give you a bowl, and tomorrow morning you will put on your robes neatly and walk for alms in the village … Tomorrow, the villagers will put fresh cooked rice into your bowl, they will pay their respects to you. Why will these old people with grey hair hold their hands up in respect to you? Because of the power of the ochre robe. This ochre robe belongs to the Buddha. It has an incomparable power … If you use it in the wrong way, you will degrade yourself.

There are a great number of Dhamma teachings to learn, but today, on the day of novice Ordination, there are just a few. Following the tradition handed down from the great teachers of old, today we study the five meditation objects: hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth and skin. When you first hear the list, it may sound a bit comical, but if you contemplate these five things well, it will become really profound. We are born with these things but we don’t know them. It is necessary to learn these five fundamental meditation objects as the entrance to the path that leads directly to Nibbāna. Herein lies Right View. We are taught to learn these five basic meditation objects and then reflect on them.

Repeat after me in the scriptural language:

Kesā, lomā, nakhā, dantā, taco.

Taco, dantā, nakhā, lomā, kesā.

Some people say that everyone has these things; they know what they are already; why study them? But they don’t really know what they are, they don’t know the true nature of head hair, of body hair, of nails, of teeth or of skin. Hair of the head is, in fact, repulsive. Where does it come from? It feeds on pus. The others are the same. These things are not glowing with health, you know. They’re not delightful. But we don’t really see that.

It’s the flawed parts that people beautify, the unattractive parts; it’s because of their great dirtiness that people pretty them up. Is there really anything beautiful about head hair? No, there isn’t. Is it clean? There’s nothing clean about it. If you heaped up a pile of hair and left it by the side of the road, would anyone pick it up? Take off your skin, put it by the side of the road, and then tomorrow on alms-round see if anyone has gone off with it yet …

We don’t see these things in their true light. Now that you are novices, pay attention to them. Head hair is not beautiful, body hair is not beautiful, nails are not beautiful, teeth are not beautiful, skin is not beautiful. But people cover them with powders and creams and so on to make them seem beautiful and so we’re deluded and don’t see the truth of things.

It’s like the fish that swallows the hook; have you seen that? Actually, the fish doesn’t intend to eat the hook, it’s the bait that it swallows. If it saw the hook, the fish wouldn’t eat the bait … It swallows the bait because it doesn’t know what it’s doing. It’s the same for all of us. If you were to see these things in their true light, you wouldn’t want them. Why would you choose to burden yourself with things like that? But it’s like the fish: once the hook is in its mouth, however much the fish wants to get it out, it can’t. It’s snagged …

If you contemplate these five parts of the body over and over again and see them clearly, your mind will be at ease … Keep contemplating. Don’t be heedless … Study these meditation objects and fear them like hooks. If you don’t feel any fear towards them, it’s because you don’t know them.

Once you’re ordained, then be obedient. Follow the teacher’s advice and instruction. Be respectful, put yourself in awe of the Buddha and the training rules that he laid down … You must try your utmost to bring up a sense of fear and awe: a wise fear of wrongdoing and bad kamma, a fear of breaking the Buddha’s laws. If you constantly reflect in this way, you will live peacefully, happy and heedful.

Now I will present you with your robe, this ochre dyed robe that is the victory banner of the arahants. Go outside and put on the lower and upper robes. Put them on beautifully, evenly all the way around.

## Parts of a Whole

### The Wat Pah Pong Sangha

The community at Wat Pah Pong consisted of monks, novices, postulants and maechees[3] (white-robed nuns). The majority of the novices were teenage boys, ineligible from taking full monks’ Ordination until the age of twenty. As for the monks, they could be divided into three groups: monks of regular standing, visiting monks and temporary monks.

The main body of the Sangha consisted of the first group: those monks who had arrived as laymen and had passed through the designated period of preparation before ordaining. This group might be further divided into: ‘new’ (navaka) monks – those having been in the Sangha for less than five years; ‘middle’ (majjhima) monks – those of between five and ten years standing; and ‘senior’ (thera) monks – those who had been in the Sangha for more than ten years.

The second, much smaller group consisted of monks ordained in other monasteries and classified as ‘visiting’ (āgantuka) monks. At any one time, this group would include both short-term visitors and monks wishing to join the Wat Pah Pong Sangha who were undergoing a period of probation and adaptation. The third group, usually only present during the Rains Retreat, consisted of monks who had taken temporary ordination.

Luang Por made it clear that, in his view, the only legitimate reason for entering the Sangha in a forest monastery was to single-mindedly follow the path to enlightenment. He would caution the monks, ‘We’re not here to become anything at all.’ In other words, monastic life wasn’t about gaining any kind of reward, status or identity; that would simply perpetuate the suffering of the lay life in a new form. All craving, even for Nibbāna itself, was to be rooted out. Forbearance was singled out as a cardinal virtue. He said that people found ways to repress or conceal their faults in the world, whereas Dhamma practice opened the inner world up wide and exposed all faults. It was hard to endure.

Remember: the practice is to look at yourself. Don’t look outside – look within. Why? Because we are practising for enlightenment. Young men and old, we have renounced worldly work to come here to practice. The practice should result in the paths and fruits.[4] If it doesn’t, then as far as I’m concerned, it’s a waste of time. Try to produce these results. Realize the paths and fruits. If it’s not a big path, then a small one; not a big fruit, then a small one. Do it. And don’t regress. Let the practice keep inching forward. Don’t be satisfied with what you’ve already achieved.

Luang Por said that if any monk practised diligently, the first level of enlightenment – stream-entry – was attainable within five years.[5]

He would urge newly ordained monks to clearly understand that they were embarking on a life that ran counter to old, worldly habits:

Everyone likes to follow their desires, but once you’ve entered the Sangha here at Wat Pah Pong you can’t do that anymore. You’ve come here to train.

If you become a monk and think you’re going to eat well, sleep well and lead a comfortable life, then you’ve got the wrong idea, you’re in the wrong place. If that’s what you want, you should remain as a layperson and support yourself.

It would not be easy for the faint-hearted. Only those who were fully committed would survive.

Those with faith can stand it. However demanding it is, they endure; whatever the difficulties and tribulations, they persist. Patient endurance is their guiding virtue. They don’t just follow their desires.

A major challenge lay in avoiding the tendency to identify with the negative emotions stirred up by the training.

Because we’re unable to distinguish between the mind and the defilements, we assume them to be one and the same thing. This undermines us. If we try to go against defilements, then it feels as if it’s we ourselves who are being frustrated, and so we don’t do it.

Becoming a monk is not an easy thing. It’s tough. When outsiders talk about it, their words don’t ring true to us. Take, for example, the common view that people become monks due to some disappointment in life. If someone like that arrives, you can tell it as soon as they walk through the gate. They’re thinking that monastic life will be restful, but once they’ve entered the Sangha here, they find themselves under even more pressure than before, and eventually they can’t take it anymore. That’s how it is. I’m not just talking about other people: I suffered a lot myself. But I had a really ardent mind. I wouldn’t let myself go on suffering. I suffered intensely – I don’t know where the pain all came from – yet at the same time there was also a part of me that wouldn’t go along with it. In fact, sometimes, thinking about the suffering and all the difficulties I was going through, I even quite enjoyed it.

Luang Por warned that if monks did not know how to take care of their faith, it could crumble. Unrealistic expectations were a great danger. Many young monks disrobed when they realized just how much harder it was to train their mind than they had imagined.

So the real, the best foundation is to live with patience. Patience is essential. You have to go against your habits of mind and trust in the teachings and advice of the teacher.

In fact, the practice that led to the best possible outcome – the long-lasting welfare of self and others – was straightforward; it only seemed difficult because of defilement. Everything had been well set up to facilitate the training. All that needed to be done was to keep the Vinaya and monastic regulations, to follow the schedule, meditate diligently, and to deal wisely with whatever arose in the mind as a result. The point to be constantly borne in mind was that the goal of practice was to abandon craving.

This craving: people don’t understand it, do they? Some people think that once they’ve gratified the craving, it will go away. It doesn’t. Feeling sated and experiencing the cessation of craving are two different things altogether … Give a hungry dog some rice. One plate, two plates of rice, go down in a flash. But by the time it’s on its fourth plate, the dog’s completely stuffed. So it lays down beside the unfinished plate and guards the rice, eyes flickering. If any other dogs come to eat the food, it threatens them, ‘Grrr! Grrr!’ Dogs, humans – their instincts are pretty much the same.

The abandonment of craving, the cause of suffering, would not be accomplished by force.

Our capacity to abandon attachment to things depends on seeing how fitting it is to do that. When we are able to abandon something, it’s because we’ve seen the suffering inherent in it. We’re able to practise like this because we see the great value of doing so.

The Buddha taught us to have mindfulness, alertness and a constant all-round knowing of what’s going on – and then to get down to it. After a period of sitting meditation is over, keep reflecting on whatever you experience … This will become a habit; it will form a condition and a power. Increasing wholesome habits is what the Buddha called progress. The development of meditation has to be like this.

Some people are disappointed by their results in meditation. They start thinking that they don’t have the capacity to experience tranquillity, and so they disrobe. But it’s not so easy to get what you desire. You can’t force your mind to achieve a state of lucid calm. You have to be cool and unhurried. Persevere with the practice and the teachings. Put forth effort with both body and mind. Downfall in practice comes from not being willing or daring to do it, from not following the teachings, from a lack of faith.

Monks were to learn by putting forth effort and observing what happened as a result. It was not so important to be proficient in all the technical terms used to describe the process. Luang Por drew an analogy:

A layperson offers you a fruit, and you experience its sweet and delicious flavour even though you don’t know its name … Knowing its name wouldn’t make it taste any better.

### Visiting monks

More and more monks, ordained at other monasteries, arrived at Wat Pah Pong asking permission to join its Sangha either for a temporary period or for long-term training. Many of these monks were unfamiliar with life in a forest monastery, and few had received much instruction in the Vinaya. Although Luang Por was willing to take on monks ordained elsewhere, he was also aware of the challenges that integrating them into the community involved, especially the more senior amongst them. If visiting monks were allowed to take their place in the hierarchy according to seniority, then the Wat Pah Pong system – in which the more senior monks were expected to act as role models for the younger monks – would be compromised. Young monks and novices might start to lose their respect for seniors who were obviously unfamiliar with the training.

Luang Por’s answer to this problem was to establish a number of protocols governing the admission of visiting monks: guests and would-be members into the Wat Pah Pong Sangha. Initially, monks arriving alone would only be permitted to stay overnight if they had been ordained for more than five years or if they had a covering letter from their preceptor. An initial stay of just three nights would be granted to visitors, although this could be extended at Luang Por’s discretion. Monks coming from monasteries whose practice of the Vinaya was significantly different from Wat Pah Pong’s would be designated as ‘visiting monks’ and not considered fully fledged members of the community. They would sit separately in the dining hall, walk at the end of the line of monks on alms-round irrespective of their seniority and, most controversially, not be invited to formal meetings of the Sangha. Most of these practices reproduced the way that Dhammayut forest monasteries treated visiting monks from the Mahānikāya sect. However, as the monks being excluded at Wat Pah Pong were of the same sect, the policy led to strong criticism in some quarters. But Luang Por was unmoved by it. He himself had lived as a ‘visiting monk’ for months at a time and found it helpful in removing pride and conceit.

The probationary period was not a comfortable time for the monks in question, but it fulfilled a number of useful functions. It provided them with an opportunity to give unhurried consideration to whether or not they wished to make a long-term commitment to the Wat Pah Pong Sangha. It allowed them to adapt to the way of practice at their own pace, without the pressure of being fully fledged members of the community. It also provided the opportunity for Luang Por to see whether or not these monks would fit in: he could observe their personalities, how the monks dealt with their loss of status, and how willing they were to take on a much more demanding standard of Vinaya practice. Furthermore, Luang Por was conscious that if monks who ordained elsewhere, with next to no period of preparation, could join the Wat Pah Pong Sangha too easily, then it would undermine the system of training that he had developed. More people would seek to bypass the initial training as postulant and novice by arriving at the monastery after having ordained elsewhere.

Ajahn Jun, who was to become one of Luang Por’s closest and most trusted disciples, arrived at the beginning of July 1960, after spending a number of years in a village monastery. The contrast was stark, and he felt jolted by a kind of culture shock. Being used to a more convivial atmosphere, he interpreted the reserve of Wat Pah Pong monks as coldness and arrogance. This was apparently confirmed on his first full day when clearing the site for a new kuti: none of the monks seemed interested in helping with the work.

“Me, I didn’t know about the Vinaya rule forbidding monks from digging the earth and I just got stuck in. I dug holes, put in the posts and cut down vines to bind things up.”

It was by no means the only Vinaya rule of which he was ignorant. He had come to the monastery with a few spare sets of robes and a stock of tinned milk and Ovaltine. He soon discovered that at Wat Pah Pong, the rule forbidding more than one set of the three robes was strictly observed, and that milk and Ovaltine were considered to be foodstuffs and could only be consumed at the meal time. There was so much he didn’t know – it was a steep learning curve.

“When he’d tested my faith and respect and he saw that I had confidence in him, he began to teach me … Luang Por said I had to throw away any spells, mantric formulas or empowered medallions I might have collected. He would teach me afresh. Right or wrong, I should just follow him for the time being and then discuss it later … I’d been ordained for six years, and I’d never meditated. The things I’d been doing before – the building work, bricklaying, carpentry, cement work – he had me put aside altogether. He taught me how to practise sitting and walking meditation. He taught me how to rest the breath, establish mindfulness. I was utterly determined to do well, and I did everything he told me.”

Just prior to the beginning of the annual Rains Retreat, Luang Por told Ajahn Jun that he was ready to be accepted into the Sangha. First, however, most of his belongings would need to be replaced. Monks commit offences against the Vinaya both in accepting money and spending it. Any item purchased by a monk is considered ‘impure’ and liable to forfeiture. Most of Ajahn Jun’s possessions fell into this category.

“Luang Por told Ajahn Tiang to go through my requisites and see what was unallowable, so that my sīla could be purified in the midst of the Sangha. It turned out that by the end of the inspection, all I had left was one thin lower robe. Everything else I’d bought myself and was in breach of the Nissaggiya Pācittiya training rules. The inspection was very thorough. Even though some of the items had been properly offered by laypeople, they were declared impure – incorrect by the Vinaya – because I’d bought the detergent that I washed them in. He had me send everything I relinquished back to my old monastery.

“Ajahn Tiang gave me a new set of robes. They were dark-coloured meditation monk’s robes, patched in a number of places. Luang Por said, ‘Don’t worry about requisites: if your sīla is pure, they will appear by themselves.’ After that, he made an announcement to the Sangha and then had me formally determine[6] the cloth, put the robes on and confess my offences. I didn’t know how to confess offences in the forest Sangha way and had to repeat the words after him. After the Sangha had accepted me, Luang Por gave a talk … He talked about various kinds of virtue, and the dirt and impurity that the Sangha had kindly cleansed me of. He said that I mustn’t forget that debt of gratitude, that I must remember it for all of my life. I cried.”

Ajahn Maha Amorn remembers the day he changed his requisites:

“It was my watch that I regretted parting from. It was a really good one, and I’d always used it to keep an eye on the time while I was teaching. As I picked it up in order to formally relinquish it, the thought arose in my mind, ‘If I give this watch up and I end up going back to teaching, where will I ever get another one like it?’ At that moment, Luang Por spoke up as if he knew what was in my mind, ‘Oh, you’ve got a watch? Throw it away. It’s not a good thing. Take mine.’ Then he took a travelling alarm clock out of his shoulder bag and gave it to me. That clock is still around. I’ve kept it with me ever since.”

Ajahn Boonchu was one of many of the stalwarts of Wat Pah Pong in later years, who began their lives as visiting monks.

“When the monks and novices performed the daily chores, or there was a work project, it made me very observant. I helped out … I allowed my pride to motivate me, ‘Whatever they can do, however hard it is, so can I.’ Luang Por watched us a lot, very carefully. When I first arrived, I felt in great awe of him – really, it was intimidation. In fact, I felt intimidated by everything: from all the rules and observances to the young novices, and even the laypeople, because many of them had been practicing longer than me and probably, I thought, knew more than I did. Although I already had six rains, it seemed as if I hadn’t even started to practise.

“Whatever I did was a mixture of the correct and incorrect, and sometimes I’d embarrass myself, but Luang Por would just let it go. After I’d been there some time, after the evening session in the Dhamma Hall was over, I had the opportunity to go together with some other visiting monks and novices to pay our respects to him and receive teachings … If anyone had a problem in their practice, that was the time when you could ask him. Sometimes he himself would ask, ‘How is so-and-so?’ and ‘What about so-and-so? Is everything going well?’ He’d ask us about how we were getting on, did we feel hungry in the evenings eating only one meal a day? Could we endure it? Sometimes he would give an exhortation: ‘Be very patient. Just keep practicing. You’re living with friends. Any task that needs to be done, or any observance that is still faulty or lax, then observe your friends. Practise well, don’t be heedless.’ ”

### Luang Ta

It is common in Thailand for middle-aged and even elderly men to join the Sangha. Some decide to enter a monastery after retirement, some after their children have grown up and left home, some following divorce and others (provided they have gained the consent of their wife) while still married. The traditional term for a man who becomes a monk after having lived the householder’s life is ‘Luang Ta’. Luang Tas have had a poor reputation since the time of the Buddha. The archetypal Luang Ta wears his robe untidily, is still stuck in his worldly ways, and is stubborn and difficult to teach. He finds it difficult to deal with the change of status he experiences as a junior member of a community in which some of the monks he must defer to are no older than his children.

There is a whole genre of humorous Luang Ta stories, mostly revolving around the theme of greed or old worldly habits asserting themselves. In one typical story, a Luang Ta on alms-round comes to a fork in the road. To the left lies a village where he often receives delicious curries but few sweets; to the right lies a village where he receives wonderful sweets but few curries. After an agonized period of indecision, he sets off down the curry village road, but soon, swept up by a vision of sweets, changes his mind, retraces his steps and takes the road to the sweets village. But as soon as he is well upon sweets village road, he starts to regret forgoing the curries at curry village. He walks back and forth so many times – caught between his conflicting desires – that eventually he realizes that the alms-round time has long past and that today he will get nothing to eat at all.

Monks resembling the Luang Ta caricature have always been easy enough to find in the village temples of rural Isan; however, this has not been the case in the forest monasteries. It takes a lot of courage for an elderly man to commit himself to the ascetic life of a forest monk. And of those who were determined to do so, only the ones who could prove themselves capable of enduring the rigours of the life and willing to live by the Vinaya and monastic regulations, were accepted into the Sangha at Wat Pah Pong. For this reason, the quality of the elderly Luang Tas at the monastery was high. Amongst their number were to be found some of the most loved and respected members of the Sangha.

As a means of gauging their suitability, Luang Por required elderly men to spend long periods of time, first as a postulant and then as a novice, before becoming a monk. During this probationary period (and some elderly men never went beyond novice status), Luang Por would comfort them when things got tough, giving them inspiration and encouraging them not to be depressed by the frailty of their bodies. One elderly novice, sad that he would not be able to become a monk, was uplifted by Luang Por’s words to him:

“He said that I had to take responsibility for my practice but not to push my body too far. It was like an old oxcart, he said, falling apart a little bit more every day, and not to worry about it too much. He said that ordaining as a monk is a convention. You don’t become a true monk by going through an Ordination ceremony, but through practice. He said that laypeople and novices could become true monks if they practised well.

“He told me stories from the time of the Buddha about laypeople who attained stream-entry, and about one who realized arahantship and then got gored to death by a bull while he was still searching for some yellow cloth to make a robe. I felt very proud when Luang Por told me these things. And he was kind enough to tell me one anecdote that was really inspiring. It concerned a certain monk of high ecclesiastical rank. He was a Pali scholar of the highest level and the head monk of a province, but he had so many responsibilities that he disrobed and re-ordained as a novice. In the hot season, he would disappear into the mountains to meditate, and then just before the Rains Retreat he would return to the monastery and stay with his disciples, giving Dhamma talks and teaching … Luang Por said to me, ‘You can do that as well. Practise sincerely, at the optimum level for your strength and age. Don’t look at others. Don’t be a fault-finder. It doesn’t matter what others do. You’re an old man now, don’t take any interest in the faults of others.’ I took Luang Por’s teachings to heart.”

### Temporary monks

Although there are approximately 300,000 monks and novices in robes at any one time, probably less than one in ten of those who enter the monastic order in Thailand remain in it for the rest of their lives. Temporary ordination is the norm rather than the exception – traditionally, for the three months of the Rains Retreat but often for a much shorter period in these busy days. It is a custom that has done much to enrich Thai society over the past millennia, creating deep and lasting links between lay Buddhists and the monastic order. Temporary ordination has prevented the Sangha from being seen as an elite caste and has ensured that few households lack a family member who is, or who has at one time been, a member. The value of the custom to the well-being of society is recognized in the allowance for those employed by the state (including members of the armed forces) to take full-paid leave to become a monk for one three-month Rains Retreat period during their career.

Temporary ordination provides a rite of passage in which young men gain the opportunity to study the Buddha’s teachings intensively and to learn how to apply them in their daily life before embarking upon a career and marriage. In former times, a young man who had yet to spend time as a monk would be considered ‘unripe’ or immature and find it difficult to make a good marriage.

Perhaps the majority of young men who become temporary monks are motivated, not so much by concern for their own spiritual welfare, as by the belief that it is the right thing for a Buddhist to do at that stage in their life, that they are upholding a long-held family custom, and most importantly, that they are making their parents happy and proud. The belief that taking temporary ordination is the supreme means of expressing the gratitude a son feels towards his parents is deeply embedded in Thai culture. Parents are believed to make much merit if a son becomes a monk.

For some monasteries, a steady or seasonal influx of temporary monks can be like a regular infusion of new blood that prevents stagnation. At the same time, it may also disrupt the harmony of an established community. Teaching and training new monks can be a heavy burden, and the influence of even a small number of young monks who have no real interest in learning, but who are merely seeing out time ‘for the sake of their parents’, can have an adverse effect on the whole monastery.

The difficulty in balancing support for a worthy custom, and the need to protect the standards of the resident community, were reflected in Luang Por’s shifting policy regarding the acceptance of temporary monks at Wat Pah Pong. Some years, the Rains Retreat would see as many as a dozen, other years almost none. Generally speaking, if one year’s intake had been disruptive, he would accept significantly fewer the following year.

At Wat Pah Pong, the majority of temporary monks were government employees in their middle years, rather than young men. Of these, the most popular with the resident Sangha tended to be members of the armed forces. They were used to discipline and physical austerity, tended to be highly motivated and fit in well. Problems tended to occur with the civil servants from a more cosseted background. For them, every day in the forest could be a struggle, and for some, the last day of the retreat seemed like the finishing line after a gruelling marathon run. On the other end of the spectrum were the temporary monks who extended their stay in robes for a few more months or even years beyond their original plan. A few found what they were looking for at Wat Pah Pong and never returned to lay life.

### Nikāya

Most of Luang Pu Mun’s great disciples began their monastic life in the larger Mahānikāya Order, and changed their affiliation to the more rigorous Dhammayut Order to which he belonged, after becoming his students. Luang Por was one of a small group of monks – its unofficial leader being Luang Pu Tongrat – who acknowledged the generally lax standards of conduct within the Mahānikāya Order, but decided to try to reform it from within, rather than reject it altogether.

Luang Pu Mun established a number of protocols regarding the reception of visiting Mahānikāya monks (considered to be lacking in purity with regards to the Vinaya) in his monasteries. They were to be seated separately, for example, and most importantly, were barred from attending formal meetings of the Sangha such as the fortnightly recitation of the Pāṭimokkha.

The abbots of Dhammayut forest monasteries conceded that the Vinaya practiced at Wat Pah Pong was of a high standard, but they felt that it would be disrespectful to the deceased Luang Pu Mun to make an exception to his instructions on their own authority. Thus, in most cases, visiting monks from Wat Pah Pong encountered the same restrictions as those who did not take the Vinaya so seriously. Despite being treated with great politeness and being reassured that it was merely a matter of convention, this could rankle.

One year, Luang Por gave a certain Dhammayut monk permission to spend the Rains Retreat at Wat Pah Pong.[7] At a meeting of the Sangha, he asked the community whether they thought the monk should be allowed to attend the Pāṭimokkha recitation. He silently allowed the tit-for-tat position to emerge. ‘They don’t allow us to attend their formal gatherings, why should we allow them to attend ours?’ was the most common response. Having listened to all of his disciples’ opinions, Luang Por gave them his own thoughts, so providing a precedent for all future occasions:

We could do that [we could exclude him], but it would not be Dhamma or Vinaya, it would be acting from opinion, personality view and pride. It wouldn’t feel right. Why don’t we take the Buddha as our example? We won’t hold to this order or that, but to the Dhamma-Vinaya. If a monk practises well and keeps the Vinaya, then we let him attend formal meetings, whether he be Dhammayut or Mahānikāya. If he’s not a good monk, has no sense of wise shame, then whichever order he belongs to, we don’t allow him to attend. If we practise like this, then we will be conforming to the Buddha’s injunctions.

### Disrobing

The majority of those who entered the monkhood at Wat Pah Pong did so without any intention of disrobing at some point in the future, but without completely discounting the possibility; they made a determination to give themselves to the training, and to find out whether they did, indeed, have what it took to stay long-term. Even amongst those who felt no interest in pursuing a life of family and career, few were willing to offer a hostage to fortune by declaring a lifetime commitment. To most it seemed arrogant and unwise; who knew what the future held?

The Vinaya does not stipulate that candidates for Ordination take lifetime vows. If monks become unhappy and wish to return to lay life, then they are free to do so at any time, without stigma and without the psychological bar of a long, forbidding disrobing ceremony.

Leaving the Sangha could not be more straightforward. Disrobing is accomplished when a monk informs any person who understands the meaning of his words that he is abandoning his monkhood. From that moment onwards, even while still wearing the robes, he is, technically speaking, a layman.

In practice, a short ceremony is performed. The monk formally requests forgiveness from his teacher, for any offence or difficulty he might have caused him, before informing him, using a short Pali phrase, of his decision to leave the Sangha. With these few words, he becomes a layman. Having changed into lay clothes, he requests the Five Precepts and some words of advice for his return to the world.

A key reason why disrobing is made so easy, both practically and psychologically, is the recognition that few people have the vocation to stay in robes for their whole life, and that it is better for someone who wishes to leave to do so, rather than live on in the monastery in a half-hearted and discontented way. Miserable monks tend to make those around them miserable, and their lack of commitment to the training easily leads to disharmony and decline in standards of the Vinaya.

Few monks avoid periods of doubt entirely. Consequently, understanding the nature of doubt and learning how to deal with it wisely is one of the most important skills that a monk can master. Until that skill is developed – and it may take many years – the teacher is there to offer reflections and encouragement. If he sees a monk’s discontent as a superficial wobble rather than a genuine inability or unwillingness to live the monks’ life any longer, he will try to help the monk find a renewed sense of purpose. The teacher will be aware of many monks who left the Sangha in haste only to repent at leisure.

In the early years at Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por put considerable effort into dissuading restless monks from disrobing. As he got older, he was less inclined to do so – a pattern common, almost to cliché, amongst leaders of monastic communities. Helping monks to emerge from a period of dissatisfaction with monastic life was hard work, and more often than not, resulted in a postponement rather than a complete ending of their desire to disrobe. As teachers matured, they tended to become more stoic about the loss of promising young monks and saw the need to be more discriminating as to how they spent their time and energy.

Some monks disrobed in order to take care of an ageing parent; some left due to chronic illness. But probably the most common cause for disrobing was the strong pull of the sensual world. Many monks found that celibacy could be managed without any great stress, and more than a few found it easy; but when lust did take hold in a monk’s mind, it could be of an ogreish intensity. To those who were struggling with lustful feelings, Ajahn Jun remembered how direct Luang Por’s words could be:

“Luang Por would say, ‘Really think about it … [women] have got nine holes in their body just like you do, and every one of them is filled with a different kind of waste. There’s nothing beautiful or good or clean in any one of those holes. You sit there and you walk about daydreaming, imagining all kinds of pleasant things, but they’re not true. You’ll lose your freedom. You’ll be under a woman’s thumb. You’ll lead a life of frustrations and strife. You’re being seduced by sexual desire. Don’t believe it. Don’t disrobe just because lust tells you to. You won’t die if you don’t follow it. Believe me: lust has been deceiving you for countless lifetimes.’ ”

He also recalled how on alms-round, Luang Por would point out the sufferings of lay life to monks assailed by lust. The sound of a husband and wife shouting at each other, the sight of a tired-looking woman trying desperately to console a screaming child, or of a woman – prematurely aged by a hard life – trudging off to the fields: any such figure might be indicated with the words, ‘Is that really what you want?’

When monks first ordained, they could be so inspired that the very idea of someday disrobing seemed unthinkable. But, as time went on, their initial faith-driven perceptions, so apparently rock solid, could waver. If monks lacked the resources of patience and endurance needed to bear with the difficult periods when their inspiration ran dry, it was staying in robes that might suddenly come to seem unthinkable.

When a monk started to doubt his capacity to realize the Dhamma in his present lifetime, he could come to feel caught between two stools: the pleasures of the lay life being behind him and yet no clear path to the profound happiness of inner liberation visible before him. The thought of reaching the end of his life in that unresolved state could come to seem intolerable. It was the classic monastic version of the male midlife crisis. Some monks faced no particular moment of truth, but it was as if their sense of vocation just gradually faded like a flashlight battery, until there was no light left to see their way by, at which point they left.

Disrobing was seen by almost all as an admission of defeat.[8] To some, return to the world after putting their best effort into the monk’s life, seemed like accepting an honourable discharge from the army after an ultimately unsuccessful campaign. Most were humble. They would say that they had not amassed enough good kamma to enable them to stay in the Sangha any longer; their store of merit had allowed them only this much time in the robes. Now they wanted to return to a less intense level of commitment to the Buddha Sāsana: to lead a good life as a householder, support the Sangha and work to accumulate more good kamma.

### ‘Like Rain About to Fall …’

Ordinations and disrobings of junior monks are such a normal part of monastic life in Thailand, even in forest monasteries, that they occasion little remark; however, when a senior monk decides to leave the Sangha, considerable shock waves pass through the monastery, particularly amongst monks who are themselves caught in a web of doubt. So it was when the abbot of one of the branch monasteries (and one of Luang Por’s senior disciples to boot) arrived one day – strained, pale-faced – with the unenviable task of announcing that he had fallen in love with a lay supporter and wanted to disrobe and get married.

To Luang Por, a monk intending to abandon monastic training because of romantic infatuation was about to take a foolish step backwards and downwards. He considered lust as merely the immature expression of a noble emotion, something that should be ‘flipped over’ into mettā, loving-kindness.

You’ve got to flip this personal love of yours over into a general love, a love for all sentient beings, like the love of a mother or father for their child … You have to wash the sensuality out of your affection, like someone wanting to eat wild yams has to soak their heads first to wash out the poison. Worldly love is the same: you have to reflect on it, look at it until you see the suffering bound up in it and then gradually wash away the germ of intoxication. That leaves you with a pure love, like that of a teacher for his disciples … If you can’t wash the sensuality out of love, then it will still be there – still bossing you around – when you’re an old man.

Sexual desire was to be clearly understood – not repressed, but investigated. Luang Por suggested, as teachers have generally done in this situation, a temporary change of surroundings. He made an appeal to the monk’s pride:

Reflect on the suffering of sexual desire until you can let it go. If you can’t solve the problem with wisdom, or at least reduce its strength, then leave your monastery for a while. After you’ve re-established your practice, then return. When you fall down, you have to know how to pick yourself up again. You have to know how to struggle and crawl. When you’ve been knocked over, don’t just lie there helplessly and give up.

But once the idea of disrobing has become real to a monk, it gains an almost irresistible momentum. A sense of inevitability – which, following an excruciating period of indecision, often feels like a blessed relief – undermines the monk’s willingness to question his decision. It was this sense, that there was no longer a way back, that Luang Por sought to counter:

According to the old saying, there are five unstoppable things: rain about to fall, excrement about to leave the body, a person about to die, a child about to be born, and a monk about to disrobe. The first four are true, I’m sure, but not the last one. I’m confident that a monk can be stopped from disrobing. I myself once considered disrobing, and I changed my mind.

In trying to puncture the unrealistic visions of the future that the monk had created, Luang Por could paint a vivid picture. Whereas the monk’s life was untrammelled, he said, with the opportunity to go walking carefree through the forests and mountains on tudong, the householder’s life was cramped and constricted:

Having a family imprisons you … You end up with the baby crying, your wife grumbling, your father-in-law scolding you, your mother-in-law hating you, hemmed in by pots and pans. Think about it.

He reminded the monk of the difficulties of making a way in the world, of how so many years of living by a high moral standard made surviving in a duplicitous world awkward and painful. He called to mind monks who had left and, once the novelty had worn off, bitterly regretted their decision to disrobe. He described the pleasures of sensuality as superficial and fleeting – like the taste of good food on the tongue – in no way comparable to the profound and lasting well-being that could be realized through Dhamma practice:

If you keep meditating until your mind becomes calm and lucid, and you see the Dhamma, then you will truly be at ease. Sometimes you can be so full of bliss that you don’t need to eat at all. And it’s a profound ease, not just a pleasant sensation on the surface of your tongue.

The fundamental message Luang Por sought to convey was that lust and longing were not things outside the monastic training pulling the monk inexorably away from it. On the contrary, dealing with such emotional crises was an integral part of the training. Looking at the suffering, letting go of the desires that fed it, freeing oneself from the suffering through the practice of the Eightfold Path – this was the very heart of monastic life.

Whatever kind of suffering arises, then contemplate it. Look at it until you see it clearly. Sometimes, when it’s not clear, you have to fast and go without sleep and fight with it, be willing to die. Ven. Ajahn Tongrat once considered disrobing. He wouldn’t listen to anybody who tried to dissuade him, his mind was made up. But then one day he asked for an axe from the villagers and started chopping logs. He chopped for three days and three nights until he was exhausted and his hands were covered in blisters. Then he shouted out loud, ‘Now do you know who’s master?’ He was talking to his defilements.

Great masters have been through this. One of Luang Pu Mun’s disciples fell in love with a woman who regularly put food in his bowl on alms-round. His friends took him off to meditate and shut him up in the Uposatha Hall. He fasted for five or six days, and then his mind flipped upright. He saw the unattractiveness of the body, his mind became calm and lucid, he saw the Dhamma – and he survived.

Sexual desire is your weak point, and you have to remedy it with meditation on the unattractive parts of the body. Keep testing your strength until you know how much you can take. Don’t let the defilements keep punching you on your weak spot until they knock you out. Develop more skill in meditation. If the defilements come high, then duck underneath them. If you’re not strong enough to take them on, then when they come at you low, jump over them and run away for a while.

The decision to disrobe may not be completely irrevocable. Nevertheless, once a monk has made up his mind to disrobe, even the rhetorical skills and charisma of a master like Luang Por Chah rarely succeed in changing his mind. He feels a momentum. It’s as if he’s travelling downhill without brakes and is being encouraged to turn around and climb back up the mountain. In this particular case, after a short period of reflection undertaken out of deference to his teacher, the monk disrobed. Little was heard of him after that. Perhaps he lived happily ever after; perhaps he did not.

### Samaṇa

‘Samaṇas. Samaṇas.’ – that is how people perceive you. And when asked, ‘What are you?’ you claim that, ‘We are samaṇas.’ So with this being your designation and this your claim [you should think]: ‘We will practice the way of the samaṇa with integrity so that our designations will be true and our claims accurate; so that the services of those whose robes, alms-food, lodging and medicinal requisites we use will bring them great fruit and benefit, and so that our Going Forth will not be barren, but fruitful and fertile.’ Thus, monks, should you train yourselves.

– MN 40

The word ‘samaṇa’, usually translated as ‘recluse’ or ‘contemplative’, is generally taken to be derived from a word meaning ‘ascetic striving’. Luang Por preferred to render it as ‘one whose mind is at peace’. At the time of the Buddha, it was the name given to members of the various religious sects who had abandoned their caste identity and the life of the householder. In the Buddhist tradition, ‘samaṇa’ has been used as a synonym for both ‘monk’ and ‘true monk’. In the sutta passage above, the Buddha refers to its first meaning as a conventional designation and urges monks to constantly bear in mind their responsibilities to act in conformity with it. As ‘true monk’, the term ‘samaṇa’ encompasses all the qualities that monks should aspire to.

Luang Por encouraged monks to dwell upon and consciously cultivate the perception of themselves as monks or samaṇas, by constantly reminding themselves of their role and responsibilities and the goals of their monastic life. By doing so, he wanted them to cultivate a new identity (as a skilful means, not an ultimate truth) that would distance them from their former identities in the world and serve to strengthen the mental factors of wise shame and fear of consequences. This perception was to give them a wholesome sense of pride in their lineage and of being upholders of an ancient tradition. It was meant to inspire them with the guiding ideals of Sangha life.

A samaṇa’s life was characterized by the sincere effort to study and practice the threefold training of sīla, samādhi and paññā, in order to realize liberation and to inspire others by their conduct.

Firstly, resolve to have victory over yourself. That’s the main thing. You don’t need victory over anything or anyone else. If you’re always thinking of defeating other people, you’re losing the battle of practice. True practice is based upon reaching the point where you know how to achieve a constant victory over yourself. Ultimately, if you achieve victory over yourself, then you achieve victory over all things. Establish this principle constantly in your mind.

In a memoir, Ajahn Khemadhammo summarized:

“And the purpose of our life we were never allowed to forget: we are monks, not for gain and fame, not for status and worldly advancement, but in order that we may have the best possible chance of facing our defilements – all those spoiling influences in our hearts and minds – seeing and understanding them and casting them out to achieve a secure and lasting peace, the real happiness of Nibbāna.”

In one discourse, Luang Por challenged the monks:

What do you want? Wealth and respect? Rank and honours? Material things? We’re monastics. The Buddha taught us not to aim at such things. If you’re intent on pleasure, on fun, on an easy life and good food, on material things, then it would be better if you hadn’t become a monk at all. It means you’re lying and deceiving the laypeople … If you want all that, then go out and make a living as a layperson. There’s no point in coming to live here in the forest, going without sleep and eating only once a day.

Reflect on this deeply. Ask yourself the question, ‘What did I come here for? What am I doing here?’ You’ve shaved off your hair, put on the ochre robe. What for? Go ahead, ask yourself. Do you think it’s just to eat and sleep and live a heedless life? If that’s what you want, you can do that in the world. Take the oxen and buffalo out to the fields, come back home, eat and sleep − anyone can do that. If you come and act in that neglectful, indulgent way in the monastery, then you’re not worthy of the name of monks and novices.

Life as a monk offered great opportunities for cultivation of the path. But without the willingness to overcome old habits, it was easy to founder.

If you accept the basic principles and try to follow them, you’ll have a practice. But if you don’t accept them and just follow your likes and dislikes, you’ll be heading for disaster. Even if you live as a monk for twenty or thirty years, you still won’t know the flavour of the Buddha’s teachings. You’ll be like the fisherman who goes every day to fish in a pond without any fish in it. However diligent such a fisherman may be, he is always disappointed. Day after day, he casts his net and brings in nothing.

Recollection of the great masters could bring the mind back onto the right track when it wandered. Their attainments could be emulated through the power of wise effort.

Read the biographies of the great teachers. They’re singular people, aren’t they? They’re different. Think carefully about that difference. Train your mind in the correct way. You don’t have to depend on anyone else; discover your own skilful means to train your mind.

If the more skilful means were unable to stem the flow of deluding thought, then a more direct approach was needed – whatever did the job. Once the immediate danger had been averted, a more nuanced approach could be returned to.

If the mind starts thinking of worldly things, then quickly subdue it. Stop it. Get up. Change your posture. Tell yourself not to think about such things – there are better things to think about. It’s essential that you don’t just mildly yield to those thoughts. Once they’ve gone from your mind, then you’ll feel better. Don’t imagine that you can take it easy and your practice will take care of itself. Everything depends on training.

## The Marvel of Instruction

### Modes of Teaching

The body of Luang Por Chah’s teachings is generally considered to consist of the material recorded on reel-to-reel tapes and audio cassettes and then transcribed and printed in books, originally in Thai and subsequently translated into many other languages. But for his monastic disciples, the formal discourses captured by those audio recordings and reproduced in books were only one part, and perhaps not the most important part, of what they received from him.

Luang Por’s most powerful teaching for those who lived with him was, arguably, not what he said or even what he did, but who he was, and who he was perceived to be. His disciples saw him as the living, visible proof that there was truly an end to suffering, and that it could be achieved through practice of the Noble Eightfold Path. Seeing him, sensing him nearby, gave them the strength of mind to endure the difficulties of the training. In the beginning, it was often faith in the teacher himself, rather than in specific, profound teachings he imparted, that kept young monks in the robes.

Charisma is not an inevitable fruit of liberation. Some fully enlightened beings prefer a life of obscurity and project a quiet and unobtrusive air that makes them almost invisible. Luang Por was not such a figure. He was, in all meanings of the word, an impressive monk: his presence impressed itself effortlessly upon those around him. One Western monk said of him, ‘If any human being deserves to be called ‘a force of nature’, it’s Luang Por.’

The Buddha referred to the teacher as the ‘kalyāṇamitta’ or good friend. He was not a guru to be worshipped but a wise and compassionate guide on the path. He inspired strong confidence through his impeccable practice of the Vinaya and the monastic observances. He practised what he preached and did not ask his disciples to do anything that he would not do himself. He taught monks to spend every spare moment on the walking meditation path, and he would often be seen pacing up and down on his own path. The sense of solidity and unwavering purpose in the way he lived his life transmitted itself to his disciples.

The feelings of faith, love and devotion, respect and reverence that Luang Por inspired in those around him provided the emotional context in which his oral teachings were received and played an important part in the effect they produced. Teaching ability is as little an inevitable outcome of liberation as charisma. Inarticulate unenlightened monks usually become inarticulate enlightened monks. Luang Por, however, had always been a fine and fluent speaker. As kalyāṇamitta to a large group of monks and lay supporters his ability to transmit the teachings in a clear and rousing manner, appropriate to his audience, became renowned.

Ajahn Jun, a fine Dhamma teacher in his own right, found the talks so gripping he could enthuse about them half a lifetime after his first exposure:

“Luang Por gave talks almost every day. If someone had misbehaved, then the talk might go on for hours. His voice was loud, resonant, very powerful; you felt how determined he was that his listeners should understand. It was as if he wanted his words to wear down his disciples’ defilements until they were as smooth as a drum-skin. His talks were on many different levels: he would talk in one way to the Sangha when there were no laypeople present, another way when there were, and another way if he was addressing the laypeople directly. He would tell us off but not angrily. He never ran out of words. The talks were incredibly forthright and bold. He wasn’t afraid of anyone. Listening to him talk you were never bored – you were enthralled. And what he said hit home so well that, even to this day, his words are still ringing in my ears.”

As monks walked out of the Dhamma Hall after one of Luang Por’s talks, it was rare not to hear voices exclaiming that parts of the talk were specifically aimed at them, how marvellous it was that Luang Por should have chosen to speak on the very subject that was currently obsessing them. Monks would speak of labouring for some time over a doubt and then how the talk addressed that problem directly and in detail, putting their mind to rest. Ajahn Anek said:

“His words pierced to your heart. Most people’s doubts about meditation would be answered during his formal talks; he would deal with exactly the problem that was frustrating you, no matter how subtle it might be. If you listened closely to every word he said, you’d find it exactly right for you. That was his genius. It was truly profound.”

In some cases – perhaps the majority of them – the belief monks held that Luang Por was talking to them personally may be put down to the flowing, unstructured nature of his discourses. The number of defilements is finite, and in a long talk it is unlikely that any one of the major ones will go unmentioned, at least in passing. Indeed, Luang Por sometimes referred to ‘casting his net’ with more general observations about mental defilements that hauled in all those who were affected by them. However, there were also occasions where monks were particularly moved by passages in talks that took an unexpected deviation from the flow of his discourse. Beyond dispute was the way in which the formal Dhamma talks set the tone in the monastery. In the days following a particularly inspiring talk, there would be a tangible buoyancy in the air; in the days after an admonitory exhortation, even the colours of the forest could seem subdued.

Luang Por would spend time every day – longer as he got older and less active – sitting on a wide wicker seat underneath his kuti, making himself available for anyone who wished to speak to him. During the day, most of Luang Por’s conversations were with lay visitors, but monks and novices acting as attendants would enjoy the opportunity to listen to him answer his guests’ questions and offer reflections. Monks with free time would often sit down in a corner and listen. Sometimes Luang Por would shoo them away, ‘No need to sit around here. Go away and meditate.’ At other times, he would permit them to stay. In the evenings after the group chanting and meditation had ended, a number of monks would gravitate to Luang Por’s kuti in order to listen and learn, and sometimes, just to sit quietly with their eyes closed in meditation.

On one occasion, a Western monk was sitting listening to Luang Por answering questions with short succinct answers, concise but profound, and after the guests had left he exclaimed, ‘Luang Por, that was just like Zen!’ And Luang Por replied:

No, it wasn’t. It was just like me.

Not all of Luang Por’s teachings have been preserved. Occasionally, he would speak privately with monks whose meditation practice had reached an advanced level. The advice given during those conversations has never been revealed. It is worth bearing in mind that the Dhamma talks that have been recorded and transcribed, for all their richness, are restricted to Luang Por’s public teachings.

Although Luang Por was always available to disciples struggling with doubts about practice, he did not necessarily answer the questions he received, or if he did, not in the way that they expected. He was not interested in spoon-feeding the Dhamma. Sometimes, sensing that no answer he might give would serve any useful purpose, that it would simply increase the questioner’s confusion or conceit, he would refuse to answer at all. This was not always to the questioner’s liking. Luang Por would shrug:

If they had even a glimmering of understanding, they wouldn’t ask such questions in the first place.

He continued:

The more you explain, the more doubts you’ll create in their minds because they haven’t practised to a point where they can understand. If they practise, then they’ll know for themselves and be free from doubts.

Inexperienced meditators were like small children who did not, as yet, understand the world around them:

When the child sees a chicken he asks, ‘Dad! Dad! What’s that?’ When he sees a duck it’s, ‘Dad! Dad! What’s that?’ Then he sees a pig and again it’s, ‘Dad! Dad! What’s that?’ Eventually, the father can’t be bothered to answer. There’s no end to the questions, because to the child, everything is new. In the end, the father just replies, ‘Mmm, Mmm.’ If he were to answer every single question, he’d die of exhaustion. The child isn’t tired at all; it never stops asking. Eventually, the problem disappears by itself as the child gets older and more experienced. In the same way, if you are devoted to reflection and persevere until you comprehend the way things are, then problems will gradually clear up by themselves.

Luang Por praised disciples who treated their problems as challenges to be overcome. He wanted monks to learn how to develop their own skilful means to deal with difficulties, rather than allowing themselves to become overly dependent on him. Most doubts about meditation practice were resolved through becoming aware of the nature of doubt itself, seeing it as a conditioned phenomenon and not identifying with it. This was one reason why he was not in favour of the daily interviews popular in meditation centres: they took too much responsibility away from the meditator and deprived them of opportunities to grow in wisdom. The Thai term for such interviews between meditation teacher and student is ‘sop arom’, literally ‘mood-inspection’, and Luang Por once joked:

Even dogs know their own moods; when they feel hungry, they howl.

His advice was to keep putting as much effort as possible into formal meditation:

In the body of practices that make up monastic training, sitting and walking meditation constitute the backbone … Those whose practice is going to be strong are the ones who don’t neglect their walking meditation, who don’t neglect their sitting meditation, who don’t let slip their sense-restraint.

Each monk had a walking meditation path, some twenty to thirty paces long by the side of his kuti. As soon as the daily meal and clean-up was completed, the monks were encouraged to return immediately to their huts, put their robes out on a line to air, and begin to practise walking meditation. For those who did that regularly:

Their walking path is worn into a furrow. I’ve seen it myself many times. Monks like that don’t feel jaded or stale in their meditation. They have energy; they have real power. If you all give that kind of attention to your practice, it will go well.

The training that Luang Por provided his monks was a well-rounded one. Monks learned how to meditate and were encouraged to meditate a lot. But they also learned the Vinaya in great detail. They also learned how to give the precepts to the laypeople, how to chant blessings and how to conduct funeral rites. They learned how to build and take care of the monastery, and how to teach. When the time was ripe to begin their own monastic community, they had been furnished with all the basic tools that they would need to survive and flourish.

Luang Por would sometimes speak about the qualities of a good teacher: he must understand the way his disciples’ minds work, just as a carpenter must understand the particular qualities of each kind of wood. Or he must be like doctors who know their patients, the cause of their illness and the appropriate medicine to cure their condition. Or, he would say, it’s like fishing. If the fisherman casts his net at random over the whole of the river, he won’t get any fish. He must wait until a fish breaks the surface of the water and then cast his net at exactly that spot. To teach, you have to look to see how much the student can take, he said, look at what’s just right for them, because it’s the ‘just-rightness’ that is the Dhamma.

Luang Por’s ability to pitch his teachings on the just-right level was so unerring that it convinced many monks, after private conversation with him, that he had been reading their minds. This may well have been true, but in most cases, the effectiveness of his words may be as easily attributed to acute observation based upon long experience. Ajahn Suriyon gave an example:

“The Western disciples liked to see Luang Por laugh and smile and give them opportunities to ask questions. If he didn’t do that and seemed indifferent towards them, they’d find it oppressive. So Luang Por would give them lots of attention, frequently asking them how they were, how their practice was going and so on.”

The Thai monks didn’t expect the same kind of personal attention.

“If he saw that Thai monks understood his teaching well enough, he didn’t say much to them, but he’d find appropriate skilful means to teach monks who were dull or unintelligent. With monks of an angry or negative disposition, he would speak humorously or give examples that emphasized kindness and gratitude. Once they felt relaxed, the minds of these monks would become receptive to what he was teaching and experience some joy and uplift in the Dhamma. As a result, they would feel inspired and their practice would progress.”

Ajahn Anek recalled another of the similes Luang Por used to describe the qualities of a teacher:

“He said, ‘How could I be a teacher if I didn’t understand the way my disciples’ minds work? It’s like the owner of a banana plantation. If he doesn’t know all about bananas, their trunks, their leaves, their fruit, then how could he run a plantation? It’s all just a matter of body and mind. It doesn’t matter whether it’s young monks, old monks, monastics or laypeople. If their minds have fallen under the power of defilement, then there’s no difference between them.’ ”

Given Luang Por’s profound understanding of the relationship between the body and mind, it was not difficult for him to recognize his disciples’ dispositions. He would observe them walking, standing, sitting, lying down, changing posture, eating, bowing, working; he would notice their alertness and attention to detail when performing duties for him. Every action told him a story.

The Buddha once said that just as integrity is to be known through long acquaintance and fortitude through adversity, wisdom is to be measured by speech. Luang Por observed how monks conducted themselves and how they expressed themselves. Meanwhile, Ajahn Liem observed Luang Por:

“Mostly he would gauge monks’ knowledge from how they spoke. He would observe their reflections on Dhamma and the wisdom that was revealed in their speech. At the end of the Rains Retreat, he would have all the monks and novices take turns to ascend the Dhamma seat and talk about their experiences during the retreat to the laypeople. This was one method he used to see how people’s practice was going. Did they possess the qualities of a Dhamma speaker? You weren’t to have any desire to give a talk, because then Luang Por considered that you were just following craving. He wanted to see who had a sense of responsibility. He wanted us to train in that way to see if we had any particular abilities. If we hadn’t had to do that, we would never have known.”

Luang Por would say that once you can ground your mind in the present moment, everything is ready to teach you. Insights into the three characteristics arise naturally in the mind. Often, he would share his own reflections with those around him. His disciples would treasure these teachings and observations not so much because they were especially profound – although sometimes they were – but rather it was because they were grounded in a particular event in which the listener participated, and so took on an immediacy, an intimacy and context that was not easily forgotten. Ajahn Pasanno, for example, recounted how one morning while returning from alms-round, a pair of lizards copulating in a roadside tree fell off their branch and landed right in front of Luang Por. Still stuck together, they lay on the ground looking stunned from the fall. Luang Por pointed at them chuckling:

Do you see that? They were enjoying themselves so much up there they became heedless. Now they’ve fallen down and hit the ground, it hurts.

Luang Por created an environment in which every element of monastic life provided challenges and learning opportunities for his disciples. His formal discourses provided his disciples with the reflective tools to profit from them. Sometimes there could be an almost sly quality to Luang Por’s skilful means. He introduced small tests of mindfulness and wisdom for his disciples that were like the concealed traps of a hunter in the forest.

One monk remembered an almost comical example. In the midst of a relaxed and informal meeting under Luang Por’s kuti – a number of conversations taking place at the same time – Luang Por must have sensed that things were becoming a little too exuberant and monks were losing their mindfulness in the pleasure of conversation. Without warning, he stopped speaking and began to sit in silence with eyes downcast. Monastic etiquette deems it impolite to carry on a conversation in front of one’s teacher. The disciple takes his cue from the master: if the teacher speaks informally, so can he; if the teacher stops speaking, then so does the disciple. Immediately. But it is hard not to get caught up in a conversation, and easy to lose awareness of a situation. The monks carried on talking for a while. One by one, look by look, and then by a sudden avalanche of urgent nudges, they stopped and tried to compose themselves. As if in a theatrical skit, there remained a single monk relating some humorous anecdote and then, in one awful moment, realizing that the atmosphere had completely changed. Everyone around him was sitting impassively with eyes downcast. There was no need for Luang Por to utter any words of admonition.

In a similar vein, a monk recalled how, while walking to a local village on alms-round, Luang Por engaged him in conversation. In such a situation, etiquette demanded that he walk slightly behind Luang Por and to one side, with the remaining monks expected to walk some few steps behind. All of a sudden, Luang Por stopped still. The monks whose minds had wandered collided with the monk in front of them, and the line came to a shuddering halt. Luang Por, looking very innocent, said nothing. At the next Dhamma talk, he spoke about the importance of mindfulness and alertness in every posture, for example, on alms-round.

Sense-restraint, circumspection, mindfulness and alertness, sensitivity to time and place – these were basic monastic virtues that Luang Por never tired of impressing on the minds of his disciples. He would say that, ‘someone who loses their mindfulness is no different from a madman.’ And he would quote the Buddha’s words:

Heedfulness is the path to the deathless; heedlessness, the path to death.

– Dhp 21

### Worldly winds

A monastery does not provide an escape from the vicissitudes of life. It does provide a framework in which a wise attitude towards them may be cultivated. The Buddha referred to four pairs of transient conditions inherent in the human realm that needed to be clearly understood.

The Buddha taught that the eight worldly dhammas of gain and loss, status and obscurity, praise and blame, pleasure and pain are inescapable features of human life. Even liberated beings experience these conditions, but knowing them for what they are – impermanent, unreliable events – they remain unfazed by them.

Luang Por frequently reminded his disciples to maintain a contemplation of the nature of the eight worldly dhammas, and not to get pulled about by them. He said that only fools believed that they could enjoy the desirable worldly dhammas without encountering their undesirable counterparts – they were inseparable. His teachings on the eight conditions were often very practical. They commonly consisted of confronting monks with the consequences of attachment by depriving them of one of the four desirable wordly dhammas or provoking one of the undesirable ones. Luang Por might, for example, test a monk by praising him on a number of occasions and then, with no forewarning, roundly criticize him. The monk was encouraged to observe that the degree to which he was upset by the criticism was an indication of the degree to which he had identified with and taken pride in the praise.

On other occasions, Luang Por might give a monk a great deal of attention for a certain period of time and then completely ignore him for a while. The monk would be left feeling hurt, and forced to acknowledge that the pain he experienced was chiefly determined by the extent to which he had allowed himself to feel flattered with the attention and had indulged in a sense of being special or entitled.

### Transmitting the theory

‘Lukewarm’ would probably best sum up the attitude of the forest monasteries of Isan to the academic study of Buddhadhamma. With their focus on the practice and realization of the truth of the teachings, the abbots of these monasteries have considered in-depth study of them to be a two-edged sword. While they recognize that a knowledge of key teachings provides the necessary theoretical basis for practice, they have been suspicious of the seductive nature of study. Gaining more and more intellectual knowledge about the path can easily come to seem more important than actually walking it. Over the years, Luang Por gave many analogies for such an error: he said it was a like a person who pores over a map but does not make the journey, or one who reads the label on the medicine bottle but does not take the medicine.

Luang Por and his contemporaries expressed concern at how book learning tended to stimulate the speculative, restless traits of their disciples’ minds that other aspects of the training were designed to restrain. Most importantly perhaps, they were concerned by the way in which concepts absorbed from the texts created expectations in the minds of their disciples that hindered, rather than helped, their meditation. One of Luang Por’s most well-known injunctions to newcomers was, ‘Don’t read books. Read your mind!’

You may know how to write the word ‘greed’, but when greed arises in your mind, it doesn’t look like the word. Anger is the same: you may have it down on the blackboard as an arrangement of letters, but when anger arises in your mind, you don’t have time to read anything – it’s already too late. This is very important, extremely important. Your knowledge is correct – you’ve spelt the word correctly – but now you have to bring it inwards. If you don’t do that, then you won’t know the truth.

On reaching a state of meditative calm, he said, the tendency of the scholar is to instinctively reach for his knowledge of the texts to interpret what he is experiencing. That movement of the mind to name or classify the experience, causes the experience to dissolve.

If a student of the texts grasps on tightly to his knowledge and upon entering peaceful states likes to keep noting, ‘What’s this? Is it the first absorption yet?’, then his mind will simply make a complete retreat from the calm and he’ll get nothing from it. Why is that? Because he wants something. The moment there’s craving to realize something, the mind withdraws from the calm. That’s why you’ve got to throw away all your thoughts and doubts, and take only your body, speech and mind into the practice. Look inwardly at states of mind, but don’t drag your scriptures in there with you – it’s not the place for them. If you insist on doing so, then everything will go down the drain, because nothing in the books is the same as it is in experience. It’s precisely because of this attachment that people who study a lot, who have a lot of knowledge, tend to be unsuccessful in meditation.

It was not that the forest monks rejected study altogether. They were exceptionally thorough in their studies of the Vinaya, particularly of the Pubbasikkhā commentary. Indeed, the importance they gave this text is one of the defining characteristics of the whole tradition. Many monks had, moreover, also completed the Thai Sangha’s national three-tier Dhamma-Vinaya curriculum (Nak Tam) before they became disciples of Luang Pu Mun (Luang Por himself falls into this category) and so, began their practice in the forest with a solid theoretical foundation.

Nevertheless, the forest Sangha’s apparently dismissive attitude to study tended to raise the hackles of scholar monks, many of whom saw the forest monks as ignorant mavericks, following their own opinions rather than the words of the Buddha. In fact, a low-level mistrust between meditators and scholars has been a feature of Sangha life since the time of the Buddha. In one sutta, Ven. Mahā Cunda sensibly encourages the forest monks and scholars to appreciate each other’s good qualities rather than criticize their shortcomings[9]. In the case of Wat Pah Pong, the relationship with the scholarly community took a significant turn for the better in 1967, when a locally prominent scholar, Ajahn Maha Amorn, joined the Sangha and was enthusiastic in his praise of Luang Por.

In one respect, Luang Por’s emphasis on oral transmission of the teaching within the context of a teacher-student relationship, was a return to the ways of early Buddhism. If there was a weakness to his impromptu style, it was that his Dhamma talks, being unsystematic by definition, did not cover the whole breadth of Buddhadhamma and were difficult to remember. Their strength lay in his grounding the theory of Dhamma (pariyatti) firmly within the lives of his disciples and their practice (paṭipatti) for liberation (pativedha). He selected the teachings that he felt were of most benefit given the time and place and audience.

But in the first year at Wat Pah Pong, with a small community of just seven monks, Luang Por – ever the experimenter – was as yet undecided on the value of the Nak Tam curriculum. He decided to teach it himself in order to determine the advantages and disadvantages. It was the first time that he’d taken on such a role since his last frustrating Rains Retreat in Bahn Kor, after which he had embarked upon the life of the tudong monk.

He taught the course over a period of forty eight-hour days. In the cold season, the monks took the exams and all passed. But it was as he had feared: the monks found it hard to integrate the sense-restraint and single-mindedness required to develop their meditation practice with the memorization and discussion that are essential to study. ‘They forgot themselves’, he said simply. He found monks becoming neglectful of their meditation. The amount of socializing increased, together with its accompanying worldliness, mental agitation and formation of cliques. The serene atmosphere of the monastery was significantly diminished. He was, however, at pains to point out that the problem did not lie in study itself:

In fact, all the teachings point out the way for us to practise. But having begun to study, if you get caught up in chatting and frivolity and dispense with your walking meditation, then you’ll start wanting to disrobe.

‘Actually’, he said, when performed mindfully, ‘reading and memorizing are forms of meditation.’ It’s not that study itself is at fault, but the lack of application and discernment on the part of the students.

Following his unsatisfactory experiences in this first year, Luang Por suspended the teaching of Nak Tam. In later years, however, when the number of monks had increased and Luang Por became concerned by how little knowledge they had of the basic teachings, he relented, delegating one of his senior disciples to provide the instruction. But familiar problems started to appear in the Sangha, outweighing the gains. Eventually, Luang Por compromised by allowing monks interested in pursuing their studies to do so alone in their spare time. The monastery supplied the necessary textbooks and arranged for monks’ official registration with the national examination board, but everything else was left to self-study. After the exams were over, Luang Por would tell the monks to put their books away and now concentrate on reading their minds. Study of the texts (pariyatti) was useful, he said, but should not become an end in itself. There was no true conclusion to such study. Without practicing the teachings, monks ran the risk of being like cowherds who’d never drunk milk. There was another kind of study, an internal pariyatti.

Are you just going to keep on studying endlessly without a fixed goal, or do you have an end in mind? Study is good, but it’s an external pariyatti. The internal pariyatti requires you to study these eyes, these ears, this nose, this tongue, this body, this mind. It’s the true pariyatti … What happens when the eye contacts a form, the ears hear a sound, the nose smells an odour, the tongue tastes a flavour, the body contacts a tangible object, or a mental phenomenon arises in the mind? How does it feel? Is there still greed? Is there still aversion? Are you deluded by forms, sounds, odours, these ears, this nose, this tongue, this body, this mind? That is the internal pariyatti, and it has an end. You can graduate.

### Working is Dhamma practice

Outside of the annual Rains Retreat period, various work projects were undertaken, most of which involved the building or repair of Sangha dwellings. Lack of funds determined that much of this work was performed by Sangha members, but even on occasions when the work could have been hired out, it was rare for Luang Por to give permission for that to be done.

Work projects provided opportunities for strengthening the cohesion and harmony of the community through concerted effort on tasks that, unlike meditation, had tangible, measurable results. Working for the common good provided a jolt for monks overly concerned with their own welfare, and increased the affection and sense of belonging that Sangha members felt for the monastery. Work projects were means by which Luang Por’s disciples were encouraged to further develop those qualities of consistent effort and patient endurance that Luang Por believed to be vital to progress in meditation. Certainly, manual labour for many hours a day in high temperatures and stifling humidity, sustained by one simple meal a day, was not for the faint-hearted.

Work projects gave monks the opportunity to practise mindfulness in more fluid situations, and afforded Luang Por the opportunity to monitor how well the monks could maintain their practice outside of the Dhamma Hall. Most of the monks were used to hard physical labour in the rice fields. In later years, when the community had grown much larger, work projects gave a means by which young monks and novices could channel any surplus out-going exuberance into useful activities.

On certain projects, Luang Por would keep the monks working until late into the night, surrounded by hurricane lamps that were besieged by insects. Some monks worried that their meditation practice was suffering. Luang Por replied:

This is practice. As you work, look at your mind. How does it feel when I ask you to perform this kind of task? Practice doesn’t mean evading things all the time; you have to come out and face up to the defilements so that you know what they’re like … Once you’ve trained, then you have to climb up into the ring … In the future, you will see the fruits. But for the time being, don’t blame or praise, just do the work.

Every now and again, a disgruntled monk might leave, but the vast majority trusted in Luang Por’s judgement. Ajahn Liem was one of those who thrived during this kind of practice.

“During work projects, Luang Por emphasized giving up our own comfort and desires for the benefit of others. This kind of sacrifice is the dāna, the giving of monks. It arises in a generous heart that considers the welfare of the community.

“In fact, there’s plenty of time, but when we hurry, craving makes us feel that we’re short of time … At Wat Pah Pong we don’t work with craving; we work in the spirit of self-sacrifice … We show how making sacrifices for the group is a beneficial Dhamma practice.”

The most legendary of the Wat Pah Pong Sangha work projects was the four-month long construction of a road up a steep, thickly forested hill to Wat Tam Saeng Pet, a branch monastery some eighty kilometres to the north of Wat Pah Pong. Ajahn Anek was one participant.

“The head of the Highways Department said that if Luang Por had really decided to go ahead with the project, he would send people to help. But after two or three days, the men from the Highways Department had had enough – they couldn’t endure the mamuy[10]. They said this level of work needs a proper budget; you need explosives and tractors; it can’t be done with this number of people. Luang Por sat there and said nothing. The day after the Highways people left, we made our own survey. Once we’d decided on where the road should go, we got down to work.

“There was hardly any time for rest. We would start work at three o’clock in the afternoon and finish at three in the morning. We got through one pair of flip-flops after another. The work mainly consisted of breaking up rocks and carrying them to where they were to be laid. After a time, the Highways Department saw that we weren’t going to give up, and every now and again they would bring up some explosives for us, and the villagers helped to set the charges.

“Luang Por would start teaching laypeople after the meal and he’d sit there right through until the afternoon without a break. We’d all have a rest during the middle of the day and afterwards when we came out, he’d still be sitting there talking with the laypeople. At three, he would start work and do the whole shift until three the next morning. Nobody could keep up with him. When he wasn’t supervising, he was raking the rubble. It was strange: we were all younger than Luang Por, but we had to admit that we couldn’t keep up with him. He would never be the one who suggested taking a break. At three in the morning we’d rest for a short time, and then at dawn, it was time to leave on alms-round. Everyone was exhausted, but he kept us going until the job was finished.

“It was really tough. We put our lives on the line. At one point, I sustained a haemorrhage and internal bruising: I felt a tightness in my chest, I couldn’t breathe properly. I think that was the start of my heart complaint.

“Everything had to be done well – well and quickly. If anyone started to make jokes or act playfully, Luang Por wouldn’t say anything, but he’d immediately walk away. The next day there would be a Dhamma talk. He’d say, ‘Act like a monk. Act like a Dhamma practitioner.’ Whatever he did, he did with total sincerity. And however tired or weary he felt, I never once heard him complain.”

In the mid-1970s, a new Uposatha Hall was constructed on a raised piece of land in the centre of the monastery, behind the Dhamma Hall and adjacent to Luang Por’s kuti. As usual, most of the labouring work was done by the Sangha. One day, as the monks and novices carried earth up onto the mound on which the building was to be erected, and Luang Por stood at a distance overseeing the work, a group of teenaged boys approached him. They followed none of the prescribed etiquette for such a situation. The boys’ leader, showing off to his friends, started to ask cheeky questions, culminating with, ‘Why don’t you tell the monks to meditate? Why do you make them work so much?’ A deadpan Luang Por replied:

If they sit too much they get constipated.

He lifted up his walking stick and poked it into the gang leader’s chest saying:

It’s not only a matter of sitting or walking meditation. Meditation has to be balanced by working for the benefit of others and by the effort at every moment to maintain Right View and understanding. Go home and read about it. You’re still wet behind the ears. If you don’t know anything about Dhamma practice, keep your mouth shut about it; otherwise, you’ll just make a fool of yourself.

### Toraman

One of the distinctive features of the training developed by Luang Por at Wat Pah Pong were practices aimed at thwarting the monks’ desires in order to encourage them to look directly at the ways in which craving produced suffering, and how letting go of it led to peace. The Thai word for this kind of training is ‘toraman’[11].

Quoting the Four Noble Truths, Luang Por would insist that suffering ceases not through turning our back on it, but by fully comprehending its nature:

If you don’t want to suffer, then you won’t see suffering. If you don’t see suffering, then you won’t fully comprehend it. And if you don’t fully comprehend suffering, you won’t be able to remove it from your mind.

The reason we don’t free ourselves from suffering is, precisely, because we are always trying to get away from it. If you want to put out a fire, you have to pour water on the flames. Running away from suffering simply makes things worse.

You can climb on a plane, but the suffering will go with you. You can dive down into the ocean, but your suffering will dive down with you … You may think that you’re escaping it, but you’re deluding yourself, because it’s right there in your mind.

You must constantly reflect on Dhamma to firmly establish it in your mind. Dare to practice. Living with friends or with a large group should be the same as living alone. Be fearless. If anybody else wants to be lazy, then that’s their business. Listen to the teachings. Don’t argue with the teacher, don’t be stubborn. Do what the teacher tells you. Don’t be afraid of practice. You will work it out by doing it. Of that, there’s no doubt.

The training involved Luang Por requiring his disciples to do things that they didn’t want to do, and not do things that they wanted to do. He emphasized that going against the grain was not to be seen as the goal itself, or as a practice that would inevitably lead to some form of purification. The rationale for the training was that it offered the opportunity to observe the way in which craving and attachment are often invisible if followed, and give rise to tension and frustration if opposed. Bearing with the discomfort mindfully, and looking closely at it, reveals its impermanent, suffering and not-self nature.

The practice took many forms, often quite mundane. On more strenuous work days, for example, a kettle of sweet drinks might arrive from the kitchen. On a cold winter day, the drink would be hot and, occasionally, Luang Por would allow the kettle to be placed under a tree in full sight of the monks without acknowledging it. Monks could not help but observe that, although up to that point they hadn’t been feeling particularly tired or thirsty, now suddenly they could think of nothing other than enjoying a hot drink. If the monks worried about the drink getting cold before they got to drink it, they would immediately begin to suffer. As long as they kept their ears open for the invitation from Luang Por to stop work, the time would drag intolerably, and they would suffer. The moment they gave up, and put their minds on the work thinking, ‘If there’s a drink, there’s a drink; if there’s no drink, that’s all right too’, then the suffering would cease.

Toraman is a teaching strategy that demands that the students have great confidence in the teacher. If they harbour the slightest doubt about his wisdom or compassion, they will find it hard to follow this path consistently. The fortitude needed to bear with the unpleasant comes from believing in the ultimate benefit of doing so. Luang Por was able to command that faith without difficulty.

Luang Por would tell the monks that when they were put in uncomfortable situations and began to feel oppressed, it was important to recognize that it was the defilements, not they themselves, that were being opposed. Only if they refused to assume ownership of the unpleasant sensations would they benefit from the practice. At mealtimes, he would say that the defilements want the food hot and fast; Dhamma wants the food cold and slow. When you don’t get the food you want, how you want it, when you want it – how does it feel?

On weekend mornings, lay supporters from Warin and Ubon would arrive with food to offer for the Sangha’s daily meal. The food tended to be richer than the usual daily fare, and it was an open secret that many monks looked forward to the weekend with pleasure. On days when the food was plentiful, Luang Por liked to sit talking to the donors after the food had been distributed, while his disciples sat – bowls full of food in front of them – struggling with feelings of restlessness, greed and hunger. Finally, after a period of time that to some of the monks had seemed excruciatingly long, but had, in fact, rarely lasted more than five or ten minutes, Luang Por would raise his hands and begin the blessing chant ‘Yathā varivahā purā …’, signalling the beginning of the meal. On some days, there would be an extra twist of the knife. It was Luang Por’s custom to clear his throat before leading the blessing. This cough became an ardently awaited sound. Knowing this, Luang Por would occasionally cough in his usual way, pause for a moment, and then continue talking.

One fabled hot season toraman practice involved late morning meditation sessions in which the Sangha would dress in their full set of robes and sit in a room whose door and windows were closed in order to produce an almost overpowering heat and stuffiness. Before long, the monks would be soaked in sweat. Luang Por, sitting in their midst, would encourage them:

Come on! You’ve spent nine months in your mother’s womb. This bears no comparison.

In the cold season, the practice was reversed. Luang Por would lead the monks in night-time meditation sessions wearing only their thin cotton angsas and lower robe, while the windows were opened to receive the bitter north wind that cut its way through the monastery at that time of the year. At least, monks comforted themselves, it kept them free of drowsiness.

Luang Por’s Dhamma talks are renowned for their capacity to fulfill the Buddha’s injunction to instruct, inspire, encourage and exhilarate their listeners[12]. But he did not always intend them to be so uplifting. Sometimes they played a different role in the training. Quite often, Luang Por spoke at great (rambling and repetitive) length simply in order that his audience would learn how to deal with the discomfort of sitting on a concrete floor for a long but indeterminate time. During the Rains Retreat of 1980, when his health was already in decline, he gave a seven-hour discourse. At one point during the talk, he looked around to see a number of the monks in front of him starting to squirm, and said, ‘Are you suffering? Can you find a place in your mind where you don’t suffer?’

One particular challenge these long talks posed was their uncertain duration. Monks could not tell themselves to grit their teeth for a certain length of time – Luang Por might stop after two or three hours or he might also carry on until the 3.00 a.m. wake-up bell. It was a memorable lesson in how the perception of time conditioned the ability to bear with the unpleasant; how letting go wasn’t an ideal to work towards in the future, but an immediate necessity.

Physically, it was especially hard for the Western monks, as monastic etiquette prohibits listeners of a Dhamma talk from sitting in the cross-legged position. The only permissible posture on such an occasion is papiap, the ‘polite’ or ‘side-saddle’ posture. While the Thai monks had been sitting in this posture all their lives, it was, to the Westerners, an awkward and unbalanced way to sit, and certainly not a posture that they would have freely chosen for a seven-hour session. But during the course of such long talks, the advantage the Thais possessed through familiarity with the posture would fall away. They would join the Westerners in being able to see the arising and passing away of a whole spectrum of emotions: interest, inspiration, indifference, boredom, drowsiness, restlessness, irritation, resentment, and even – occasionally – acceptance and joy.

The policy of frustrating desire covered every area of monastic life. If Luang Por knew someone wanted to go somewhere very badly, then he wouldn’t let him go. If he badly wanted to stay, he might well be sent away. Showing greed for requisites was sure to lead to grief.

A toraman regime is not without weaknesses; it is limited by its inherent elitism. It provides the best results in a small and highly motivated community. With a larger, more varied group, the stresses and strains experienced by the less motivated members can adversely affect the whole, creating a grim atmosphere in the monastery. Young monks can push themselves too hard, or become competitive. In addition, a teacher known to train his students in this way may be so intimidating to outsiders as to seriously reduce the number of people who are willing to take up the training in the first place.

Ideally, the trainer in toraman demonstrates that he himself is able and willing to do everything he demands of his students. This was very much the case with Luang Por, who made a point of leading from the front and of not only sharing in the hardships of his students, but exceeding them. However, as Luang Por got older and his health declined, he relaxed a number of these practices. It is debatable as to what extent this change was influenced by the waning of his own physical powers, and to what extent it was a response to a larger Sangha that lacked the intensity of the earlier years. Whatever the case, the underlying principle remained constant:

Practice means going against the stream – against the stream of our mental activity, against the stream of defilements. Countering a stream is always difficult. It’s difficult to row a boat against the current, and because of the flow of our defilements, it’s difficult to do good. We don’t want to go against the stream, we don’t want difficulties, we don’t want to have to endure. Mostly, we just want to go with the flow of our moods, like water that follows its natural course. That may be comfortable, but it’s not the way of practice. Practice is characterized by going against the grain, going against the defilements and the mind’s old ways. It demands mindful suppression, increasing our patient endurance.

Many of Luang Por’s most rousing exhortations concerned the struggle with defilements. He once gave a simple rule of thumb: any monk who had not broken down into tears of frustration at least three times in his practice hadn’t been putting forth enough effort. ‘Don’t follow the mind’s desires!’ was a constant refrain. ‘Train it. This practice means putting your life on the line.’ His disciples were to push through obstacles, recognize their lack of substance and realize that they were paper tigers. ‘If you’re sleepy and you want to sleep – don’t! After you’ve got through the drowsiness then you can sleep.’ On one occasion, he exhorted the Sangha on the battle against defilements that could occur between alms-round and the daily meal:

Sometimes you get back from alms-round and you’re sitting there meditating before the meal, but you can’t do it. Your mind’s like a mad dog, slobbering with desire for food, and it won’t contemplate anything at all. Or else the contemplation can’t keep up with the greed, and so you just run with the greed – and then things really go downhill. If your mind won’t listen and refuses to be patient – push your bowl away. Don’t let it eat. Train your mind. Torment the defilements. Don’t keep following them. Push your bowl away and leave. If there’s so much craving to eat, if your mind won’t listen to you, then don’t eat. The saliva will dry up when it realizes it’s not going to get any food. It’ll have learned its lesson, and in future it won’t disturb you. It’ll be afraid of going without. It’ll be silent. Give it a try. If you don’t believe me, then see for yourself.

He would talk a lot about courage, of daring to go against the defilements, and how it was faith that takes us beyond the fears of hunger, pain and death. He pointed out how fear of suffering hobbles the mind, and how reflecting on what’s really essential to life can overcome that:

Reflect on what’s most important in life. What is that – the most important thing? It’s the thing without which you’d die. That’s what’s important … And all you really need to keep alive is plain rice and water. Everything else is a bonus. As long as you have a sufficient amount of rice and water to eat every day, you won’t die. Be frugal. When you lack something you want, then ask yourselves whether the lack of it will kill you. Take enough rice and water to give you strength to practise. Don’t worry about whether or not you get anything in excess of rice and water; the important thing is that you have enough of those two things to keep you alive. And there need be no fear of going without them. Alms-round, in even the poorest villages, will provide a monk with a lump of sticky rice.

If it starts to drizzle while you’re practising walking meditation, then think of those times when you were farming, your working trousers still not dry from the previous day and, first thing in the morning, having to put them on wet. Going down to get the water buffalo out of the pen below the house. Outside all you can see is its neck, but then when you pick up the rope you realize it’s covered in shit, and then the buffalo flicks its tail and splatters you all over with even more of it. As you walk to the fields your foot-rot is playing up and you’re thinking, ‘Why is life so much suffering? Why is everything so hard?’ Think of that, and then ask yourself what the big problem is about walking meditation in the rain. Working in the paddy fields involves much more suffering and you’ve managed that. Why can’t you do this?

You have to dare to do it, dare to practise. If you’ve never been to a cremation forest, then you should train yourself to go. If you can’t manage it at night, then go during the day. Go later in the day, go often, and after a while, you’ll be able to go there at dusk.

By going against the grain, monks could discover for themselves that the fears and limitations holding them back were not fixed and unalterable things, but merely the results of habit that they had the capacity to overcome.

Luang Por was blunt about those who only put effort into what they enjoyed and avoided what they disliked or feared. They were deluding themselves if they thought they were practitioners of Dhamma. No matter how long monks had been in robes, ‘if you are still following your likes and dislike, you haven’t even started to practice.’ There was no alternative to total commitment.

If you’re really practising, then, to put it simply, it’s your life, your whole life. If you’re really sincere, then why would you be interested in whether someone else is getting something that you’re not, or if they’re trying to pick a quarrel with you. There’s nothing like that in your mind. Other people’s actions are their own business. Whether other people’s practice is on a high or low level, you don’t give attention to things like that. You pay attention to your own affairs. It’s when you have this attitude that you find the courage to practise. And through the practice, wisdom and profound knowledge will arise.

If your practice is in the groove, when you’re really practising, then it’s night and day. At night time, you alternate sitting and walking meditation, at least two or three times. Walk and then sit. Sit and then walk. You don’t feel like you’ve had enough, you’re enjoying yourself.

Discourses would switch back and forth between descriptions of the well-practising monk and pointing out how far his students were from that level, how much work they needed to do. He gave an analogy for his students who were still following their likes and dislikes and not facing up to challenges:

It’s like your roof has a leak in it over here, and so you go and sleep over there; and then it starts to leak over there, and so you shift somewhere else and spend your time lamenting, ‘When will I ever have a nice place to live in?’ If the roof was to become full of leaks, you’d probably just move out. That’s not the way to practise. If you follow your defilements, things just get much worse. The more you follow them, the more your practice declines.

And then would come the encouragement:

But if you go against the grain and keep practising, eventually you’ll find yourself amazed at your mind’s incredible appetite for practice. At this stage, you become completely uninterested whether other people are practising or not – you just constantly work at your own practice. Whether people come or go, you just keep doing your work. It’s this looking at yourself that is the practice. Once you’re fluent, then there’s nothing in your mind except for Dhamma.

In whatever area you still can’t do it, wherever you still have an obstruction, the mind circles around that spot. It won’t give up until the problem’s been cracked. And when that problem’s been dealt with, then the mind gets stuck somewhere else. And so you work on that, and you don’t give up until you’ve cracked that one too, because there can be no real sense of ease until these matters are seen to. Your reflections need to be firmly focused on the issue in hand, whether you’re walking or sitting.

The problem that the meditator now faces becomes all-absorbing. He feels the weight of an unresolved issue or an ongoing responsibility. Luang Por said it felt like being a parent:

You leave your child to play by itself upstairs while you go down to feed the pigs. While you’re doing that, you’re anxious all the time that your child is going to fall off the veranda. It’s the same with our practice. Whatever we’re doing, we don’t forget our meditation object for a moment. As soon as we become distracted, it immediately beats at the mind. We keep following it night and day, not forgetting it for a moment. Practice has to reach that level for it to be successful. It’s not an easy task.

As the practice progresses it gains momentum. There is less need for the teacher:

To begin with, it’s necessary to depend on the teacher and his advice. When you understand, then put it into practice. It’s up to you to do the work yourself. If you are negligent in any area or something bad arises, then you will know for yourself. There will be the knowing, it will be paccattaṃ. The mind will know naturally whether it’s a big fault or a small one. It will try to look at just where the fault lies, try to do its practice.

### Joy in the Dhamma

It was considered normal, and not necessarily a bad thing in itself, that monks putting forth effort to overcome defilements became tense at times or felt frustrated. Luang Por would say that if monks felt no inner resistance to their practice, then they probably weren’t doing enough to oppose old habits. He would, nonetheless, keep his finger on the pulse of the community and a clear eye out for signs of monks becoming obsessive or depressed. If he felt the atmosphere was too intense, he would invite the Sangha around to his kuti for an informal gathering. On these evenings, the atmosphere was warm and intimate. He would often relate anecdotes from the old days or tell funny and uplifting teaching stories. However long the sessions lasted – and even if they went on until well after midnight, everybody was still expected to be at the 3.00 a.m. morning session – nobody would want to leave. One monk summed it up:

“Walking away from Luang Por’s kuti one time I thought, ‘These are the nights I’ll remember when I’m an old man.’ ”

Luang Por had a deep well of stories. In addition to a lifetime of experience with monks and their flaws to draw upon, he also knew how to adapt local folk tales and humorous stories for teaching purposes. Much of the enjoyment these stories provide depends on familiarity with the culture they mirror, and they often lose a lot in translation. But the tale of the plachon gives something of their flavour.

Ajahn Tongjun heard Luang Por tell this story at a time when a number of younger monks had caught the teaching bug. It was a common phenomenon amongst monks whose meditation practice was starting to progress. Armed with a vocabulary gleaned from Luang Por’s Dhamma talks, these monks – ‘hot with knowledge’ – tended to make a nuisance of themselves sharing their insights at great length with whoever would listen, or could not escape. The story Luang Por told dealt with fishing, a subject familiar to all the monks, and featured the plachon, or serpent-headed fish, considered by many to resemble the human penis. Ajahn Tongjun recounted the story as he remembered Luang Por telling it:

There was once a newly married couple who, following the old tradition, lived in the wife’s family home. The young husband was constantly trying to find ways to impress his mother- and father-in-law: he wanted them to see what a capable son-in-law they had acquired, how hard-working he was, how good he was at making a living.

Every evening, the young man would accompany his father-in-law down to a nearby stream where he would set a catfish trap – a bamboo basket weighed down with rocks, containing a lump of termite mound full of termites as bait. Early in the morning, the young man would check his catch.

In those days people were very poor, cloth was hard to come by, and the young man had no underpants. After he’d taken off his trousers on the river bank, he would go down into the water naked. On one particular day, he found that the trap was crammed full of the lucrative catfish thrashing around wildly, unmixed with the plamor (climbing perch) or plachon that earned a lower price. It was a very good catch. The young man was so overjoyed with his success that he forgot to put his trousers back on before running back to the house with the trap full of fish, eager for the praise he felt sure that he would receive. He bounded up the stairs to the house still marvelling to himself, ‘nothing but catfish!’, and rushed in on his wife who was rinsing the sticky rice grains. Hearing his voice, she looked up, only to see him standing before her stark naked saying, ‘Nothing but catfish.’ Pointing to his groin she said, ‘Then where did the plachon come from?’ Her words broke the spell and the young man looking down at his nakedness, turned bright red, before sprinting back to the stream for his trousers.

Luang Por told the young monks that wanting to show off about their practice, oblivious of their embarrassing faults visible to everyone, made them just like the young man who was so keen to impress his family that he didn’t realize that he was exposing his plachon.

### Governance of the Sangha

The Sangha is structured hierarchically with seniority determined by length of time spent as a monk, measured by annual Rains Retreats (a monk of ten years standing, for example, is referred to as a monk of ‘ten rains’). The Buddha’s teachings on the qualities that leaders of monastic communities should possess tend to focus on moral and spiritual values. There is little detailed discussion of the exercise of power. The Vinaya texts do, however, make it clear that unanimity should be sought in community decisions on contentious matters. On the other hand, the will of the majority may be the guide in minor issues where strong feelings are unengaged, and a vote will not alienate the minority and affect the harmony of the Sangha.

As Buddhism evolved in Thailand, it became more institutionalized, and the dominant model for governance of monastic communities that emerged was of a benevolent dictatorship tempered by the checks and balances embedded in the Vinaya. This development was conditioned by many factors, not least of which were the laws of the land which put various legal powers in the hands of abbots whose appointments had to be recognized by the state.

As most of those who join a forest monastery do so out of faith in the abbot and with a willingness to submit to his judgement in the matter of their training, a system in which power resides primarily with him is uncontroversial. The system’s paternalism may be traced back to the Buddha’s declaration that the relationship between teacher or preceptor and student should be modelled upon that of father and son. The integrity of the system is dependent upon the fact that membership in the Sangha is completely voluntary, and that no barriers are put in the way of those who wish to leave. This, combined with the demand for leaders to keep all the Vinaya training rules without exception, means that the scope for abuse of power is severely limited.

Luang Por’s style of leadership largely conformed to the benevolent dictator template. However, his emphasis on creating a durable institution that was not overly tied to him and that could survive and prosper independently of him, led him to tweak it in significant ways. Luang Por took almost all major decisions himself, but he made a point of listening to the views of his disciples and encouraging them to express their opinions in an appropriate fashion and at an appropriate time and place. Ajahn Suriyon recalled:

“First of all, he would determine a basic plan or principle, and then he would ask for the opinions of the Sangha; if it was appropriate, he would also consult the laypeople. In some cases, his idea might have some weakness, and he was able to modify it. Often his idea was good, but by listening to other views he was able to know what the general feeling was and address any worries there might be.”

Luang Por was an intimidating figure by dint of his position, his personality, his charisma, and the belief that almost all shared that he was an enlightened being. There was no question that he possessed the natural authority to exercise his will without consultation. But he chose to give his disciples the sense that he listened to them, and that he could be flexible when faced with intelligent arguments. The system worked well because, ultimately, the monks’ confidence in his judgement was such that they were able to accept his decisions even if they did not always agree with them.

There were many occasions in which Luang Por made use of formal meetings of the Sangha to deal skilfully with community issues. The decision as to whether to allow a monk from another tradition to attend the Pāṭimokkha recitation mentioned above, is one example. Another occasion in which he found himself in disagreement with the main body of the Sangha occurred when a lay supporter asked permission to offer a vehicle to the monastery. Luang Por had told the would-be donor that, before giving an answer, he would have to consult with the Sangha. At the next formal gathering of the community, he canvassed opinions on the matter. Assuming the outcome to be a foregone conclusion, those called upon to speak were enthusiastic; a monastery vehicle could be used when Luang Por went to visit branch monasteries; it could be used in the case of a medical emergency; there were so many ways in which it would be useful. When it came time to offer his summation, however, Luang Por surprised the whole assembly by announcing that he opposed the motion, and then went on to rebut, one by one, all of the arguments that had previously been put forward to support it. The emotional impact of his words was considerable.

Personally, I have a different view on this from all of you. The way I see it, as monks, or samaṇas – in other words, men of peace – we should be content and of few wishes. In the mornings, we carry our bowls out on alms-round and receive food from the villagers to sustain our bodies. Most of the villagers are poor. If we live on the food they offer us, and we have a vehicle and they don’t – think about it – how would that look?

We should be aware of our status as disciples of the Buddha. Given that the Buddha never had a vehicle, I say it’s better that we don’t either. If monks do start accepting vehicles, then sooner or later there’ll be news about this monastery’s vehicle overturning and that one’s knocking someone over. It’ll be an utter mess. And these things are a real burden to look after.

Formerly monks had to walk everywhere. In the old days if you went on tudong, you’d never get a lift in a car like nowadays. If you went on tudong, then it really was tudong: up mountains and down to the valley floors – you’d walk everywhere. You’d walk until your feet were covered in blisters. But these days, people say they’re going on tudong and they go by car. They go to tour around different regions, they drive right through the forests [literally: ‘they talu-dong’]. It doesn’t matter if we don’t have a vehicle. What does matter is that you practise well. Then when the celestial beings (devas) see you, they will be filled with faith and inspiration. That’s why I’m not going to accept this vehicle that they want to offer. It’ll be even more convenient; you won’t have to tire yourselves out washing and wiping it. Please remember this point: don’t allow yourselves to be swayed by the wish for convenience and ease.

After the meeting, one senior monk said with a rueful smile on his face, ‘It was like we attached targets to our chests for the firing squad.’

One year, when many temporary monks were spending the Rains Retreat in the monastery, a theft occurred. Inquiries and appeals for the missing object to be returned all proved fruitless. Finally, Luang Por announced that they would have to take recourse to the ancient method by which, one-by-one, each member of the community would make a solemn vow of their innocence, calling upon them and their families to be cursed for seven generations if they told a lie.

After he had let this sink in for a while, Luang Por announced that, before he took such a drastic step, he would give the guilty party one last chance. Everyone was told to return to their kuti, make a small bundle, and then, on returning to the darkened Dhamma Hall, place it on a pile in the middle of the floor. When all the bundles had been deposited and the monks were sitting at their places, lanterns were lit and the bundles were examined. The missing article was discovered in the middle of the pile.

Disputes amongst members of the Sangha were infrequent but not unheard of. When the quarrelling parties were summoned to his kuti, Luang Por would refuse to accept that either party was completely in the right or wrong. He would say that both sides must have contributed to the dispute to some extent or other, and both were culpable. Ajahn Suriyon was present at probably the most extreme incident to occur.

“There was a dispute the year I arrived. It reached the point where one monk started chasing after the other with a knife in his hand. Luang Por showed no sign of fear or hesitation. He spoke from his seat in a very normal voice. The monk came back, put down the knife and started to cry … Overall there were very few problems. Maybe it was the power of the Dhamma, of the virtue and goodness that Luang Por had accumulated. Even if there were odd incidents, there were no harmful consequences, there was never any danger. When Luang Por spoke, then that would be the end of it; people could put down their enmity. He wouldn’t allow us to drag up old matters.”

The knife-waving incident and Luang Por’s response to it were exceptional. It was clearly understood by all at Wat Pah Pong that physical violence was completely unacceptable. Nevertheless, one day many years later, monks leaving the Dhamma Hall after the evening practice session came across two teenaged novices in the midst of a fight, lashing out at each other with their flashlights. The following day, after evening chanting, the Sangha was convened below Luang Por’s kuti. Ajahn Supon was one of the monk’s present.

“After Luang Por had instructed us on a number of matters, he eventually told the two novices to come out to the front, where he questioned them about what had occurred the previous evening. After he’d examined them, he said that in the twenty-five years since he’d established the monastery, this was the first time that there had been a fight amongst the novices. He explained concisely why it was such a bad thing to happen, and then he made an announcement to the Sangha.”

On consideration, I see no benefit in allowing these two novices to live here anymore. Although one of them has only recently gone forth and his actions are more forgivable, this other one has been here two years and not only is he still unable to set a good example to others, he has also behaved unacceptably. I see no point in the two of them continuing here. What is the opinion of the Sangha?

After Luang Por had spoken in that way, nobody dared to say anything. If anyone had spoken up with good reasons why they should be allowed to stay, there might have been a different outcome – but there was silence. Luang Por finally asked Ajahn Virapon to provide a response on behalf of the Sangha. Ajahn Virapon said he agreed with Luang Por. At first, Luang Por threatened to have the novices disrobe there and then and go home in their bathing cloths, but in the end, he allowed them to stay until the following morning.

When another fight broke out between two young monks the following year, Luang Por was more peremptory:

Get out! If you’re going to act like that, then you can’t stay here. Go! You can’t live with me. Find a pair of trousers.

It was the last of such incidents.

### Delegation

An important element of Luang Por’s efforts to create a strong Sangha was his policy of delegating authority. In the Vinaya texts, the appointment of ‘officers of the Sangha’ requires a short ceremony to be performed at a formal meeting of the Sangha; at Wat Pah Pong, it was more relaxed. Luang Por would simply announce that he was appointing such-and-such a monk to take on specific responsibilities: to act as the monastery secretary or storekeeper; to look after the cloth cupboard; to take responsibility for assigning lodgings; or, in later days, to oversee the electricity supply. Monks were chosen on the basis of their competence for the particular task and were cautioned to perform their duties diligently and impartially, free from bias caused by greed, aversion, delusion and fear.

As monks became more senior, Luang Por required them to give Dhamma talks and sent many of his most trusted disciples away to establish branch monasteries. In 1979 and 1981, he spent the Rains Retreat elsewhere, partly in order to give his designated successor, Ajahn Liem, and other senior monks experience in running Wat Pah Pong in his absence. This proved a prescient move as it enabled the monastery to adapt remarkably well when Luang Por became seriously ill and unable to continue as abbot from late 1981 onwards.

Luang Por sought to encourage his disciples to contribute to the welfare of the community in whatever way they could. Everyone had something to offer.

It’s like the trees at Wat Pah Pong. Every one of them is of benefit: the small trees, the big trees, the short and the long and the bent. All are useful if we know how to select the right one for the job in hand.

Luang Por would often comment on how other forest monasteries had drastically declined after the death of the abbot. This was always a danger when the loyalty and devotion of the monks was almost exclusively focused on the teacher, while the fostering of a sense of community and loyalty to the monastery itself was neglected. Luang Por did not want this to happen at Wat Pah Pong. Giving the monks responsibilities gave them experience, self-confidence and, above all, a sense of participation and belonging.

Luang Por spoke often of respect for the Sangha, and how the welfare of the Sangha must always take precedence over that of the individual. Nevertheless, when he felt that the Sangha had overstepped its authority or behaved unwisely, he would provide an admonishment. One such occasion occurred when the disquiet felt by many members of the Sangha at the behaviour of one of the senior monks reached a tipping point.

The monk in question was one of the more eccentric figures at Wat Pah Pong. He was known for his love of chanting and for his bubbly, sometimes slightly manic, outgoing personality. His behaviour, especially towards lay supporters, was considered by many monks to be undignified and inappropriate. Matters came to a head when, in the absence of Luang Por, the Sangha convened a meeting to discuss the monk’s behaviour and, after a vote, decided that he should be formally censured. The monk accepted the Sangha’s decision with good grace but was deeply hurt. He insisted that he had no bad intentions; it was just that every now and then he forgot himself. Everyone awaited Luang Por’s return and his decision on how to proceed.

On the evening of his return, the Sangha gathered below Luang Por’s kuti. He listened in silence to the account of the Sangha meeting. Then, without asking any questions and without hearing the accused monk give his side of the story, he began to give a Dhamma talk.

He spoke about how character traits varied. Even the great arahants had different habits and personalities – the result of kamma they had created in the past – which were unconnected with defilement and remained after enlightenment. He mentioned Ven. Sāriputta, who had previously been born as a monkey for many lifetimes, and, as a result, every now and again acted in an eccentric, almost monkey-like fashion – most famously by occasionally jumping over puddles.

Differences of personality were also to be seen amongst those still striving to cleanse their minds of defilement. There were those of a predominantly lustful temperament, those with a negative, fault-finding mentality and those with a slow and dull disposition. There were those given to thought and worry, those with a devout temperament, and those with a naturally intelligent disposition.

The differences between these character types are superficial. Ultimately, they are all one and the same: they’re all equally impermanent, unsatisfactory and selfless, all ungraspable. Like a lemon, a chilli, sugar cane and borapet. All these things are born of the earth, but their flavour is different. The lemon has a sour flavour, the chilli is hot, the sugar cane is sweet and borapet is bitter. Their unity lies in the fact that once born of the earth, they all have to die.

Luang Por’s teacher Luang Pu Tongrat was acknowledged as a monk of high attainments but was never a greatly loved figure. He could be rude and aggressive and act in eccentric ways. Many people thought he was crazy.

On one occasion, the villagers – I don’t know whether they did it on purpose in order to provoke him or what – put a live fish in his bowl. They’d only just caught it and it was still tied up in jute twine. He received it in his bowl and then took it down to a stream and released it. He said to the fish, ‘Well, it’s better, my child, than if they’d killed you.’ When he died, his only possession was a razor; he had no other possessions. At his funeral a strong wind blew up, and it poured with rain just for a moment and then stopped – just enough to see that it was a marvel.

The reason that I have told stories like this is so that all of you may see that sometimes strangeness is not so strange at all, it’s normal.

Luang Por admonished the Sangha for making too much out of a minor matter. Their efforts should be put into developing the path of practice, not into finding fault with each other. There were always going to be monks whose behaviour was not particularly inspiring.

Don’t let your feelings of satisfaction or dissatisfaction be your criteria. If you do that, you will be elevating your moods above the Dhamma. Whatever you do, you must be circumspect and use your wisdom faculty. Some things will be too small, some too big, some to your liking and some not, but if the matter doesn’t involve transgression of the Vinaya, then you should be able to let it go.

Monks should not waste their time in meaningless disputes.

It’s like the two monks who started arguing about when the sun is closest to the earth. One said in the morning, because that’s when it’s biggest. The other said at noon, because that’s when it’s hottest. They went to ask the teacher to adjudicate. He said, ‘Go and eat your lunch.’

## A Well-Rounded Training

### Putting forth effort

One of the foundations of Buddhist practice is the conviction that purposeful effort has meaning. The Buddha rejected the beliefs that human life is determined by a divine will or fate or randomness. He proclaimed that human beings created their own life and environment by the quality of their actions of body, speech and mind. Luang Por’s teachings expressed this ‘Right View’ again and again. Monks were to take responsibility for their lives through their own consistent efforts. They all had the potential for liberation within them. The question was whether they had the determination and the patient endurance to realize that potential.

Don’t just sit there waiting for Nibbāna to come to you. Have you ever seen anyone successful in that way? Wherever you see you’re in the wrong, then quickly remedy it. If you’ve done something incorrectly, then do it again properly. Reflect on experience.

There was no alternative to hard work.

Some people become monks thinking that they’ll be able to take it easy and enjoy life. But if you’ve never learned to read, you can’t just pick up a book and start to read it …

Some people come here to become monks in order to find happiness. But what does happiness arise from? What is its cause? Hardship must come first. Don’t you have to work before you have the money to buy food? To farm the land before you get rice to eat? Hardship precedes happiness.

One phrase in particular, monks heard again and again over the years:

Eating little, sleeping little, talking little: these are the actions of the practitioner. Eating a lot, sleeping a lot, talking a lot: these are the actions of the fool.

### Paṭipadā

Monks often take on special observances in order to get out of a rut or in the hope of accelerating their practice. At the very least, by doing so they exercise powers of diligence, vigour and renunciation, all of which are important qualities for monks to cultivate. However, Luang Por would remind those of his disciples prone to putting their faith in radical but unsustainable asceticism to look closely at the intention behind their undertakings. A short period of heroic effort followed by a longer lazy period of recuperation was not, he insisted, a wise or effective strategy for dealing with defilement. Craving for results too easily infected a mind set up in this way. For him, the key to success was paṭipadā: steady, consistent, continuous practice[13] – the tortoise rather than the hare.

Don’t pay any attention to whether you’re feeling diligent or lazy. Normally, people do things when they feel diligent and stop when they feel lazy; but as monks that’s not how we conduct ourselves. Whether we feel lazy or diligent, we practice. We have no interest other than cutting things off, in abandoning them, in training ourselves. We are consistent day and night, this year and next, at all hours, indifferent to feelings of laziness or diligence, hot or cold. We just keep doing it. This is called paṭipadā.

Sometimes monks get really gung-ho and sustain it for six or seven days. But when they see they’re not getting anywhere they give up. And then they really lose it for a while, chatting and socializing in a heedless way, until they come to their senses and put in another couple of days of hard effort. Then they give up again until the next time they feel inspired, and that becomes the pattern. It’s like people who throw themselves into their work like there’s no tomorrow – digging fields, clearing trees, clearing hillsides – and then when it’s time to take a break, throw their tools down and walk off without putting them away. By the following morning, the tools are completely caked with mud.

Then they get enthusiastic for the work again and in the evening throw their tools down once more. This is not the way to prepare fields for cultivation, and it’s the same for our practice. If you don’t think paṭipadā is important, you’ll have no success. Paṭipadā is absolutely vital.

Making fire was another of Luang Por’s favourite analogies for this principle, one that allowed him to perform a favourite short pantomime. As he spoke – and with a big smile on his face – he would mime the fool who rubs two sticks together until he becomes tired or bored, puts them down for a while before picking them up once more, expecting to carry on from where he’d left off. Finally, he gives up altogether and compounds his error by insisting that he knows from experience that it’s not possible to get fire from wood. ‘There is fire there’, Luang Por said, ‘but you’re only going to produce it if you keep rubbing the sticks without interruption until the critical temperature has been reached.’ In the same way, practice can only bear fruit when it is developed in a similarly steady manner. Short bursts of effort, no matter how intense, cannot create the necessary momentum.

A fisherman casts his net and catches a huge fish. He becomes afraid that the fish is going to jump out of the net and get away. He becomes so anxious he grabs at the fish wildly, struggles to get a grip on it. Suddenly, just as he feared, the fish is out of the net; but it escapes because his own efforts to grasp hold of it are too violent.

There’s an old saying, ‘Gently, gently does it – but not too gently.’ That’s our practice. Keep feeling things out, feeling them out. Don’t give up. You have to look at the mind, understand what it’s all about. Try to keep doing the practice, making it consistent. If you’re feeling lazy, do the practice. If you’re not feeling lazy, do the practice. That’s the kind of continuity that’s needed.

He often repeated that the craving to get something or become something would always sabotage even the most determined effort:

The Buddha taught that putting forth effort is for abandonment, for letting go, for withdrawing from attachment. There should be no desire for becoming and birth, to get or to be anything at all.

This effort was to be constantly monitored and tweaked, the goal being a balanced level called ‘por dee’, ‘just-right’. Putting forth effort that, moment by moment, was maintained at the optimum intensity for achieving one’s purpose, Luang Por defined as ‘right practice’.

Putting forth effort is not restricted to a particular posture. You can do it while standing, walking, sitting and lying down. You can realize Dhamma while sweeping leaves, or merely by looking at a sun-beam. It is essential that mindfulness be constantly primed. Why? Because when you are intent on discernment of the truth, there are opportunities to realize the Dhamma at all times and in all places.

### Knowing Now

Luang Por often said that the present moment encompasses everything: it includes past and future because it is the result of the former and the cause of the latter. For this reason, developing the ability to dwell with clarity in the present moment is perhaps the most fundamental of all meditation skills. However, Luang Por said the value of it did not just lie in the lucid calm that resulted from letting go of memory and imagination – it was in the present moment that wisdom could be cultivated:

In Dhamma practice, all you have to do is keep looking at the present moment … Look at the instability, the impermanence, and ‘Buddha knowing’ will arise and grow. Keep seeing the truth of all things – that they are impermanent. Pleasure and pain arise and they’re impermanent, it’s unsure how long they’ll last. If our mind sees the uncertain duration of things, the problem of attachment will gradually diminish.

The past was gone; the future had not yet arrived. Suffering, its cause, its cessation and the path towards its end all lie in the present moment.

This practice of staying in the present is mental cultivation. To put it simply, we must be mindful, have a constant awareness and recollection, knowing what is occurring right now, what we’re thinking, what we’re doing, what’s going on with us. We must look at our mind, constantly mindful of our mood, our thoughts, whether we’re experiencing pleasant or unpleasant feelings, whether we are in the right or in the wrong. Reflecting, investigating in this way, the wisdom faculty has already manifested … the eyes see a form, the ears hear a sound, the nose smells an odour, the tongue experiences a flavour, the body a touch – whatever is felt is known. Whether we think something is good or bad, we like it or dislike it, it’s all impermanent, unsatisfactory and not self. The Buddha taught us to put these things down, not to grasp on to them. This is called solving problems.

### Mai nae

In the last five or six years of his teaching career, most of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks were recorded on audio cassette. In this collection of talks, now stored digitally, Luang Por deals with a wide variety of themes, amongst which one frequently repeated teaching stands out – that of ‘mai nae’. The phrase ‘mai nae’ translates most readily as ‘unsure’, ‘uncertain’, ‘changeful’ or ‘indefinite’[14] and is an everyday term that all of Luang Por’s audience would have immediately understood. A farmer, for example, asked in the planting season whether he expected to get a good harvest that year, would most probably reply, ‘Mai nae. If we get enough rain, it should be all right.’ The phrase ‘mai nae’ here, is a simple recognition that things are affected by many variable conditions (e.g. how much rain falls) and are thus never completely predictable.

Luang Por taught his disciples to practise the perception of ‘mai nae’ as a means of cultivating the wisdom faculty. By constantly reminding themselves that both internal and external phenomena were ‘mai nae’, they developed aniccasaññā (the perception of impermanence), and with practice, the associated perception of dukkha (the inherently flawed, ultimately unsatisfactory nature of experience) and anattā (the conditioned, selfless nature of experience). These perceptions of the ‘three characteristics of existence’ created a pathway for vipassanā, the deep, wordless insight that uproots defilements and leads to the end of suffering.

The practise of ‘mai nae’ achieves its power from directly confronting the ingrained tendency of unawakened beings to invest experience with the appearance of solidity. This sense that the things within and without us are real and substantial is founded upon unexamined assumptions. The perception of changefulness became the tool Luang Por most often recommended to challenge those assumptions. Luang Por chose to use the phrase ‘mai nae’ in preference to the more traditional ‘aniccaṃ’ or ‘impermanent’, to bring a fresh slant on wisdom development. For his disciples, ‘mai nae’ was a familiar, approachable idea, deeply embedded in the culture. It demystified Dhamma practice and made it seem immediately practical.

The specific emphasis of the ‘mai nae’ practice may be examined by comparing it to the comparable phrase ‘this too will pass’. Whereas ‘this too will pass’ reminds us of a future beyond the present experience and so puts it into perspective, ‘mai nae’ points to the nature of the present phenomena itself.

In daily life, Luang Por taught that the ‘mai nae’ reflection was particularly effective in dealing with attachment to ideas and views. In this context, the word might be better translated as ‘maybe not’. Whenever the mind was about to draw a conclusion or jump to one, when it was about to make a judgement about something, he taught the meditator to recall, ‘maybe not’. Maybe that’s not how it is, maybe that’s not how it happened, maybe that’s not what he or she is really like. Whenever the sense of certainty arose, meditators were to temper it with a gentle ‘maybe not’. Even if they were convinced, they were still to reserve a small space in their mind for the possibility of being wrong: ‘Yes, but maybe – just maybe – not.’ In this way the mind was to become more careful and nuanced in its attitudes.

Luang Por gave this practice the greatest importance: ‘Mai nae is the Buddha himself’, he would say, ‘It is the Dhamma.’ He taught the recollection of ‘mai nae’ both as a means of re-educating a person’s attitude to their life, and also as a specific technique in meditation. As hindrances arose in the course of a sitting, he would encourage the meditator to recognize the hindrance as ‘mai nae’, or ‘changeful’ before returning to the breath. As the mind became more subtle, this accumulated perception of ‘mai nae’ – that whatever arises does not endure – is an exercise of the wisdom faculty that ensures that the mind does not fall into the trap of attaching to joy or to stillness, and is primed to develop vipassanā.

When you see impermanence clearly, you become a true monk. Seeing the impermanence, the instability of form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness, the mind does not attach to the five aggregates.

It doesn’t matter what it is – even if something happens that upsets you so much that tears are forming in your eyes – remind yourself, ‘This is mai nae.’ Always bear this in mind, with your sati, with your alertness. Whether you feel satisfied, dissatisfied, think this is good, this is bad – see it all as ‘mai nae’ and you can release the attachment. When you see things as ultimately without value, the letting go occurs automatically. ‘Mai nae’ is the object of vipassanā.

When something arises, call it ‘mai nae’. Don’t forget this word. Don’t let it drop. The Buddha taught us not to grasp on to the good or the bad. Whatever arises, pool your resources in this word. It is the source of wisdom, and the object of vipassanā. Make it your constant focus of attention; it will take you beyond doubt … ‘mai nae’ is a tool to uproot attachment to experience. It will enable you to see the Dhamma clearly.

One of the means by which Luang Por sought to inculcate the principle of ‘mai nae’ in his disciples’ minds was by maintaining an element of unpredictability in their daily lives. Changes would be introduced to the monastic schedule without prior warning and with no indication of how long they would last. A monk preparing for the annual Rains Retreat at Wat Pah Pong might be told a day or two before it began that he would be doing the retreat elsewhere, that he should gather his things together, clean up his kuti, and be ready to leave within the hour for a monastery hundreds of kilometres away. It was a style that kept monks on their toes, and it enabled Luang Por to create a singular atmosphere in his monastery, one in which the calming effects of simplicity and repetition were enlivened by a sense that nothing could be taken for granted. Ajahn Jun remembered how plans could change in a single moment:

“He’d say to me, ‘Get your bowl and robes. We’re going to such and such a place.’ By the time I got back again with my things he’d say, ‘Change of plan.’ This happened so often that I got a real feeling for ‘mai nae’ … Afterwards, I came to understand it to mean dividing things up 50/50, maybe/maybe not. I adopted it as my guiding principle in practice.”

### Por dee

‘Por dee’ was another common everyday word that Luang Por’s disciples got to hear a great deal. ‘Por dee’ means ‘just-right’, or ‘just the right amount’. It refers to the optimum amount, neither too much nor too little. If a robe fits well, neither too long nor too short, then it is por dee. For some people, a sitting meditation period of thirty minutes might be por dee; for others, por dee might be an hour or more.

‘Por dee’ was the term that Luang Por used when he wanted to talk about the Middle Way more informally. He said that the ability to tune into the por dee mode for any activity is at the very heart of Dhamma practice. He would often tell the story of Ven. Soṇa who was taught by the Buddha to practice meditation in the same way he had formally played the lute, with strings neither too taut nor too loose[15].

Luang Por taught his disciples to develop a sensitivity to what was por dee in every area of their lives. At the meal time, awareness of por dee meant taking just enough food to fill the stomach, but not so much as to overeat and cause drowsiness or laziness. Por dee in sleeping meant taking enough rest to refresh the body, but not so much as to be indulgent. Everything had to be ‘not too fast, not too slow, not too tight, not too loose.’ He cautioned against the understanding that upholding por dee as a standard implied a bland moderation in all things. Por dee was to be gauged by the extent to which an action was conducive to the solving of a problem or the attainment of a goal. At certain times and places, a practice might seem to be extreme in the short term, but with regard to overall progress, it might, in fact, be por dee. In any endeavour, por dee represented the optimum, the most efficient strategy.

But how was a monk to know when his practice was por dee? Luang Por would answer this question with a simile:

It is as if you want to row a boat straight across a swiftly flowing river. You don’t aim your boat in a straight line. You aim slightly upstream, allowing for the strength of the current to carry you a little downstream, and so, consequently, straight across. In the same way, it is wisest to pitch your practice at a slightly more demanding level than you believe to be ‘por dee’ and allow for the strength of defilement to carry you down to the correct level.

I teach you to eat little, sleep little, talk little – everything has to be little! But is that por dee? Actually, it’s not; it hasn’t reached that even consistency, but I teach it to enable you to recognize por dee, just-rightness, to see what is appropriate for you … Rushing too much is not right. Know how to balance different interests until you find the right amount. If there’s too little, then add to it. If there’s too much, then take some away. This is right practice, or por dee.

In the Suttas, the Buddha teaches the Middle Way that avoids the two extremes of sensual indulgence and empty asceticism. Luang Por liked to expand the meaning of these two extremes to include like and dislike, pleasure and pain. By doing so, he sought to make clear that the teaching was not so much about a general approach to spiritual development, as a moment-by-moment stance towards mental states:

‘Just-rightness’ means not being drawn into either of the two extremes:

Kāmasukhallikānuyoga: being lost in pleasure and comfort and happiness; indulging in thoughts of being good, excellent, sublime;

Attakilamathānuyoga: aversion, suffering, dislike, anger.

These two extremes are not paths that a monastic should follow … The monastic sees those paths, but he doesn’t follow them, he doesn’t attach to them. In order to attain peace, he lets go of them, he abandons them.

The ability to maintain practice on this optimum por dee level was dependent on the wisdom faculty, and the perception of changefulness.

The practice becomes por dee when you recognize the impermanence of every mental state that arises and tell your mind that it’s ‘mai nae’. Patiently endure right there. Don’t move onwards from that knowing and don’t retreat from it. Persist at that point, and before long you will come to the truth.

Leaders of communities were also to constantly refer to the sense of por dee, whether in implementing monastic regulations or determining a daily schedule. In this context, por dee was to be acknowledged as a temporary balance that would need to be regularly re-calibrated, rather than a standard that once achieved could be sustained long-term. After an initial flurry of enthusiasm, there would be a slow but inexorable slipping of standards until an admonitory discourse from Luang Por would re-establish the standard. Recognizing this pattern, Luang Por would start each new cycle on the strict side of por dee, as a way of retarding the process. Once, when a monk complained that the standard that Luang Por had set was too strict and tight, Luang Por replied:

Tight is good. Before long it will ease off by itself.

### Learning from nature

By founding his monastery in a forest, Luang Por was upholding a venerable tradition stretching back to the time of the Buddha himself. Almost every one of the monasteries established by the Buddha during the forty-five years of his ministry were situated in wooded areas. While the settings for these monasteries varied considerably in wildness – ranging from benign fruit orchards to forbidding jungle thickets and mountainsides – they all shared certain features in common:

… being neither too far nor too near a village, suitable for coming and going, accessible for those seeking what is profitable (i.e. Dhamma), not crowded in the day, quiet and still at night, [possessing] an atmosphere of solitude, undisturbed by people, suitable for seclusion.

– Vin Mv 1.13

Since the time of the Buddha, monastics with minds liberated from defilement, able to live in any environment without mental suffering, have almost always chosen trees and silence over buildings and noise. It would seem that forests and lonely places are the natural habitat of the arahant. One of the most surprising passages in the Pali Canon is the lyrical verse attributed to Ven. Mahā Kassapa, the great ascetic and probably the gruffest, most forbidding monk in the Suttas:

Like towering peaks of dark-blue clouds, Like splendid edifices are these rocks, Where the birds’ sweet voices fill the air, These rocky heights delight my heart.

With glades refreshed by (cooling) rain, Resounding with the calls of crested birds, The cliffs resorted to by seers, These rocky heights delight my heart.

– Th 1067-68

In many of his discourses, the Buddha encouraged monks to live in the forest. The vital importance that the Buddha attributed to it may be discerned by his declaration that as long as monks continued to find satisfaction in forest dwellings, the Dhamma-Vinaya would not decline.

The advantages of forest dwelling begin with the physical: in a hot climate, trees provide cool shade that enables monks to practice sitting and walking meditation throughout the day. Secondly, forest dwellings provide physical seclusion from disturbing and stimulating experiences that can disrupt the training.

In the Buddhist understanding, the human relationship to sense experience, mediated by eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and mind, may best be conceived as addiction. The forest monastery in this analogy is akin to a rehab centre. Just as these institutions are situated far from the surroundings in which the patient’s addiction flourishes, so too the forest monastery provides distance from worldly influences. Until the mind is strong, unnecessary exposure to the triggers of addictive behaviour needlessly jeopardize the efforts to free the mind.

Sense pleasures are not condemned as evil. They are, however, considered to have strong effects on the unenlightened mind inimical to higher progress in Dhamma. The world of the senses is seen as drawing the mind outwards in a way that is inherently agitating, while the intoxication that results from sense pleasures and the desire for their continuation and increase, easily overrides moral judgements. The absorbing nature of sense pleasures impedes development of the subtlety of perception regarding internal states that must be sustained for long periods in effective spiritual cultivation. For these reasons, the monastic lives in an environment where the opportunity to enjoy such pleasures is drastically reduced. By simplifying his world, he is able to understand more clearly how it works.

Luang Por would often refer to the three kinds of seclusion (viveka) mentioned in the texts. Physical seclusion provides the optimum supporting conditions for mental seclusion, i.e. the state of concentration ‘secluded’ from the hindrances. This, in turn, creates the basis for the ultimate seclusion from defilements.

The Buddha taught that sound is like a thorn that prevents the mind from entering deep states of meditative calm.[16] Forest monasteries provide a respite from the more invasive noises (although in Thailand today, few are completely unaffected by the sounds of road traffic and village loudspeakers).

And yet, Southeast Asian forests are by no means silent places. During the rainy season in particular, they throb with life. The same heat and humidity that humans can find so enervating, seems to swell the exuberance of other creatures. The volume of noises they produce can be considerable. Bird song; the deep ‘eung ang! eung ang!’ night-time bellowing of bullfrogs following heavy rain; the gecko lizards ‘tuk gae!, tuk gae!’; the chorus of cicadas piercing the dusk – these sounds are as familiar to forest monks as traffic noise is to an urban dweller.

Strangely enough, forest noise, even at its most raucous, does not detract from the sense of peace in the monastery. It tends to be the associations evoked by sounds rather than their aural impact that disturbs the meditator. Luang Por once joked that whereas a newly ordained monk could hear birds singing at the tops of their voices in a tree outside his kuti and hardly notice it, the faintest sound of a female singer, wafting into the forest from a village loudspeaker, could turn his mind upside down.

Monks intent on the path of practice have always been drawn to forests because secluded environments support the development of sense-restraint, fewness of wishes, contentment, love of solitude and introspection – the core virtues of a monastic vocation. Living in nature demands care and respect for one’s surroundings and a patient acceptance of a world over which one has only limited control. While the man-made rhythms of urban life are busy, purposeful and stressful, the rhythms of nature are cyclical and timeless, exerting a steady calming effect on the mind. But perhaps the greatest advantage in living in the forest is that the monastic is surrounded by natural processes demonstrating at all times the nature of arising, growth, decay and disappearance. Internal investigation of these qualities is much enhanced when they are being revealed in the external world.

Luang Por encouraged his disciples to wake up to the simple truths that surrounded them:

Nature is full of teachings for all of us. A wise person learns from the things around him in the forest: the earth, the rocks, the trees, the creepers. It’s as if all these things are ready and willing to give us advice and teachings … When we consider it well, we’ll see that forms, etc. are only our enemies because we still lack wisdom. In fact, they are excellent teachers.

He drew an analogy with his attempts to feed the forest chickens when he first came to live at Wat Pah Pong. After checking for danger again and again, these wary, suspicious creatures eventually discovered that the rice he scattered on the ground for them was, in fact, safe. Thus, they came to see that something that they had originally viewed with great mistrust was of great advantage to them. In the same way, he said the wise came to see that sense objects that had formerly been perceived by them as being dangerous to their practice, had only seemed so because of ‘wrong thinking, wrong view, wrong consideration’. In fact, sense objects gave useful knowledge and the means by which to realize liberation.

Living in the forest was beneficial in many ways to Dhamma practice, but it was not to be attached to. Monks were to be wary of allowing themselves to be content with the merely superficial peace of mind that they experienced through living in an environment secluded from disturbing, distracting sense objects. They should constantly remind themselves that it was a means to an end:

We don’t retreat from forms, sounds, odours, flavours, physical sensations and mental objects as an admission of defeat, but in order to train ourselves, to nurture our wisdom.

Liberation didn’t lie in escaping from the world of sense objects but in transforming the experience of them through wisdom.

One year, Luang Por sent an Australian monk, Ajahn Jagaro, to spend the Rains Retreat in a branch monastery more than 150 kilometres away from Wat Pah Pong. During the retreat, Luang Por paid a visit.

Luang Por: How are you getting on, Jagaro? Why are you so thin?

Ajahn Jagaro: I’m suffering, Luang Por. I don’t feel so good.

Luang Por: What are you suffering about? Why are you unhappy?

Ajahn Jagaro: It’s because I’m living so far from my teacher.

Luang Por: What do you mean? You’re living with six Ajahns, isn’t that enough for you?

​[A look of puzzlement.]

Luang Por: Ajahn Eyes, Ajahn Ears, Ajahn Nose, Ajahn Tongue, Ajahn Body and Ajahn Mind. These are your teachers. Listen to them well, watch them well and you’ll become wise.

Observing the creatures that shared the forest with the Sangha could also be a cause of insight – even if, as was the case at Wat Pah Pong, there were few larger animals to be seen. By the mid-1950s, most of the large wild animals indigenous to Northeast Thailand such as tigers, wild boar and elephants had disappeared from the rural areas of Ubon, remaining only in the more remote mountainous areas on the Lao and Cambodian borders. In Pah Pong, situated relatively close to a number of long-established villages, only smaller creatures survived: wild chickens, squirrels and chipmunks, flying foxes, flying lemurs, tortoises, snakes, civet cats, mouse deer and various kinds of birds. Over the years, Luang Por did everything he could to encourage local people to give up hunting. But although he achieved some notable successes, any overall decline in hunting was probably due as much to the decimation of the hunted as it was to an increased restraint on the part of the hunters.

Regardless of what was going on outside its gates, Luang Por was at least able to maintain the monastery as a refuge for vulnerable creatures. On the large sign at the monastery gate, it was prominently declared that the monastery was a sanctuary, a ‘khet abhaytan’, literally an area in which the gift of freedom from fear is extended to all beings.

Often, forest creatures would form the subjects of homilies delivered to the Sangha, none more so than the forest chickens:

Look at how spry the forest chickens are, how wary of danger they are! And they’re no gluttons: the moment they become conscious of a threat – even while they’re eating – they’re away! These forest chickens are vigilant, they protect themselves. And they can fly high. When they sleep, they rest on tree branches and tree tops, each one to himself.

Not like domestic chickens. They eat a lot; they’re heavy; they’re ponderous. They can’t fly high. They don’t have their wits about them. Even if one manages to run off, it soon gets mauled by dogs. Domestic chickens get attention from human beings, they’re looked after – and it makes them heedless.

The forest chickens are different; they’re alert and self-reliant. They go about their business without any fuss. They’re punctual: come rain or shine – even if it’s bitterly cold – when it’s time to crow, they crow. In fact, they’re so reliable we use them as an alarm clock. They’re consistent about their work, and they never demand any reward from anyone for doing it. They live at ease in nature. They don’t seem to get attached to anything; it’s almost as if they have their own kind of Dhamma practice. They don’t think a lot, they’re not inquisitive or doubtful; they don’t look for things to stir up their minds.

### Working with Sensuality

Monks, I see nothing that can disturb the mind of a man as much as the form, sound, etc. of a woman.

Monks, I see nothing that can disturb the mind of a woman as much as the form, sound, etc. of a man.

– AN 1.1-10

Have I not described in many ways the abandoning of sensual desires, the full understanding of perceptions of sensual desires, the curing of thirst for sensual desires, the eradication of thoughts of sensual desires, the allaying of the fever of sensual desires?

– Vin Pr 1

Monks, if a sensual thought, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harming arises in a monk while walking (standing, sitting, lying down), and he tolerates it, does not abandon it, dispel it, terminate it, and obliterate it, then that monk is said to be devoid of ardour and wise fear of consequences; he is constantly and continuously lazy and lacking in energy while walking (standing, sitting, lying down).

– AN 4.11

The first expulsion offense of the Vinaya states that a monk who commits an act of sexual intercourse immediately forfeits his monkhood. Although this is the most important of the Vinaya rules governing the expression of sexual desire, it is by no means the only one. Masturbation, lewd speech and making lustful contact with a woman’s body, for example, constitute major breaches of the Vinaya (saṅghādisesa), requiring periods of penance and rehabilitation. Other rules require monks to avoid being alone with a woman or conducting a conversation with a woman without another male present.

The strictness and comprehensiveness of these rules point to some of the central tenets of Buddhist monasticism, namely: that sexual desire is amongst the greatest obstacles to the highest spiritual attainments; that initially, the expression of sexual desire may be skilfully restrained through mindfulness of precepts; that sexual desire itself can, and should, be attenuated and eventually eliminated through practice of the Eightfold Path; that, as sexual desire is rooted in identification with the body and mind, liberation from that identification inevitably entails cessation of sexual desire; that an enlightened being is free from all sexual thoughts and perceptions.

Luang Por’s exhortations on the topic of sensuality were usually blunt in tone but spiced with humour – sometimes he would warn monks of the dangers of letting cobras spread their hoods or, worst of all, allowing them to spit. Sexual feelings arose naturally in the untrained mind, he said, as they were a part of nature, but it was a part that monks must refuse to indulge. Giving harbour to sexual thoughts and fantasies was one of the most foolish errors that a monk could commit. A vicious circle would be created. The more the monk indulged in sexual thoughts, the more his meditation would suffer. The more his meditation suffered, the less able he would be to protect his mind from indulging in sexual thoughts. A serious transgression against the Vinaya or disrobing would most likely follow.

If you still enjoy the form or the odour of a woman, you’re still dwelling in the sensual realm; you still haven’t managed to let go of sense objects. You’re monks in name only.

The threefold training provided the basis for dealing with sensuality. Firstly, commitment to the Vinaya, bolstered by wise shame and wise fear of consequences, was to be used to guard against the kamma created by lustful actions and speech. Secondly, patiently enduring of sexual feelings was to support mindfulness in preventing the rapid proliferation of sensual thoughts that tends to follow from an initial perception; at the same time, meditation was to provide a clearly superior solution to the human need for pleasure. Thirdly, wise reflection was to be developed in order to undo the false perceptions upon which lust thrived.

The importance of wise reflection was vital: lust could only be sustained by restricting attention to those parts of the body that encourage it, and by disregarding those that engender indifference or disgust. Even those parts of the physical body that do provoke lust are only able to do so when they are looked at in a certain way, and when certain information or perspectives are ignored. By opening the mind to all those aspects of the body that the lustful mind represses, lust is deprived of its foundation.

The loathsome aspects of monks’ own male bodies were more easily seen. As they practised constantly observing their bodies with an equanimous mind, they could not help but be confronted with the unattractiveness of such phenomena as sweat, phlegm, urine, excrement, etc. But the recognition that women’s bodies were every bit as coarse and full of unattractive parts as a man’s, was harder to accept. Luang Por’s words, intended to disabuse monks of such a coarse mental state as lust, were correspondingly earthy. On one occasion, he spoke to an infatuated disciple:

Look more closely. Delusion arises in your mind when you don’t meditate. Are you going to let yourself be fooled by the beauty of skin? Consider what’s underneath it. Have you really thought about that? What’s got into your mind that you won’t let it pull free of these desires? They’re causing you suffering!

Do you want to go back to jail again? Are you in love with her waste holes? There’s two holes, and they’re waste holes. If they’re not washed they stink. Or don’t you believe me?

Mucus runs out of these holes. You don’t even realize that you’re infatuated with a waste hole. She’s full of waste holes. Her face is full of them. It’s crazy to be attached to all that and yet you’re ready for more. You still want to go back and die in the same old place. Haven’t you had enough?

Sensual desire doomed them to rebirth. And just one nine-month term of imprisonment in a woman’s womb should be more than enough to make somebody not want to have to go through it again. But, incredibly:

You’ve passed through these filthy things countless times before, and you still feel no compunction.

Comparisons involving disgusting holes or sewage pipes were Luang Por’s forte, but when speaking of sensual desire itself, rather than its object, his similes were more wide-ranging. He pointed out that the pleasure was short-lived and was usually followed by some discomfort. As soon as you’ve dealt with the discomfort, then you want more.

Referring to his own practice, he once said:

Once I’d become a monk, I became afraid of it all. I saw more suffering in sensual pleasures than enjoyment. It was as if there was this nice sweet banana. You knew it was sweet, but now you’d found out that the banana had been poisoned. Even though you were aware of the sweetness, you also knew that if you ate it, you’d die. That was the view that was in my mind all the time. I was constantly aware of the poison, and so I drew back more and more. Now, after many years as a monk, it doesn’t look even slightly appetizing.

As for extreme cases in which no amount of meditation could reduce the mental agitation, Luang Por had a piece of advice guaranteed to send a shiver down a young monk’s spine:

Give it a good whack with an axe handle. Then see if dares lift its head again.

But the word ‘kāma’, or sensual desire, has a wide-ranging meaning. It is not solely confined to sexual desire.

When people become monks they often say how happy they are to have left the sensual world behind them. But look more closely at the nature of sensual indulgence. If feelings of like and dislike arise when you see a form with your eyes, then you are still indulging in sensuality. Any unmindful contact through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body or mind, is sensory indulgence.

Another analogy to point out the drawbacks of sensuality returned to the world of dogs:

Practice is tough. The teacher instructs you to fit into the monastic form but it’s hard – you’re already attached to the flavour of sensuality. Like dogs. If all you give a dog to eat every day is plain rice, it may still eat so much it gets as fat as a pig. But if one day you tip some curry over the rice – two plates are all you need – then after that the dog will refuse plain rice. That’s how fast attachment takes hold. Unless we reflect on our use of the four requisites, then forms, sounds, odours and flavours can destroy our practice.

It was not that monks were to keep silent all the time. Developing Right Speech is an essential element of the Eightfold Path, and nourishing and supportive relationships with fellow monks would be impossible without it. Nevertheless, Luang Por urged monks to observe how often seeking out conversation with friends was little more than an attempt to escape from themselves. But habits were strong, and it was not always so easy to draw the line between appropriate and inappropriate speech. So there would be a stern Dhamma talk, a period of strictness and then gradually the trivial conversations would start to spring up once more, until the next talk damped them down again. Luang Por never seemed to expect it to be any other way. But he did consider that a clear standard and ideal that monks found difficult to live up to was better than no standard at all. At the very least, the standard honoured the monks who were inclined to keep themselves somewhat aloof. And it was obvious to everyone that there was a correlation between the avoidance of socializing and devotion to meditation.

A favourite location for idle conversation was the shed where the monks washed and dyed their robes. To prevent this, Luang Por instructed the monks to either practice walking meditation or make toothwoods while they waited for their robes to dry. Luang Por’s kuti was not too far from the dyeing shed and if the sound of conversation reached him, he would walk over to admonish the culprits:

You’ve let the dogs bite you again.

### Tudong

‘Tudong’, the Thai form of the Pali word ‘dhutaṅga’, refers to the ascetic practices allowed by the Buddha. In Thailand, the word is most often heard in the phrase ‘pai tudong’ or to ‘go on tudong’. Going on tudong is the practice by which monks walk through the countryside and in lonely places, either as a form of pilgrimage, or to find secluded spots for meditation. Monks on tudong keep many of the traditional ascetic practices, thus the adoption of that name rather than the more accurate ‘jarik’ (Pali: ‘cārika’). Going on tudong is one of the key practices of the forest monk, and one on which Luang Por gave a great deal of advice:

The Buddha praised going on tudong as proclaiming the Holy Life. The ‘Holy Life’ means the refined training practices, the inner practices. It’s not that the walking or the journey itself is tudong. The real meaning of ‘tudong’ are the practices undertaken on that journey.

He explained further:

We go on tudong in order to experience physical solitude. When we come to cremation forests or quiet mountain valleys, then we stop to meditate. When we gain the seclusion of physical solitude, it forms a cause for mental seclusion, and the mind becomes lucidly calm.

Two virtues he stressed as all-important for the tudong monk were wise shame and wise fear of the consequences of one’s actions. He said that in possession of these two qualities, ‘wherever a monk may go on tudong, his mind will be bright.’

When you go to visit different teachers, don’t start comparing different monasteries – take whatever is good from each one. Don’t worry that you will need all kinds of things and then take a great load of requisites. Once you start walking, you’ll see your mistake and end up having to give it all away. Tudong is preparing your mind for practice. Soap isn’t essential; you can rub yourself down with a piece of cloth. It’s not necessary to take a toothbrush; a piece of wood (mai khat) will do. A bathing cloth and a dipper is all you need for a bath. You can survive like that. That’s the way of tudong.

By the mid-1960s, Luang Por considered the tradition to be in decline. The great respect afforded to tudong monks by lay Buddhists had led unscrupulous monks to take advantage of it by masquerading as ascetics in order to garner donations. Scathing about the corruption of the tudong tradition that he saw around him, Luang Por would refer to the tudong ideals that he had inherited:

Even if there were vehicles, you didn’t make use of them. You relied on your mindfulness and wisdom. You travelled with physical pain, you looked at the painful feelings. You went contemplating your mind. You went for coolness, for practice, to search, to look for Dhamma and peace. You went into the mountains and forests looking for truth.

Every now and again, Luang Por would lead small groups of monks and lay attendants on tudong expeditions. These trips, usually to the more remote areas of Ubon Province bordering Laos or Cambodia, might last as long as two or three months. They gave Luang Por the opportunity to see his disciples at close quarters dealing with adversity. He would use their daily experiences as a teaching device. A lump of human excrement by the side of the road could lead to a reflection on the human body; emerging mushrooms and dead tree stumps prompted homilies on the impermanent nature of things.

As Luang Por got older and was unable to lead the monks on tudong himself, he would instead occasionally send groups of three or four monks to stay in cremation forests outside local villages. The cremation of those who had died an unnatural death (and whose confused and unhappy spirit was believed to be roaming around) was a favourite occasion for this practice. Luang Por pushed his disciples to confront their fear of spirits, as he himself had done many years before.

Monks given permission by Luang Por to embark on a tudong trip would first ask for his blessings and guidance. Ajahn Jun went on many such walks and remembered much of the advice he received. He recalled that Luang Por would encourage tudong monks to keep returning to the three refuges of Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha. They should humbly invite the qualities of clear knowing, truth and good practice into their hearts. With Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha dwelling within them, they would be joyful, energetic and mindful, and develop a wisdom that could deal effectively with any problem that might arise. Going on tudong meant testing themselves against all kinds of obstacles. Those obstacles were not to be feared or resented. It was through facing up to them that they would come to understand the truth of things.

Luang Por gave detailed instructions on how to minimize the dangers from human and non-human beings. He suggested that in areas populated by wild animals such as tigers and elephants, it would be better to avoid eating meat, as the subtle odour emitted from the body after meat eating could provoke attack. If a monk did come face-to-face with a wild creature, he should simply keep still, and in most cases, the creature would simply go its way. If it did not, then evasive measures would have to be taken. Ajahn Jun took to heart Luang Por’s advice on how to deal with dangerous animals.

“He said if an animal – say a wild bull – means to harm you, then it will usually lower its head, but it can’t get very low. So, if you can’t get away, then duck down below its horns and away to one side. Or try opening your glot. If the animal is startled by that, it will run away. If there’s a ditch nearby, then go down into it; the bull will be unable to gore you properly down there. When bulls are about to butt, they shut their eyes. If your mind is really firm, then stand your ground and as it runs in, then at the last moment, move away at a slight angle. But you might not be quick enough; it depends on your strength of mind and agility.”

Luang Por also explained the protocols for staying in caves. Those in which monks with bad sīla had stayed in the past should be avoided. The monk should make clear his pure intentions before entering, as described by Ajahn Jun:

“Luang Por said that if there were fierce animals or local spirits or guardian deities in the area, then when you arrived, you should stand at the entrance and make a resolution, ‘I am about to enter this cave. I come as a friend, in order to help you be free of suffering, not as an enemy to do you harm.’ You should establish your intentions in that way, and put any animals or other beings inside at their ease. ‘There’s no need to doubt or be suspicious of me. I’ve come here to put forth effort in my meditation, to do good. If you wish to continue living here and share the cave with me, then please do as you wish.’ Having first made that determination, he said, you should then enter the cave purposefully and with mindfulness.”

The greatest protection was always morality.

“He said that the most important thing was not to break my precepts, because if I did, something untoward would happen … Morality is very important, and you must try to look after it with every breath, every step of the way. If you break your precepts, all kinds of unpleasant things can happen to you: sometimes it might be stomach ache; sometimes you might rave deliriously in your sleep, have nightmares; sometimes it might be animals or spirits coming to harm you. So keep reflecting on your morality.

“Luang Por said that going by yourself can be lonely; going with a friend is good. Two is a good number. But if three or four go together, it’s too much, and it often leads to complications and turmoil … He cautioned me about conflicts with fellow monks and advised me to be patient. If you go with a group of five monks for more than a month or two, there’s usually only one or two left by the end. The combination of tiredness and harsh surroundings gives rise to arguments about things like the route or the place to rest. Some monks can be forgetful; they leave things behind and have to go back for them, which annoys their friends. There are many problems, particularly with shortages of requisites. To go on tudong you need a great deal of patience and endurance.

“He said that if more than one monk goes to stay in a cremation forest, you should stay well apart – although, if Luang Por himself was one of the group, he would cough every now and again just to encourage you. He always stressed that we shouldn’t be hesitant about the practice. It was correct, it was right … Don’t be fearful about breaking a leg or crippling yourself. There’s no need to fear death.”

Monks would often visit forest monasteries during their tudong walk.

“Luang Por cautioned us that it was important when entering into the company of other groups of monks not to be conceited or attach to conventions.”

The main criterion for choosing places to stay on tudong was seclusion. After a few days in one spot, lay people would often start to come to visit, and the advantages to meditation would be lost.

“You may start getting offered good food. The place is beautiful and it’s comfortable, and you can get attached to these things. That’s why it’s good to move on after three days, or seven days at most. You don’t go on tudong for comfort and pleasure and good food. You go for the benefit to your practice. Don’t stay long enough to give rise to a sense of loss when you leave … If you stay longer, attachments to laypeople can arise.”

Tudong was to wear away the defilements, not to accumulate new ones. Monks should constantly be monitoring their feelings towards their surroundings.

“If you’re somewhere and you don’t like it and suddenly you have to leave today – right now! – or if you like it and you want to stay for a long time, then it means that you’re following craving and desire.

“Luang Por told us that we shouldn’t go sightseeing. He told us to look at the inner sights instead. He said, You don’t need to go and visit a lot of teachers. Go and stay in cremation forests. Maintain your practice of chanting and bowing in such places. Be restrained and don’t stay anywhere for long, or you will form attachments to the laypeople.

“He said that if you speak to laypeople, you should take into account their level of understanding. Don’t be contentious or aggressive. He warned us about people coming to ask for lottery numbers. He said, ‘Tell them you don’t know, and that you’ll give them something better – the principles of practice. If they pester you and you can’t get away from them, then teach about practice, the Five and Eight Precepts, and let them come up with the numbers themselves.’ Examine people’s characters; they may be dangerous to you. But on the other hand, they may have previously looked after monks. Then they will come and attend to you. At night time they will bring their families to take the precepts, and on Observance Day, they will come to take the Eight Precepts.

“He gave advice on how to deal with questions that might get asked … He said that if people come and ask you about levels of absorption and enlightenment, then tell them that you’re not interested in that way of talking. Our way of practice comes down to whether you can abandon greed, hatred and delusion. Are you grasping at material things? If someone abuses you, do you get angry? As for different absorptions, our teachers don’t use those terms; they teach you to watch your mind, and by doing so, to free yourself from Māra’s snare.”

Luang Por said that monks on tudong could spread the Dhamma through the quality of their sense restraint. Sometimes, their deportment could so inspire those who saw them that it might lead them to request teachings.

“He told the story of how Ven. Sāriputta, while still the member of another sect, saw the arahant Ven. Assaji on his alms-round. The colour of Ven. Assaji’s robe was sober. He seemed much more composed in his movements than members of other sects. He walked peacefully, neither too fast nor too slow, but alert to his every movement and the environment he was walking through. Ven. Sāriputta became inspired and approached him. As a result of the short teaching he received from Ven. Assaji, Ven. Sāriputta realized stream-entry and subsequently became one of the two great disciples …

“Luang Por said that on tudong you see things you’ve never seen before, hear things you’ve never heard before, and get to know things you never knew before. With wisdom and self-restraint, every experience on tudong could be beneficial, both to yourself and others.”

### Medicines

Tudong monks like to seek out secluded places to practise, but places that are far from the hustle and bustle of the world are also far from modern conveniences, and most crucially, they may be hours from the nearest hospital. Thus, it is important for tudong monks to have a knowledge of herbal medicines so as to be able to make use of the things nature gives freely to treat their illnesses. In a memoir, Ajahn Dilok wrote:

“Luang Por once told the Sangha that before going on tudong, he would finely pound somlom leaves together with salt and then pack the mixture tightly into a length of bamboo and roast it, which would leave a dried stick within the bamboo. When he wanted to eat some, he’d dig it out of the tube with a knife. He said that if you have no tonic to drink in the afternoon, then you can eat a little of this instead. For malaria, he recommended eating neem leaves and about six inches of borapet vine a day as a prophylactic. If you have malaria badly, then you should pound the borapet, extract the sap and drink it. Some people like to cut borapet into little rings and lightly roast them with salt. Its aroma is as good as coffee. Luang Por said he got a lot of his remedies, especially those for snake bites, from his brother Por Lah.

“Another medicine that tudong monks have used successfully to cure snake bite is the one allowed by the Buddha in the Vinaya. In the event of a snake bite, you are allowed to cut living wood, burn it and mix the wood ash with urine and excrement; and having strained it, give it to the bitten person. It causes violent vomiting and can eliminate the poison.

“There was an army colonel who heard Luang Por mention this a number of times and it stuck in his memory. One day he took a group of soldiers on patrol in the jungle and one of them got bitten by a snake. The colonel remembered Luang Por’s words. He asked for donations of excrement and urine. They were mixed together and forced down the man’s throat. At that point, his jaw was already stiff. He went cold and then started to vomit. He survived.”

The idea of drinking urine might seem repulsive, but in India, its medicinal value has been recognized since ancient times, and the Buddha allowed the consumption of cow urine for medicinal purposes. The older generation of Isan tudong monks (the younger generation are generally not so keen), pickled human urine. They would bury earthenware jars of urine, ginger, lemongrass, galangal and kaffir lime peel – sometimes diluted with water, sometimes not – for months or even years. Then they would filter and boil it with fresh ginger and salt. The resultant brew was considered an excellent remedy for digestive problems.

### The Monk

Luang Por spent some thirty years training monastics. It was the main work of his life. He experienced successes and failures, and he learned from both. The standard of practice he established and the goals he set for his disciples were expressed most beautifully by the Buddha himself in the Dhammapada:

For the wise monk, These are the first things to cultivate: Sense-control, contentment, Observance of the Pāṭimokkha rules, Association with keen friends, Who lead a pure life.

Dhp 375-376

Just as the jasmine sheds, Its own withered flower, So should you, O monk, Cast off lust and hatred.

Dhp 377

By yourself censure yourself. By yourself examine yourself. Thus self-guarded and mindful too, Shall you, monk, live in bliss.

Dhp 379

Dwelling in the Dhamma, Delighting in the Dhamma, Investigating the Dhamma, Remembering the Dhamma, That monk falls not away From the Dhamma sublime.

Dhp 364

He who grasps at neither ‘I’ nor ‘Mine’, Neither in mentality nor materiality, Who grieves not for what is not – Such a one indeed is called a monk.

Dhp 367

1 By the end of his teaching career the length of time was much shorter.

2 See Glossary, ten precepts.

3 The nuns lived separately from the male monastics; their training is dealt with in Chapter IX.

4 Pali: maggaphala. The ‘paths and fruits’ refers to the practice inclining towards, and the attainment of, the four stages of enlightenment. See Glossary: stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner and arahant.

5 cf. The Buddha’s statement in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta (MN 10): ‘Should any person maintain the Four Foundations of Mindfulness in this manner for seven years … seven months … seven days then by him, one of two fruitions is proper to be expected: arahantship here and now; or if some form of clinging is yet present, the state of non-returning.’

6 See Lifeblood, ‘Robes’

7 Dhammayut forest monks from a recognized monastery took their place in the Sangha hierarchy immediately.

8 The Western monks who disrobed tended to be more upbeat. Many opted to see it as, for example, the ending of a chapter in their spiritual life, a time to move on to new challenges.

9 AN 6.46

10 Latin: mucuna pruriens. A plant which, when touched, produces severe itchiness.

11 In every day usage, ‘toraman’ has lost its sense of training and now refers simply to torture or torment.

12 e.g. DN 1

13 This is the definition adopted by the Thai Forest Tradition. In fact, this Pali word simply means ‘way of practice’ and may be beneficial or unbeneficial depending on context. Here, it may be understood as an abbreviation of ‘sammā patipadā’, or ‘Right Practice’.

14 The Pali word closest to the idea of ‘mai nae’ is ‘vipariṇāma’, usually rendered in English as ‘subject to change’.

15 AN 6.55

16 AN 10.72