# From Distant Lands

Luang Por and the Western Sangha[1]

If by renouncing a lesser happiness one may realize a greater happiness, let the wise renounce the lesser, having regard for the greater.

– Dhp 290

## Introduction

### Farang

From the mid-fourteenth century until its sack by the Burmese in 1767, Ayutthaya was the capital of the Thai nation. Established on an island in the Chao Phraya River, it was ideally situated to act as an entrepôt port at a time when land routes were safer than sea, and merchants in the Orient sought to avoid sending their goods through the Straits of Malacca. Within two hundred years, Ayutthaya had become one of the most cosmopolitan cities in Asia. Its population of approximately a million people exceeded that of London. Some five hundred temples, many with pagodas covered in gold leaf, lent the city a magical, heaven-like aura that dazzled visitors from other lands. By the mid-seventeenth century, with communities of traders from France, Holland, Portugal and England housed outside the city wall, the inhabitants of Ayutthaya had become accustomed to Westerners or ‘farangs’. The kings of Ayutthaya often employed foreign mercenaries as bodyguards. To the Thais, these strange white beings seemed to resemble a species of ogre: hairy, ill-smelling, quarrelsome and coarse, lovers of meat and strong spirits, but possessors of admirable technical skills, particularly in the arts of war.

The ogres had a religion – priests and monks accompanied them – but it did not appeal to the Thais who were content with their own traditions. As Buddhists, they were accustomed to equating spirituality with the renunciation of sensual pleasures. They found the Western clergy worldly and hypocritical, undignified in their rivalries. The Ayutthayan Thais gently rebuffed what they saw as an alien faith with politeness and smiles. However, the legendary Siamese tolerance was stretched to the limit during the reign of King Narai (1656-88), when a charismatic Greek adventurer, Constantine Phaulkon, rose to become the closest adviser to the King, who appointed him Mahatthai, minister for trade and foreign affairs, second in power and influence to the king himself. After his conversion to Catholicism, it is alleged that Phaulkon became involved with the French in plots to put a Christian prince on the throne and thus win the whole country for God and Louis XIV. At King Narai’s death in 1688, however, conservative forces prevailed, French hopes were dashed and Phaulkon was executed. For the next 150 years, the Siamese looked on Westerners with fear, aversion and suspicion.

But as French and British power and prestige spread throughout the region in the nineteenth century, the image of the Westerner changed. He came to represent authority and modernity – the new world order that had to be accommodated. As all the rest of the region fell into European hands, Siam’s independence became increasingly fragile. King Mongkut (1851-68), believed that the only way for a small country to survive in the colonial era was by earning the respect of the Western powers through becoming more like them. To that end, he began to reverse policies of previous monarchs and cultivated friendships with Western scholars and missionaries. He introduced Western styles of dress and uniform. He predicted eclipses by scientific means, undermining the hitherto unshakeable prestige of the astrologers. He also sought to reform popular Buddhism along more rational, ‘scientific’ lines to protect it from the missionaries’ disdain.

After King Mongkut’s death, his son, King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910), carried on his father’s policies and sought to create a modern, centralized state and administration, relying heavily on Western expertise. Members of the royal family and aristocracy were sent to study in the West, particularly to England. The policy was successful: Siam preserved its independence. At the end of the nineteenth century, however, the French humiliated the Thais by annexing their eastern territories. To many, this confirmed the West’s unquestionable superiority in all things worldly.

By the time Luang Por reached manhood, the wealthy Thai elite had become enamoured with the material symbols of Western culture. Expensive imported clothes, motor vehicles, gadgets and foods were the sought-after status symbols. The absolute monarchy was overthrown in 1932 in favour of a Western style democracy, that was soon displaced by a more potent import: military dictatorship. Fascism was the new vogue – far more appealing to the military men running the country than the messiness of political debate. The country’s name was changed to ‘Thailand’. Chauvinism was promoted in the guise of patriotism. Cultural mandates accompanied political change. Field Marshal Phibunsongkhram passed laws making it compulsory for men to wear hats and kiss their wives on the cheek before leaving for work in the morning. A marginalization of Buddhist goals and ideals, coinciding with official support for Buddhist forms and rituals, became a feature of development that was to become an enduring trait.

In the hamlets of Ubon, images of the West came from Hollywood. Travelling movie companies set up their screens and loud speakers in village monasteries where Clark Gable and Greta Garbo enchanted their audiences in homely Lao, dubbed live in front of the screen. Thus, the first flesh-and-blood glimpse of farang in Ubon, exciting though it was, came as a shock. During the Second World War, while the newly ordained Luang Por was studying in local village monasteries, a group of gaunt and ragged POWs was jailed in the centre of town. They were prisoners of the local Japanese garrison, hostages against Allied bombing raids. The local people smuggled them bananas.

Then, in the 1960s, came the Vietnam War. Ubon, closer to Hanoi than to Bangkok, attained a strategic importance. By the end of the decade, twenty thousand young Americans were stationed on a sprawling airbase north of the town. Large uniformed men – black, brown and white – strode along the streets hand-in-hand with mini-skirted prostitutes. They caroused in tacky nightclubs with names like ‘Playboy’ and sought to escape the stress of their lives with ‘Buddha sticks’. Overhead, at regular intervals, came the deafening sound of Phantom fighters and A130 airships taking off on missions over Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.

American military personnel were not, however, the only young Westerners in Thailand at that time. It was during this period that villagers working in the fields to the east of Wat Pah Pong became used to a strange new sight. Tall, fair-skinned young men with scruffy hair and dressed in tee shirts and faded blue jeans would often be seen walking along the ox-track with a dogged, loping stride and with a large grubby backpack, like a malignant growth, behind them. These young men were the first trickles of the steady stream of Westerners who were finding their way to Luang Por Chah. They were to become the senior members of a Western Sangha which now, more than forty years later, numbers almost two hundred monks and nuns.

### More Than Words

‘Luang Por, only a few of your Western disciples speak Thai and you can’t speak their language. How do you teach them?’ This was one of the most common questions that Luang Por faced from the early 1970s onwards as the number of his Western disciples steadily increased. He would explain that he was teaching Buddhism not as a philosophy, but as a way of liberation. Pointing directly to the experience of suffering, its cause, and the way leading to its cessation were more important than finding words to describe the process. Sometimes to clarify this point, he would pour water from the thermos flask on the table before him into a cup.

In Thai we call this ‘nam ron’, in Lao it’s ‘nam hon’ and in English they call it ‘hot water’. But these are just names. Dip your finger in it, and no language can really pass on what that actually feels like. Even so, people of every nationality know the feeling for themselves.

On another occasion, a visitor seeing all the foreign monks, asked Luang Por whether he spoke English or French or German or Japanese, to which, in every case, he replied that no, he could not. The questioner looked confused: how did the foreign monks learn anything then? Characteristically, Luang Por replied with a question:

Do you keep any animals at home? Have you got any cats and dogs? Any oxen or buffalo? Yes? Well, can you speak Cat language? Can you speak Dog? Can you speak Buffalo? No? Then how do they know what you want them to do?

He summarized:

It’s not difficult. Training the Westerners is like training water buffalo. If you just keep tugging the rope, they soon catch on.

To Thais, the water buffalo is the epitome of dullness and stupidity. Comparing a human being to a buffalo would normally be considered offensive; anyone who calls someone ‘khwai’ to their face is either showing contempt or is spoiling for a fight. Given the exaggerated respect for the intelligence of Westerners common in Thailand, Luang Por’s audiences would always find his buffalo comparison both shocking and hilarious.

The sight of Western monks made a powerful impression. At a time when Western technology, material advances and expertise were being so touted by the powers-that-be, here were to be found educated young men who had voluntarily renounced the good things of life that people were being encouraged to aspire to. These were men who had chosen to live austere lives in the forest as monks – not understanding the language, eating coarse food, striving for peace and wisdom in the same way that Thai monks had been doing for hundreds of years. It was baffling, fascinating, and, above all else, inspiring. Many visitors would leave Wat Pah Pong thinking that perhaps there was more to Buddhism than they had supposed. If the Westerners had so much faith in it, how could it be outdated?

Luang Por’s basic technique was not, he insisted, particularly mysterious: he led his Western disciples, he showed them what to do, he was an example. It wasn’t necessary to impart a great deal of information.

Even though I have a lot of Western disciples living with me, I don’t give them so much formal instruction. I lead them in the practice. Good actions yield good results and bad actions yield bad results. I give them the opportunity to see that. When they practise sincerely, they get good results, and so they develop conviction in what they’re doing. They don’t just come here to read books. They really do the practice. They abandon whatever is bad in their hearts and goodness appears in its place.

The Westerners had come to Buddhist teachings and monastic life without the cultural conditioning of the Thais. In one sense, they had ‘beginner’s mind’. Luang Por found their open, questioning attitude refreshing and stimulating. As students, they were largely free of the complacency that he considered such an obstacle for his Thai disciples. On the other hand, their need for explanations could make them susceptible to crippling doubts. Sometimes, questions led only to more and more questions, diminishing the intensity of their practice. The Westerners often came to envy the single-minded application of their fellow Thai monks, who seemed blessed with unquestioning faith in the teacher and the tradition.

Luang Por said:

Once you’ve got them to stop, these Westerners can see clearly how they’ve done it. But in the beginning, it’s a bit wearing on the teacher. Wherever they are, whoever they’re with, they ask questions all the time. Well, if they don’t know the answers, then why not? They have to keep asking until they run out of questions, until there’s nothing more to ask. Otherwise, they’d just keep running – they’re hot!

## The First Disciple

### Ajahn Sumedho

In 1967, a Wat Pah Pong monk named Ven. Sommai returned from a tudong trip to northern Isan with a monk who literally stood head and shoulders above him. Even the most restrained monks in Wat Pah Pong were unable to resist at least a surreptitious glance. The new monk was six foot two inches tall, had a fair complexion, an angular nose and bright blue eyes. His name was Sumedho.

The two monks had met in a meditation monastery in Nong Khai Province. Upon discovering that they were both Korean War veterans and that Ven. Sommai spoke English, they had exchanged their stories. Ajahn Sumedho told Sommai how, after the war, he had returned to college and gained a master’s degree in South Asian Studies from Berkeley. Upon graduation, he had joined the Peace Corps and taught English in Borneo before moving on to a spell at Thammasat University in Bangkok. He said that it was after receiving meditation instruction at the nearby Wat Mahathat that his interest in Buddhism, first kindled by his readings of Japanese haiku poetry during his military service some ten years before, had ripened into the decision to become a monk.

Now, however, after moving to Isan, receiving full Ordination, and spending the last several months in a small hut on solitary retreat, Ajahn Sumedho was beginning to lose confidence in the form of his monastic life and feeling the need for a more rounded way of practice. Ven. Sommai’s descriptions of Wat Pah Pong were timely, and inspired him. He asked permission from his preceptor to leave, and before long, the two monks were setting off together to walk the 450 kilometres south to Ubon.

It would turn out to be a decision with far-reaching consequences. Ajahn Sumedho would go on to spend the next ten years of his life in Ubon under the guidance of Luang Por. He would form the nucleus around which a community of Western monks coalesced. In 1975, he would establish the branch monastery, Wat Pah Nanachat, before moving to England in 1977. There, at Chithurst, in southern England, he founded the first of several overseas branch monasteries.

When someone once asked Luang Por whether he had any special connection with Westerners that led to so many becoming his disciples, he replied with a smile that as a boy, he had watched a cowboy movie with his friends. Images from it had stuck in his mind ever since, and perhaps they had exerted some kind of attractive force.

One of the characters in the movie was this big man smoking cigarettes. He was so tall! It fascinated me. What kind of human being could have such a huge body? That image has stuck in my mind until now, and a lot of Westerners have come. If you’re talking about causes, there was that.

When Sumedho arrived, he was just like the cowboy in the movie. What a long nose! As soon as I saw him, I thought to myself, ‘This monk is a Westerner.’ And I told him that I’d seen him before in a movie. So, yes, there were supporting causes and conditions. That’s why I’ve come to have a lot of Western kith and kin. They come even though I can’t speak English. I’ve tried to train them to know the Dhamma as I see it. It doesn’t matter that they don’t know Thai customs. I don’t make anything of it, that’s the way things are. I just keep helping them out – that’s the gist of it.

When Sumedho asked to be accepted as a student, Luang Por agreed, but made one condition: that he fitted in with the Thai monks and didn’t expect any special considerations.

“At the other monasteries in Thailand where I’d lived, the fact that I’d been a Westerner had meant that I could expect to have the best of everything. I could also get out of the work and other mundane things that the other monks were expected to do: ‘I’m busy meditating now. I don’t have time to sweep the floor. Let someone else sweep it. I’m a serious meditator.’ But when I arrived at Wat Pah Pong and people said, ‘He’s an American; he can’t eat the kind of food we eat.’ Luang Por said, ‘He’ll have to learn.’ And when I didn’t like the meditation hut I was given and asked for another that I liked better, Luang Por said, ‘No.’ The whole way of training was that you had to conform to the schedule. When I asked Luang Por if I could be excused from the long Dhamma talks, which I didn’t understand, he just laughed and said that you have to do what everyone else does.”

Wat Pah Pong provided a very different monastic environment to the one Sumedho was familiar with. In his previous wat, he had been living in solitude, sitting and walking at his hut, single-mindedly devoting himself to the development of meditation. The only human contact had been with a novice who brought him his daily meal. It had been a beneficial period for him, but he had become unsure how sustainable such a kind of monastic life would be in the long term. What he felt he lacked was Vinaya training.

“At Wat Pah Pong, the emphasis was on communal activities – working together, eating together, etc. – with all its rules. I knew that if I was going to live as a monk I needed the monk’s training, and I hadn’t been getting that at the meditation centre that I had been in before. What Luang Por gave me was a living situation to contemplate. You developed an awareness around the monastic tradition, and it was something that I knew I needed. I needed restraint and containment. I was a very impulsive person with a tremendous resistance to any kind of authority.

“I had been in the navy for four years and had developed an aversion to authority and rank. And then, before I went to Thailand, I had spent a few years in Berkeley, California where it was pretty much a case of ‘doing your own thing’. There was no sense of having to obey anybody, or to live under a discipline of any sort. But at Wat Pah Pong, I had to live following a tradition that I did not always like or approve of, in a situation where I had no authority whatsoever. I had a strong sense of my own freedom and right to asserting it, but I had no idea of serving anyone else: being a servant was like admitting you were somehow inferior. So, I found monastic life very useful for developing a sense for serving and supporting the monastic community.

“What impressed me about Luang Por was that although he seemed such a free spirit, an ebullient character, he was, at the same time, very strict with the Vinaya. It was a fascinating contrast. In California, the idea of freedom was being spontaneous and doing what you felt like. The idea of moral restraint and discipline was like this big ogre that’s coming to squash you with all these rules and traditions – you can’t do this and you can’t do that – and pressing down on you so much.

“So my immediate reaction to the strictness of Wat Pah Pong was to feel oppressed. And yet my feeling about Luang Por was that although his actions were always within the margins of the Vinaya, he was a free being. He wasn’t coming from ideas of doing what he liked, but from inner freedom. So in contemplating him, I began to look at the Vinaya so as to use it, not just to cut yourself off or to oppress yourself, but for freedom. It was a conundrum: how do you take a restrictive and renunciant convention, and liberate your mind through those conventions? I could see that there were no limits to Luang Por’s mind. Oftentimes, attachment to rules makes you worry a lot and lack confidence, but Luang Por was radiant. He was obviously not just someone keeping a lot of rules and anxious about his purity. He was a living example of the freedom that comes from practice.”

Ajahn Sumedho was impressed and reassured by Luang Por’s inquiries about his meditation practice. Luang Por merely acknowledged with a grunt that the method Ajahn Sumedho was using was valid, and gave him permission to carry on with it if he found it useful. It did not seem to be a crucial issue. It was clear that what Luang Por was teaching was not confined to a particular meditation technique: his way was a comprehensive training, the creation of a context or environment in which any legitimate technique would bear fruit. This was exactly what Ajahn Sumedho felt he needed.

“You have to find someone you resonate with. I’d been in other places and nothing had really clicked. I didn’t have a fixed idea of having a teacher either; I had a strong sense of independence. But with Luang Por, I felt a very strong gut-reaction. Something worked for me with him.

“The training at Wat Pah Pong was one of putting you in situations where you could reflect on your reactions, objections and so on, so that you began to see the opinions, views, prejudices and attachments that come up naturally in those situations. Luang Por was always emphasizing the need to reflect on the way things are. That is what I found most helpful because when you’re as self-centered and opinionated as I was then, you really need to open your mind. So I found Luang Por’s way much more clear and direct. As I was very suppressed already, I really needed a way of looking at myself honestly and clearly, rather than just trying to suppress my feelings and force my mind into more refined states. He was also very aware of the individual needs of the monks, so it wasn’t like there was a blanket technique. He realized that you really have to figure it out for yourself, and so how I saw him, how he affected me, was that he seemed to provide a backdrop for my life from which I could reflect.”

Even with this kind of appreciation of the way of practice at Wat Pah Pong, Ajahn Sumedho did not find it easy. Apart from the easily foreseen difficulties and frustrations he experienced with the language, culture, climate and diet, it was the Vinaya, ironically, that caused him most misgivings. His personality had always been an idealistic one; he was drawn to the big picture, the unifying vision, and tended to get impatient with the nuts-and-bolts of everyday life. Unsurprisingly, he felt a natural antipathy to much of the detailed Vinaya instruction, which could seem to him like a continual nit-picking over trivial matters.

“The Vinaya readings were excruciatingly boring. You’d hear about how a monk who has a rent in his robe so many inches above the hem must have it sewn up before dawn and I kept thinking, ‘This isn’t what I became a monk for.’ ”

The Vinaya texts prescribe various duties to be performed towards a teacher by his students. One of them is to wash the teacher’s feet on his return from alms-round. At Wat Pah Pong, as many as twenty monks would be waiting for Luang Por at the dining hall foot bath, eager for the honour of cleaning the dirt from his feet or of having a hand on the towel that wiped them dry. At first, Ajahn Sumedho found the whole thing slightly ridiculous. Every day, he would look on with bemusement as monks started to make their way out to the foot bath. It was the kind of ritual that made him feel alienated from the rest of the community. He would be aware of the critical, judgemental part of his mind coming to the fore:

“But then I started listening to myself and I thought, ‘This is really an unpleasant frame of mind to be in. Is it anything to get so upset about? They haven’t made me do it. It’s all right; there’s nothing wrong with twenty men washing one man’s feet. It’s not immoral or bad behaviour, and maybe they enjoy it; maybe they want to do it – maybe it’s all right to do that … Perhaps I should do it.’ So the next morning, twenty-one monks ran out and washed Luang Por’s feet. There was no problem after that. It felt really good: that nasty thing in me had stopped.”

Although the Buddha called praise and blame ‘worldly dhammas’, even the most dedicated and unworldly spiritual seekers must learn how to deal with them skilfully. Throughout his early days at Wat Pah Pong, Ajahn Sumedho received generous praise. In Buddhist cultures, the voluntary renunciation of sensual pleasures in favour of spiritual training is an esteemed virtue. The sacrifices Ajahn Sumedho had made to become a monk inspired both his fellow monastics and the monastery’s lay supporters. In leaving America and donning the ochre robe, not only had he given up a standard of living that Isan peasant farmers could only dream about, but he had done so in exchange for a life in one of the strictest and most austere forest wats in the country. The conservative Isan people – with their sense of security and well-being so bound up with the maintenance of their traditions – were impressed by how well Ajahn Sumedho could live in exile from the conditions he was used to. They were inspired by how diligent and dedicated he was in his practice. As the only Westerner, he stood out and was a centre of attention wherever he went, second only to Luang Por himself.

On the other hand, it is common for Thais to possess a natural, apparently almost effortless physical grace, which is enhanced by the monastic emphasis on developing mindfulness through close attention to form and detail. It confused them to see Ajahn Sumedho, physically imposing and with an obvious zeal for the practice, but at the same time, by their standards, so awkward and ungainly. In most, it provoked a quiet but affectionate amusement; for some, that amusement was soured with a hint of fear, jealousy and resentment. Ajahn Sumedho, both a little paranoid and enjoying the attention, could not help but feel self-conscious.

“They would ask, ‘How old are you?’ I’d say, ‘Thirty-three.’ And they’d say, ‘Really? We thought you were at least sixty.’ Then they would criticize the way I walked, and say, ‘You don’t walk right. You’re not very mindful when you walk.’ And I’d take this shoulder bag and I’d just dump it down, without giving it any importance. And they’d say, ‘Put your bag down right. You take it like this, fold it over, and then you set it down beside you like that.’ The way I ate, the way I walked, the way I talked – it seemed that everything I did was criticized and made fun of – but something made me stay on and endure through it. I actually learned how to conform to a tradition and a discipline – and that took a number of years, really, because there was always strong resistance. But I began to understand the wisdom of the Vinaya and over the years, my equanimity grew.”

### Pushed

After a few years, Luang Por’s attitude to Ajahn Sumedho changed. Seeing his disciple’s growth in confidence and the praise he was receiving, he began to treat him more robustly. Ajahn Sumedho remembers:

“For the first couple of years, Luang Por would compliment me a lot, and boost up my ego, which I appreciated, because I tended to be self-disparaging, and to have this constant very positive attitude towards me was very helpful. Because I felt so respected and appreciated by him, I put a lot of effort into the practice. After a few years, it started to change. He saw I was stronger and he began to be more critical. Sometimes he would insult me and humiliate me in public – but by then I was able to reflect on it.

“There were times that Luang Por would tell the whole Dhamma Hall full of laypeople about things I’d done that were uncouth. Everyone, monks and laypeople, would be roaring with laughter. I’d just sit there feeling angry and embarrassed. One time, a novice picked up my outer robe by mistake and gave it to him. Luang Por laughed and said he knew immediately whose it was because of the bad smell, the ‘farang stink’. Of course, I felt pretty indignant when I heard Luang Por say that; but I could endure it, and because of the respect I felt for him I didn’t show any reaction. He asked me if I was feeling all right and I said yes, but he could see that my ears were bright red.

“He had a wonderful sense of timing and so I could work with it, and I benefited from being able to observe my own emotional reactions to being insulted or humiliated. If he’d done that at the beginning, I would never have stayed. There was no real system that I could see; you just felt that he was just trying to help you … forcing you to look at your own emotional reactions … and I always trusted him. He had such a great sense of humour, there was always a twinkle in his eye, always a bit of mischief, and so I just went along with it.”

Many of Ajahn Sumedho’s most vivid memories of his early years at Wat Pah Pong are of occasions when some dark cloud or other in his mind dissolved through a sudden insight into the desires and attachments that conditioned it. Luang Por’s genius as a teacher seemed to him to lie in creating the situations in which this process could take place – bringing a crisis to a head, or drawing his attention most skilfully to what was really going on in his mind. His faith in Luang Por allowed him to open up. A smile from his teacher or words of encouragement at the right moment could make hours of frustration and irritation seem ridiculous and insubstantial; a sharp question or rebuke could wake him up from a long bout of self-indulgence.

“He was a very practical man, and so he was using the nitty-gritty of daily life for insight. He wasn’t so keen on using the special event or extreme practices as on getting you to wake up in the ordinary flow of monastic life, and he was very good at that. He knew that any convention can become perfunctory and deadening after a while if you just get used to it. He was aware of that, and so there was always this kind of sharpness that would startle and jolt you.”

In the early days, frustration was the major fuel of Ajahn Sumedho’s suffering. The afternoon leaf sweeping periods could be exhausting in the hot season. One day as he toiled in the sun, his body running with sweat, he remembers his mindfulness becoming consumed by aversion and self-righteousness, and grumbling to himself: ‘I don’t want to do this. I came here to get enlightened, not to sweep leaves off the ground.’ Just then Luang Por approached him and said, ‘Where’s the suffering? Is Wat Pah Pong the suffering?’

“I suddenly realized something in me which was always complaining and criticizing and which was preventing me from ever giving myself or offering myself to any situation.

“Another time I had this really negative reaction to having to sit up and practise all through the night, and I must have let it show. After the evening chanting, Luang Por reminded everyone that they should stay and meditate right through to dawn. ‘Except’, he said, ‘for Sumedho. He can go and have a rest.’ He gave me a nice smile, and I just felt so stupid. Of course, I stayed all night.

“There were so many moments when you were caught up in some kind of personal thing, and he could sense that. He had the timing to reach you in that moment when you were just ripe so that you could suddenly realize your attachment. One night we were in the small hall where we did the Pāṭimokkha[2] and his friend Luang Por Chalui came to visit. Usually, after the Pāṭimokkha was over, we would go and have a hot drink and then join the laypeople in the Dhamma Hall. But on that night, he and Luang Por Chalui sat there joking with each other for hours, and we had to sit there and listen. I couldn’t understand what they were talking about, and I got very irritated. I was waiting for him to tell us to go to the hall, but he just carried on. Every now and again, he would glance at me. Well, I had a stubborn streak and I wasn’t going to give up. I just got more and more angry and irritated.

“It got to about midnight and they were still going strong, laughing like schoolboys. I got very self-righteous; they weren’t even talking seriously about practice or Vinaya or anything! My mind kept saying, ‘What a waste of time. They should know better.’ I was full of my anger and resentment. He knew that I had this stubborn, tenacious streak and so he kept going until two in the morning, three in the morning. At that time, I just gave up to the whole thing, let go of all the anger and resistance and felt a wave of bliss and relaxation; I felt all the pain had gone. I was in a state of bliss. I felt I’d be happy if he went on forever. He noticed that and told everyone we could leave.”

### Speaking from the heart

Given Ajahn Sumedho’s celebrity, and his growing proficiency in Thai, it was natural that Wat Pah Pong’s lay supporters would be eager to hear him give a Dhamma talk. Four years after his arrival, Luang Por decided that the time had arrived for his first Western disciple to begin a new kind of training: that of expounding the Dhamma.

The opportunity arose during a trip to a branch monastery. As evening approached, a large number of lay supporters started to file into the monastery to participate in the evening chanting period and to listen to a Dhamma talk from Luang Por. With no prior warning, Luang Por asked Ajahn Sumedho to give the talk. The prospect of ascending the monastery’s Dhamma seat and struggling to give an extemporary address to a large audience in a language in which he was not particularly fluent, was an intimidating one. Ajahn Sumedho froze and declined as politely but firmly as he could. But with his strong trust in Luang Por and the realization that he was merely postponing the inevitable, he began to reconcile himself to the idea that soon he would have to start teaching.

When Luang Por ‘invited’ him to give a talk on the next Observance Day, he acquiesced in silence. Despite being well aware of Luang Por’s view that Dhamma talks should not be planned in advance, Ajahn Sumedho felt insecure. At the time, he was reading a book on Buddhist cosmology and reflecting on the relationship between different realms of existence and psychological states. He made some notes for the coming talk.

Observance Day soon came and Ajahn Sumedho gave the talk. Although his vocabulary was still quite rudimentary and his accent shaky, it seemed to go down well. He felt relieved and proud of himself. Throughout the next day, laypeople and monks came up to him to express their appreciation of a fine talk, and he looked forward to basking in the sun of his teacher’s praise. But on paying respects to Luang Por beneath his kuti, and seeing his expressionless face, he felt a chill go through his heart. In a quiet voice, Luang Por said, ‘Don’t ever do that again.’ Ajahn Sumedho realized that Luang Por knew that he had thought the talk out beforehand and that, in his eyes, although it had been an intelligent, interesting and informative discourse, it was not the Dhamma speaking; it was merely thoughts and cleverness. The fact that it was a ‘good talk’ was not the point.

In order to develop the right attitude towards giving Dhamma talks, a monk needs to guard his mind against the desire for praise and appreciation, and he must develop a thick skin. One night, Ajahn Sumedho was asked by Luang Por to give a discourse to the laypeople with an unusual condition – it must last for three hours. After about an hour he had exhausted his initial subject and began to ramble, hunting with increasing desperation for things to talk about. He paused, repeated himself and embarked on long meandering asides, painfully aware of members of his audience getting bored and restless, dozing, walking out. Just a few dedicated elderly women sat there throughout the whole three hours – slumped, eyes closed – like gnarled trees on a blasted plain. Ajahn Sumedho reflected after it was all over:

“It was a valuable experience for me. I began to realize that what Luang Por wanted me to do was to be able to look at this self-consciousness, the posing, the pride, the conceit, the grumbling, the laziness, the not-wanting-to-be-bothered, the wanting to please, the wanting to entertain, the wanting to get approval.”

### Turn and Face the Strange

Ajahn Sumedho was the only Western monk at Wat Pah Pong for four years until, in 1971, two more American monks arrived to spend the Rains Retreat. One of them, Dr Douglas Burns, was a psychiatrist based in Bangkok who intended to be a monk for the duration of the retreat; the other was Jack Kornfield (Ven. Santidhammo) who, after practising in monasteries throughout Thailand and Burma, was to return to lay life and become one of the most influential teachers in the American vipassanā movement. Neither monk stayed at Wat Pah Pong very long, but both exerted a strong influence on future developments.

At the end of his short period in the robes, Dr Burns returned to Bangkok where he would recommend Westerners interested in becoming monks to go to live with Luang Por. A number of the first generation of monks came to Ubon following such a referral. In the months that Jack Kornfield was with Luang Por, he made assiduous notes of the teachings that he received and later printed them as the very popular Fragments of a Teaching and Notes from a Session of Questions and Answers. Subsequently, as Kornfield’s own reputation spread in America, his frequent references to Luang Por introduced Luang Por’s name to a Western audience. This acquaintance was strengthened by A Still Forest Pool, a collection of Luang Por’s teachings which Kornfield co-authored with another ex-monk, Paul Breiter (formerly Ven. Varapanyo).

Luang Por’s charisma and his ability to move and inspire his Western disciples soon became well-known. But if Luang Por was the main reason Wat Pah Pong became the most popular Thai forest monastery for Westerners seeking to make a long-term commitment to monastic life, Ajahn Sumedho’s presence was often a deciding factor. Here was someone who had proved it could be done.

He had lived a number of years in trying conditions with no other Western companions and had obviously gained much from the practice. He was a translator and a mentor. And, although he resisted the evolution, he was also becoming a teacher in his own right. Ven. Varapanyo arrived in Wat Pah Pong at a time when Luang Por was away for a few days. His meeting with Ajahn Sumedho was crucial to his decision to stay.

“Sitting up there on the porch in the peace of the forest night, I felt that here was a place beyond the suffering and confusion of the world – the Vietnam War, the meaninglessness of life in America and everywhere else, the pain and desperation of those I had met on the road in Europe and Asia who were so sincerely looking for a better way of life but not finding it. This man, in this place, seemed to have found it, and it seemed entirely possible that others could as well.”

In 1972, the Sangha of Western monks was steadily increasing and Luang Por decided that they should spend the Rains Retreat at Tam Saeng Pet, a branch monastery perched on a steep hill overlooking the flat Isan countryside, about 100 kilometres to the north of Wat Pah Pong. Away from the guiding influence of Luang Por, personality conflicts festered, and a burned out Ajahn Sumedho left at the end of the retreat.

“To begin with, I felt a lot of resentment about taking responsibility. On a personal level … the last thing I wanted to do was be with other Western monks … I was adjusted to living with Thai monks and to feeling at ease within this structure and culture, and yet there was an increasing number of Westerners coming through – Dr Burns and Jack Kornfield had been encouraging people to come.

“After the Western Sangha had this horrendous Rains Retreat at Tam Saeng Pet, I ran away, spent the rains in a monastery in the southeast and then went to India. But while I was there I had a really powerful heart-opening experience. I kept thinking of Luang Por and how I’d run away, and I felt a great feeling of gratitude to him, and I decided that I would go back and serve. It was very idealistic: ‘I’ll just give myself to Luang Por. Anything he wants me to do!’

“We’d just opened this horrible branch monastery at Suan Kluai down on the Cambodian border, and nobody wanted to go and stay there. I’d gone for a Kaṭhina ceremony and been taller than all the trees. So, in India, I thought I’d volunteer to go and take over Suan Kluai. I had this romantic image of myself. Of course, when I got back, Luang Por refused to send me there and by the end of the year, there were so many Westerners at Wat Pah Pong that he asked me to translate for them … Basically, I trusted him because he was the one pushing me into things that I wouldn’t have done by myself.”

## Through Western Eyes

### Beginnings

The question which every Western monk would get asked sooner or later (and usually sooner), was why he chose to become a monk. It was often a more difficult question to answer than might be expected. It wasn’t so easy to distinguish causes from triggers, or to be sure that an uplifting narrative was not being patched together with hindsight. Monks usually settled on recounting the events leading up to their decision and their departure to Thailand. There was, for instance, Pabhakaro, an American helicopter pilot, who first came to the country on ‘R&R’ during the Vietnam War. There were the Peace Corps volunteers, and the young travellers backpacking through Asia like the Canadians, Tiradhammo and Viradhammo. There were also those like the British Brahmavamso and the Australian Nyanadhammo who came with the express intention of becoming monks.

Many started off by reading books. The first generation – when books on Theravada Buddhism were hard to find – were inspired by the works of Alan Watts, Charles Luk and DT Suzuki. Later generations arrived having read translated works of Luang Por Chah, books by Ajahn Sumedho or American vipassanā teachers. Some were seeking to deepen and stabilize the lucid calm they had experienced on seven- or ten-day meditation retreats. Others were inspired by their contact with Buddhist monks while travelling around Thailand. One amongst the latter was Ajahn Sucitto. He recounts the effect of seeing monks on alms-round:

“One early morning sitting in a cafe, I saw monks from a local monastery walking on alms-round. They were in a line, barefoot in the dusty road, walking towards me. The rising sun glowed through their brown robes. Each monk had only a simple alms-bowl with him, and their faces were serene and gentle. Their walking was calm and unhurried; they were not going anywhere, they were just walking. The weight of years of self-importance lifted off my heart; something soared within me like a bird at dawn.”

But for the disciples of Luang Por, it was almost invariably his presence and example that inspired them to stay and take the leap into monastic life, or, if they were already ordained, to make a long-term commitment to the Wat Pah Pong training. For most, the first meeting with him, although outwardly inconsequential, was momentous and life changing. Some monks spoke of a sense of relief, as if they had finally found a place and a teacher they didn’t want to leave. As Ajahn Nyanadhammo squatted down respectfully, hands in anjali, Luang Por walked over to him, and without speaking, took his hands in his own.

“I felt this shock and joy and a weight fall from my shoulders. I didn’t realize until after he’d gone how much suffering I had been carrying around with me.”

One of the richest sources of anecdotes concerning Luang Por and his Western disciples is to be found in the writings of Paul Breiter. Breiter arrived in Wat Pah Pong in 1972, and, as Ven. Varapanyo, struggled gamely through five years of monastic training before disrobing and returning to his native United States. In 1993, his memoir of the years he spent with Luang Por, Venerable Father, was printed in Bangkok. It begins with words that struck a chord with many of his contemporaries: ‘If I have ever loved anybody in my life, then it is Luang Por Chah.’ Ven. Varapanyo’s first meeting with Luang Por took place in Bangkok.

“I was overwhelmed by his radiant, exuberant happiness. I had really never seen anyone like that. He seemed like a big, happy frog sitting on his lily pad, and I thought, if all you have to do to be like that is sit in the forest for thirty years, it’s worth it … I remember how my spirits were lifted then. In the car going back to the wat, I was thinking, ‘there’s hope’; the practice of meditation and the Buddhist monk’s way of life – both of which I found so difficult, much more difficult than anything I had ever done, thought of doing, or heard of anyone else doing – can produce results. Seeing a living example was worth more than reading any number of books.”

Ajahn Brahmavamso, a monk with a rigorous scientific background, decided to take Luang Por as his teacher after having his rational mind confounded. He recalls that shortly after his arrival in the wat, while listening to Luang Por teaching another Western monk, he mentally formulated his own question. As soon as he’d done so, Luang Por spoke words that seemed to answer his query directly – more so than that of the apparent questioner. Assuming it was probably a coincidence, he formulated another question, which was also promptly answered. This occurred again and again.

Not all of the foreign monks at Wat Pah Pong were from Western countries. Ajahn Gavesako, for instance, was from northern Japan. After a period mountaineering in Nepal, he had devoted himself to learning yoga in India before visa difficulties forced him to leave for Thailand. For him, inspiration first arose from his impression of the monastery itself and what it suggested about the abbot.

“I arrived at the wat just as the monks were leaving on alms-round. I was very impressed to see them walking in a line, composed and restrained. I couldn’t take my eyes away from them. It was such a beautiful sight, something I’d never seen before. I walked into the wat and the path was neat and clean and pleasant to walk along. There were no branches or leaves littering the path. It impressed me even more. I thought the abbot must be very good. He must have a very strict discipline.”

Ajahn Gavesako’s lay name had been Shibahashi. Luang Por found it impossible to pronounce and dubbed him ‘Si baht ha sip’ (‘Four baht fifty’). He inspired the young man by explaining how an inner search, a search for the end of suffering, was more valuable than an outer search. Unless he knew how to abandon negative mental states, climbing mountains was a waste of time. This inner search and training lay at the heart of monastic life. ‘Four baht fifty’ decided to stay. Some fifteen years later, when Luang Por was bedridden, Ajahn Gavesako became one of the stalwarts of the nursing shifts. Above all, he was motivated by gratitude. He said that he felt that, however much he did, he would never be able to repay even a small part of the debt he owed his teacher.

“I felt as if he gave me new life. He was like mother and father to me; he gave me so many things. It was like I was slowly sinking into quicksand, just about to be swallowed, and he pulled me out and saved my life.”

The young Australian musician who was later to become Ajahn Puriso, was struck by the contrast between Wat Pah Pong and other temples: the sombre coloured robes of the monks, their composure as they went about their duties, their aloofness – the sense that something meaningful was going on.

“I was told I could stay in the Dhamma Hall, informed where to find a pillow and a blanket, and then left to myself. The eerie Pali-Thai chanting I heard that night was totally beyond my mind’s grasp. I couldn’t even figure out if it sounded good or just strange. But the sight of the monks in the great, dark hall, lit with only a few candles, squatting immobile on their toes as they chanted for more than thirty minutes, was truly awe-inspiring.”

Ajahn Pasanno, abbot of Wat Pah Nanachat for over ten years and now abbot of Abhayagiri Forest Monastery in Northern California, first came to Wat Pah Pong as a visiting monk after having entered the Sangha in Bangkok. His thoughts echo those of Ajahn Sumedho:

“An abiding impression I gained of the way of life at Wat Pah Pong was that this was something that you could live over a long time, whereas at the places I had practised meditation before, it was a matter of applying a particular technique in a kuti in a special section of a monastery; it wasn’t something that could be lived. Wat Pah Pong opened up a new dimension for me – that sense of being able to make a long-term commitment to a teacher, a training and the Vinaya. What struck me very strongly was the thought that, if you were going to lead the Holy Life for any length of time and reap benefits from it, then you would need to keep the Vinaya, to have an integrated lifestyle of Dhamma-Vinaya practice.

“Luang Por really understood very clearly how completely we need to restructure our perceptions and every aspect of our conditioning. So his way of teaching was not just a meditation technique but a complete training of body, speech and mind. That was really the hallmark, his emphasis, what I feel was special about him.”

After a period of probation as a visiting monk (āgantuka), Ajahn Pasanno was fully accepted into the Wat Pah Pong community.

“I remember looking forward to being able to participate in the Pāṭimokkha and getting quite excited. When the bell was rung, I was very eager and immediately made my way to the Uposatha Hall. Luang Por didn’t show up for another hour and a half – he was over in the Maechee Section giving them a talk – and I had a lot of trouble sitting on the hard floor. We hadn’t even started the Pāṭimokkha, and I was already squirming. Luang Por came and chatted back and forth with various monks, and then, we performed the Pāṭimokkha. Afterwards – about 10 p.m. – he started to give a discourse, and that went on until almost three o’clock in the morning, when he looked over innocently at the clock and said, ‘Maybe you’d better ring the bell for morning chanting.’ Then Luang Por walked into the Dhamma Hall to give a short talk to the laypeople, and we went to have a drink. The kettles of sweet drinks had been standing there since the previous evening and were full of ants. I must confess that quickly dampened my enthusiasm for Pāṭimokkha.”

### Many Luang Pors

Naturally enough, perceptions of Luang Por varied considerably from monk to monk, reflecting their own differing experiences and ideals, biases and projections, and the clarity of their minds. Some sought to be close to him. Others, more self-sufficient, kept themselves at a greater distance. Different aspects of his teachings appealed to different monks, and there were various opinions as to where exactly the essence of it all lay.

For Ajahn Munindo, who, like Ajahn Sumedho, had begun his monastic life in a monastery with an emphasis on solitary, formal meditation practice, it was Luang Por’s more group-oriented approach.

“The thing that most attracted me to come up to Ubon was that Fragments of a Teaching showed that Luang Por was really committed to training his monks, which was something that I had not seen elsewhere. What characterized Luang Por’s teaching as far as I could see, was his insistence on our learning to live together as a community – meditation of course, that’s what we’re here for – but that we should also view our communal, monastic lifestyle as central to practice. Somehow, I got the message that that was what he was about, and I realized that’s what I needed.

“It wasn’t that he’d tell you all the answers. He was there for you – he would listen to you and give you space to experiment, get it wrong. His teaching was an invitation to figure it out. He seemed to see that his job was to get us established in the monks’ life, but that it was then up to us to do the practice. There was the feeling that he wasn’t going to take you and guide you step-by-step through the teachings and various stages of meditation. He said he wasn’t interested in giving daily interviews. This was clearly not his way. It was giving you the guidelines of how to live as a monk. I didn’t take that as an abandonment; it was freedom – personally, I welcomed it.”

To Ajahn Munindo, it was Luang Por himself and the quality of attention he gave to his disciples, that was most inspiring. Here, he felt, was a teacher ‘who was going to be there for whatever situation that might arise’. Luang Por made them feel like they were his sons and was always concerned with their welfare.

“He was available as a human being with a good sense of humour. He could share a joke with you, he could share your suffering with you. You felt he understood you, that he knew what you were thinking or going through. You felt he was there with you in your life and your struggles and your joy.”

Ajahn Munindo cherished the memory of the daily visits that Luang Por made to his kuti to check on his condition during a period of illness. He also appreciated being able to speak to Luang Por when doubts and worries threatened to overwhelm him:

“I remember going to see him once, full of doubts. Luang Por just sat there and listened. He must have heard that kind of thing a thousand times before, but I really felt he looked at me and saw me and he said, ‘I felt like that once. I felt like my head was going to explode or split open. I doubted so much I thought my head was going to burst. I know what it’s like. But never mind. Working like this with doubts makes you stronger.’ ”

Ven. Varapanyo agreed that kind words and gestures could be more memorable than profound teachings:

“Luang Por had visited us briefly at Wat Tam Saeng Pet. It was afternoon, we were outside, and he came up to me and looked me over. He felt my ribs and, with a very concerned look on his face, remarked how skinny I’d gotten – it was not only my mind that had been freaking out. For many months afterwards, I remembered that look of concern.”

A turning point in Ven. Varapanyo’s monastic life came with the opportunity to be Luang Por’s attendant.

“He said, ‘In the afternoon, when water hauling is finished, you can come here and clean up.’ My first reaction was, ‘He’s got a lot of nerve, telling me to come and wait on him!’ But apart from being one of my duties, it was a foot in the door, and a privilege. Through it I was to start seeing that there was a way of life in the monastery – rich, structured and harmonious. And at the centre of it all is the teacher, who is someone to be relied upon.

“And finally, he asked, why was I so skinny? Immediately, one of the monks who was there told him that I took a very small ball of rice at meal time. Did I not like the food? I told him I just couldn’t digest much of the sticky rice so I kept cutting down. I had come to accept it as the way it was, thinking I was so greedy that eating less and less was a virtue.

“But he was concerned. Did I feel tired? Most of the time I had little strength, I admitted. So he said: ‘I’m going to put you on a special diet for a while, just plain rice gruel and fish sauce to start with. You eat a lot of it and your stomach will stretch out, and then we’ll go to boiled rice, and finally to sticky rice. I’m a doctor’, he added. (I found out later that he actually was an accomplished herbalist, as well as having knowledge of the various illnesses monks are prone to.) He told me not to push myself too much, if I didn’t have the strength, I didn’t have to carry water, etc.

“That was when the magic really began. That was when he was no longer just ‘Ajahn Chah’ to me; he became ‘Luang Por’, ‘Venerable Father’.”

Most of the Westerners who came to Wat Pah Pong with the intention of becoming monks had read a lot of Buddhist books, and carried with them ideas of how a monastery and an enlightened master should be. It was often when Luang Por confounded those expectations that he made the deepest impression. For Ajahn Amaro, it was a generous smile at a time when he was expecting to be admonished for a mistake. At the time, Ajahn Amaro, still a novice, was serving as attendant to the then-abbot of Wat Pah Nanachat, Ajahn Pabhakaro, during an overnight visit from Luang Por.

“I woke up and saw light coming through the gaps between the planks in the walls of my hut. I thought, ‘Wow, the moon is really bright tonight.’ I looked at my alarm clock and it said one o’clock. Then I realized, ‘My clock must have stopped; that’s not the moon, that’s the sun!’ So I leapt up, gathered my robes on and raced down the path. When I got to the back of the Dhamma Hall, all the other monks had already left on alms-round, except Ajahn Pabhakaro and Luang Por, who were going on a shorter route. I thought, ‘OK, I’ve still got time. Maybe they didn’t notice.’ So I started to prepare their robes for alms-round, hoping they didn’t see that I’d arrived late and had missed the morning chanting and sitting. While I was kneeling down by Luang Por’s feet, tying up the tags at the bottom end of his robes, he said something in Thai which I couldn’t understand. I looked up, slightly anxiously, toward Ajahn Pabhakaro for translation. Luang Por had a big grin on his face, a wonderful friendly loving smile. Then Ajahn Pabhakaro translated, ‘Sleep’s delicious, huh?’ ”

For Ajahn Khemanando, another British-born monk, a key moment occurred when he unexpectedly saw his teacher in a new, more approachable light. One day, newly arrived and still wearing the white robes of the postulant, he had been chatting with a friend on the balcony of his kuti, when, glancing down the path, he had been shocked to see Luang Por.

“And he was calling out and beckoning with his hand! We thought he was going to scold us for not meditating diligently, but Luang Por didn’t seem bothered at all, he wasn’t telling us to stop talking, but calling to us, ‘Come here, come here!’ ”

It transpired that Luang Por was on a monitor lizard hunt. He was very fond of the forest chickens, which he would feed with rice in the area around his own kuti. He wanted to protect them from their natural enemy, the large monitor lizards, which liked to eat their eggs. He had tracked one of these lizards to this part of the forest and now mimed an explanation to them of how to fix a string-snare to the end of a bamboo pole. He was going to catch the lizard and have it banished from the forest. The two clumsy, inexperienced Westerners, goaded on by an enthusiastic Luang Por, thrashed around unsuccessfully for some time, and finally, after enjoying a good laugh together, gave up the hunt.

“What struck me most about this little episode was the contrast between Luang Por the lizard hunter, displaying a very natural spontaneity and down-to-earth, almost child-like simplicity and humour, and the awe-inspiring formality of his role as head of a large, important monastery which, up to this point, was all I had ever seen of him. This had the effect of undermining many of my own preconceptions regarding what a great, enlightened teacher was supposed to be like, and helped me to see that Luang Por was actually very natural and quite funny which allowed me to feel less intimidated and more relaxed in being around him.”

For another newly arrived postulant, Shaun, the memorable occasion occurred in a more formal setting.

“It was New Year’s Eve and the Dhamma Hall was jam-packed. We’d all gathered to see in the New Year with Dhamma talks and auspicious chanting. As there was no space inside, hundreds more people were sitting out under the trees. The raised platform at the western end of the hall where the monks sat was equally packed. In the middle of the platform, directly below the large, bronze Buddha image, sat Luang Por, surrounded by all his monastic disciples. It was a marvellous, thrilling scene. Suddenly, I saw a slight ripple pass through the rows of monks. One of the senior monks, his hands in anjali, leaned towards Luang Por. Immediately, Luang Por got up and his sitting cloth was moved to one side.

“Shortly afterwards, an old monk wearing the brighter yellow robes of a city monk walked onto the platform. I couldn’t help comparing him unfavourably with Luang Por, who always looked so immaculate. The old monk’s robe was crumpled and kept falling off his shoulder. I was not impressed and wondered what Luang Por’s reaction to a visit at such an inconvenient time would be. He answered me immediately with his humble and respectful demeanour. The old monk knelt down on Luang Por’s seat, bowed to the Buddha in a perfunctory way, and then turned around to face the Sangha. Luang Por led all of his monk disciples in bowing to the old monk, followed by the novices, nuns and laypeople in their turn. It seemed to me that I’d never appreciated the beauty of a bow until I saw Luang Por bow that night. But, more than that, what particularly struck me and has stayed in my mind ever since, was the fluency with which Luang Por switched from being the centre of all attention and devotion to an ordinary monk paying respects to a senior. I felt that I was seeing a perfect expression of the teacher as head of a Sangha, but subservient to Dhamma and Vinaya.”

In speaking of the admirable qualities of their teacher, Westerners frequently referred to Luang Por’s uncanny ability to adapt to the changing imperatives of situations and audiences – apparently without effort, and as if it was the most normal thing in the world. Interestingly, it was an ability rarely mentioned by his Thai disciples. The hierarchical nature of Thai society, the emphasis on social harmony and prioritizing the needs of the group over the individual, means that most people, including non-meditators, are quite accomplished in adapting to the social environment. It is likely that the more profound expression of this ability in a great spiritual teacher, was thus less obviously special to the Thais than to the Westerners. The Westerners, for their part, felt inspired by what they recognized as an impressive non-attachment to social roles and personality. The sense that Luang Por could be anything at all because he identified with nothing whatsoever as an abiding self, was captured well by Ajahn Amaro, when relating the time he was asked to deliver a message to Luang Por at his kuti:

“I saw that he was sitting downstairs on his rattan seat. His eyes were closed, and there was no one else around. When I went up and kneeled in front of him, he didn’t open his eyes, and I thought, ‘Hmm, I wonder what I should do?’ I waited a few minutes and his eyes were still closed. Some important Ajahn was waiting, so I said in Thai, ‘Excuse me.’ Then he opened his eyes and it was like there was absolutely nobody there. It wasn’t like he was asleep; the eyes came open, but there was no expression on his face. It was completely empty. He looked at me, and I looked at him and said, ‘Luang Por, Ajahn Chu asked me to bring a message that some people have come to the Dhamma Hall and would it be possible for you to come and receive them.’

“Again, for a moment there was no expression, just this completely spacious, empty quality in his expression. Then suddenly, out of nowhere, the personality appeared. He made some remark that I didn’t quite catch the details of. It was as if suddenly the ‘person’ appeared – it was like watching a being coming into existence. There was an extraordinary quality in that moment, seeing the personality, the body, all the characteristics of person-hood, just being taken up like he was putting on his robe or he was assuming a role.”

### Skilful means

If there is anything which distinguished Luang Por from his great contemporaries, it was his ability to guide a large and flourishing Sangha of foreign monks. It is true that Luang Ta Maha Bua in Udon usually had five or six Western monks with him, including Ajahn Panyavaddho, the greatly revered and most senior of all the foreign monks in Thailand. But it was Luang Por alone who was able to oversee a Sangha that had reached over twenty monks by the mid-1970s and is still growing to this day.

The reasons for this success may be found both in Luang Por himself and the system of monastic training that he developed. Initially, it was Luang Por’s charisma that drew people in. Over time, in his dealings with the foreign monks, he showed an ability to communicate with them unhampered by the obstacles of language and culture. Despite being unable to speak to them in their own tongue, his Western disciples felt that he genuinely understood them. Ajahn Khemanando noted:

“He was very observant and could quite accurately assess the personality of an approaching new-comer by watching their faces, their postures, the way they walked, etc. Before they had even sat down or said anything, Luang Por might make a remark to those present such as: ‘This one’s full of doubt!’, that subsequent conversation would invariably reveal to be true.”

Luang Por seemed to realize clearly how different the needs of his Western disciples could be from those of his fellow Thais. The local monks were largely from poor rice farming families. They tended to be pragmatic rather than speculative in character, and their defilements usually veered towards the more undisguised forms of greed, hatred and delusion. Consideration of this influenced Luang Por’s development of a training that emphasized ‘going against the grain’. The Westerners’ problems, however, often tended to be of a more intellectual bent. They could easily get caught up in tortuous webs of thought and opinion. They struggled with difficulties hard for Thais to understand, particularly a baffling kind of self-aversion they called ‘guilt’. The Westerners found it hard to put forth concerted effort into meditation without dropping into old ruts of obsessively goal-oriented striving that created more stress and tension than inner peace.

While Luang Por was not infallible in his treatment of the Western monks, he was adept at learning from mistakes. He soon saw how the authoritarian, occasionally hectoring tone to which the Thai monks responded so well, didn’t work with his foreign disciples at all. They had grown up with a distrust of authority, took criticism more personally and responded much better to informality and kindness. Whereas most young Thai monks did not expect a personal relationship with their teacher – most indeed would have felt uncomfortable if one had been offered – the Westerners needed to feel ‘seen’, to feel taken under the teacher’s wing. With the Westerners, Luang Por was noticeably less stern. He appreciated the sacrifices they had made to come so far and live in the forest, and so he made allowances. He quickly saw how effectively humour could dissolve his Western disciples’ self-importance. But whereas most of the Thai monks believed that the more relaxed way Luang Por behaved around the Western monks was simply a ‘skilful means’ he was employing for their benefit, many of the Westerners tended to see in it a revelation of the ‘real Luang Por’. It was a common theme: everyone tended to see their Luang Por as the real Luang Por.

Luang Por reassured the Western monks that the difficulties they were experiencing were transitory, and inevitable, given that they were taking on the power of defilements accumulated over uncountable lifetimes. It was, he said, like a very small army taking on a much larger one. Until you could marshal your resources and strengthen your forces, you should be prepared for a few humbling defeats. When he saw that the Westerners were downcast at how much harder it seemed to be for them to calm their minds than it was for their Thai friends, he explained that, although it was true that monks with little formal education found it easier to let go of attachment to the thinking mind than their more educated companions, they tended to be at a disadvantage in the development of wisdom. He compared the Western mind to a large house with many rooms. It took longer to clean than a simple cottage, he said, but once the work was done, it might be a better place in which to live.

### Patience

It was not easy for the Westerners to adapt to life at Wat Pah Pong. Not only were they faced with all the innate, fundamental challenges of an ascetic life, but these were compounded by the need to learn a new language and adapt to a new culture. Physically, it could be brutal. The heat of the hot season, combined with the energy sapping humidity, made for a particularly enervating climate. Many of the foreign monks developed gastric disorders, especially those whose diet had formerly consisted of highly refined foods. They found sticky rice heavy and hard to digest, but with only one meal a day, they had little choice but to eat a large ball of it. The alternative was losing a lot of weight, and, indeed, many of the monks became so thin their ribs protruded alarmingly. Most of those who stayed on became seriously ill at least once: malaria, scrub typhus and amoebic dysentery were a constant threat.

Luang Por told them to patiently endure. When Ajahn Brahmavamso was hospitalized with a high fever, Luang Por visited him and encouraged him with words that were as far from mollycoddling as could be imagined. He told the young monk to reflect that there were only two outcomes to his illness: either he’d get better or he wouldn’t. He should be at peace with both possibilities.

On one occasion, Ven. Sunyo told Luang Por that he felt that since becoming a monk his hardships and suffering had increased rather than decreased. Luang Por replied:

I know that some of you have had a background of material comfort and outward freedom. By comparison, now you live an austere existence. Then, in the practice, I often make you sit and wait for long hours. Food and climate are different from your home. But everyone must go through some of this. This is the suffering that leads to the end of suffering. This is how you learn. When you get angry and feel sorry for yourself, it is a great opportunity to understand the mind. The Buddha called defilements our teachers …

On such occasions Luang Por would conclude with his keynote teachings: patience and Right View.

You must be patient. Patience and endurance are essential to our practice. When I was a young monk, I didn’t have it as hard as you. I knew the language and was eating my native food. Even so, some days I despaired. I thought about disrobing or even killing myself. This kind of suffering comes from wrong views. However, once you have seen the truth, you become free from views and opinions. Everything becomes peaceful.

On another occasion, after reminding the monks that ‘patience is the heart of Dhamma practice, the root virtue of practitioners’, Luang Por observed that, as few people would freely choose to practice patience, the Westerners could be said to have one advantage: it was much harder for them to run away than the Thais. He said, ‘The thought of going all the way home is daunting, and so you’ve been able to put up with it so far.’ But it wasn’t enough for them to simply grit their teeth. They needed to see the purpose for exercising patience. He was not advocating asceticism for its own sake.

Things here run counter to your old habits. You eat out of your bowl, with the curries and sweets all put in together. Who could like doing that? If you’ve still got any defilements left, then they will be continually thwarted. Food of different kinds gets mixed together in your bowl. How does that feel? Do you see any defilement arising in your mind? Have a look. This way of eating is niggling and frustrating. That’s how it’s meant to be. The training is a wearing away of defilements. Even if the effort to awaken sati is not always successful, you can at least oppose defilement. That’s how the training has to be.

Sadly, the intellectual defilements of the Western monks did not entail a compensatory deficit in the earthier afflictions, and they were not spared Luang Por’s methods intended to ‘toraman the defilements’. The rationale was explained to them on many occasions: defilements could be most clearly revealed as defilements – the cause of suffering, and not-self – when they were steadfastly opposed. Looking at what happened when one was separated from the liked and united with the disliked provided a simple shortcut to understanding the nature of the mind. As this path of opposing desire was one that few people, even dedicated monastics, could follow consistently in a balanced, constructive way on their own, it was embedded in the heart of the training at Wat Pah Pong.

For some, the need to constantly go against old habits could be overwhelming. One English postulant famously exclaimed loudly in a broad northern accent: ‘This going against the stream: it’s not a babbling brook we’re talking about here, it’s WHITE WATER!’

One of the monks who felt the brunt of this style of teachings was Ven. Varapanyo. His well-known craving for iced drinks – a cause of much teasing – meant that he was seldom given the chance to indulge it.

“When I went to Luang Por’s kuti, it was as though he didn’t even see me. If there was ice or a drink for the monks, he would wait until I left before passing it out … Years later, he recounted these episodes, saying that he felt for me, but that he knew he had to give me a hard time for my own benefit … ‘Now you see the value in such treatment, don’t you?’ I did. He often said jokingly, to me and to the Sangha, ‘I would be afraid to go to America, because Varapanyo would probably want to get me back for torturing him.’ ”

Ven. Varapanyo also recalled an occasion when a visiting monk received similar treatment.

“Just before the Rains Retreat, a newly ordained American showed up. He was just out of the Peace Corps and was planning to stay in robes for a few months before going back home. He wanted to stay at Wat Pah Pong for the retreat, but Luang Por refused. It had nothing to do with the monk personally. Rather, it was the fact that Luang Por wanted to put new people through a probationary period which couldn’t be done during the retreat, and that he sometimes was not so keen on people who weren’t seriously committed but were just dabbling in monkhood.

“So the monk stayed a few days and prepared to leave, somewhat disappointed. One night before he left, Luang Por came to the Dhamma Hall to give a talk. After chanting was done, he spoke for an hour with a layman who had come. Then he began his Dhamma talk. He went on and on. And on. After a couple of hours, it was obvious he was playing with us. One new monk was foolish enough to ask a question, and he gave a very long answer. Then he asked, does anyone have any more questions? Nobody stirred, I thought, ‘Maybe he will let us go now’, but he said, ‘Well, maybe you were uncertain about …’ and went into more explanation. It seemed that he covered everything in the entire Buddhist Canon. Meanwhile, the Peace Corps monk, who had been sitting directly in front of him, was squirming around, changing sitting positions, holding his drawn up knees (definitely not to be done), and glaring angrily at Luang Por. Finally, at 1.15 a.m., Luang Por looked at the clock and innocently said, ‘What time is it? Oh, I guess it’s time to adjourn.’

“Perhaps I should mention that we never sat comfortably in chairs, but flat on the floor, and at Wat Pah Pong the floors were concrete or marbly granite. We couldn’t stretch our legs out or put our knees up in front of us or use a cushion. If you’re accustomed to sitting on chairs, try it for two or three hours and you’ll appreciate what it was like; if you are accustomed to sitting on the floor, try four or five hours on a hard floor with no cushion.

“The next day, the Peace Corps monk came to me to complain, ‘He shouldn’t have done that! What a waste of time! That’s the extreme of self-mortification!’ (The Buddha’s Middle Way means avoiding the extremes of sensual indulgence and self-mortification.) That afternoon Luang Por asked me if the new monk liked his talk the night before. I told him what he had said. He laughed, and said, ‘I saw. I was observing him. I knew he was angry. Now he won’t feel bad about not being able to stay here.’ ”

Luang Por himself seemed to have an endless store of patience with his ‘high maintenance’ Western disciples. Ajahn Khemadhammo recounts:

“I remember him listening attentively as I laboured to explain some of the difficulties I’d been having, and then grinning and pointing to himself and saying, ‘Me, too!’ – and that was it. And he was amazingly tolerant. Really, with so many monks and a few really awkward ones, like me whose language he couldn’t speak, it must have been an awful lot to put up with. But he never seemed to mind, except on one occasion when something went badly wrong, and then it was as if a jolly, happy old frog suddenly metamorphosed into the most terrifying species of monk-eating tiger you can imagine. He didn’t mess about. I liked that.”

### Work Projects

In the end, it was the Western monks’ belief in Luang Por’s wisdom and compassion that allowed them to give themselves to the training. He pushed them out of their comfort zone. He showed them that they could do far more than they thought they could, endure things that, alone, they would never have endured. Work projects were one good example. Every now and again, there would be an intense period of hard physical labour, usually a building project, and the daily routine would be transformed. Morning chanting at three, a one or two hour alms-round at dawn, meal at eight – these were sacrosanct. But after the daily meal was over there might be a string of days when the monks would become cement mixers and labourers from midmorning until after dark. Working long hours in temperatures exceeding thirty degrees and humidity above 90%, fuelled by one meal a day and four or five hours of sleep, stretched them to the limits.

The construction of a new Uposatha Hall was one of the last major projects that Luang Por was to oversee. The Uposatha Hall is usually the most beautiful and ornate building in a monastery. Often, many years have passed before a newly established monastery has sufficient funds to build such a hall. This was the case at Wat Pah Pong. From its inception, Pāṭimokkha recitations took place in a small nondescript building behind the dining hall. Only in 1977 did work begin on the erection of an imposing Uposatha Hall, designed by an architect disciple of Luang Por in an unorthodox modern style. The building was to be situated to the west of the Dhamma Hall on a raised platform of earth some three metres high. The earth for this base was brought in by truck, but with no machinery available, the task of moving it into place and pounding it solid fell to the monastics.

It was gruelling work, accomplished with wheelbarrows, bamboo baskets and wooden pounders. The monks would begin at nine in the morning and finish by the light of kerosene lanterns at nine or ten at night. Most of the Thais, being from farming backgrounds, were not unused to this type of work in these kinds of conditions. But for the Westerners, predominantly from urban, middle class backgrounds, it was a harsh test of endurance. Worse perhaps than the physical ordeal, was the mental resistance. One monk said:

“The choice was to do it in a grudging way, longing to be away from all the activity and exhaustion, back in your kuti meditating, or just give yourself to the work. It made more sense to say to yourself: ‘Luang Por’s my teacher, and he wants me to do this. He’s not asking me to do anything wrong, just something I don’t want to do. Why make myself miserable with wanting something I can’t have right now?’ Also, I’d notice that if I did think wistfully of being away somewhere doing formal meditation, the meditations I imagined I’d be having were always more peaceful than the real ones I was actually having at that time.”

The presence of Luang Por put others’ minds at rest. One monk said:

“Just catching sight of Luang Por walking around looking so solid, so unshakeable, I would be filled with this absolute certainty that he knew exactly what he was doing. ‘If this project was all right by him,’ I’d think, ‘it’s certainly good enough for me.’ ”

With the conclusion of the work on the mound, Luang Por left for a few days and an almost farcical period of earth shifting ensued. The acting abbot decided that the left-over earth, which had just been laboriously shifted to a discreet location, would be better placed at a different spot. The monks were asked to return to work in order to shift the earth for a second time – a job requiring some three days hard work. On Luang Por’s return, however, he declared his preference for the original location and the earth had to be carried, wheelbarrow by wheelbarrow, basket by basket, back to the original spot. Some of the Western monks remembered having read about the trials of the Tibetan yogi Milarepa, and now felt that they had a better idea of what had been involved.

Nevertheless, the value of this kind of interlude was not lost on the monks involved. Another monk commented:

“Luang Por was always creating situations where we’d have to face up to our old ingrained habits, particularly the ones in which we created suffering for ourselves by wanting things to be other than the way they were. He helped us to see our craving and, in everyday situations, how it fed our discontent, how we lied to ourselves.”

Ajahn Brahmavamso summarized:

“It taught me to look for the cause of suffering, not in the externals, but in ‘me’, in ‘my attitude’, in ‘my craving’, in ‘my attachment’, in ‘my delusions.’ … And that if you cannot work and be peaceful, if you cannot move earth all day and be at peace with it, you will never be freed from suffering.”

## On the Nose

### Facing the facts

Luang Por showed much compassion for the difficulties of his Western disciples, but he could also tease them when they became self-indulgent. On one occasion, he mimed wiping imaginary tears from his eyes and saying tragically, ‘He’s my father, I’m his son …’, before chuckling and shaking his head. The performance left a deep impression on Ven. Varapanyo, for whom it was ‘an example of the way Luang Por saw through the self-important attitude that Westerners are especially prone to, how it needlessly glorifies, and increases, suffering’.

Ajahn Santacitto recalled being part of a group of monks helping to bathe Luang Por:

“As our many hands lathered his limbs and torso he said to me: ‘Santacitto, did you ever bathe your father this way?’ Though I’d learned – sometimes the hard way – not to take this kind of question at face value, I followed what seemed a safe path and referred to differences in culture to explain why I never had. Then he said: ‘That’s why the practice is so difficult for you.’ His simple words hit me very hard.”

Many of Luang Por’s most memorable teachings involved putting monks in positions where they were brought face-to-face with their defilements and had no choice but to let them go. The reactions to praise and blame were a fertile ground for such instruction.

Ajahn Viradhammo spent his first Rains Retreat at a branch monastery and, while he was there, memorized the Pāṭimokkha. Chanted at speed, the text takes some forty-five minutes to recite, and learning it by heart is a formidable undertaking. He returned to Wat Pah Pong at the end of the year with a sense of accomplishment. But being a young monk, he assumed it would be a long time before he would be given the honour of reciting the text alone in the midst of the whole Wat Pah Pong Sangha.

“Luang Por light-heartedly asked if I would chant the Pāṭimokkha, fully expecting that I didn’t know it. I surprised him by saying I would give it a go. With considerable performance anxiety, I chanted the rules in a fairly decent style and Luang Por heaped praise on me.

“Getting so much praise from Luang Por was no small thing, and my heart swelled with happiness and pride at the honour and attention I had been given. A fortnight later, Luang Por commanded me to chant again. This felt a bit strange because it was not a request, but I thought I would be able to show my stuff once again. Nervous as always, I set forth with the introductory chant but, within a few stanzas, Luang Por was tugging at my outer robe[3] and telling the monk beside him that this fellow who is chanting stinks. He said: ‘Doesn’t he wash his robes?’

“My powers of concentration were limited at the best of times, and this interruption was quite upsetting. I lost my focus, made some errors, regained my focus and started again. For the next hour, Luang Por continued to interrupt my concentration again and again. Each time, I became more confused or angry and had an extremely difficult time finishing the recitation. I can’t remember if the other monks were chuckling to themselves, but it was obvious that Luang Por was offering a very direct and difficult teaching: ‘You like praise and success, but when you are blamed and fail you suffer. Go beyond praise and blame to be free from suffering.’ ”

### A natural perfume

Luang Por soon realized that humour was amongst the most effective tools he had at his disposal for teaching his Western disciples. It allowed him to point out their mental defilements in a way that they did not find oppressive or fill them with self-aversion. Encouraging them to see the humorous side of their frustrations, irritations and anger, he showed them how to laugh at themselves and so let go of identification with their foibles. But he did not do this by cracking jokes for cheap laughs. Instead, he pointed out the absurdity of their cravings, regaled them with outlandish analogies, enacted hilarious anecdotes. Monks might not always laugh out loud at his sallies, but it was hard for them to keep a straight face when he was in such a mood. Ven. Varapanyo remembers one teaching given to an American monk called Gary that became something of a legend.

“Gary had a girlfriend back home, and thought that he might want to go back and marry her someday – he had entered monastic life without a sense of long-term commitment. Then the ‘Dear John’ letter came: she had married someone else. I wasn’t there at the time, but others said Gary was pretty upset. One day, someone mentioned it to Luang Por. With his merciless compassion, he advised Gary to write to the woman and ask her to send him a vial with some of her shit in it. Then, whenever he thought of her with longing, he should open the vial and smell it.”

On another occasion, a rumour spread that the Communists were putting some chemical in the noodles that made penises shrivel up. Luang Por advised the monks that if they noticed their penis starting to shrink, then they should tie a big knot in it so that it wouldn’t disappear completely.

### Words

Luang Por shared with many people of his culture a love of language and word play. His Dhamma talks were often studded with puns and unorthodox usage. So it was with real delight that he observed the misadventures of his Western disciples in their efforts to learn the tonal Thai language. Gaffes were frequent because, although Thai grammar is straightforward, the tones are a minefield. The word ‘lek’, for example, pronounced in a high-tone means ‘little’ and with a low-tone, ‘iron’. One day, Luang Por told a young Australian monk to go and fetch the monk who lived in the hut with the iron door. When the monk returned many minutes later, unsuccessful in his search, he was confused by a gale of laughter when he told Luang Por, that all the kuti doors seemed to be the same size.

The more embarrassing mispronunciations would enter monastery folklore. Of these, the most notorious occurred when a monk, advising Luang Por not to visit the West in December, thought he had given the reason that there would be a lot of snow around at that time of year. What he had actually said – and in the crudest of terms – was that it wouldn’t be a good idea to go right then given the seasonal profusion of dog vaginas.

When teaching his Western disciples, Luang Por took their varying language skills into account. Apart from the formal translated Dhamma talks that he delivered, he often gave short teachings couched in very simple phrases to prevent misunderstanding. The exhortations to endure, ‘Ot Ton!’ and to let go, ‘Ploi Wang!’ were soon known to everyone. He used easily grasped metaphors and similes: ‘You’re like someone who wants a duck to be a chicken’, he might say. Often his words would be unexpected, apparently off the cuff, and the recipient might walk away thinking, ‘Did he just say what I think he said?’ ‘What thing is this mind?’ he once asked rhetorically. ‘No thing at all.’

### Bugbears

A recurring debate in the transmission of Buddhism to the West has been over the extent to which the Dhamma can or should be separated from the cultural context, or ‘trappings’, in which it has been transmitted over the centuries. A Buddhism tailored to the West, untied to Asian customs, has been a goal for many pioneers. But for the Westerners who made their way to Wat Pah Pong, submitting themselves to monastic training implied an acceptance of the whole Thai Buddhist package. For some monks, adapting to the Thai style of doing things could be irksome. ‘But that’s not in the Vinaya, it’s just Thai custom!’ was a common grouse of monks admonished for a faux pas such as using a head pillow as a sitting cushion. Few of the Thai monks made any distinction between those parts of monastic custom traceable to the Buddha’s time and those of more recent and local provenance. A Western monk showing disrespect for any one facet of the training could be seen as looking down on the whole thing. Luang Por exhorted the Western monks to be humble, respectful and observant in the face of things unfamiliar to them, to let go of attachments to their old ways.

A bugbear for a number of Western monks was having to participate in ceremonies that seemed to owe as much to Brahmanism as to the ‘pure’ Buddhism they had expected to find in a forest monastery. Although Luang Por would not cater to the superstitious beliefs of the local people, neither was he a fundamentalist, and he was willing to perform one or two of the more benign local ceremonies, as a way to draw people towards the Dhamma.

Ajahn Santacitto, one of those who arrived at Wat Pah Pong looking for a meditation teacher to instruct him in vipassanā, received a rude shock on his first day.

“After the meal, a small group of village folk spread a white cloth over their heads, the monks all around me started chanting, and Luang Por began dripping melted candle wax into a bowl of water. After the chanting was over, he sprinkled this ‘holy water’ over the heads of the now uncovered villagers. I was shocked by what seemed to me to be out-and-out superstition. But then my eyes caught Luang Por’s. To my surprise, he had a mischievous grin on his face, like a young lad having a grand old time. I was completely disarmed. But the real point hit home after the ritual finished and he gave a Dhamma talk, when I noticed how attentively the villagers sat listening.”

### Kickstart

If a monk felt that he had been singled out to receive a particular teaching, it left an especially deep impression. This happened to Ajahn Nyanadhammo during his first Rains Retreat at Wat Pah Pong. At that time, a more senior monk would often seek to engage him in conversation during their return to the monastery after the daily alms-round. As they walked along, this monk would expound on the faults of various monks and spout what seemed an endless stream of complaints. Ajahn Nyanadhammo found the monk conceited and hypocritical, but being junior to him, felt unable to rebuff him politely. By the end of one of these walks, he would arrive back at the monastery feeling annoyed and out of sorts. But one day, as he passed Luang Por Chah’s kuti reviewing all the faults of this fault-finding monk, his sour mood dissolved in an instant. A broadly smiling Luang Por, practising his English, looked out and wished him a hearty, ‘Good Morning!’

That evening, Ajahn Nyanadhammo went to Luang Por’s kuti to offer him a foot massage. When the bell sounded for evening chanting and monks started to leave the kuti, Luang Por told him to continue the massage and asked someone else to extinguish the candles.

“The moon was just coming up and I was listening to the monks chanting. As I massaged his feet, Luang Por sat there silently in the darkness meditating – it was really inspiring – and then suddenly, he lifted up his foot and kicked me in the chest. I fell back on the floor. He pointed at me and said: ‘There! One person says something that you don’t like and you get upset. Somebody else just says, ‘Good morning’, and you’re happy all day. Don’t follow your moods. Don’t be attached to other people’s words.’ ”

### You can go

Luang Por was habitually reticent on the subject of psychic powers and there are few occasions in which he was clearly seen to demonstrate them. But one such occasion did occur when a certain Australian monk received a letter from home informing him of his father’s death, and asking him if he could come back for a visit.

This monk’s energy and short temper had earned him the nickname amongst the Thai monks of ‘Venerable High Octane’. He was a fiercely intelligent man, who considered those who disagreed with his (often rather cynical) views to be guilty of wishful thinking and unable to face up to the hard truths of life. Although he had great respect for Luang Por, he could be withering about anyone he perceived to be putting their teacher on too high a pedestal. Belief that Luang Por had psychic powers was, to him, a good example of the woolly-mindedness that he found so annoying.

When the monk arrived at Luang Por’s kuti, letter in hand, in order to ask for guidance, Luang Por was talking to some other monks, and so he sat down to wait. After a while, Luang Por turned to him and said, ‘What would you do if your mother wrote you a letter and invited you to return home for a visit? Could you handle it?’ The monk was completely taken aback. He had not mentioned the matter to anyone. He realized that Luang Por was asking if he was confident that he could sustain his practice of the Vinaya outside of the supportive surroundings of the monastery. ‘I’ll try’, he replied. Luang Por said: ‘You can go if you want.’

### The smell in your bag

Ven. Aranyabho was another monk with an overly critical mind. After returning from a branch monastery with a familiar litany of complaints, Luang Por said to him:

Aranyabho, you’ve got dog shit in your shoulder bag, do you realize that? Everywhere you go, you sit down and there’s a bad smell. So you think, ‘Ugh, this place is no good.’ And you pick up your shoulder bag and go off somewhere else. You sit down and there’s the bad smell again, and so you get up once more, taking your shoulder bag with you. You never realize that the smell is coming from the dog shit in your shoulder bag, and so you carry it with you wherever you go.

It was a variation on one of Luang Por’s favourite teaching stories: the mangy dog who blames wherever he sits down for the itching that torments him. Ven. Aranyabho listened to this blunt admonishment with a face that was presumably more sheepish than canine. Ven. Varapanyo commented:

“There was never any bad feeling when he talked to people like this, because we knew it came from a pure, loving heart; he was offering us, right then and there, a clear and simple solution to our problems, one which he had obviously practised. His words, and his whole being, simply said, ‘Let go – now.’ ”

## Knower of the Worlds

### Results of the practice

Although the overwhelming majority of Westerners who entered the monastic life at Wat Pah Pong were male, there were also a small number of Western women who came to train as maechees. Chief amongst these, was an American known by her adopted name Khamfah, who arrived with her husband Paul, after fleeing their home in Laos ahead of the Communist takeover in late 1975. The couple decided to try to stay for five years, with the proviso that, if at any time, both of them wanted to leave, then they would do so; however, in the case that one wanted to go and the other wanted to stay, then they would both carry on and endure through their difficulties. It was challenging for both of them, but they survived the five years.

At the end of every year, Luang Por would allow Maechee Khamfah to go to Wat Pah Nanachat for a few days where she would have the chance to speak to Paul (by then known as Ven. Thitabho). But mostly, their relationship was confined to the odd clandestine note, secreted at an agreed spot in the forest on the maechees’ route to the kitchen. In many ways, it was harder for Maechee Khamfah: as a nun, she had much less access to Luang Por, and, in the Maechee Section, her inspiration could easily waver. But Ven. Thitabho did not find monastic life easy either, and sometimes he would probably have preferred the distance from Luang Por that his wife resented.

By the late 1970s Luang Por had become a more grandfatherly figure. But the old fire and ability to give corrosive admonishments would occasionally resurface. He could also accomplish the effect of a scolding without speaking a word, as he demonstrated one day when he caught Ven. Thitabho breaking a key monastic regulation.

Private supplies of tea, coffee, sugar and so on were forbidden at Wat Pah Pong. Everybody was expected to be content with whatever communal drinks were provided. However, a number of the Western monks – Ven. Thitabho included – persuaded themselves that they were a special case in this respect, and if they were discreet enough about it, boiling a pot of water in the forest and having a cup of tea together was a minor, harmless indulgence. Every now and again, they would meet at Ven. Thitabho’s kuti, where an ancient black kettle was secreted.

One day, Ven. Thitabho received a parcel of fine teas from his sister in England. In the late afternoon, he made a small fire in the forest behind his kuti, at a spot where the smoke would not be visible from the path, to enjoy a first cup of the new batch. But when an involuntary shiver passed through his body, he quickly turned around to see a motionless and stonefaced Luang Por watching him. It was the proverbial nightmare come true. Luang Por walked over to the illicit supplies, lifted up his walking stick and knocked over a few jars of tea with a crash, spat on the ground and walked off in silence.

Luang Por spent most of the second half of 1979 overseeing the renovation of the monastery in Bahn Kor where he had spent his first years in the robes. Towards the end of the year, Ven. Thitabho was assigned as his attendant. One day, a group of Thai visitors began to praise the Western monks for their renunciation and dedication. Luang Por agreed, yes, his Western disciples were accomplished, many of them could chant the Pāṭimokkha. ‘They’re all very intelligent,’ he paused dramatically, ‘except for this one’, he pointed to Thitabho, ‘He’s really stupid.’ Afterwards, Luang Por asked Thitabho slyly if he got angry when he treated him like that. Thitabho said, ‘How can you get angry with a mountain?’ Luang Por was delighted. Laughing, he turned to one of the novices by his side, ‘Write that down. Write that down!’

Eventually, the five years were up. In the last few months, Khamfah’s growing sense of isolation in the Maechee Section had been exploited by a fundamentalist Christian missionary. This had culminated, somewhat bizarrely, in her conversion (‘Maybe, she’s right’, said a deadpan Luang Por, startling Ajahn Sumedho who brought the news). After their departure, ex-Thitabho adopted his wife’s faith. The couple sent letters to Western monks lamenting what they called the aridity of Buddhist spirituality, and exulting in what they believed to be a shared sense of Christ’s presence. One of their main complaints was that after five years in the wat, they could see no tangible results from their practice. No matter how much they had tried, life had always seemed to remain pretty much the same. These comments were passed on to Luang Por. Then one day, a photo of the couple with their first child arrived in the post. It was shown to Luang Por. He looked at it for a moment and then said, ‘At last, they’ve seen the results of their practice.’

### Nature and nurture

Whereas Luang Por had obviously thought that Ven. Thitabho would benefit from blunt or humbling words, he saw others were more in need of attention and nurture. Venerable Varapanyo was a member of this group. As a young monk, Ven. Varapanyo struggled with a craving for sugar, which culminated in him gorging on a packet of candies sent in a care package from home. The lapse propelled him into a frenzy of guilt and self-loathing. He went to confess to Luang Por:

“I blurted out, ‘I’m impure, my mind is soiled, I’m no good.’ He looked very concerned. ‘What is it?’ he asked. I told him the story. Naturally, he was amused, and within a few minutes, I realized that he had me laughing. I was very light hearted, the world was no longer about to end; in fact, I had forgotten about my burden. This was one of his most magical gifts. You could feel so burdened and depressed and hopeless, and after being around him for a few minutes it all vanished and you found yourself laughing. Sometimes you only needed to go and sit down at his kuti, be around him as he spoke to others. Even when he was away, I would get a ‘contact high’ of peacefulness as soon as I got near his kuti to clean up or sweep leaves.”

But it was the opportunity to serve as Luang Por’s attendant that was to have the most profound effect.

“There was usually a lot of competition for the honour of waiting on him, but I was allowed to go to his kuti for the early morning chores, before dawn. It meant getting up earlier in the chilly mornings, but I was inspired. The more I hung around him, the safer I felt. He would give me little discourses from time to time, keep checking to see how I was doing, ask me about my past, etc. I began to feel, here is somebody unshakeable, like a mountain. ‘To believe in God is to know that somebody somewhere is not stupid.’ It really seemed to me that I had found that somebody; he was to me what you always expected your father, family doctor, priest, teacher, Santa Claus and Superman to be, all rolled into one. He would keep on pulling rabbits out of the hat – teachings, things to do, medicines, whatever – so that the situation began to feel open-ended, like there were unlimited possibilities awaiting me, much different from the dreary path I had imagined for so long.

“So, in the morning I would boil water and bring hot and cold water for him to wash his face. When he came downstairs, I would give him the water and kneel there with a towel, while one of the novices took his false teeth to clean them. Usually he would walk around with the towel afterwards, and let me follow, until he finally gave it to me to hang up. His robes would be made ready to put on for alms-round, but first he would check things out at his kuti, throw some rice to the wild chickens, sit down and talk, drink tea.

“Occasionally, a couple of nuns would come at this time to discuss something. It was always interesting to watch the local monks and nuns when they came to see him. They spoke to him with the utmost deference, almost as if they were terrified of him. With us Westerners, he was usually the kindly old man, though over the years I was to see him play many different roles. He could make you love him or hate him, feel respect, fear, doubt or disgust for him, and he could juggle your mind states around quite rapidly. For me, at that time, he was instilling faith. Those early morning scenes were especially effective: the wat was almost empty, most of the monks having left earlier for the other alms-round routes, and we were limited to about 15 minutes before we had to go, so the situation felt intensified – despite the fact that it was so funny to see the great man sitting there with his teeth out, all of a sudden looking like a little old Ukrainian grandmother.

“In the afternoons, after sweeping his kuti, emptying his spittoon, and so on, I would sit down for a while, to listen as he spoke to whoever was there, sometimes to talk or maybe be given a cup of tea, but mostly just to be there. After the guests were gone, he took his bath, with a few of us helping him, holding his towel, taking his robe, offering the dry bathing cloth, washing his back and feet, cleaning his sandals.”

As Ven. Varapanyo became more settled and confident, Luang Por started to use him as a figure in his teaching stories. Varapanyo usually filled the role of the fool: sometimes the fool who never got it right, sometimes the fool who sees the light.

“It was getting cold, and a monk who was leaving suggested that his kuti might be a bit more comfortable since it was smaller and less drafty. So I moved. But it was near the wall of the wat and the farmers would pass by with their buffalo in the daytime. This disturbed me because I was still convinced that meditation and noise don’t mix, so after a few days I moved back. Someone noticed of course (the CIA has nothing on the monastic grapevine) and duly reported it to Luang Por. He questioned me about it, and over the years, I was to hear the story many times, expanded and embellished.

“He would often use incidents like this (somewhat tailored to fit his purpose) to teach. He would tell people about learning the mind’s tricks, how it becomes bored and dissatisfied, always wanting something else: ‘Take Varapanyo, for example – he came to Wat Pah Pong and was sitting in his kuti, but he wasn’t happy. He moved all his things and went to live in the other kuti, but he wasn’t happy there either. So, he thought the first kuti was better, and he moved back there.’ He always told the stories in a very gentle and funny way, everyone would have a good laugh, and he would make his point: it’s the mind that does it all; know your mind.”

March and April were the cruellest months for hot weather. The Western monks would drag themselves around, occasionally lapsing into daydreams of a cooling thunderstorm.

“The heat was a torment with the fatigue and discomfort it brought me. One afternoon, somebody brought iced drinks from town. I drank several glasses, and felt so relieved that I soon started thinking, I could have my family donate an ice machine to Wat Pah Pong, it could be run on the generator a few hours each day and we would always have ice. It seemed like a perfectly valid thought to me. Finally, I began to realize that the Buddha lived in the forest and did his ascetic practices without our modern conveniences such as ice, so I could probably endure and survive without it. I later told Luang Por of this episode I had gone through in my mind. It became one of his ‘teaching stories’ about how to contemplate situations to eliminate unnecessary suffering: ‘Varapanyo was living in the forest, and the hot season came. He was so hot, he was really unhappy. All he could think about was ice. But then he contemplated, “When the Buddha lived in the forest, did he have ice? No! He didn’t.” This was wisdom arising. So then he became happy, his problem was resolved.’ ”

### Nobody knows

Luang Por could be so acute and penetrating about the general ways of the world that the Western monks could be surprised at how little interest he had in the details of that world, and how little knowledge. Nevertheless, he occasionally showed curiosity about the West and its culture and customs. One day, he asked Ajahn Sumedho what hippies were, and after listening to the description, said that it sounded like they would make good monks. Ven. Varapanyo recalled:

“Occasionally, Luang Por would ask about Western life and customs, about my past experiences, about science (astronomy was usually interesting to the Thais). He was disinterested, in that he obviously wasn’t hankering after anything, yet he was very interested because he all of a sudden had on his hands several of these people from a part of the world he knew hardly anything about, and he cared about us …

“One thing he never showed any interest in was politics, either domestic or international. One day, sometime after Nixon was re-elected, he said, ‘Nixon ran away with it’ – a visitor must have told him, and he just passed it on to me with that one line. And then, one time when a few of us went to see him, he said, ‘CIA: nobody knows who they are. Who is the CIA? Nobody knows.’ And that was the extent of the political discussion I can remember having with him.”

### Parental Caution

At one point in the Ordination ceremony, the applicant is asked in the midst of the Sangha, ‘Anuññātosi mātāpitūhi?’ ‘Do you have your parents’ permission?’ And he replies, ‘Āma bhante.’ ‘Yes, Venerable Sir.’ It is fortunate that a candidate’s failure to admit to parental opposition at this juncture does not invalidate the ceremony, for many Western monks were unable to gain the blessing of their parents until long after their admission into the Sangha. Some monks endured years of rejection by their families. Others received regular letters begging them to come home – impossible to discard unopened, but heart-wringing to read beyond the first few lines. For their part, some parents were agonized by thoughts of their son as a brainwashed member of a strange cult in the heart of a steamy jungle; others felt hurt at the rejection of their own values and religious traditions and grieved at the loss of the dreams they’d cherished for their son. Even those parents who respected and supported their son’s choice – the numbers of whom probably exceed those that did not – had to cope with the sorrow of knowing it might be years before they saw him again.

Some monks succumbed to the pressure of emotional blackmail. One was tricked into returning to England by a telegram falsely informing him that his mother had had a heart attack. For others, when their practice faltered, knowing that their parents disapproved of what they were doing made it harder for them to justify to themselves the pain they were causing. Lack of parental support was often a factor – sometimes a decisive one – when monks afflicted by doubts, discouragement, or sensual desires were considering a return to the lay-life. However, in almost every case of those monks who stayed on, their parents eventually came round. At last, a conciliatory letter would arrive, announcing a visit or offering a plane ticket for a visit home, expressing acceptance of their son’s way of life.

Luang Por went out of his way to welcome the parents of his Western disciples to Wat Pah Pong. The warmth and kindness he showed to them was dialled up to such a dazzling intensity that few could resist. Most parents would be thoroughly charmed and their worries put to rest. Even the most sceptical of parents would show signs of thawing. ‘I must say, he’s certainly got something about him’, they’d say after meeting him, or admit, ‘Well, he does seem like a very nice man.’ Also, they saw positive changes in their sons which they could not help but feel proud of. They were impressed by the great reverence with which the monks were treated by people on every level of Thai society. Even if in their heart of hearts they hoped that their son might someday give up the robe, at least, for the time being, their minds were at peace.

In the early 1980s, there began an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to start a maechee community at Wat Pah Nanachat. A young woman from Hong Kong, Sister Suddhamma, became one of its first members. Her parents were extremely upset and the mother wrote at regular intervals, imploring her daughter to come home. The nun wrote back, politely refusing and asking for time and understanding. On receiving it, the mother immediately replied with a threat to kill herself. The nun became very anxious, not really believing the threat, not wanting to return to Hong Kong, and yet unsure of the right thing to do. Luang Por advised her not to disrobe but to invite her mother to come to visit. He said, ‘She feels this antipathy because, not having seen for herself what you’re doing, she’s imagining a lot of bad things.’ He made a comparison:

To tell you the truth, I was like that once – but with cheese. Ugggh! I hated the smell of it! It was awful. When I went to the West everybody reeked of the stuff. But I got closer and closer to it, and then one day they gave me some. I thought I might as well give it a try. Mmm … it was pretty good. Now I think it’s delicious. These days I eat more than the Westerners do. I used to think it smelled like chicken shit, and now I like it. So stay. It won’t be long and your mother will come.

Which she did. And after the initial suspicion and paranoia had worn off, she began to understand, if not condone, her daughter’s decision and returned to Hong Kong with her mind much calmed.

Another occasion on which Luang Por’s skills in diplomacy were displayed, came with the arrival of Randy (later Ajahn Kittisaro), a champion wrestler and Rhodes Scholar from Tennessee. During his summer break from Oxford, Randy had travelled to Thailand to research Thai Buddhism. There he met Luang Por and became inspired by him to become a monk. Randy’s parents were shocked and deeply worried. They flew out to Thailand to save him from brainwashing and the ruin of his future. On meeting Luang Por, however, their concerns dissolved. They were impressed at the changes they saw in their son: a new-found self-discipline, calmness and resolve. Luang Por put forward Randy’s novice Ordination in order that his parents could be present to see their son enter the Sangha before they returned home. On the morning of the ceremony, they went into town and bought food to offer to the Sangha of Wat Pah Nanachat as a celebratory offering on an auspicious day.

### A snake in the house

Over the years, many Western laypeople came to stay at Wat Pah Pong. A large number arrived without any intention of becoming monks or nuns, but simply with the wish to meet and receive teachings from Luang Por, and to participate for some time in the life of the monastic community. Usually, Luang Por would delegate basic teaching duties to a senior Western monk, but every now and again he would give a Dhamma talk to the lay guests, or answer their questions.

It is sometimes alleged that monks are dismissive of lay practice, and that great masters reserve the most profound teachings for those who have made a commitment to monastic life. This was not the case with Luang Por. Western lay guests with a sincere interest in practice energized him. Indeed, monks would become excited if they knew that Luang Por was going to give a Dhamma talk to the foreign lay guests, because of the profundity of the Dhamma that they might expect to hear.

One talk, subsequently published as Living with the Cobra, gives a good idea of the flavour of these teachings. In it, Luang Por compared mental states, both positive and negative, to poisonous snakes. Identifying with a mental state he said was like letting yourself be bitten by a cobra. The separation from the truth of things that results from that identification is like death from the cobra’s poison.

All mental states are like cobras. If nothing obstructs their path, they just glide along their way. Even though they possess venom, it’s inside them. They are of no danger to us as long as we don’t go near them. They just do what cobras naturally do.

Intelligent people let go of attachment to everything, both good and bad. They let go of both what they like and what they dislike. It’s as if we were to release a cobra from captivity: it would slither away taking its poison with it. And that is the way we release mental states – we release the good and bad with an awareness of their nature. We don’t touch them, don’t take hold of them, because we don’t want anything; we don’t want good or bad, heavy or light, pleasure or pain. A conclusion is reached, and lucid calm is firmly established.

He taught that the path of practice was founded on the development of mindfulness and alertness. When these two factors were mature, the wisdom faculty would arise naturally, and meditators would then be wakeful day and night. Practitioners would be close to the Buddha at all times.

The term ‘arising of wisdom’ means that, through clearly seeing how all phenomena arise and fall according to causes and conditions, meditators abandon attachment to them as self or adjuncts of self.

When things arise, we know; when they cease, we know. When there is happiness, we know; and when there is unhappiness, we know. Once we know, we don’t take possession of that happiness or unhappiness. When there is no sense of possession of those feelings, then all that remains is the simple process of arising and ceasing. You let it follow its natural course because there’s nothing there worth attaching to.

At this time, Luang Por had been reading Zen Buddhist texts and gave his own view on the relationship between Nibbāna and saṃsāra discussed in them.

The Buddha said that Nibbāna is cessation. Where does that cessation take place? Well, it’s like a fire. It’s extinguished wherever it springs up, wherever it’s burning. You cool something at the point where it’s hot. It’s the same with Nibbāna and saṃsāra. They lie in the same place.

The Buddha taught us to put out the fire of saṃsāra that is inner turmoil. Bringing inner turmoil to cessation is called putting out the fire. External fires are hot, and when they’ve been put out, there is coolness. The inner heat of greed, hatred and delusion are also fires. Think about it. When sexual desire arises in the mind, it’s hot, isn’t it? If anger arises, it’s hot; if delusion arises, it’s hot. It’s this heat which the Buddha called ‘the fires’. When fires spring up, there is heat; when they are extinguished, there is coolness …

Nibbāna is the state that cools the heat. The Buddha called it peace, the cessation of the wheel of birth and death.

Then, at the end of the discourse, Luang Por descended from the exalted level in which he had been dwelling, to address some warm personal words to the elderly English woman who was the recipient of the talk:

When you first arrived, you cried. When I saw your tears, I felt happy. Why was that? Because I knew you were going to be studying the true Dhamma. If no tears flow, then you won’t see the Dhamma, because the fluid in tears is bad stuff. You have to let it all out before you can feel at ease.

So please take this Dhamma away with you and put it into practice. Practise in order to transcend suffering. Die before death and be peaceful and at ease.

But occasionally Luang Por could treat foreign guests with great abruptness. One day a Western woman arrived at Luang Por’s kuti while he was talking to some of the monks. He asked one of the Western monks present to ask her what she wanted. The monk translated, ‘She’s asking permission to stay. She would like to receive teachings from Luang Por.’ Luang Por scowled, ‘Tell her that there’s no teaching here, all I do is torment people.’

After shocking everyone in earshot, Luang Por relented and the woman was led away to the Maechee Section. Luang Por gave no reason for his words, and each person was left to speculate on why Luang Por thought this particular woman would benefit from such a welcome. For the Western monks, living with loose ends such as these when they weren’t quite sure what just happened, was a normal part of the life at Wat Pah Pong.

On another occasion, a European academic arrived with a questionnaire. He asked Luang Por through a translator, ‘Why do you practise? How do you practise? What are the results of your practice?’

Luang Por replied:

Why do you eat? How do you eat? What are the results of your eating?

Luang Por smiled, the scholar frowned, and asked for an explanation.

Think about it. Why do you eat? Because you’re hungry and if you don’t eat you will suffer. Why do we practise? Because we’re hungry. Food relieves the pain of physical hunger and Dhamma practice relieves mental and spiritual hunger. If the mind is suffering, then you must use Dhamma to alleviate it. How do we practise? Just as we put food into our stomach, so must we put Dhamma into our heart. What are the results of our practice? Well, it’s just like eating. The results of eating are that your stomach is full of food. The results of practising are that your heart is full of Dhamma.

## The Twain Shall Meet

### Wat Pah Nanachat

By 1975, there were almost twenty Western monks at Wat Pah Pong – about a quarter of the resident Sangha. This rapid and significant influx brought with it inevitable tensions. Although the organization of the monastery and a common faith and confidence in Luang Por kept the situation workable, minor but niggling conflicts between the Thais and the ‘farangs’ became increasingly common. The first generation of Western monks was predominantly North American. These were young men used to an informal, unregimented life, to expressing their feelings about things freely, using their initiative. Many of them had robust personalities. In an era when travel to Southeast Asia was a lot more daunting than it is today, the path to a forest in Northeast Thailand was not an easy or straightforward one to take. Having to conform to the Vinaya, to many rules and regulations that they could not always see the reason for, could easily provoke the rebellious side of their nature.

The Thai monks, almost all brought up in local villages, could be dazzled by the exoticness of the Westerners. They admired them for their renunciation, but were puzzled, amused and occasionally repelled by their gaucheness and failures to govern emotion. Sometimes, the Thai monks were made uncomfortable by what they saw as the Westerners’ over-familiar manner towards Luang Por, or else envied their easy access to him.

These tensions did not run particularly deep; essentially, they were little more than ripples on a placid forest pool. In the monastery as a whole, attitudes of tolerance and goodwill towards the foreign monks usually far outweighed any negativity. But even so, Luang Por was aware that certain changes needed to be made. His solution was to reduce the number of Western monks at Wat Pah Pong by establishing a branch monastery especially for them.

Problems at Wat Pah Pong were not the only reason for his decision. Luang Por saw that, in future, many of the Western monks would want to return to the West and establish monasteries there. Before that happened, he wanted them to gain experience in running their own affairs. In particular, he wanted to train Ajahn Sumedho in the role of abbot of a monastery. It would also be good to have a place where the Westerners could practise together, where the teaching would be in English, and where the food could be blander and more suited to a Western palate. Monks could alternate between spending time with him and living at this new monastery. He started to consider the idea aloud.

At first, Ajahn Sumedho, the prospective leader of the new community, was not enthusiastic. He had no wish to take on such a responsibility. But as time passed, he began to consider his resistance to be selfish and decided to trust in Luang Por’s judgement.

That hot season of 1975, Ajahn Sumedho’s large, cast iron alms-bowl developed a rust patch and needed to be re-fired. Luang Por gave permission to him and four other foreign monks to walk over to the cremation forest of Bung Wai village, some nine kilometres to the northwest of Wat Pah Pong. There they would find a plentiful supply of wood and could combine a bowl firing expedition with a short retreat.

For many years, a group of villagers from Bahn Bung Wai had been walking over to Wat Pah Pong on every Observance Day for a day and night of Dhamma practice. They were excited at the idea of having monks come to live outside their own village. Soon, a deputation went to see Luang Por and asked him to give permission for the Western monks to spend the Rains Retreat in the Bung Wai cremation forest. They would build huts for the monks to live in. It was an opportune moment and Bung Wai was not far away. Luang Por agreed.

From the first days of the new venture, Luang Por would make frequent visits. He offered his assistance in various ways. He used his influence to get a dirt road cut right around the forested area so as to give clearly defined limits to the monastery’s land. When the jealous abbot of a local village monastery started to pen anonymous letters to the authorities slandering the Western monks, Luang Por, with great tact, chaired a meeting in which the problem was resolved. Ajahn Sumedho, Wat Pah Nanachat’s first abbot, felt grateful for the support as he strived to get to grips with a role he did not find easy.

“I could always go to see Luang Por, and he came here quite often. Also, he knew I’d have to learn from trial and error. I remember one time feeling in such a state of despair. All these feelings of being responsible and of being totally inadequate to deal with them. He helped me to get some perspective on this feeling of being burdened by responsibilities. I remember one time going to see him in a state of despair, and he sensed it immediately and he said, ‘Now you know what it’s like to be an abbot. You thought it meant having a triangular cushion to lean against and the key to the larder.’ And he laughed.”

Ven. Varapanyo recounted his memories of his first Rains Retreat at Wat Pah Nanachat:

“On the first night of the Rains Retreat, Ajahn Sumedho told us what the schedule would be – the emphasis would clearly be on formal meditation practice … and encouraged us to just do the practice as it was set up, without second thoughts, and that if we did so, mindfulness would become habitual, and we’d find that we’d be able to live our lives out mindfully. That sounded reasonable to me, and quite wonderful – what more could a person ask for, really? But it still seemed a distant goal.

“There was also more of a harmony of purpose than I’d felt before – no temporary ordinations, kids who were in the monastery only because their parents had sent them – and easy communication with each other, without cultural barriers that often could lead to misunderstanding and bad feeling. This is not to say that everything was perfect, of course. We had much to learn about living with each other, and Ajahn Sumedho had many trials and lessons about being a teacher waiting for him. Still, the overall feeling was very good, and there were many factors that hadn’t been present in past situations in other places.

“The retreat went on, the schedule intensified. It wasn’t easy, but it was good … Luang Por would make his usual jokes, calling it ‘Wat Pah Woon Wai’ (‘Forest Monastery of Confusion’) or ‘Wat Pah Amerikawat’, but he obviously thought it was a good thing, and the lay people who came did too. Yet I doubt anyone could have envisioned how the place would develop in the near future. That first Rains Retreat there were only nine or ten kutis and two kratop (grass huts with no floor, just a bed on the ground). Ajahn Sumedho lived in a small bamboo kuti with a grass roof, and we had a tiny grass-roofed Dhamma Hall with a dirt floor.”

Luang Por did not intercede in the daily running of Wat Pah Nanachat. The monks were free to build the monastery as they saw fit. They designed the Dhamma Hall themselves, and its layout – with the raised sitting area for the monks running along the side of the hall rather than across the front – was a departure from the norm. Luang Por would often recommend visitors who came to pay respects to him at Wat Pah Pong to go to visit Wat Pah Nanachat as well. One of the first groups to arrive was Bangkok’s Radio 01 Dhamma Group. Every year, a fleet of buses filled with pilgrims from this group would travel upcountry to visit various monasteries, receive teachings and make offerings. Now they added Wat Pah Nanachat to their itinerary and supported it generously for many years.

Luang Por showed some concern that the strong-willed Westerners would find it hard to live together in harmony. Whenever he spoke to the Wat Pah Nanachat Sangha, he emphasized the importance of mutual respect and goodwill. He taught that the protocols governing relationships between monks based on seniority prevented old, worldly speech habits from resurfacing, and insisted that they not be relaxed. Honorifics were always to be used: a junior monk’s name must always be preceded by the prefix ‘Tan’; a senior monk’s by ‘Ajahn’. Luang Por maintained that without creating an atmosphere of trust and respect in their monastery, meditation practices would not bear fruit. The conventions of Right Speech had a part to play in achieving this goal.

Ajahn Amaro was one of the first of the Westerners who came for a visit and ended up becoming a monk.

“I found a group of Westerners like myself, with very similar backgrounds, who were living in the forest doing Buddhist meditation practice. And they all seemed remarkably cheerful. When they explained their way of life and the basis of their practice, it made perfect sense to me … They explained that by living a life which is disciplined, simple and harmless, one could discover the true freedom that lies within us. Upon hearing their words, my immediate reaction was, ‘How could I have been so stupid not to have seen this before?’ ”

### Three tiers

A three-tiered training was developed for foreign nationals seeking to become monks. After spending some time as lay meditators in Wat Pah Pong or Wat Pah Nanachat, those who requested permission to join the Sangha were, if accepted, given the white robes of the lay renunciant, or postulant, in a short ceremony marked by a formal commitment to the Eight Precepts. As postulants, they acted as monastery attendants and absorbed the basics of the monastic training through proximity to the monks and by acts of service.

After some months in white, their second step was to enter the Sangha as a novice monk (sāmaṇera). In the year allotted for novice training, they would lead a life very similar to that of the monks but without the pressure and requirements of the Vinaya rules. Once the year had passed, applicants considered ready by their mentors would be admitted into the bhikkhu Sangha through the ceremony of Upasampadā. For the first five years of their training, junior monks would alternate between living with Luang Por, living at Wat Pah Nanachat and living at other branch monasteries. As long as Luang Por’s health permitted, every stage of the process, every movement between monasteries, was either initiated by him or else given his blessing. In the last years of his debilitating illness, this power devolved to the abbot of Wat Pah Nanachat.

The Western monks appreciated the sense that Luang Por was always aware of what they were doing and had their best interests at heart. Often, he would turn up at Wat Pah Nanachat unannounced (although it must be said that in pre-mobile phone days, this was more of a monastic norm than an exception). Ven. Jotiko wrote in a letter to his family:

“Luang Por plays everything by ear so he might drop by for a visit next week or so. We heard he is pleased about the Dhamma Hall project, and he told the laypeople that the foreigners need a lot of cakes. The next day we had a lot. He always plays with our greed like that. He is always throwing curves at us to keep us on our toes, but that is the only way to understand our nature. See the extremes, and if wisdom comes, then you know the middle path.”

### Out on a Limb

Most of the Western monks wanted to be close to Luang Por, but accepted that their training would include spells away from him at Wat Pah Nanachat and other branch monasteries. Life at a branch was usually a mixed experience. Western monks were a novelty in the rural Isan of the mid-1970s. Being the single foreign monk in a monastery brought with it a special, almost celebrity status. Some found this amusing, others distracting. Learning the language – one of the main goals of training at a branch monastery – was not an easy task as there were, in fact, two languages to navigate. Casual conversation would usually be conducted in Isan dialect (‘as thick as yoghurt’, one monk complained) with central Thai used on more formal occasions.

Not understanding much of what was going on around them could be stressful in a culture where few things were planned far in advance, and everyone was expected to be on their toes and ready to adapt to whatever came up. The presence of teenage novices, with all their adolescent energy, could also be challenging. The Sangha at many branch monasteries included a number of sons of local supporters, sent by their parents for the abbot to straighten out. The need to keep these lads busy, meant that work projects were a common feature of life at a branch monastery. A young Swedish monk, Ven. Natthiko, gave a sense of the atmosphere in a letter:

“All this work is exhausting some days. One evening, sitting after a long day’s work, I was overwhelmed by sleepiness and just fell asleep bent forward with my head on my chest. I didn’t even wake up at the bell. It was a hilarious situation: me slowly coming to life while they waited to start chanting. The monks knew how sensitive I’ve become here to being laughed at, but a novice or two couldn’t restrain themselves and soon most of the Sangha was roaring with laughter, including the Ajahn. It was so bad it was good.”

Life at a small branch monastery could also be very enjoyable. The Thai emphasis on social harmony and the conventions of non-confrontation that underpin it, could make for a refreshing change from Wat Pah Nanachat, where not all of the more individualist Westerners ranked emollient social skills amongst their spiritual goals. Many made good friends at branch monasteries and maintained contact with them over the following years. Others developed a much richer idea of the monk’s life, the running of a monastery and the relationship between a wat and local communities. One monk was clearly revelling in life at a branch monastery, when he wrote:

“Part of what I love about being a monk in Thailand is this simplicity: walking barefoot through the village each morning, the balmy weather which makes me feel safe and comfortable, and the simple, physical chores. It’s much easier to be comfortable in my body and be content within the simplicity of the monastic form. These characteristics of contentment and simplicity seem like basic matters, but I often come to think that they’re really what life’s all about.”

But even with the occasional epiphany, most of the Westerners were in agreement that, all in all, life at a branch monastery was a humbling experience. In the words of Ven. Natthiko:

“I know it’s good for me – it hurts in all the right places.”

Although some of the Western monks found that their meditation practice progressed while at a branch monastery, this was by no means always the case. Luang Por was aware of this, but it did not seem to overly concern him. The long-term effects of the training that he was trying to provide were not always measurable by short-term progress in meditation. The penetration of the Four Noble Truths was always the overarching goal, and a gradual and comprehensive training in all areas of the monk’s life was the path.

### You have to stop to keep up

Formal entry into the monastic order is effected through the ceremony of Upasampadā. This ceremony is presided over by a senior monk, designated the upajjhāya or preceptor, who is empowered to receive the new monk into the Sangha and is required to take responsibility for his welfare and training. The relationship between the preceptor and his disciple is modelled on that of father and son. Luang Por became a preceptor in 1975, and, over the next six years, fourteen non-Thais entered the Sangha with him as their preceptor.[4]

At the conclusion of an Ordination ceremony for Western monks, Luang Por would usually take the opportunity of this gathering of the Western Sangha to give a Dhamma talk which would encompass the whole monastic training from its most basic foundations to the ultimate goal of the Holy Life. On one such occasion, he began – as was his custom – by emphasizing the importance of living together in harmony, of how important it was that the foreign monks related to each other according to the conventions laid down in the Vinaya. He instructed them that, as a group of samaṇas, they should put behind them all consciousness of different skin colour, language and culture, and look on each other with kindness and respect, as companions in the Holy Life. They should train themselves in speaking to each other mindfully:

If any problem comes up in the group, then speak about it in a skilful way: ‘I see it like this.’ ‘I feel like this.’ And then listen to what the other person has to say.

The Western monks should learn to listen with an open mind, both to the words of others and to their own thoughts. When a view or opinion arose in their mind, they should be aware of it as simply that – a view, an opinion – and remind themselves that, as yet, they did not, in fact, know whether it accurately reflected the truth of things. The mind was the measure of the effectiveness of their practice. If they were experiencing mental suffering, that meant that they had deviated from the Dhamma and allowed craving to arise. In community life, devotion to the Dhamma and Vinaya would dissolve all sense of conflict and bring a feeling of unity in diversity.

Luang Por seemed to share the widespread concern in Thailand at that time that Buddhism was undergoing a sharp decline. He lamented the fact that so many people were going to monasteries merely in search of protective amulets or to be sprinkled with holy water. He opined that, ‘The true Dhamma is disappearing, it’s seldom seen; few people are practising.’ The Westerners seemed like a breath of fresh air. The sacrifices they had made to spend their lives as monks in the forest gave new inspiration to many people.

So with the world in its present state, I feel that for all of you to have come from so many countries to join in the training here is a singular thing. It’s uplifting for the laypeople to see you coming from abroad to become monks, and to see that you can eat sticky rice, you can speak Thai, you can speak Lao, that you are able to endure life in such a poor and backward place. That’s why, when I went to London, I said to people there that people come to Wat Pah Pong for a doctorate in Buddhism. What I mean by that is that you come here intent on genuine transformation. To me, it’s as if all of you have died and then been reborn; everything here is different from your former life. You have had to get used to the weather, the food, all kinds of things. In order to become monks, you have strived to overcome all these obstacles including learning the language and chanting for the Ordination ceremony. Your efforts are inspiring.

Nevertheless, he cautioned them, the Ordination ceremony was simply a convention. It didn’t, in itself, change them for the better. And it should be remembered that, ultimately, all such forms were empty:

Once you’ve taken the robe as a monk or a novice, you’re still the same person as you were before. Postulant, novice, monk: it’s all the same person. So don’t have ideas about becoming anything. The things we are practising with are, at every stage, the same old things. Truly speaking, there are no Thais and no Westerners here at all; there are just the elements of earth, water, fire and air. Nothing has any intrinsic existence. There are merely the conventions that we have created.

The most important thing was the training of the mind.

Don’t follow after your thoughts. Try to keep looking at your mind. Through my own reflections, I’ve come to see that things which run in a circle are the fastest of all. You can’t keep up with them. You have to just sit there calmly and watch them run. Don’t run with them. When they come to entice you, don’t get up from your seat. And then when your mind stops, you will become aware of many different things. If you run after your thoughts, you won’t be able to keep up with them; but if you stop, then you will. It’s strange. This applies to all mind objects, which are just the way they are, in accordance with causes and conditions.

Transcending the world required an understanding of what ‘the world’ truly was and what it meant to be ‘born into the world’.

Wherever there is a cause, there will be a result – it is the way of the world. There are causes and results; there is birth, and there is death; there is pleasure, and there is pain; there is love, and there is hate. The existence of all these things is called ‘the world’.

Identification with any of these phenomena was the profound meaning of ‘birth’. Birth formed the cause for a proliferation of conditions, and then, inevitably, death. Birth and death were inseparable, he said. Every single person who dies has experienced birth. To determine the Middle Way of practice, it was necessary to bear the end in mind.

The highest teaching of the Buddha is to put things down – take hold of them and then put them down. Pick them up to see what they are, and when you know, then lay them down again. In the end, that’s the way it has to be with everything: you have to put it all down. When you truly know all the things in your mind, then you put them down as a matter of course. If you don’t, and it’s ‘This is mine’, ‘That is mine’, then you’ve got it wrong. If you really understand something, then you put it down. The teachings of the Buddha mean an end, an end without remainder. Whatever there is must be brought to a conclusion, to a complete end. The term ‘khīnāsavo’[5] means one who has come to an end of ‘outflows’[6]. Know the good as good and then put it down; know evil as evil and then put it down.

Eventually, the teachings lead to an ending: knowing the cause you lay down the cause, knowing the effect you lay down the effect. So, having done that, then where do you dwell? Beyond cause and effect; beyond birth and death. You abide there, where things are concluded, where they have come to an end. There is nothing there, the mind is at peace in the absence of cause and effect, birth and death, pleasure and pain. In that peace, there is no cause and effect, because the mind has gone beyond them. It is our ultimate aim in practice. The Buddha taught just this. What remains is for us to travel to that point. The Buddha has provided a boat and oars and left them for us to make use of. If we start to row, then the boat will move; if we don’t, then the boat will remain motionless … The Buddha is the one who tells us what’s what. He cannot do the practice for us. That is our responsibility.

1 Strictly speaking, it would be more accurate to use the word ‘non-Thai’ or ‘foreign’ here. A small number of Asian monks, mainly Japanese and Chinese, trained at Wat Pah Pong. However, the vast majority of the foreign monks have been from the West, and the Thai word used to refer to the non-Thais, ‘farang’, is one specifically coined for Caucasians. For these reasons and for ease of usage, I have chosen to use the word ‘Western Sangha’.

2 The new Uposatha Hall, mentioned elsewhere, was built some years later.

3 See Appendix I, A forest monk’s robes and requisites

4 Seven of these monks remain in robes in 2017: Munindo, Bodhipalo, Amaro, Nyanadhammo, Jayasaro, Vajiro, Khemanando.

5 An epithet for an arahant.

6 Pali: ‘āsavā’. Literally: ‘effluents’ or ‘fermentations’. Defilements of the mind which obstruct liberation. The traditional list includes four: 1) sensuality, 2) views, 3) becoming, and 4) ignorance.