# Off the Beaten Track

Wat Nong Pah Pong[1]

Inspiring are the forests in which worldlings find no pleasure. There the passionless will rejoice, for they seek no sensual pleasures.

– Dhp 99

## Settlers

### Pong Forest

It was on the eighth of March, 1954 that Luang Por Chah and his disciples made their way along the cart track running westwards from Bahn Kor on the last leg of their journey to Pong Forest. Afternoon temperatures at that time of year regularly exceed 35 degrees, but the oppressive heat would have cooled slightly as they approached the dense forest and the path become increasingly stippled and striped by the shade. In the late afternoon, as the gorged red sun was starting its descent ahead of them, the monks strung up their glots at the edge of the forest, amid the hum of mosquitos and the deafening shrill of cicadas.

Pong Forest held strong associations for Luang Por. An abiding memory of his childhood was of his father walking there one morning with some friends to offer alms to the great Luang Pu Sao, who was camped out in the forest practising meditation. That evening, the young Chah had listened with fascination to his father’s account of their expedition. It was the first time he had heard about wandering monks living austere lives in the jungle. He always remembered how impressed his father had been that Luang Pu Sao ate all his food from his alms-bowl, rather than from plates as the village monks did. And he also recalled his father’s slight puzzlement at Luang Pu Sao’s teaching style, ‘It wasn’t like a proper sermon at all’, he had said, ‘it was just like normal talking.’ Many years later, Luang Por’s recall of the day was still strong:

When I set off and started practising, the memory of my father’s account was constantly with me. Whenever I came back home to visit, my mind would always turn to this forest … Ajahn Dee from Phibun and Ajahn Phut[2] once passed through there, and the villagers invited them to stay – Ajahn Phut still speaks of it to this day. Ajahn Dee said, ‘This isn’t our place. We can’t stay. It won’t be long now, and the owner will arrive.’

The following morning, after finishing their daily meal, the group of monks entered the thickly tangled forest for the first time. Villagers from Bahn Kor moved in front of them, expertly hacking a way through the stubborn vines and luxurious undergrowth with their machetes. Eventually, at the cool heart of the forest, they halted. No photographs were taken of this auspicious occasion. It is unlikely that anyone present that day had ever seen a camera, much less used one. But imagination may supply a picture: the wiry villagers, sweat running down the protective spells tattooed on their chests, squatting in a circle and rolling cigarettes. With Luang Por at the foot of an ancient and imposing mango tree, the monks sit some distance apart, drinking water from their bamboo flasks and tranquility from the air around them.

A group of women had been following in the monks’ wake. They soon joined their men-folk in methodically removing all the vines, stumps and thorns in the neighbourhood of the old mango tree. Clearing land was work at which the villagers were adept, and a central open area soon started to take shape amongst the larger shade-bearing trees, creating a neat, stately and almost park-like atmosphere in the midst of the thick and matted jungle that surrounded them. At the foot of some of the larger trees beyond the edge of this area, small squares of land were cleared for the monks to set up their glots. The monks themselves, forbidden by the Vinaya to dig the earth or destroy plant life, helped by dragging the cut branches into the forest and sweeping the cleared areas.

There was a break at midday for the villagers to eat their lunch – sticky rice and fermented fish brought from home and fresh forest leaves gathered along the way. Then with the sun overhead, filtering down between the large patches of shade in bright, hot pools, it was back to the steady rhythm of the work. By late afternoon, a rudimentary path had been cut to the edge of the forest. After taking their leave of Luang Por, the laypeople made their way along this new path for the first time, hurrying a little in order to reach their homes before dark. In the heart of the forest, as darkness set in, the monks, in their glots, sat in meditation.

Early one morning a few days later, a group of volunteers from Bahn Kor and Bahn Klang arrived to build huts for the monks and expand the open area. They brought with them sections of thin ya kha thatch for the roofs and cut the main posts and beams from the trees around them. The men deftly split bamboo into long strips to weave into floors while the women attached large, dry chat leaves to bamboo frames for the walls. Four huts were completed by the evening: simple dwellings, but sufficient for the monks’ needs. The flimsiness of these shelters could not conceal their significance. Their creation, in the space of a day, had transformed the monks’ presence in the forest from that of respectful guests of its peace and shade, into settlers.

Pong Forest, the monks’ new home, possessed a certain notoriety amongst local people. In former days, the now-dry freshwater pool towards its northern end had attracted many wild animals, including tigers and elephants. Adding to the forest’s daunting reputation was the widespread belief that a harsh and vengeful guardian spirit had vowed to protect it from human intrusions. Luang Por, who was generally very forthright in his criticism of baseless superstition, did not counter this belief. On the contrary, he frequently referred to the spirit by name – Por Daeng. He once explained to some guests:

When I first came to stay here, it was a hard place to live: there were none of these buildings you see now, nothing but forest. It goes without saying that there were no roads, and coming in and out was very difficult. The local farmers lived a long way away. They didn’t dare to come into the forest because the guardian spirit here was so fierce. This spirit was once an elephant herder who would often pass through the forest on his expeditions to capture elephants and would water them at the pond on the way back. In the end, he settled down here to look after the forest, and it’s thanks to him that, by the time I came to live here, there was still some of it left. Otherwise, it would probably all have been cut down long ago. A number of years ago, some villagers from Bahn Bok and Bahn Peung did clear a patch of land and plant some rice and vegetables, but all of them came to an unfortunate end. People who have come in and cut down trees have tended to die from mysterious causes. Wild potatoes grow abundantly in the forest, but nobody’s dared to touch them. It was only after I’d come to live here that people started to farm more closely to the forest edge.

### Strange Visions

The full moon day of March marked the first Observance Day since the monks’ arrival in the forest. About a dozen laypeople came to spend the day and night chanting and meditating with the monks. At seven o’clock, the evening chanting completed and the last light of the day fading away, Luang Por began to expound the Dhamma, his voice energetic and compelling. As the words flowed more and more surely, his form was illuminated by the rays of the newly risen moon. Then, quite without warning, arrested in full spate, Luang Por suddenly fell silent. Many of his listeners found their eyes jerking open in surprise to be greeted with the view of their teacher sitting in the moonlight as still and composed as a Buddha image. After a few moments, he spoke to them, ‘Everyone just sit calmly. If anything strange occurs, there’s no need to be alarmed.’ And then, without further explanation, he resumed his discourse.

A few minutes later a bright light, like a comet, appeared in the sky to the northwest. Passing over their heads, it then dropped earthwards to the southeast of the small cleared area in which they sat, bathing the whole forest grove in a dazzling light. Despite the forewarning, monks and laypeople were profoundly thrilled at what they saw as an auspicious portent for the new monastery. Luang Por, however, paid no attention to the light whatsoever and carried on with his Dhamma talk as if nothing had happened. Gradually the spell and power of his words re-asserted their hold over his audience.

Luang Por was never to refer to this matter again. Nevertheless, the following morning when he led a small group of laypeople to mark the limits of the new monastery with stakes, it did not pass unnoticed that the boundaries he chose, enclosing an area of some 150 rai[3], were governed by the points at which the strange light had risen and fallen. It was not the end of mysterious lights. Mae Noi, one of the villagers who would spend the Observance Day nights practising in the monastery and had been present on the first occasion relates:

“In those days it wasn’t as easy to get to the monastery as it is today. Those of us from Bahn Kor who wanted to go and listen to the Dhamma on Observance Day nights would follow a narrow track which passed through some scrubby forest. Some sections of this track were thickly overgrown with khah grass. One night there was quite a big group of us including Por Phut, but we still managed to get lost out by Python Pond. Just as we were standing there discussing which way to go, we saw a bright light hovering over the tips of the large mango tree, and we headed into the forest towards it. The undergrowth was thick with grass and tangled vines, but we kept on struggling through it with the light as our goal. We assumed that a big hurricane lamp had been suspended in one of the trees. When we thought of how kind Luang Por was to put up a light to guide us, all our weariness disappeared. Finally, we reached the clearing where the monks lived. There was no light at all. We were amazed.”

### Early Austerity

It would be inaccurate to describe the establishment of Wat Pah Pong as signalling the birth of the Forest Tradition in Ubon. It is impossible to tell how many hermitages have quietly flourished and declined in the last few hundred years or how many flimsy kutis have been swallowed by the forest. Some fifteen years earlier, Luang Pu Sao had returned to Ubon determined to spend the last years of his life establishing the Forest Tradition in his native province, and a few small monastic communities had resulted from his efforts. Nevertheless, it is clear that Luang Por Chah settling in Pong Forest was a most significant development. Wat Pah Pong was to become a training centre for forest monks who, within thirty years, would establish over sixty branch monasteries throughout the province, and many more in adjoining provinces of south and southeast Isan.

Wat Pah Pong was established without capital and with no plan of development. Luang Por’s belief was that if the Sangha practised sincerely, the material evolution of the monastery would gradually take care of itself, because lay Buddhists, inspired by the monks’ dedication, would offer the necessary funds of their own volition. In the long term, buildings would be needed, but they were not an urgent or overriding concern. The important thing was the monks’ practice. The Vinaya forbids monks from any kind of fund-raising effort; they are taught to be content with whatever is offered out of faith, however much or however little, whether of good quality or poor. Luang Por followed these injunctions to the letter. If it was going to take ten or twenty years to build a proper Dhamma Hall, then so be it. He was certainly not going to sell his integrity for bags of cement.

Every morning, the monks went on alms-round, ate their one daily meal, and then spent the rest of the day at their practice. Faithful villagers provided the things they needed. Everything else they simply did without.

The arrival of Luang Por and his monks was a talking point in local communities for a few days. But the villagers had their work to do and when the novelty of the forest monks had worn off, so did much of the interest in them. The majority of villagers thought it was a good thing, in general, to have a forest monastery nearby, and they appreciated the opportunity to put food in the forest monks’ bowls in the morning, but their lives continued unchanged. The cultural identity and the opportunities for making merit provided by the village monasteries were as much as most people expected or sought from religion. Although a few people maligned the forest monks as misguided zealots, a certain number of villagers were deeply inspired by the forest monks, becoming regular supporters of the new wat and disciples of Luang Por.

For a number of years, the physical conditions in which Luang Por and his disciples lived were very austere. The gap between their standard of living and that of the people in the villages surrounding the monastery was not, however, a large one. ‘Find in the morning, eat in the evening’ is a Thai idiom that well expresses the poverty of most inhabitants of rural Ubon in the mid-1950s. If the monks had little to eat with their daily ball of sticky rice and patched their robes until they fell apart, the local villagers were hardly better off. Cash or disposable income was still in short supply. What little money people did have was kept aside for times of illness. If they had a few spare coins for merit-making, their first obligation was to support their local village monastery. For these reasons, funds for the material development of Wat Pah Pong were slow to appear. It was not considered a problem. There was no standard length of time laid down for building a monastery. If money was offered, some construction took place; if not, it didn’t.

### Requisites

The monks had three main robes[4] made of thick cotton, supplemented by one or two angsas and bathing cloths. The upper robe (jiwon) and the lower robe (sabong), if looked after and patched as they began to wear thin, could last for three or four years, and the double-layered outer robe (saṅghāṭi) much longer. Both larger robes could double as blankets at night. Bedding consisted of a rattan mat and a folding wooden pillow that the monks usually made themselves. Their other requisites consisted of a glot, a shoulder bag, a sitting cloth, water-filter, needle and thread. They had no footwear. Candles and matches were hard to come by. Water for drinking and general use was drawn from a well. To make fire:

You’d stuff kapok into a length of bamboo, leaving one end open with half a lemon skin as a lid. Then you’d strike the flint to get a spark and light the kapok in the tube.

Walking around at night was dangerous.

You’d come down from your kuti in the thick, black darkness, raise your hands in anjali above your head and say, ‘Sādhu! With the power of the virtues of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha,

Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu. Sabbe sattā averā hontu. Sabbe sattā abhyāpajjhā hontu.

May all beings be happy … and please leave me be!’

In the middle of the night it was pitch black, you couldn’t see a thing. It was easy to tread on something on your walking path without seeing it. In fact, I trod on snakes a number of times – there’s a lot of those small venomous pit vipers around – but they never bit me.

Cloth was in very short supply. If a robe became ripped, its owner would be expected to patch and darn it until the cotton reached a terminal, tissue-paper stage of decline, at which every slight strain would tear it. Only then would the monk be issued cloth from the monastery store to make a new one.

Ajahn Tiang[5] remembered:

“For the first three or four years, we sewed by hand. Sometimes, after cutting the cloth for a robe, the whole Sangha would sit down and help with the sewing. Then the robe would be dyed in jackfruit dye. By the time it was finally ready to be worn, a couple of months had passed. Making the full set of three robes was no easy thing. To get enough dye, you had to keep the wood chips boiling on the fire for hours and hours – that is, if you could get hold of any cloth to make the robes to dye in the first place. Bowl covers we had to crochet ourselves. It was difficult. If there had been as many monks as there are these days, I don’t know how we would have managed. It was hard, but Luang Por kept it all going.”

### Alms-food

Alms-food was basic at best. Usually the monks would return from alms-round with little more than sticky rice. Only rarely would there be a few bananas or dried fish to augment it. The Isan tradition, especially in the countryside, was to make alms-round an almost ritual offering of rice, and then afterwards to take side dishes (literally ‘with rice’) – curries, fruit, sweets, edible leaves etc. – to the monastery and offer them at the monks’ meal time. It was a custom that maintained a close daily relationship between the Sangha and the laity. But it was not a system that worked so well when the monks lived a long walk away from the village. Although few people could find time to go to Wat Pah Pong in the morning, they were slow to change their alms-giving habits. Plain rice was still the most common offering on alms-round. Consequently, as they returned from the village, the novices – unhampered by the Vinaya rules that prohibited the monks from destroying plant life – would stop to pick edible leaves from the trees by the path. These leaves, dipped in chilli sauce, would relieve the monotony of the heavy rice.

Four women – Luang Por’s mother, Mae Pim, and three other elderly villagers – came to live in the monastery in that first year, and they tended a herb garden to supplement the alms-food. Maechee Boonyu Pimwong, who arrived a few years after the maechee community was established[6] and went on to become the senior nun, remembers the hardships of those days:

“The food that was left over from the monks would be distributed amongst the maechees. However much that might be, there was never any left over. If the monks got nothing, then we would go without as well. We’d never try to procure food from elsewhere. Sometimes, there would be an invitation for the monks to eat in a layperson’s house and there would only be two or three monks left to go on alms-round. There were ten of us. After we’d shared out the rice, each of us would be left with a ball the size of a lemon – and so that’s how much we’d eat. There was nothing to go with it, but we knew how to get by with plain rice. One time, I remember the monks came back from alms-round with three bananas between them. Luang Por had one of the monks cut them into thin little slices and distribute them. That day those three bananas fed the whole community.”

To hungry young monks, the daily meal consisting of a ball of sticky rice with a dab of chilli sauce and not much else, could still be delicious. Ajahn Jun was one whose appetite was never blunted by the frugality or monotony of the food. Until the end of his life, he cherished the memory of looking up from his bowl one day to see Luang Por’s eyes upon him. Self-conscious, he stopped eating, painfully aware of how much he had been enjoying his meal. But his embarrassment subsided in an instant. He realized that the look on Luang Por’s face was not disapproval; the heedless disciple was not about to be scolded for gluttony. What Ajahn Jun remembered seeing in Luang Por’s expression that day, he said, was the warm, generous smile of a father watching a ravenous son tucking in after a hard day’s work in the field.

Luang Por said of those days:

I never sat around wasting my time trying to think up ways to get hold of this or that kind of food. As far as I was concerned, plain rice was enough to survive on. And that went for the people that had the faith to come to practice here as well: Ajahn Jan, Ajahn Tiang, Ajahn Sinuan and the rest. I’d make an announcement that today there would be a hot drink in the afternoon, and everyone would come and drink it quietly – not coffee or cocoa or anything sweet, but borapet.[7] Nobody complained about its bitterness. There was nothing else, and so that’s what we drank.

In later years, when lay support for the monastery had grown and food and drink were more plentiful, Luang Por would often recall the early hardships. He would constantly remind the monks that they had no right to be well-fed. Frugality was not an austerity imposed through circumstances, but a virtue to be cultivated.

At least we had something to eat every day, and even if it was only plain rice, it was better than going without. Eating plain rice would make me think of dogs. In poor areas, the villagers feed their dogs with just a small lump of sticky rice once a day – nothing with it, just plain rice – and they don’t die, they get by alright. And what’s more, those dogs are really diligent and wakeful guards. They only have to hear the sound of leaves rustling and they start barking. When their owner takes them hunting, they run really fast because they’re so lean. Whereas the dogs who are well looked after by their masters get lazy. Anyone can walk right up to them – almost step on their head – and they still don’t wake up.

### Medicines

Throughout his life at Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por showed a determination to keep the world of institutions and bureaucracies at arm’s length as best he could, and to maintain the independence of his Sangha. During the first ten years or so of the monastery’s existence, this policy included a rejection of allopathic medicine. His rationale was that monks had not had the advantage of Western medicine for 2500 years, and that what had been good enough for the great monks of old was good enough for the Sangha of Wat Pah Pong. To his way of thinking at the time, access to medical care provided by the state was one of the conveniences of lay life renounced on entering the monastic order. Running to the local hospital with every small complaint would undermine the key virtue of patience that the training aimed to cultivate. Over the course of time, Luang Por’s compassion led him to moderate this particular principle, and he eventually discarded it. But for the early pioneers of Wat Pah Pong, it was a proud tradition.

This did not mean that physical ailments were left untreated altogether. In times of illness, the monks relied on herbal medicines made from local roots and leaves. Luang Por himself had gathered a wide knowledge of such traditional remedies during his years of wandering and knew treatments for most of the common ailments – digestive problems, joint pain, and haemorrhoids – that afflict monastics. In the early years at Wat Pah Pong, malaria was the greatest scourge, and virtually nobody was spared from it. For those afflicted, malarial fevers occur every one or two days, usually commencing in the afternoon. They are characterized by a coldness that no number of blankets can relieve and accompanied by blinding headaches and nausea. If the parasites find their way to the brain, death may result. Fortunately, nobody died at Wat Pah Pong, but many, including Luang Por, came perilously close. Maechee Boonyu remembered one occasion vividly:

“Luang Por was the first one to fall ill with malaria, and he got it very badly. He had the monks carry him down from his kuti and lay him on a bamboo bed in the shade. We had no modern medicines. Luang Por wouldn’t let anyone have anything to do with the hospital; he wouldn’t even let anybody mention its name. So we just did our best to treat him with the herbs we had.

“When he got really bad, his skin took on a kind of greenish, discoloured hue. We knew that meant he’d reached the last stage of the illness. One day, the fever was particularly severe. After laying there for a moment, he’d pull himself up into a sitting posture; then, almost immediately, he would crumple back down again. This happened time and time again. Monks, novices, nuns and laypeople – we all sat there watching in silence. All our eyes were glued to him. He sat up again. He was swaying from side to side, trying to keep himself upright. He looked about and saw the dipper of medicine. He lifted it towards his mouth unsteadily, and before his attendant could help him, tipped it all over himself. He lay there drenched for a moment. Then you could see him make a great effort to gather himself. He put down the dipper, sat up straight one more time – and stayed that way. There was silence. He had entered samādhi. We were all frightened and amazed at what we saw.

“The next morning, he still hadn’t recovered, but from then on, over a period of many days, he started to gradually improve. I don’t know how it was he recovered but as soon as he did, then everyone else started to get ill. It was like an epidemic: monks, novices and nuns, everyone got it badly.”

Malaria rarely disappears completely. It often lies dormant in the liver. Luang Por was to suffer a number of relapses over the next three years. Ajahn Jun was one of the monks who tended to him during those times.

“At one time, he became seriously ill and we took turns nursing him. There would be two monks on each shift who would sit out on the veranda of his kuti and go inside every now and again to check how hot he was and see if he needed anything. But he would never let us massage him. He was concerned he’d become dependent on it. So we would sit out on the veranda and he would lie in the room shaking with fever. The attendants didn’t talk. We would sit meditating with our backs to each other. Whenever there was something to be done, we went inside.

“His fever would come on in the afternoons. I remember one day some people had come to see him and were waiting beneath the mafai tree, where we’d made a raised seat for him to sit on. Luang Por’s fever was very high right then: his head ached and he felt nauseous. But when we told him he had guests, he just got up, put on his robe and went down to welcome them as if nothing was the matter.

“The fever gave him bad constipation. Finally, one day he called me over, ‘Ajahn Jun, come and have a look at this.’ I walked over to where he was standing. He pointed to a leaf that he’d put down on the ground by the side of him and said, ‘That’s why I’ve been so constipated.’ I looked down. In the middle of the leaf was something that looked like a small rock. It was a lump of his excrement.”

The medicine used for malaria was prepared from borapet. The making of borapet infusions became one of the daily duties of the nuns. Maechee Boonyu recounts the method:

“You’d finely chop the vine – a foot-long section for each person – pound it to a mush and then strain it through a thin cloth into a glass of water. That would give you a thick liquid. Then you’d have to hold your breath and knock it back.”

Luang Por’s attitude to illness was uncompromising:

The monks in those days knew how to endure. No matter how ill they were, they would refuse to go to the hospital. I myself had malaria for three years and never went to the hospital once, I just struggled with it here. How did I treat it? I boiled borapet and drank it with salt or with samor[8]. It worked really well; it just wasn’t very pleasant, that’s all. It was difficult on the body, but if you haven’t reached your time, you won’t die. There was no medicine in those days. If anyone got malaria, I’d encourage them, ‘Endure it. Meditation monks must be fearless. If any of you die, I’ll see to the funeral myself. If I die first, then all of you can cremate me. Don’t hold on, it’s suffering.’ That’s how we’d talk and admonish each other. There was no discouragement or despair. The monks were really brave, courageous, capable. I had no concerns that any of them would be cowed by such things.

As Ajahn Jun remembered it, Luang Por’s treatment of sick monks was gentler than his rhetoric:

“Luang Por was very tough. He used to say, ‘If you’re not dead, then make it good; and if it’s no good, then let it die.’ Even so, whenever one of the monks or novices became ill, he would always give them special attention and be particularly kind to them. If someone was too ill to come out for the meal, he would put food aside for them himself. He would go and visit them regularly at their kuti and ask how they were. If their spittoon was full, he’d take it away and wash it out. After that, he would sweep around the kuti and then inspire them with Dhamma teachings. We didn’t have much in the way of medicine – only local herbs – but he gave the best that he could: encouragement in the practice.”

## Golden Days

### Warrior Spirit

The Luang Por Chah that left such an indelible impression on those who met him during his trips to the West in the mid-1970s is for many, the Luang Por Chah. Most of the surviving recorded talks, the well-known photographs, and the priceless seconds of footage in the BBC documentaries, were all from that period of his life. It is a wise, chuckling grandfather figure with a potbelly and walking stick that has embedded itself in the Western Buddhist pantheon. People who met him at that time recall a warmth and wisdom emanating from him that seemed timeless – so much so that it was hard for anyone to imagine that he could ever have been any other way. But, of course, he had. Looking back twenty years, a somewhat different Luang Por Chah emerges. At that time in his life, although he appears a powerful and impressive figure, he is also, perhaps, a less engaging one. If, in his later years, he might have been compared to an absolute monarch at ease in a peaceful kingdom, then in the 1950s, the comparison that would have come to mind was that of the warrior king of a troubled land.

In the memories of those who lived with him in the early days of Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por was a spare, stern, vigorous figure. The few photos of him from this period convey an intimidating intensity. The images speak of a honed and disciplined mind focused unwaveringly on its goal. It was a period in which he felt the culmination of his practice to lie within his grasp. Seeing the kind of momentum and intensity of effort needed to break through the last wall of ignorance, he was in no mood for compromise. He pushed his disciples to their limits. Those who could endure it, stayed; those who could not, left. He would say to them that if they genuinely aimed for liberation, they should know that Nibbāna lay on the shores of death.

The intensity of the schedule that Luang Por maintained at Wat Pah Pong during the first period of its existence was the natural outcome of the prodigious efforts he was putting forth in his own practice. As he led a small, tightly knit community, with few of the teenage novices and elderly men that were to swell – and somewhat dilute the intensity of – the Sangha in later days, he did his best to carry his disciples along in his wake.

Patient endurance, lauded by the Buddha as ‘the most excellent incinerator of defilements’ was the virtue that featured most prominently in Luang Por’s exhortations to the Sangha. It was also the most striking feature of his own practice. The respect and awe in which the young monks held their teacher was inspired not only by the peace, wisdom and compassion that they recognized in him, but perhaps above all, by the fact that he seemed so much tougher than everyone else.

Over the centuries, it has been common throughout the world, for men at least, to look on spiritual endeavour as akin to warfare. In theistic traditions, the enemy that must be overcome is conceived of as an evil being; in Buddhism, it is the mental defilements. The idea of the spiritual warrior is one that has always appealed to young men, and in the early years of Wat Pah Pong, it was the dominant metaphor.

Luang Por, at this early stage of his teaching career, had much of the battlefield general about him. He appears as a rugged figure, always leading from the front, hard but fair to his disciples, and a master tactician. He portrayed spiritual life to his disciples as a long campaign requiring endurance, guile and supreme self-discipline. He urged them to grit their teeth and stick to their guns because the rewards of victory were great. His Dhamma talks often featured forceful martial and boxing imagery. The monks were urged to fight the good fight and kill greed, hatred and delusion; or at least to get up in the ring and beat them to pulp. It was good, stirring stuff and expertly pitched to the needs of his young audience.

The members of the Sangha at Wat Pah Pong had all grown up in the midst of a hierarchical and authoritarian society. They felt comfortable about deferring to elders. They responded well to clarity and bluntness. To a twenty-first century eye, Luang Por’s style of leadership at this time of his life can seem harsh and autocratic, but seen in the context of the times and the prevailing culture, it was by no means unusual. He was a strict disciplinarian, scolding the monks for their failings with a sometimes startling ferocity. But nobody questioned that he had the right to speak to them in such a way. Indeed, for most young monks, having a teacher who struck fear into their hearts was inspiring. It was how it should be, how it was meant to be.

The training at Wat Pah Pong was characterized by a very precise attention to the extensive list of observances and regulations that augmented the main body of the Vinaya. Another military analogy may best describe the rationale for this approach: in the monastery, where life is understood as a ‘state of emergency’, care over the smallest of details can make the same difference between life and death as it can in wartime. Sharpness and clarity of mind were to be enhanced by grounding awareness in the concrete realities of the monks’ daily life. Today, that early period has attained the status of ‘the good old days’, a golden age from which subsequent generations have fallen. Monks who later confessed how afraid they felt of Luang Por then, did so with a pride that they were there, and a nostalgic smile.

Initially, Luang Por led the monks in the ruthless head-on style that worked so well for himself. As he got older his style mellowed. Whether the later period is viewed as an evolution or a decline (as will be seen, there were monks who held to both views), there is no doubt that, throughout his life, Luang Por would look back to the early days of the monastery as a time when the cohesion, dedication and faith of the Sangha were at a level never to be surpassed.

In those days, Ajahn Jun and Ajahn Tiang still didn’t understand the practice – but they endured. They did as they were told, obedient to their teacher’s instructions. Whatever I taught them or told them to do, they accepted it without argument, willing to listen to my words and reflect on them. That’s why one of them was here for six years and the other for seven. During that period Ajahn Jun and Ajahn Tiang never left the monastery; never went off tripping around the country aimlessly, wasting their time on things of little value. They sought the Dhamma from the teacher and practised all the things that led to progress. That gave them great energy, both physical and mental. I led them in the practice, taught them to act courageously, to fear nothing at all. And they followed me.

### One Day at a Time

Ajahn Jun has spoken in detail of the daily life in Wat Pah Pong in those days:

“The bell would be rung at three o’clock for the morning chanting and meditation session. Luang Por would usually be in the Dhamma Hall first. We would all arrive at about the same time, and sometimes there would be a check to see if everyone was there. If anyone was slacking in their practice and not coming out, he would ask where they were. You had fifteen minutes to get to the Dhamma Hall from the time the bell was rung and if you didn’t make it, something would be said. There would be a period of sitting meditation first, followed by chanting. Sometimes during the sittings, Luang Por would give basic instructions on how to overcome the hindrances. We all tried hard and he kept an eye on everyone. If anyone was nodding, he would call out to wake them up.

“At the end of the session, Luang Por would remind us once more about our conduct and urge us to be constantly aware. When he spoke, everyone was completely silent. We respected him; we were in awe of him; nobody dared to fidget or speak. If anyone had to speak while they prepared their bowl and robes for alms-round, they whispered. The longer routes would leave first. Luang Por himself went on a short route. He never went to Bahn Kor; he said the virus was still inside him. He meant that he still felt a trace of attachment to his old village and the people in it. If he went every day and saw the old place where he used to live – his brothers and sisters, his nephews and nieces – it might bring up old attachments. So, unless it was unavoidable, he wouldn’t ever go to Bahn Kor; he’d go on alms-round to Bahn Klang. During the time before alms-round, after the monks on the long routes had left, he would pick up a broom and do some sweeping or, on some days, remove the leaves from the shallow ditches along the side of the paths.

“At three o’clock in the afternoon, the bell would ring again. Before leaving your kuti, you’d close the door and windows, and take in your robes or any cloth that was out on the line so that if it rained you wouldn’t have to run back. Then you’d bow. You always bowed. If you suddenly realized half-way down the path that you’d forgotten to bow, then you had to go back.

“You’d be carrying a broom and a water kettle in your hands, with your bathing cloth folded and tucked under your arm or on your head. When you got to the Dhamma Hall, you’d put your things down and go and bow to the statue of the Buddha inside. You’d put your kettle on the monks’ seat and then go out. If the sun was strong you’d put the folded bathing cloth neatly on your head and then help sweep leaves. Luang Por would be there and we would sweep in a big line across the cleared area of the forest. There was no conversation. If it wasn’t absolutely necessary, nobody spoke. All that you could hear would be the sound of the brooms.

“In those days, there was rarely anything sweet to drink in the afternoons. All we’d get would be a bitter infusion made from borapet vine, samor and Indian gooseberry (makhampom)[9]. There may not have been much sugar but there were plenty of samor – we’d eat them pickled or dipped in dried ground chillies and salt[10]. But it wasn’t every day. If there were some, Luang Por would have the afternoon bell rung early and we’d meet under the big mango tree at half-past two, before chores. Anyone who tossed the seeds away in a careless fashion would be in trouble. He’d say, ‘You’ve soiled your virtue.’ We weren’t to throw the seeds away just anywhere, we had to put them all together in a neat pile and then afterwards one of us would dispose of them in the proper place. After we’d finished, Luang Por would say a few words of Dhamma, and then at three o’clock we’d go to work.

“Once the sweeping was over, we’d prepare water for drinking and general use. In the early days, we’d haul the water from the well and then carry it to the places it was needed in old kerosene cans. These cans would be carried suspended from a bamboo pole with a monk at each end, taking the weight on a shoulder. Luang Por would be one of the ones pulling on the rope and I would be the one who would lift out the bucket full of water and fill the tin cans. In those days, there weren’t many monks – six, eight, ten – the numbers steadily increased. Everybody would help with the water hauling, young and old, and it was done in silence. Luang Por would be observing us the whole time. The monks were careful, respectful. We had a deep faith in what we were doing.

“When water hauling was over, then we’d sweep the Dhamma Hall, wipe down the floor and window frames, and lay down mats for the evening session. After that, we’d take a bath and then go out onto our walking paths to practice some walking meditation. As soon as the bell was rung at six o’clock, we’d pick up our robes and shoulder bag from the kuti, close the windows, bow, and set off for the evening session at a brisk pace. Luang Por was always reminding us to get to the Dhamma Hall promptly and not to keep the senior monks waiting.

“After the evening sitting, there would be a period of chanting and then Luang Por would get up onto the Dhamma seat. Most days, he would read a passage from the Pubbasikkhā and then expand upon its meaning. It would usually be around ten or eleven o’clock before we’d pay respects to the Triple Gem and return to our kutis. Sometimes, it would be midnight or one in the morning.

“Luang Por was very frugal with the requisites. If he saw that someone had thrown something away in the forest – an old plastic dipper, say, or a spittoon that was still useable or whatever – he’d retrieve it. He’d say we were wasteful. ‘You’ve soiled your virtue.’ That was one of his favourite phrases, ‘You’ve soiled your virtue.’ When I first went to live at Wat Pah Pong, I couldn’t understand how you could soil your virtue so quickly or so easily. What he meant was that you’d said or done something inappropriate. You’d say something wrong, do something wrong, put things away poorly, lose your awareness, be in a daydream – and that would be soiling your virtue. He tried to have us use requisites frugally so that we wouldn’t run out of things. Some people didn’t understand. They said Luang Por was always complaining, that he nagged, that he was stingy. But it was really just that he had a standard that he was trying to maintain.

“Every Observance Day we’d keep the sitter’s practice – monks and laity. Everybody would refrain from sleeping for the whole night. It was very difficult to leave the hall. You’d be sitting there in agony but nobody would have the courage to be the first to go outside because it would mean showing yourself up in front of the others – and you’d worry about that. But once one had gone out others would follow. It wasn’t that people wanted to lie down and rest: they wanted to stretch their legs and do some walking meditation. Some nights, though, if you couldn’t bear it, you might actually lay down for a few minutes on the forest floor. But if you heard the sound of someone coming or of leaves crackling you’d jump up, afraid someone would see. Luang Por would say, ‘Going outside is for changing your posture. Don’t get into conversations.’ He himself just sat there motionless for the whole night.

“Sometimes Luang Por would have one of the laypeople give a Dhamma talk. There were two laymen who could give talks: Por Dee and Por Moon. Those two could talk all day and all night if you gave them the chance. Luang Por would say, ‘All right, now the monks and novices can hear a talk about lay life and how hard and full of troubles it is.’ Then one of the two would tell us all about the sufferings of life in the world. And, actually, we learned a lot.”

### Absolute Sincerity

In later years, Ajahn Tiang was sometimes teased for exaggerating the purity of the practice in the early days. Some monks said he projected too much of the fierceness and lack of humour in his own personality on to Luang Por. Nevertheless, his account of that early period is a powerful one.

“The heart of what Luang Por was teaching, the two things he was emphasizing above all else, were the Vinaya and meditation practice. The monastic regimen was not to be discarded or interrupted under any circumstances. If it wasn’t absolutely necessary, then there were no breaks from group practice. If there was a break, it never lasted more than fifteen days or, at most, a month. He laid great emphasis on meditation practice. You were told to practice walking and sitting meditation, keep putting forth effort – morning, noon and night. If you had some task to perform, you were to see to it and then return to your meditation. The monks weren’t interested in chatting or playing around. Everyone kept to themselves and did their practice. The laypeople who went to the monastery did the same. They listened to talks and learned about the Dhamma. They took meditation practice seriously and applied themselves to it at the appropriate times.

“Luang Por never spoke playfully. He never told jokes or acted in a high-spirited way. He never spoke of worldly things or led the monks into bad habits with talk of the sensual world. On the contrary, he would forbid such talk. He told the monks not to socialize. He said it led to cliques and disharmony. His sights were set firmly on practice. He was intent on the threefold training, and the study of the Dhamma and Vinaya.

“In those days, he would give regular instruction based on the Pubbasikkhā. Every day, after evening chanting, we’d listen to the Vinaya. All our ways of doing things were in accordance with the Vinaya, right down to the details of the annual robe-offering ceremony (kaṭhina). We trained ourselves to cut and sew our own robes, and to make toothwoods. We incorporated those things into our daily schedule and used them to overcome sloth, torpor and laziness. That was the way he taught: if you feel sleepy, then don’t sleep. Find some skilful means to get through your drowsiness. In the middle of the day if nothing else works, you can always make toothwoods.

“Sometimes, we’d practise until eleven or twelve at night before he’d let us go back. That would give you two hours of rest. How could you go to sleep for two hours? You just ended up sitting propped up against a wall or a tree somewhere near the Dhamma Hall. You’d never be in time to ring the bell: Luang Por would always be there first. We tried our best but who could make do with as little sleep as him? …

“You had to do what you were told. If it was a walking period, you had to walk – no question. If it was a sitting period, you had to sit; you weren’t to get up. He wasn’t joking; it wasn’t in him. You had no alternative. If he saw you being stubborn, he would call you over and scold you. He scolded the monks; he scolded the novices. He’d even call a meeting to do it … You couldn’t sit around relaxing anywhere, even for the blink of an eye. You couldn’t drift in and out of the Dhamma Hall: he’d ask straightaway, ‘What did you go outside for?’ If you’d gone out to urinate and disappeared for an hour then that would be it. ‘An hour to urinate? Next time you go, let me know. I’d like to see that for myself.’

“How could you fail to be afraid? You couldn’t skip anything. He didn’t joke, and he didn’t let anything go. If you didn’t have a proper walking path or the central area was left unswept, then that was it, you’d hear about it that very day: ‘Why not? Are you unwell? If you’re not feeling well, then why didn’t you come and tell me, or if you couldn’t do that, why didn’t you tell someone else? How can you just follow your own mind like that? You’re a member of a community, aren’t you? Or do you think you’re living alone?’

“He’d pull you up on everything. You couldn’t move an inch. You couldn’t wander about. Once the session was over and you could carry on practising on your own, even still, if he saw someone walking about then that was it, ‘Venerable Sir! Venerable Sir! What are you playing around at now?’ He had really sharp eyes. He didn’t let anything go, even very minor matters. If he told everyone to walk and you didn’t, then it would be a big deal. If the session was over, you had to go straight back to your kuti. If he hadn’t given permission, then you couldn’t go anywhere. If there was anything the matter, then you had to mention it. So there were some great stories in those days. It wasn’t so much that he forced anybody, but he had an absolute sincerity. That’s the way he ran the monastery in those days; but to be frank, we weren’t quite up to it.”

### Coconut

Ajahn Tiang summarized Luang Por’s teachings:

“The first thing he told us to do was to establish a stable mindfulness: to make it continuous, not to get lost or distracted or let it be cut off. He said his Dhamma had no top and no bottom, it wasn’t short or long. He said that he had pressed it into a ball that was shaped like a coconut.

“He taught us to establish mindfulness, nurture our faith, incline our minds towards the Triple Gem of Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha. He himself had genuine reverence, and he taught that reverence to us too. He taught us to be mindful while we were bowing. He said if we let our minds wander and our mindfulness was poor, then there would inevitably be some fault or other in what we did. He would say that when your mind is not calm, when it’s in a hot, agitated, abnormal state, something will always go wrong.

“Mindfulness was his main emphasis: making mindfulness constant and smooth, without interruptions – not allowing it to be broken. Whether standing, walking, sitting, lying down or eating you had to be mindful, because if you lose your mindfulness it’s the same as losing your life – that’s what he’d say. If there was a work project going on for instance and we complained that we didn’t have the opportunity to practise, he would ask us if our breath stopped while we were eating or lying down. How could you be too exhausted to meditate when your breath is so immediate and ordinary? There’s nothing more to it than the breath. If you practise and you’re mindful, it’s nothing more than being with this ordinary breath. That was all he taught. Mindfulness was the main part of it.

“If you lose your mindfulness, what kind of meditation technique are you going to use? What sort of concentration are you going to develop? What purification is going to take place? You won’t know how to achieve any of those things. It’s mindfulness that is important. Coolness and tranquillity arise in the presence of mindfulness. Internal and external well-being come with mindfulness. Dhamma, Vinaya, every one of the monastic regulations depends on mindfulness. Without mindfulness, what are you going to make your object of awareness? That’s how he taught the fundamental principles.

“He’d say, ‘Don’t get puffed up about being monks and novices; don’t look down on others; don’t be attached to your family background or nationality – that’s not virtuous, and it’s not the Dhamma. Wash your hands of that kind of pride. Aim at abandoning all conceit and views.’ He told us not to make too much out of each other’s faults, to keep considering how similar we all are, and not to dwell on thoughts of who’s right and who’s wrong. Admonishments are normal; after you’ve done something wrong, then put it behind you: don’t hold on to feelings of right and wrong. As soon as there’s holding on and attachment, it’s not Dhamma and it’s not Vinaya …

“If something is in line with the Vinaya, then it is in line with the Dhamma as well: by keeping the Vinaya you are practising Dhamma. Luang Por treated them as interconnected; he never separated Dhamma from Vinaya … He taught us to practice the different aspects of the path simultaneously. That’s why he said his teachings weren’t short or long but were pressed into a sphere, like a grapefruit or a coconut.”

### No Reprieve

Monks who arrived in the mid-1960s, as the size of the community steadily increased, might have found a slight relaxation of Luang Por’s intensity, but by no means did they have an easy time of it. He still sought to create within his disciples the enthusiasm for the training and the patient endurance that was needed for them to succeed in it. His aim was still to foster within them a whole new attitude to their lives: an attitude in which ‘everything matters’. Nothing was to be done in a slipshod manner. Care, attention and respect had to be given to every action. Luang Por tirelessly admonished the monks when they were heedless. He drummed into them how essential it was to sustain mindfulness in every activity. With laxness or negligence in minor matters of procedure bringing down such wrath upon their heads, few monks could even contemplate larger, more serious transgressions. In most cases, a sense of wise shame and fear of consequences, although artificially quickened, soon matured. As Ajahn Anek remembered it:

“If anyone did something that deviated from his instructions, it would become an issue immediately … Suppose Luang Por heard the sound of buckets clanking at the well outside of the time he’d laid down for hauling water, or of someone chopping jackfruit chips to make dye at the wrong time – that evening we would hear about it. He would get up on the Dhamma seat and lay down the law until late at night. On some occasions, he would keep going until three in the morning. By that time, it wasn’t worth going back to our kutis, and after he’d got down from the seat, we would launch straight into the morning chanting.

“So we would have to keep nudging and reminding each other if we saw anyone doing anything at the wrong time, because we were afraid of another dressing-down. Even if there was only one miscreant, Luang Por wouldn’t let anyone else go back to their kutis. Everyone had to sit there and listen to the admonishment; it was no different than if you yourself were being told off. And it was frustrating for those who wanted to meditate or had other business to see to.

“We monks were really afraid – afraid that we’d have to listen to a long talk. If Luang Por knew someone had done something wrong, then he would never leave it overnight. He’d either call over the individual monk at fault, or speak to the whole Sangha. He was always very strict and vigorous. Anyone who had any kind of business, no matter how important or trivial, would have to go and ask his permission first before seeing to it. You couldn’t just go ahead and do something on your own authority. If you did, you could be sure that that evening you’d be in for a long talk.

“If anyone missed chanting or came five or ten minutes late, it was a serious matter. As you approached the Dhamma Hall you had to walk as softly and silently as possible. Making a noise was completely unacceptable. If you did, you’d be admonished for disturbing the people already meditating in the hall. Luang Por said that making a noise close to people who were meditating was ill-mannered and bad kamma; what’s more, it indicated a lack of mindfulness, self-awareness and sense-restraint. He said that for a practitioner of Dhamma, it was disgraceful behaviour.”

Ajahn Reuangrit recalled:

“If you went out to urinate, you’d be admonished; you had to endure until the end of the session. He’d say, ‘Other people can do it, why can’t you? You’re a human being the same as they are, you’ve got all the same organs. What’s so difficult?’ That’s how we did things in those days. Your robe would become completely soaked with sweat, and you’d lose so much fluid that way that the ache to urinate would disappear. We were also afraid of Luang Por, really afraid, when he started getting onto us like that, ‘You eat a lot and sleep a lot. If you eat a lot, then you have to shit a lot; drink a lot and you have to piss a lot.’ I’ve heard those words so many times! But as a result, in our eating, in our actions, we were always very moderate. In those days, there was a great care and precision in how we did things.”

### Relaxation

The atmosphere at Wat Pah Pong was not, however, as grim and harsh as some of the preceding passages might suggest. Luang Por’s exhortations were given in a semi-tropical forest in which, for months every year, stifling heat and humidity encourage sloth and torpor. His audience was an easy-going group of young men, raised in a culture that did not instil the crippling sense of guilt or self-aversion that might have led them to take such brow-beating unwisely. The heavy hand was, in short, a medicine whose benefits outweighed its side-effects.

After some time, monks became accustomed to the novelties of the monastic life. If their meditation practice was yet to bear much fruit, it was difficult for them to maintain their original enthusiasm. The constant urging and upbraiding from Luang Por sought to invigorate the regular cases of slumping zeal. His words were, in some ways, the equivalent of a Zen master’s stick. Not everyone could endure it, and some monks left. But for the most part, they enjoyed the fiery talks in the same way that they relished fiercely spiced food; common praise for a more abrasive talk was that it ‘really got down to the chillies and ginger’.

But there were also times when the Sangha came (as close as bald-headed monks could come) to letting their hair down. Every now and again, Luang Por would invite everyone over to his kuti in the evening. Cigarettes would be passed around and the monks would sit in the lamp light, outer robes removed, smoking and listening to Luang Por’s anecdotes and stories. He would talk about the wisdom of enlightened monks, the hard-earned triumphs and comical failures of unenlightened disciples, encounters with wild animals and ghosts, tales from the time of the Buddha. Monks would laugh a lot, there would be questions and the sharing of experiences. These occasions were treasured by the monks. The warmth, companionship and emotional support they felt as they sat there answered needs not met in the formal gatherings of the community.

On these occasions, Luang Por effected an apparently effortless switch from commander-in-chief to father figure. The ambiguity of the monks’ feelings towards Luang Por became obvious on these occasions. At the same time as fearing him almost as mice do the cat, or (in his own simile) as burglars do the policeman, they loved and trusted him completely, and would savour every moment of their time in his presence. The monks sometimes felt that the points of Dhamma that they gleaned from these occasions went deeper into their hearts than the teachings they received during formal Dhamma talks. They would return to their kutis after these sessions, charged and refreshed, eager to meditate.

### Water Rights

Not everyone was happy that there were monks in Pong Forest. There were local prejudices and misunderstandings to overcome. One of the first points of contention with the villagers was the sensitive issue of water use.

We dug a really good well in the forest. We put up a sign in front of it saying, ‘For monks only. Not to be used by laypeople’, and filled a separate earthenware jar with water for anybody coming through the forest. We got criticized for that. Por Nupee was the worst: as soon as he heard the village women saying that the monks wouldn’t let the laypeople drink their water – that was it! He was hopping mad, ‘What! Who do those monks think they are? Why won’t they let laypeople drink their water? They go to all the trouble of becoming monks and learning about the Buddha’s teachings, and they end up so selfish they won’t even share their water. You’d think they weren’t dependent on the laypeople for their food every day.’

There! All because of a misunderstanding. In my own village as well. In fact, they were welcome to drink the water. It was just that, when the villagers haul water themselves, they use buckets that they’ve been storing frogs and fish or tadpoles or whatnot in, which make the water dirty. I didn’t want them to do that, and so when we hauled water every day, we put some in a jar specially for laypeople. But people didn’t tell the whole story: they just said that we wouldn’t let them use our water. So when Por Nupee heard just that, he was so angry that he stormed out of the village. He said he was going to drive the monks out of the forest. ‘What sort of monks are these? Who do they think they are? Have they forgotten that we’re the ones that feed them?’ He’d only heard half the story. It took a long time to explain to him, but then when he understood he became a disciple and, later on, the monastery’s head layman.

Villagers, some of whom had formerly cut timber illegally, hunted and raised cattle etc. on the edge of the forest were now unable to do so. They were angry at the disruption of their livelihood. Some of the disgruntled villagers came up with a plan to discredit the monks. Unwittingly repeating a ploy going back to the time of the Buddha himself, it involved compromising one of the monks with a woman. The monk who went on alms-round to that village was informed by a well-wisher of what was being considered. Worried, he informed Luang Por. Luang Por said that he would go on alms-round to the village himself. Inevitably, monastery lay supporters objected:

“Ajahn, don’t go on your own. They say they’re going to get a young woman to hug you and then shout out that you tried to rape her.”

Luang Por unfazed, joked with them:

Bring her on. I’ve never been hugged by a young woman in my life. Let her try. It should be great!

In the end, the villagers lost their nerve (who knew what kammic retribution they would be calling down upon themselves, they worried; better safe than sorry). And from that point onwards, relations between the wat and the villagers slowly but steadily improved.

### To Catch a Thief

Another problem arose when it became known that the nuns had planted fruit trees. At the beginning, people would come in to ask for a few of the papayas, guavas, lemons or bananas; after a while, they came to steal. One of the nuns resident at that time remembers the skilful way Luang Por solved the problem:

“The thieves would usually sneak in at about eight or nine at night while the monks were attending the evening session. One day Luang Por told some postulants to cut some of the largest korm thorn bushes and conceal them by the side of the path used by the thieves. That night he had monks wait at three points along the path. He himself was at the first point close to where the thieves would steal the papayas. The second point lay half-way along the path, and the third was near to the thorn trap.

“At the expected time, the thieves came into view carrying bags and baskets. While they were engrossed in picking the papayas, Luang Por gave a signal and the thorn bushes were placed length-wise along the path. The bushes were big. Every branch was covered with sharp thorns and they covered the path completely.

“When Luang Por estimated that the thieves had almost filled their baskets, he coughed softly. The cough wasn’t loud enough to make them panic and throw away their booty immediately, but it was enough for them to decide they needed to leave quickly. The thieves lifted the baskets to their shoulders and hurried off, half-walking, half-running. When they reached the second point Luang Por shouted out from behind them: ‘Did you see anyone go that way?’ ‘Where are they? Where are they?’, the monks hiding at the second point shouted back.

“Hearing these voices the thieves got really scared and started to run like crazy. When they reached the third point the monks hiding there made a commotion. Meanwhile, behind them, the monks from the first two points were chasing them down the path. The sound of shouts and whoops filled the forest. Now the thieves really panicked. They threw down the baskets and lengths of cloth wrapping the papayas and sprinted away – straight into the thorn bushes. The first thief suddenly felt the pain and pulled up sharply. The second one cannoned into him and the two of them crawled around trying desperately to free themselves from the thorn bushes. Their groans of pain were deafening. Anyway, they were so afraid that, finally, they managed to get free and ran off back to their village.

“Luang Por had the postulants gather up the evidence, the baskets and the khaoma cloths. He knew the identity of the thieves would be no secret, because they would be laid up in bed for two or three days before their children would be able to pull out all the thorns. After that time had passed he sent for the Village Headman.

“Luang Por said, ‘Tell them to come and collect their baskets and cloths. They dropped them in the forest. Tell them they don’t have to be afraid. Tell them to come and get them from me. They’ve left them here a long time already. If they don’t hurry the papayas will have dried up and they won’t be able to sell them.’

“One of the thieves came. Luang Por spoke to him kindly, without scolding, and taught him to carry on an honest livelihood and to give up thieving; the papayas weren’t worth the bad kamma. After that, the thefts ceased.”

### Cats and Dogs

Abandoned dogs were another issue. It has long been a custom in Thailand to release unwanted dogs in village monasteries where the monks feed them from leftover alms-food. But when people started to do this in Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por had to explain why he could not agree to it:

We don’t like cats and dogs here. We already have a lot of creatures – squirrels and shrews and jungle fowl in particular – and we’re trying to conserve them for future generations. The dogs you let go in the forest kill these animals. Please don’t do it again. Whoever brought these dogs here then take them away with you. If you don’t want to take them, then I can get one of the monastery lay supporters to see to it. But don’t bring dogs into the forest again. The squirrels, the shrews, the forest chickens – they belong to all of you as much as to me. When your children and grandchildren have grown up, they will be able to come and see these different kinds of creatures in the monastery. There’s not many left of the ones living outside the monastery. We’ve all got to help to look after these creatures in the forest.

### Taking Root

Initially, relations between Wat Pah Pong and the monks in the surrounding villages and the city of Ubon were strained. The tensions were familiar ones. Since the appearance of the Luang Pu Mun lineage some forty years before, friction between the forest monks and local Sanghas had occurred frequently. Urban scholars and administrators tended to look on forest monks with disdain. Their custom of giving Dhamma talks in the Isan language rather than Central Thai, and of employing a plain, unvarnished style rather than delivering text-based sermons in elevated language read from palm leaves, was considered disrespectful to the Dhamma. With some reason, scholars worried that the impromptu style of teaching, unsupported by frequent reference to Pali texts, easily led to uneducated opinion being passed off as the Buddha’s teaching. The forest monks’ practice of keeping to the ascetic practices, such as eating once a day from their bowls, was seen as excessive, out of date and uncouth.

The forest monks threatened the prestige of the urban monks. Although the forest tradition was largely unknown in Ubon, anyone who had read or heard stories from the scriptures could see that their way of life was much closer to the ancient ideal than was that of the urban monks. The local village monks often felt intimidated by the presence of monks strict in Vinaya. Formerly, there had been no standard to measure them by: their laxness was just the way things were, and people were used to it. But now things had changed. Laypeople who had been to Wat Pah Pong came back inspired and compared it favourably with their local monastery. Luang Por did not just accept their offerings and chant a few blessings in Pali, they said, he taught them the value of precepts and how to meditate. Jealousy of Luang Por sometimes found expression in scorn and abuse. Luang Por’s reply was to quietly carry on with his practice and the training of monks, and to behave so impeccably as to deprive the snipers of their ammunition.

From very early on, the monastery established by Luang Por in Pong Forest was known as Wat Pah Pong. But it was not, in the technical or legal sense of the word, a ‘wat’ at all. ‘Wat’ is a designation conferred on a monastic residence by the Crown, on the advice of the ruling body of the national Sangha. It denotes a formal recognition of the monastery’s legitimacy and orthodoxy from the powers-that-be. Application for this status is a natural and expected progression for monastic communities that are firmly established, have all essential buildings erected, and have a steady lay support. Wat Pah Pong would not become a ‘wat’ in the eyes of the law until 1970. In the early years of its existence, its insecure legal status made it worrisomely vulnerable to hostile forces.

Luang Por was keenly aware that the long-term security of Wat Pah Pong was dependent on establishing a good relationship with the Sangha Elders in the city or, at least, one based upon mutual acceptance. While it was true that there was no danger that powerful figures would seek to interfere in the way that he ran Wat Pah Pong on a day-to-day basis, Luang Por and his monks were answerable by law to the administrative jurisdiction of senior monks appointed on the rural, district and provincial levels. If Wat Pah Pong became the subject of these monks’ enmity or suspicion, it would be difficult for the monastery to survive. Monks branded as ‘vagabonds’ and ‘renegades’ had been known to be evicted from their hermitages or even forcibly disrobed. Accusations that forest monks were communists was becoming an increasingly effective slur.

Luang Por’s solution was quiet diplomacy. To the monks in village monasteries surrounding him, he was unfailingly polite and often made donations to them of excess requisites or tools. Gradually, Wat Pah Pong became a recognized member of the local scene. By asking the head monk of the local district to be his disciples’ preceptor, Luang Por gave this powerful figure a personal interest in the welfare of the Wat Pah Pong Sangha. He arranged textbooks for monks who wished to take the Nak Tam Dhamma exams, and the impressive exam results of the Wat Pah Pong monks earned them a grudging respect amongst the urban scholars.

Luang Por made a particular point of showing deference to the senior monks in the local town of Warin and the city of Ubon. He tried to let them see for themselves that he and his disciples were not revolutionaries bent on overthrowing a corrupt establishment; they were simple forest monks seeking a quiet place to practise. Once a year, at the start of the Rains Retreat, he would take his Sangha to pay respects to their superiors. Even if – as often occurred in the early years – he was spoken to sarcastically or patronized, Luang Por would maintain a bowed-head humility that disarmed his would-be antagonists.

As the years went by, Luang Por’s seniority and fame steadily increased. Burgeoning lay support, both local and national, provided a buffer against his detractors, and the wat became secure. At the same time, a number of locally prominent scholar monks such as Ajahn Maha Amorn became disciples, giving the Wat Pah Pong Sangha a certain intellectual legitimacy in the eyes of Pali scholars. Suspicion and distrust of Luang Por lessened considerably. Jealousies went underground. More and more monks asked to come to train at Wat Pah Pong.

Adverse reactions from village and urban monks were not a wholly bad thing. The perception that the Wat Pah Pong monks held of themselves as a beleaguered minority – the only strict and dedicated monks in a sea of corruption and decline – intensified their commitment and sense of community. It seems reasonable to assume that the harmony and unity that became such a distinctive feature of Wat Pah Pong was, in part, built upon this early perception of the wat as a solitary island of authentic practice. It was true that, from time to time, the arrogance that usually accompanies feelings of being special could be seen to surface amongst members of the Wat Pah Pong Sangha. But with Luang Por constantly urging them to confront defilements head on, most monks were too painfully aware of their own failings to sustain serious feelings of superiority.

Ten years after Luang Por’s return to Ubon, he could be happy with the results of his efforts at Wat Pah Pong. The growing number of monks, novices and nuns was an indication of a monastery in rude good health. Luang Por was learning more and more about how to teach and train his disciples. Almost a hundred years after the birth of its founder, Luang Pu Mun, in an outlying village, the forest monastic lineage was finally taking root in Ubon.

1 The monastery’s official title is ‘Wat Nong Pah Pong’, but on all but the most formal occasions, it is referred to as ‘Wat Pah Pong’. ‘Wat’ means monastery; ‘Nong’ is a pool of water; ‘Pah’ is a forest; ‘Pong’ is an indigenous wild grass.

2 Better known as ‘Luang Por Phut’, this disciple of Luang Por Sao was a good friend of Luang Por Chah and, for many years, was the abbot of Wat Pah Saensamran located some six kilometers from Wah Pah Pong.

3 The rai is the Thai unit of area. 10 rai is equivalent to about 4 acres or 1.6 hectares.

4 See Appendix I, A forest monk’s robes and requisites

5 The ‘Venerable Tiang’ of the previous chapter went on to become a senior monk, and will henceforth be referred to by the honorific ‘Ajahn’. Other figures referred to as Ajahn in this and following chapters may be understood to be monks who also went on to become senior disciples.

6 The Wat Pah Pong maechee community will be dealt with at length in a future chapter. Here it is sufficient to note that, although maechees did not go on alms-round and were not forbidden the use of money, Luang Por treated them as monastics. They were expected to keep to most of the practices that were standard for the monks.

7 Borapet (tinospora crispa), also known as heart-shaped moonseed or guduchi, is an extremely bitter concoction prepared from a local vine. It was much used as a prophylactic and treatment for malaria.

8 The samor (chelubic myrobalan) is an astringent fruit allowed by the Vinaya to be eaten at any time of the day as a laxative.

9 The Indian gooseberry (emblic myrobalan) is another laxative member of the myrobalan family allowed by the Vinaya to be eaten at any time of the day.

10 Chillies, salt and garlic may also be consumed after noon for medicinal purposes.