# A Broader Canvas

Luang Por in the West – 1977 & 1979

On hearing the Teachings, the wise become perfectly purified – like a lake deep, clear and still.

– Dhp 82

## Inner Land – Outer Land

In 1976, Ajahn Sumedho returned to California in order to visit his parents. On his flight back to Thailand, he stopped over in London for a few days as a guest of the English Sangha Trust (E.S.T.), a body set up to establish a Theravada Sangha in England. For the duration of his visit, Ajahn Sumedho stayed at Hampstead Vihāra, a four-storeyed terraced house belonging to the trust on the busy Haverstock Hill road, a mile or so south of Hampstead Heath. The E.S.T. had suffered years of frustration and disappointment in their efforts to promote a home-grown Sangha. In Ajahn Sumedho, they saw someone who might finally turn their dreams into reality.

Ajahn Sumedho’s thoughts had already been turning towards the West, and he was impressed by the dedication of the members of the trust. Following Ajahn Sumedho’s return to Ubon, George Sharp, the president of the E.S.T., flew out to Thailand in order to request Luang Por Chah’s permission for Ajahn Sumedho to establish a Wat Pah Pong branch monastery in England. His arrival was greeted not with a red carpet but a rush mat. Luang Por was still away on a journey, and had instructed Ajahn Liem, his deputy, to have George sleep on the floor at the back of the Dhamma Hall, eat one meal a day out of an enamel bowl and join in the life of the monastery. On his return, Luang Por agreed to discuss the proposal, presumably satisfied that George Sharp was sincere and had more than a passing acquaintance with the virtues of humility and patience.

Luang Por did not dismiss the notion of a monastery in England out of hand, but said that he would not feel comfortable about granting permission without having seen for himself the suitability of the conditions. On behalf of the English Sangha Trust, George Sharp invited him to accompany Ajahn Sumedho to England the following May, and Luang Por accepted.

Luang Por set off on his first ever trip abroad – and his first flight on an airplane – on the sixth of May, 1977. Accompanying him and Ajahn Sumedho, were an English monk, Ajahn Khemadhammo, and Dong, a lay supporter from Ubon. In honour of the special nature of the trip, Luang Por decided, for the first and only time in his life, to record his experiences in a journal. In it, he recounts that as he sat in the plane he reflected on the Buddha’s teaching that going to a strange land, in which you are unfamiliar with the language or the customs, you should not be conceited or attached to your own ways.

The theme of adaptation was to recur in the journal throughout the journey. As he looked out on the billowing clouds, he developed an elaborate play on the Thai word for ‘overseas’ which means literally ‘the land outside’, comparing ‘the land outside-inside’ and ‘the land inside-outside’. It was the first of many puns and passages of word play that occur throughout the journal. But the first pages were also to have more dramatic content. Mid-air, one of the plane’s wheels exploded.

The air staff made an announcement that we should fasten our seatbelts. People with false teeth had to take them out. People even had to take their glasses and shoes off. We had to see to our personal belongings. After the passengers had stowed everything away, everyone was silent. They were probably thinking it was the end of their life. I was thinking that this was the first time that I had travelled abroad to do something useful for Buddhism, and was this really all the merit I had? Once I’d thought that, I then made a vow, dedicating my life to the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha and settled my mind in a suitable place.

I felt a lucid calm and coolness as if nothing was happening and rested in that place until the plane came down to make a safe landing. The passengers clapped their hands with joy at being safe. The strange thing was that when the accident occurred, various people pleaded with me, ‘Luang Por protect us!’ But when the danger was over and we disembarked from the plane, only one person came up to thank the monks. Everyone else went over to thank the air crew. That was the strange part.

Ajahn Sumedho’s concerns about how Luang Por would react to conditions in the West were soon allayed. After the plane’s emergency landing in Rome, the passengers were asked to leave the plane and board the airport buses that would take them to the transit lounge. By the time the monks had disembarked, their bus was packed tightly. Many of the passengers, inevitably, were women. It was the first test of how Luang Por would cope with a new and alien world in which women did not keep a respectful distance from monks. As Ajahn Sumedho looked on somewhat tensely, Luang Por simply put his head down and marched onto the bus, ignoring the proximity of the women.

Luang Por noted in his journal that he did not find it especially difficult to adapt his body, speech and mind to the new environment. ‘The unusual part was what appeared at my eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body.’ he wrote. ‘My mind was the same as normal.’ His initial response to what he saw around him – no doubt tinged by the reports of his Western disciples in Thailand – was of a fundamental lack. He wrote: ‘They have developed their country materially, but because they lack the Dhamma, they have found no contentment.’

On the first day in London, Luang Por was taken to see the sights and, in the afternoon, went for a walk on Hampstead Heath. He was impressed by the lushness of the grass and the unfamiliarity of the trees. In the evening, he recalls:

At about eight o’clock, nine people came to listen to the Dhamma, some of whom had previously been to visit Wat Pah Pong. I taught them the Dhamma that is ‘beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle and beautiful in the end’.

Afterwards, I answered questions with Ven. Sumedho translating my replies into English. They had prepared to chant the formal request for the Five Precepts, the first time that had occurred. After I had finished my talk, I led them in a meditation session for thirty minutes. I felt that they revealed a natural disposition with close affinities to the Dhamma.

The next day, George Sharp drove Luang Por and his party to Birmingham (‘a city’, he noted in his journal, ‘that has branched off from London’) for a Vesakha Puja celebration that included monks from all the Buddhist traditions, and at which Ajahn Sumedho had been invited to give a talk.

It was a day in which I saw laypeople of many nationalities gather together to listen to Dhamma in many different languages. I couldn’t understand any of the words they used, but I could understand their meaning by looking at their manner and .

A few quiet days followed. At this time, Luang Por was as yet not widely known in Western Buddhist circles. The number of English people interested in Theravada Buddhism was still small, and of that number, even fewer were aware of the Thai Forest Tradition. Later that year, Jack Kornfield’s book, Living Buddhist Masters, would be published and the name of ‘Ajahn Chah’ would become more familiar, but for the time being, he was still an obscure figure. If his trip were to have taken place thirty years later, he would have been inundated with invitations to take his daily meal in Thai restaurants; but at that time, Busabong, on King’s Road was the only one in London. The number of Thai residents in Britain was still in the low hundreds rather than the forty-thousand of today. The advantage of his anonymity was that Luang Por could rest quietly in the vihāra in a way that would have been difficult for him in Thailand.

His next outing was a courtesy call to Wat Buddhapadipa in Wimbledon, a temple sponsored by the Thai government for the purpose of providing for the spiritual needs of Thais resident in the United Kingdom. The visit was not only a matter of protocol, it was also an opportunity to make useful contacts with members of the Thai Sangha already living in England, to ensure their support and to request the blessings of the senior monk for the establishment of a new monastic community. It was given with good grace.

The next day, the party travelled to Oxford where they were to be the guests of the Saws, a wealthy Burmese family who owned a large estate in the countryside a few miles to the west of the city. It gratified Luang Por that, in the morning, the monks were offered food in their bowls at the front door of the main house in the traditional manner. ‘It was an auspicious occasion’, he wrote, ‘and fulfilled my vow of establishing the custom of alms-round in England.’ In the evening, he taught the family meditation. In his diary, as in almost every daily summary, he referred to the ‘benefit created’ that day. It was clear he had little interest in sightseeing. For him, the value of this long journey was in the ‘benefit created’.

The visit to Oakenholt gave Luang Por his first glimpse of a ten-day meditation retreat. A group of prefabricated huts, built on the estate during the Second World War, was now functioning as a retreat centre, and a retreat led by John Coleman, a teacher in the Burmese U Ba Khin tradition, was underway. Luang Por was impressed by the obvious sincerity of the meditators. After visiting the group and speaking to the teacher, he concluded in his diary that the Buddhist lotus was starting to bloom in the West.

### A Lot for a Little

Luang Por’s enthusiasm for his diary continued to wax and wane. On a number of days, he recorded little in it but the briefest summary of his daily activities. But on the fifteenth of May, back in London again, he felt inspired:

At about seven o’clock this morning, sitting in a quiet peaceful place, many insights arose in my meditation. Afterwards, I picked up my pen and paper to record them.

Emerging from ‘a profound part of his mind’, he wrote:

I realized that, as a monk following in the Buddha’s footsteps, there were still many matters related to the Sāsana that I had not yet fully accomplished, things which I was still neglecting: firstly, concerning place; secondly, concerning persons; and thirdly, concerning time. I reflected that truly following the teachings of the Buddha meant that, having created a sufficient amount of benefit for oneself, one should create benefit for others.

It is, in fact, a somewhat puzzling passage. Luang Por’s conclusion that the life of a monk is only complete when he shares his understanding with others is quite clearly one that he had held for a long time. Indeed, a few days previously he had written, ‘One must sacrifice everything for the Sāsana, primarily for the benefit of sentient beings.’

So, I am of the opinion that England deserves to be considered paṭirūpadesa, ‘a land suitable for the propagation of Dhamma’, which is why I have arranged for Western disciples to live here on a regular basis and carry on the work of the Sāsana.

The style of teaching Dhamma here should be of doing a little and getting a lot, doing a lot and getting a little; teaching people to see that the cool exists in the hot, and the hot in the cold; the wrong lies in the right, the right in the wrong; pain lies in pleasure, and pleasure in pain; progress lies in regress, and regress in progress; the little lies in the big, and the big in the little; the dirty lies in the clean, and the clean in the dirty. This is called ‘saccadhamma’ or else the science of truth, ‘saccasaht’.[1]

All of us who are disciples of the Buddha must practice in order to develop four qualities to their full extent: S.U.Ñ.S. (supaṭipanno, ujūpaṭipanno, ñāyapaṭipanno, sāmīcipaṭipanno),[2] and then teach the Dhamma in a way true to the Buddha’s intentions. We must study the science of truth and then realize truth itself. ‘Realization’ means to come to the end of the last sentence. That is what is called ‘the One Dhamma’: no more sentences of the teachings remain. It is ‘reaching the end of the Holy Life’, in which, in the midst of ‘things’, there is ‘no-thing’. If disciples fully comprehend the Buddha’s wishes in this way, then they may travel around alone, both internally and externally.

Those monks are the ones who know what is what. When they know that clearly, then the knowledge of ‘enough’ emerges into their minds. When ‘enough’ has emerged, then simultaneously there arise all kinds of righteousness. The Dhamma that manifests in the mind is prominent day and night; prior assumptions about what is what and what things mean have come to an end.

This Dhamma will not appear with any clarity merely through the words of another; it will only manifest through practice. It is paccataṃ: you can’t teach it to anyone, you can’t tell anyone about it, you can’t study it. As the Buddha said, ‘Akkhātāro tathāgatā.’ ‘The Tathāgata[3] is merely the one who shows the way.’ The meaning of that phrase becomes supremely clear, free of all doubts. This is the Buddha’s goal.

### Strange But Fascinating

While he was in England, Luang Por met a number of monks from other Buddhist traditions. One of them was an English Zen monk, trained in Japan, called Seng-ko. Luang Por ‘interviewed’ him about the teachings and the way of life of Japanese monks, a summary of which he later entered in his diary. On asking how many precepts the monks in Japan keep, he had been told that, ‘constant mindfulness is their sīla’, which Luang Por found a ‘strange but quite fascinating idea’; he was told that there were two kinds of monk: one kind celibate, ‘these are the good kind, the ones who seek for purity’; and one kind who could marry and whose son carries on the family temple after his death. This, Luang Por noted, entailed ‘some divergence’ from his own tradition.

Learning that the syllable ‘ko’ refers to emptiness, that evening he made it the subject of his evening talk:

‘Ko’ means emptiness, as in the Buddha’s term ‘temple of emptiness’ (suññatāvihāra). We should enter into this temple. ‘Vihāra’ means the place where the mind dwells in the perception of emptiness. The Buddha taught that this body – in fact, all things – are empty, meaning that there is no being, there is no person. Through seeing its emptiness clearly, seeing it as merely earth, water, fire and air, then Ven. Sumedho here won’t die. Why not? Because actually there’s no Sumedho. Okay? Sumedho’s death is a convention. There is no real Sumedho. There’s no Sumedho to die. He is not born and he does not die. There is just a configuration of dhammas, comprised of causes and conditions, which arises and then passes away.

The Buddha said that the Lord of Death, in other words, death itself, can’t keep up with one who dwells in the temple of emptiness. He can’t find him. There is no pleasure and no pain, no self, no separation of self and other; it’s ‘empty’. There is the seeing of emptiness in empty phenomena. The word ‘empty’ means that there is nothing at that place. It is empty with regards to the mind. There is no conceit or view whatsoever, attaching to ideas of ‘self’, of ‘us’ and ‘them’. There are simply the four elements of earth, water, fire and air arising and passing away in their natural way. That’s why the Buddha said that the Lord of Death can’t catch up, can’t find one dwelling in emptiness, and through that comes liberation. It’s called liberation from birth, liberation from old age, liberation from death.

In fact, the elements keep on being born and dying as before, but it’s simply earth, water, fire and air, coming together. There is no being, no person. The mind is empty of the concept of ‘being’, empty of the concept of ‘person’. It’s precisely that which is the empty place. The mind is empty in a place that is not empty. It sees the emptiness in something that is not empty: not allowing there to be a perception of a human being where one usually arises, not allowing there to be a creature where one is usually perceived, not allowing the perception of death where it would usually be perceived. That’s why the Buddha called it ‘the temple of emptiness’. If you enter it you feel at peace, a peace free from pleasure, a peace free from pain, a peace free from birth, old age, sickness and death. That is the supreme emptiness. It’s the end.

### The Same Fruit

The following day, Luang Por recorded a historic occasion:

Today was the first day that we went walking for alms in London. Ven. Bodhinyana Thera[4] led the way, followed by Ven. Sumedho (American), Ven. Khemadhammo (English) and Novice Jinadatto[5] (French). On this, our first alms-round, I received some rice, two apples, two bananas, two carrots, two sweets and a cucumber. I was happy to get this food today because of the way in which it was acquired, and because I understand alms-food to be ‘Father’s-food’: food which, ultimately, comes to us from the Buddha.

The people of this city have never seen monks on alms-round before because most monks who’ve lived here have been too ashamed to practise it. I am of the exact opposite view. I only find actions that are evil or incorrect to be shameful, which is in conformity with the Buddha’s meaning of the term. (That’s my opinion anyway; true or false, I ask the indulgence of all the sages.)

On this same day, Khemadhammo’s parents came to offer food as well and asked to listen to a talk and have a special period of meditation, which they found satisfying.

On alms-round, newspaper reporters followed in our tracks and took photographs at regular intervals, because alms-round is an unusual thing here. The people of London – children and adults – stood in lines watching us go by.

Later in the month, Luang Por returned to Oxfordshire to teach a retreat at the meditation centre established on the grounds of the Saws’ mansion. There were a hundred people on the retreat, and their dedication impressed Luang Por. He is, however, noticeably reticent about the retreat in his diary, presumably because he could find little time for writing. He summarizes only that there were ‘reasonably satisfying results from the work’.

Back in London, Luang Por gave a number of evening talks, one of which he began with a now familiar reminder that doubts and uncertainties regarding the Dhamma could not be removed through study alone. The Dhamma lies beyond language. Study, being reliant on language, could only provide a superficial understanding of it. Only through practice could the wisdom necessary to penetrate the Dhamma be cultivated.

He had been asked a number of times about the difference between samatha and vipassanā. He explained that on a theoretical level, they could be distinguished, but from the point of view of Dhamma practice, they were related qualities of mind that emerged as the mind matured:

An unripe fruit is a fruit; as it ripens, it’s still the same fruit; and when it’s fully ripened, it remains that same fruit.

Essentially, he explained, you didn’t practice samatha or vipassanā; you practiced Dhamma. By doing so, the truth of things could be known directly, independently of names. It was a natural process.

When you keep your precepts, your mind is clean; when it’s clean, it’s at ease; and when it’s at ease, it’s at peace; and when it’s at peace, wisdom arises.

He spoke about the challenge in finding the Middle Way, or as he liked to call it, ‘just-rightness’ (por dee), or ‘correctness’. How was it possible to know when you had achieved that optimal, just-right or correct approach most effective for realizing the goal, when you didn’t know what that goal was? He said that it was necessary to have the incorrect to measure it against. The meditator proceeded by being careful not to attach to pleasure and pain. Having recognized and let go of the incorrect, correctness would arise naturally.

It’s like a person with a pair of scales. If it’s weighed down at this side, the buyer doesn’t like it. If it’s weighed down at that side, then the seller doesn’t like it. Only when the scales are evenly balanced and horizontal is everyone satisfied.

When you’re practising sitting meditation, you know that if you’re not peaceful, if it’s not ‘just-right’, the mind must be attached to a mental state of one kind or another.

Constant mindfulness was needed to observe the state of the mind. The mistake was in grasping on to what the mind found pleasant and rejecting what was perceived to be unpleasant. Right View could not arise, and the mind would fabricate the world it lived in as one of likes to be pursued, and dislikes to be avoided.

This is samudaya, the cause of suffering, because we can’t live experiencing only mental pleasure or only mental pain. For the duration of our lives, the two are mixed together. And because that’s so, it’s essential that we understand the nature of mental pleasure and pain as they really are. If we don’t understand their true nature, then we will just continue holding on to wrong views. The Buddha recognized that these two mental states are our constant enemies. As long as we don’t fully understand them, we will never be liberated from suffering.

For this reason, we must develop the Buddha’s Right Practice (sammāpaṭipadā). We need: sīla, taking care of our actions and speech so that they are in good order, without creating unpleasant consequences for self or others; samādhi, firm stability of attention; and paññā, a thorough understanding of the mass of conditioned phenomena.

Luang Por emphasized that being mindful did not refer simply to dwelling in the present moment. The Buddhist practice of sati was distinguished by its moral and ethical dimension.

Some meditation groups hold the view that it’s not necessary to practise sīla or samādhi, that mindfulness in all postures is enough. That’s good in a way, but it’s not the Buddha’s way. A cat has mindfulness, goats and sheep have mindfulness. But it’s wrong mindfulness, not sammāsati, Right Mindfulness. On the Buddhist path, you can’t take that as a working principle. Buddhism teaches that being mindful and aware means being aware of right and wrong. Having become aware of the right and the wrong, then practice to abandon whatever is wrong and cultivate whatever is good.

### A Suitable Land

Luang Por considered England a suitable centre for the dissemination of the Buddha’s teachings in the West. For him, as for most people of his age and background, the image of Britain projected around the world in its colonial heyday, was yet to fade. England seemed to be a country at the very heart of the Western world. At the same time, it was also conveniently small and easy to get around. English society seemed peaceful and stable, with no deep religious prejudices against Buddhism. Moreover, it possessed a rich history of Buddhist scholarship, most notably at the Pali Text Society[6]. Above all, there was a burgeoning interest in the practice of Buddhist meditation.

As the Buddhists Luang Por met were almost all members of the educated middle class, the opinion he gained of Westerners’ intellect and acuity was high. Comparing the situation with Thailand, where ‘it seems like we’re running out of steam’, he said:

From what I’ve seen, the people in this country are intelligent. If you give them profound observations, they understand them easily. I have explained Dhamma to them, and they’ve taken away what I’ve said and reflected on it. I believe that the basic character of the Westerners will enable them to make Buddhism flourish here.

He saw great potential in the thoughtful, questioning attitude of the people he spoke to:

I’ve looked at the general deportment of the people here, and as yet, it’s not so good; but with regard to the profound teachings, I think they’ll take to it easily. In this country, it’s as if the species of fruit are good, the soil’s good, but there are no farmers; there’s nobody to teach people here as there is in Thailand.

In my opinion, when coming over to the West, it’s not necessary to say much. I’ll give you a comparison. It’s like you’ve got some fruit you want them to eat. All you have to say is that it’s delicious. It might be sweet, sour, salty – you don’t have to go into all that. You just say that it’s delicious, and let them take it away and try it; let them find out for themselves exactly what the taste is like. That’s how you have to teach Westerners. Intelligent people don’t need a great deal of teaching.

With all kinds of knowledge, you have to see for yourself. You can’t see something clearly just through having it explained to you. To see the truth, you must proceed until you see it for yourself. Just give them the fruit. You don’t have to tell them about the flavour. They’ll find out for themselves.

Luang Por seemed at ease with his inability to express himself directly to the people who came to see him. He showed no signs of impatience or frustration at the hiatuses resulting from the need for translation of his every word. But it was hard work for Ajahn Sumedho; the task of translating the Dhamma discourses was a particular challenge. When giving talks, Luang Por made no attempt to modify his mode of delivery. Rather than speaking in short bursts to prevent overtaxing the memory of the translator and the attention of his audience, Luang Por spoke in his usual manner. On occasions, a full hour would pass before he instructed Ajahn Sumedho to translate.

It was not the most effective way for Luang Por, the great communicator, to get through to his audience. In Thailand, he sometimes used Dhamma talks as a means of training his audience in patience, rather than for the transmission of information and the rousing of faith. But in England, it was hard to say to what extent that kind of intention came to play a part. It may well have been that he simply found it too difficult to transform his unpremeditated flowing style of discourse into a series of discrete chunks. Whatever the case, many members of his audience found that his presence, his mannerisms, the sound of his voice, more than compensated for difficulties in understanding his words.

On one evening, with an argument not guaranteed to inspire his translator to further efforts, Luang Por spoke of the inferiority of language compared to direct experience. Everybody knew what water felt like, but people of different nationalities had different words for the experience.

When we human beings are experiencing the same thing, then we don’t have to say so much. Just by looking at each other, we already understand each other. That’s the feeling I had as I walked in here.

### Planting the Lotus

Luang Por was satisfied with what he saw in England. Certainly, living conditions for the Sangha were far removed from those in the forest monasteries of Isan, but he had never expected it to be otherwise; developing a forest-dwelling mendicant order was obviously going to be a long-term project. What Luang Por was looking for was a solid core of lay support and potential for future development. These, he found.

The deciding factor in his agreement to the new venture was his confidence in Ajahn Sumedho’s ability to carry the burden. With the assistance of Ven. Khemadhammo and Sāmanaṇera Jinadatto, soon to be augmented by two more North American monks trained in Wat Pah Nanachat – Vens. Anando and Viradhammo – there would, from the start, be a Sangha in residence. As four monks provided the minimum quorum needed for rituals such as the Pāṭimokkha recitation, this was an important constituent of the solid foundation he was seeking to establish.

Luang Por was aware of the frequent failures of temples focused upon a single charismatic figure rather than a community of monks. He was emphatic that the success of the whole venture depended on maintaining the observances that characterized the tradition in Thailand, in particular, the scrupulous adherence to the Vinaya, and the upholding of practices such as a daily alms-round. There were many ideas being bandied about in the lay community regarding which aspects of the tradition might have to be discarded. Luang Por’s decision was to try to transplant the whole thing and then, through trial and error, see where adaptations might have to be made.

During a discussion about the practice of the Vinaya in England, Ajahn Sumedho mentioned to Luang Por that the governing council of one of the Asian Theravada Sanghas had recently passed a resolution permitting monks living abroad to waive the rule forbidding the use of money. Their argument had been that keeping the rule in non-Buddhist countries was impractical. Luang Por strongly disagreed. The rules governing monks’ relationship to money were key to the preservation of the Vinaya as a whole. The Buddha had stipulated procedures involving lay stewards that were fit for purpose, and should be respected. An official declaration that a particular rule was no longer practical set a dangerous precedent. In fact, the difficulty in keeping some of the rules was not a bad thing at all: it prevented monks from becoming careless about the Vinaya.

We have to maintain the Vinaya in perpetuity. In the future, if monks accept money, they’ll start buying and selling, and that will be the end of it. There’ll be no pure monks in Thailand or England or on the whole face of the earth. All down the drain!

It was clear that Luang Por felt strongly that relaxing the practice of any of the core training rules would lead to a slippery slope that must be resolutely avoided. But while the Vinaya and observances were to be upheld without picking and choosing according to convenience, Luang Por allowed that, in certain areas, there was room for flexibility. He was not insisting that everything had to be done in exactly the same way as it was in Thailand. Whenever he found himself in unfamiliar situations, he said, the wise monk should examine prevailing conditions and consider to what degree he might adapt to local customs without undermining his Vinaya practice:

It is intelligent to learn how to make compromises when faced with things that are not in direct conflict with the Vinaya, are not harmful in themselves, but are simply different from our own agreed ways of doing things.

Minor changes he sanctioned were prompted by the much colder climate. They included the wearing of shoes on alms-round and the covering of the right shoulder within monastic boundaries. This latter allowance led to the design of a long-sleeved shirt-cum-jacket, under which sweaters could be worn in the winter.

### All in Your Head

Although Luang Por repeatedly impressed his disciples and English hosts with the apparently effortless ease with which he adapted to conditions which were new and strange to him, the acceptance of his environment that he demonstrated was not indiscriminate. On certain occasions, when he might have been expected to conform with conditions, he showed no inclination to do so at all.

One day, for example, it was necessary for him to travel on the Underground during rush hour. The atmosphere was hurried and frantic. The monks and laypeople accompanying Luang Por felt themselves swept along by the energy of the place. They were surprised and a little irritated to see that, rather than increasing his pace to keep up with them, Luang Por had seemed to quite deliberately slow down. One of the monks got the point: they had plenty of time to get to their destination. Why start rushing just because everyone else was?

In what areas was adaptation appropriate and to what extent? What were the causes of insufficient adaptation or over-adaptation? What was the wise relationship to customs and conventions? All these questions were of much interest to Luang Por. Observing the customs of the English allowed him to look at Thai customs with a fresh perspective. His reflections on this matter appeared in many talks that he gave on his return to Thailand. During the course of one such talk he said:

If we invest things with our views and beliefs, then they immediately gain value – they can become sacred or holy objects. But without our projections, nothing has any intrinsic worth. We Thais take the head to be the most exalted part of the body. We don’t let anybody touch our heads in jest; it makes us so angry that, in the past, it has even led people to kill each other. It is because of a view that we won’t let people touch our heads, a deeply entrenched attachment. When I was abroad, I saw the Westerners touching each other’s heads quite freely. One of the Western monks took me to visit his parents. As soon we arrived, he put out his hand and touched his father’s head affectionately. He stroked his father’s head and laughed. And his father was really happy about it! To him, it meant that his son loved him. That’s how it is over there.

Every culture had its conventions. Problems arose when people gave absolute and fixed values to them. Understanding conventions as conventions and making use of them as appropriate was the wise path. Luang Por said that with the abandonment of wrong views and attachment to conventions, all things lost their former value. This did not mean a moral nihilism, simply that when the blind identification with conditioned phenomena fell away, suffering could find no way into the mind.

### Urban Dhamma

One morning on alms-round in London, the monks became aware of a group of teenagers veering towards them. They carried with them a threat of casual violence. Laughing and joking, they shouted insults at the monks and made threatening gestures. To roars of approval from their friends, one or two of them ran up and aimed playful kicks at the line of monks, missing them by inches. They taunted the monks, probing for a response. Ajahn Sumedho began to be concerned that things were turning ugly and prepared to shield his teacher. Luang Por, completely unfazed by it all, continued walking at an unhurried pace, with eyes downcast. Soon the lads became bored with the game and ran off. On safely reaching the entrance to the temple, Ajahn Sumedho went forward to receive Luang Por’s bowl. Luang Por smiled and said, ‘It gives good teachings, England. Good teachings.’

### Further Still

Luang Por had a certain basic knowledge of Christianity. At Wat Pah Pong, his Western disciples would occasionally speak about their experiences of it with him, and he sometimes enjoyed discussions with Fathers Pasec and Pisec, local French priests who were fluent in Thai. But it is unlikely that Luang Por possessed more than a fundamental idea of Christian teachings, or realized that the Protestant denominations he encountered in England were any different from the Catholicism he had met in Thailand. He certainly did not seem to be aware of how blunt his words might sound to a Christian ear. When the vicar of an old church he was visiting asked him, ‘There is no prayer in your practice. Do you believe it can still take you to God?’, Luang Por replied:

Beyond that.

On another occasion, Luang Por referred to a belief in gods with a saving power as a hindrance to the realization of the human potential to save oneself. To Luang Por, the preciousness of a human birth lay in the unique opportunity it provided to abandon the defilements powering the whole wheel of birth-and-death. He was critical of teachings that he saw as undermining a person’s determination to take advantage of that opportunity. Those who were unaware that there were defilements in their heart that could be removed with the right training, tended to allow life to take its course, never achieving a true refuge.

Some take refuge in a god up in heaven and just wait around for him to come and help them. In fact, we can help ourselves, it’s just that we don’t know how to. We wait for someone else to help us and die with nothing to show for our lives.

Buddhists should take responsibility for their lives by following the path towards being one’s own refuge.

Knowing our own responsibility, we should keep abandoning defilements, abstaining from evil, doing only good, and then abandoning identification with the good.

There was no need to look for an external support. People who loved themselves, in other words, those who truly wished themselves well, should learn how to be their own refuge. Those who had practised well and gained a true inner refuge were able to create for themselves a world of experience that was full of virtue and peace. By this token, they could be said to be creator-gods themselves.

### What a Wat Is

Many of the people who came to Hampstead Vihāra had little idea of the role that a forest monastery plays in its local community. They would usually assume that monks lived in complete isolation behind high walls. Luang Por explained the truth of the matter to a university lecturer:

The forest monastery is deeply involved in the villagers’ lives. It’s the place where people are taught how to abandon wrong views, and how to have a correct understanding of their human birth – how to conduct themselves, how to live life. On Observance Day, the villagers gather in the monastery, offer the Sangha their daily meal and take the Eight Precepts. They practise meditation to purify their minds. The monks teach and advise them and give Dhamma talks to help them understand the principles of Buddhism.

There are people who, like you in Europe, have never heard the Buddha’s teachings before. Those people are given a better understanding of the teachings. People who don’t know about merit and demerit, right and wrong, are taught about them in the monastery. People from every stratum of society learn how to be intelligent about their lives: how to refrain from committing base acts of body, speech and mind, and how to establish themselves in right conduct of body, speech and mind. They learn how to reduce conceit and attachment to views and how to gradually lessen the greed, hatred and delusion in their hearts until they become true Buddhists, people who know how to share with others and how to live with loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity.

### Counterquestions

The limits of intellectual understanding was a theme Luang Por often returned to. One evening, when a lay meditator asked him to describe the monk’s life, he said it would be as difficult as a fish trying to explain its life to a bird: It would not be possible for the bird to imagine what it would be like to live in the water. Unless, he added, the bird was reborn as a fish.

When someone asked what happens after death, Luang Por extinguished the candle by the side of him and asked her in return:

Luang Por: Where does a candle flame go after it’s extinguished?

The questioner looked confused. After a few moments, he said:

Luang Por: Are you satisfied with my answer?

Questioner: No.

Luang Por: I wasn’t satisfied with your question either.[7]

### Refugee Dhamma

At the end of June, Luang Por went to France to visit a Laotian disciple, Ajahn Bankhao. While he was there, groups of refugees from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam came to pay their respects, and he heard harrowing tales of the suffering they had endured in their homelands. During one exhortation, he said:

Give up thinking about it. Things that have passed have passed – like the days that have gone by. Don’t keep grasping on to them like thorns to pierce you. Look at it as if you have been reborn. Where is your home? Now, it’s right here. You have friends and family here. The place that you have left wasn’t really your home. If it was, then you could still live there. In fact, we have no real home in this world. Wherever we live we simply create a convention that it is our home. But it’s not really. Before long we have to move on … So while you’re here, put effort into being here. Make your life here. Make your peace with being here.

That peace came through the acceptance of change.

Wherever you are, it’s just like that; there’s no essence or core to it, no lasting stability. The world is continually changing. If you go back and live over there, it will change; if you stay here, it will change. We exist through change. If there was no change, we couldn’t go on living. Your out-breath changes into an in-breath which changes into an out-breath. Inhalations and exhalations alternate with each other in that way, and without it we’d be dead. You can’t just keep on breathing in all the time, or breathing out. We exist through change. Food is the same. You put it in one end of your body, and it comes out the other; then you eat some more. There’s continual change.

Luang Por asked his audience the point of brooding on thoughts of hurt and sorrow about the unchangeable nature of change. Wherever they found themselves, they should do what needed to be done in that place. Wherever they went, they were human beings; they were Buddhists. They should reflect on the truth of their situation in order to make the best of it. Wealth and possessions come and go when conditions are ripe for them to do so. Human beings are born and die and are born again. Suffering only arises when we don’t reflect on the changing nature of things.

So may all of you face up to the truth of change taught to us by the Lord Buddha. Be resilient. Wherever you find yourselves, then make that a place where you create goodness and virtue. Even if you come to the end of your life, don’t abandon the goodness and virtue that comes from your Dhamma practices. Without Dhamma there is nothing truly good. ‘Attā hi attano nātho.’ ‘It’s the self that is the refuge for the self.’ Who else could be a refuge to you? That is the truth.

When conditions are ripe for things to happen, they happen. Don’t spend so much time brooding over it all and causing yourself needless trouble. Put your effort into making an honest living. Do good deeds. Live harmoniously, help each other out, be kind to each other. Wherever we live, nobody stays around for very long. Soon we’ll all go our separate ways.

### Frog to Pond

After three months away from Thailand, Luang Por summarized his trip on the last page of his journal with the wordplay that had come to characterize it:

15th July, 1977

I travelled to the inner-outer land and the outer-inner land, the inner-inner land and the outer-outer land: four lands altogether. The languages that I needed to use in these lands were nirutti[8]. And so it produced satisfactory benefit. There is no teacher for these languages; they have to be learned individually. These languages only manifest when prompted by particular events. Thus, the Buddha was well-versed in all languages, and I truly saw European people as the four kinds of lotus.[9]

I am a monk who has lived in the forest for a long time. I thought that going abroad would be exciting, but it was not, because I was governed by the Buddha in every posture. Not only that, but the journey also gave rise to wisdom. Just as the lotus allows no water to submerge it, my reflections constantly ran directly counter to my surroundings.

I visited various universities, and I had the thought that all the sciences of humanity are blunt: they are unable to cut off suffering, they merely generate it. I felt that, if these sciences do not rely on Buddha science, they will not survive. On the plane, I had many kinds of unusual feelings, and my mind raised up the Buddha’s saying:

Look on this world as grand as a king’s chariot. Fools are enamoured of it, but the wise remain unbound.

This saying has become even clearer, as did the phrase about not being proud when in a group whose ways and customs are unfamiliar to you. That has become absolutely clear.

Luang Por had travelled in many different vehicles over the past months. He noted that the plane he was now sitting in was flying at 30,000 feet, its maximum height above ground level. But impressive as such vehicles were, he mused, they were nothing compared to the vehicle of Dhamma. In fact, they were not so amazing at all.

The vehicles that convey people to their destinations are coarse because they merely take people who are suffering in one place off to suffer somewhere else. They just go around in endless circles.

My feeling about this trip abroad is that it’s been a humorous affair. For many years now, I’ve felt like I was a lord of monkeys being poked and teased by spectators. ‘What would it be like’, I thought, ‘to go abroad and try being an Ajahn Frog for a while?’ I knew I’d have to be an Ajahn Frog for sure because I didn’t know their language. And that’s how it turned out: frogs don’t know human language, but the moment they start croaking, people come running.[10] For me, it was like a mute teaching the insane. And that’s not so bad. You don’t have to study or pass exams to receive the degree offered by the Buddha. And so, a mute monk established a branch monastery in London for insane people to study in. It’s comic.

## Dutiyampi: And For a Second Time

Two years later on the thirtieth of April, 1979, accompanied by his American attendant, Ajahn Pabhakaro, Luang Por set off to the West for a second and final time. On this trip, he was to visit America as well as Europe. But his first destination was England where the E.S.T had invited him to give encouragement to Ajahn Sumedho’s community, and to see for himself the latest developments in their efforts to establish a forest monastery.

It was an exciting time for the Sangha in England, and a pivotal one. After being based for two years – confined, some of the monks would have said – in Hampstead Vihāra, a property had been acquired in a beautiful stretch of countryside just over a hundred kilometres to the south of London. The move was to take place in June, on Luang Por’s return to England following the American leg of his journey. In the meantime, he took up residence in Hampstead Vihāra. For the first few days, he enjoyed some quiet time with the Sangha. One of the monks he met for the first time, Ajahn Sucitto, had joined the community the previous summer after some years in central Thailand. Having heard so much about Luang Por, it was finally a chance to meet him in the flesh. He was not disappointed.

“It was more the manner of the conversation than the topics that counted. He had a way of questioning an attitude I had in an affirmative way – such as, ‘Having to eat is really a nuisance, eh Sucitto?’ – with a big smile, that made it really easy to engage with him just by saying ‘yes’, and yet, gave you the feeling that you and he were on the same wavelength and he was affirming you. After half an hour of this, I felt tremendously uplifted and at ease. He had opened a window onto a world of joy and unfaltering response to suffering. The way out of the jungle of the mind was to stop creating it through fear and self-consciousness. The Holy Life seemed so simple and such a good and joyful way to live. It was exactly the kind of message that my anxious and tense mind needed.”

Luang Por’s reputation in England had steadily grown over the past two years. Having heard of his visit, Buddhist groups throughout the country had been in touch, inquiring as to the possibility of them receiving teachings from him. In response, Ajahn Sumedho invited Luang Por on a road trip to the north of England and Scotland, a journey during which teaching engagements could be combined with some sightseeing. Luang Por was amenable.

### Is That a Question?

The minibus containing Luang Por and his small entourage made their first stop in Manchester at the Samatha Society, a Theravada Buddhist meditation group. Despite the fact that his audience consisted of people committed to inner tranquillity, many of the questions put to Luang Por were of a convoluted intellectual nature that severely tested Ajahn Pabhakaro’s translation skills. One particular questioner took an excruciatingly long time to articulate a question that, in the end, was little more than a request for Luang Por to agree to his position on a certain matter. Before he’d stopped talking, a gently smiling Luang Por turned to Ajahn Pabhakaro and inquired whether the man was asking a question or giving him a Dhamma talk.

Luang Por’s replies to the questions were, for the most part, characteristically direct and pragmatic.

“When I’m afraid, I feel it in my belly; but at other times, the awareness is in the brain. Why is that?”

That’s just the way it is. Love arises here (he points to his heart[11]), and fear and fearlessness. You don’t need to talk about the navel or the brain at all. Everything converges here at the heart. When there’s a feeling of fear, then who’s afraid? It isn’t the navel, and it isn’t the brain. The feeling of fear or fearlessness, the feeling of pleasure or pain, who is that? Who is the one who feels? It is nāmadhamma[12], it’s the way things are. The brain and the navel are inanimate matter, there’s nothing to them (rūpadhamma). Feelings are nāmadhamma, and it’s their nature to be that way. If there are no causes and conditions for them to arise, they’re inert; if there are causes and conditions, they spring up in the mind. That’s the nature of things. So the great masters say if you feel afraid, it doesn’t matter. Just say to yourself, ‘It’s impermanent, impermanent. Pleasure is impermanent, pain is impermanent.’ Tell feelings that, and they’ll soon disappear. They’re changeful.

“I’ve read in the scriptures that Nibbāna is the cessation of suffering. In my meditation, I have experienced a state in which there is no form, the mind is vast, infinite, without suffering. I assume that it is probably not Nibbāna. What is your opinion?”

Suffering is an immaterial phenomenon; it’s not a form which disappears in meditation. Suffering is a feeling that arises in the mind. We don’t know what to call it, and so we have agreed on the word ‘suffering’. It’s a label that we have decided upon. Suffering arises, and then it passes away. The peace of mind you described is merely a calm state of mind. It’s not the peace of freedom from suffering. If suffering had come to an end, then you wouldn’t have this kind of doubt. There would be no doubt at all. Truly nothing left to doubt: that is the peace that comes through wisdom.

With samādhi, you’re peaceful as long as you’ve got your eyes closed, and there are no disturbing sounds. If you get home and sounds disturb you, then your mind’s in a state of turmoil all over again. You’ve merely gained the peace of no disturbance, the result of samādhi, not wisdom, not the real thing. If it were the result of wisdom, there wouldn’t be this kind of doubt; it would be the end of the matter.

But he could also speak in an enigmatic, ‘Zen-like’ style, that employed simple phrases in a way that confounded rational thought:

Suppose you’re walking up and down. Walking, you’re aware that you’re walking. Stopping, you’re aware that you’re stopping. But suppose you’re not walking forward or back, and you haven’t stopped – what’s that? Exactly where is that? How do you exist at that moment?

Now there’s no more walking forward, there’s no more walking back. There’s nothing to doubt anymore. There’s no doubt while walking forward because doubt has come to an end. There’s no doubt while walking back because doubt has come to an end. There’s no doubt standing still because it’s all come to an end. There’s no more doubt in the mind any more. This is the nature of wisdom: nothing is born in the mind.

### Manjusri

From Manchester, they drove further northwest to Manjusri Institute in the Lake District, a community consisting of a core of Tibetan monastics, and a larger number of Western ordained and lay practitioners. It was Luang Por’s first contact with Tibetan Buddhism. He found at Manjusri a different conception of monasticism, one in which the distinction between monks and laity was more fluid than he was used to. The revelation that, in this particular lineage, monks might wear lay clothes – and even hold down a job in the local community – seemed bizarre to him.

Although it would be a short visit, Luang Por appreciated the warm welcome he received from the whole community and enjoyed the colourfulness of a tradition that was as exotic for him as it was for most inhabitants of rural northwest England. The countryside around Manjusri was glorious, and with Luang Por obviously fascinated by the flora and fauna – so different from all that he was acquainted with in Thailand – a picnic was arranged.

After the meal, while Anāgārika Philip[13] was washing Luang Por’s bowl for him, Luang Por approached him, took hold of the bowl, and gave Philip lengthy and detailed instructions on the correct way to look after it. Soon Ajahn Sumedho came over to listen. Finishing his exposition, Luang Por, chuckling, said to Philip:

Ajahn Sumedho can teach you the way to Nibbāna, and I’ll show you how to look after a bowl.

Later, in a session with the Manjusri community, Luang Por gave a discourse on the Four Noble Truths. He spoke humorously about the challenges that teachers face with lazy students. He said that he had asked their teacher whether it was the same here as in Thailand and had been told that it was. He talked about the foolishness of wanting things to be other than what they were, or could be, saying it was like wanting a chicken to be a duck. He said that the ordinary suffering of being alive was like the unavoidable pain of a doctor’s needle entering the skin. The suffering of those who grasped on to things as self or belonging to self, on the other hand, was like that felt after being injected with poison. At one point, he spoke about dealing with anger:

Set a clock down in front of you and make a vow for the anger to disappear in two hours. See if you can do it. If anger really belonged to you, you could. But, in fact, sometimes two hours have passed and you’re still angry; other times the anger’s gone in an hour. If you identify with the anger as being yours, then you suffer. If anger is who you are, you should have power over it. If it doesn’t follow your wishes, then it’s fake. Don’t believe it. Don’t believe in your feelings of happiness or sadness, love or hate. They’re all lying to you.

When you get angry, is it painful or pleasurable? If it’s painful, then why do you hang on to it? Why don’t you throw anger away? How can you be intelligent and wise if you don’t do that? You’ve been angry so many times in your life. Sometimes, it leads to family arguments; sometimes, you spend the whole night crying. But still you get angry, still you hold on to it in your heart. And so you go on suffering for as long as you live. This is the way saṃsāra works. If you understand suffering, then you can solve the problem. For this reason, the Buddha said that there is no skilful means to free the mind from suffering that excels seeing not-self. That’s all that’s needed. It’s the supreme, sublime remedy.

The journey continued northwards. Edinburgh, their next stop, was the city that impressed Luang Por the most on his travels. He had already seen grand stone buildings in London and elsewhere, but he found a whole city built out of stone around the foot of a huge volcanic rock especially impressive. It filled him with admiration for the skill of the stone masons. His hosts in Edinburgh included a young woman, Kate, who was shortly to shave her head and become Sister – and later, Ajahn – Candasiri, a founding member of the nuns’ order in his new monastery in southern England. During the evening question and answer session, she recalls a question on a topic that, at the time, interested her greatly:

“A professional flautist, began to ask about music: ‘What about Bach? Surely there’s nothing wrong with that – much of his music is very spiritual, not at all worldly.’ Luang Por looked at her, and when she had finished, he said quietly, ‘Yes, but the music of the peaceful heart is much, much more beautiful.’ ”

### Disturbing the Sound

On his return from Scotland, Luang Por took up residence at Hampstead Vihāra once more. Every evening, people came to meditate and receive teachings. The vihāra was situated upon a busy main road, and traffic noise was a constant backdrop to the evening meditation sessions. On some nights, the rumble and hum from the road was drowned out by the sound of rock music from the pub across the way. Luang Por gave some advice on how to deal with this distraction:

Today I would like to offer you a small reflection. It concerns the view that the traffic noise is a disturbance to meditation. In fact, isn’t it true that, rather than the traffic noise disturbing you, it’s you that are disturbing the traffic noise?

Suffering arises through this kind of wrong view. If we think the problem is the noise, then we aim our remedies at the traffic noise or other people, instead of at the real cause. With wrong view, suffering is endless. Do you have this wrong view in your mind? Investigate this within.

Take my words away with you today and consider them: the right view is that we disturb the traffic noise, not that it disturbs us. Or more profoundly, when there is no sense of self, of traffic or of sound, then the whole business comes to an end. Look at your mind and reflect on this point.

The crucial mistake was to assume ownership of impermanent phenomena. It was the essence of wrong view.

What about if you were to sit here meditating today and pain were to appear, but there was no sense of it having an owner. How would that be? Are you close to that view or still far away? Nobody who still has the wrong understanding that pain and pleasure belong to them will find lucid calm. What is this practice for? Who is it for? Have you ever thought about that? Have you ever reflected on the matter?

Two young Englishmen who were to go on to ordain as monks and become senior members of the Western Sangha in Europe, met Luang Por for the first time during this period. The first, Philip (now Ajahn Chandapalo), had attended the Question and Answer session in Edinburgh. The second, Chris (now Ajahn Karuniko), was one of the young men who went to meditate at the Hampstead Vihāra during Luang Por’s visit. He would recall:

“He used to tease people; ask people questions and tease them a little bit. So when I sat there and I was at his feet, just in awe of this wonderful man, he looked down at me and said, ‘What do you think it would be like to sit there for one whole hour without one thought coming into your mind?’ I thought, ‘Oh, very enlightened!’ But he said, ‘Like a stone!’ and I couldn’t answer that.”

Before leaving for America, Luang Por mentioned in a casual tone that it might be time for a change of leadership and that he was thinking of having Ajahn Sumedho return to Thailand with him. It was the proverbial bombshell. The renovation of the property they had acquired in the countryside, and to which they would be moving in a short two-months’ time, was going to be a long, arduous task. The willingness and inspiration of the community to bear with all the hard work ahead was due in no small measure to the confidence everyone felt in Ajahn Sumedho. It was generally agreed that for him to be recalled would be a disastrous move that would throw the whole project into jeopardy. Having given everybody a good chance to look at their hopes, attachments and fears, and with the matter still unresolved, Luang Por left for America.

### A Pacific State

The two monks arrived in Seattle, Ajahn Pabhakaro’s home town, on the twenty-fifth of May. They were met at the airport by Norm and Jeanne Kappel, Ajahn Pabhakaro’s parents, together with Paul Breiter (ex-Ven. Varapanyo), and a welcoming group of Seattle Buddhists.

As soon as Jeanne caught sight of her son, she rushed joyfully across the crowded concourse. Ajahn Pabhakaro almost panicked. It looked as if she was going to give him a big hug. He would be breaking one of the rules of the Discipline right in front of his teacher.[14] He braced himself to repel her in the most tactful and least hurtful way. But as Jeanne got within a few feet, she sunk to her knees, and to his great relief, gave three neat bows.

Paul Breiter took the opportunity to offer his services as lay attendant for the duration of Luang Por’s visit. When Luang Por saw that his former disciple still kept his head shaved and learned about his lifestyle, he laughed with pleasure and said that he was neither fish nor fowl, neither monk nor layman. In the coming days, he was to joke how Paul had become a special kind of transgendered person.

They stayed at the Kappel’s home in the city for two or three days and then moved up to their cabin in the mountains. During this first week, Luang Por seemed exhausted and spent most of the time resting. Sometimes he would discuss Dhamma with his two disciples; on occasion, he would have them turn on the television. Completely unintelligible though the language was to him, he was interested in watching and absorbing the images of an alien way of life.

On drives around the area, Luang Por was observant of his surroundings, the culture, the customs, the behaviour and demeanour of the people he met. Sometimes, he would point people out and express how deserving of compassion they seemed to him. On one occasion, he remarked on how, ‘They really like to try out everything in this society.’ It seemed to Paul that he was assessing the best way to teach in America. This was confirmed when one day Luang Por started talking about Dhamma propagation. In America, he said, it wasn’t necessary to use the word ‘Buddhism’, but to point out how the Buddhist teachings are not philosophical concepts but expressions of the truths of nature.

He observed that Westerners who were interested in Buddhism tended to be well-educated and quite opinionated. The best way to teach people like that was in such a way that they would feel like they’d come to the conclusions themselves, rather than adopting them from someone else. But he cautioned that if someone’s views were so deep-seated to prevent them receiving the teachings, then not to argue with them: that would be as undignified as a millionaire arguing with someone poor and destitute. They would have to be left to their beliefs. It was their kamma.

Luang Por and Paul found much to talk about. Luang Por was particularly interested in the state of Buddhism in America and its future propagation. Paul, for his part, had been practising in the Zen Buddhist tradition since his return to the West, and was eager to hear Luang Por’s perspective on key Mahayana teachings. He was also curious to know Luang Por’s view on providing mindful and compassionate end-of-life care for the terminally ill, a topic of great interest in Buddhist circles at that time.

“On working with the dying – which was becoming popular at the time of his visit – he said that most of the benefit was to be found by those who visited the dying, by contemplating the truths of sickness and death, rather than by those we might visit and try to help … He said that it was unlikely that we could affect the state of mind of a dying person very much, either positively or adversely. He took his cane and poked me in the chest and said, ‘If this were a red-hot iron and I was poking you with it, and then I held out a piece of candy with my other hand, how much could the candy distract you?’

“He also said that it was very difficult to know what people were experiencing at death by observing them. I told him how people described the transformations that came over the dying, how they went out smiling peacefully. He said, ‘When pigs are taken to be slaughtered, they too are smiling up to the last moment. Can we say that the pigs are all going to Nibbāna?’

“He emphasized that, of course, we should treat dying people with love and compassion and look after them as best we can, but that if we don’t turn it inward to contemplate our own inevitable death, there is little real benefit for us. The theme of imminent death was to be one he returned to over and over as the trip progressed.”

### Mahayana

“He seemed to get a kick out of hearing bits of Mahayana Sutras that I would occasionally translate for him, often saying that they were expressions of deep wisdom. But sometimes he would turn them around and challenge me, reminding me not to be satisfied with conceptual knowledge. Once when I said that, according to Mahayana, the arahant has only travelled half the path, he asked, ‘Has anyone ever travelled the whole path?’ When I said that Sāriputta, the embodiment of wisdom in the Pali Scriptures, became the fool in many Mahayana texts, he said, ‘The people who read these things are the real fools.’ Needless to say, I’m sure he wasn’t denigrating the Sutras, only poking those people who merely grasp the words without experiencing the deep meaning. Talking about the Diamond Sutra, I said, ‘This Sutra says, “He who sees all forms as unreal, sees the Tathāgata,” ’ which prompted him to look down at me very fiercely and say, ‘Yeah, is that so?’ More than once he asked me if I knew who wrote these Sutras. Well, they say the Buddha did. ‘Do you know who Buddha is?’ he demanded. I had to keep my mouth shut.

“On another occasion, I asked him once more about the Bodhisattva ideal. ‘The Vimalakirti Sutra says something like, “Though beyond attachment, the Bodhisattva does not cut off the streams of passion so as to remain in the world for the benefit of sentient beings.” ’ Luang Por said:

That’s not talking about the mind itself, but the function of the mind. It’s like asking, ‘Do you want this?’ ‘No.’ ‘Do you like it?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Do you want it?’ ‘No.’ ‘Is it beautiful?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘So do you want it?’ ‘No.’ But he really doesn’t want it, he’s not merely talking.

“When I said that the Bodhisattva concept was profound, he said, ‘Don’t think like that. It is your own thinking that is shallow or deep, long or short. There’s not so much to it, but you get caught in your doubting mind.’

“Should we get everyone else to Nibbāna first? ‘The Buddha didn’t leave us after his enlightenment, but stayed to help others gain liberation. But we can do only so much and that’s enough. If we save all beings in the world now, the next Buddha won’t have a world to be born into.’ When I asked Luang Por if he was going to return to teach in his next life, he said, ‘No, I’m tired. One life of teaching is enough.’ He sounded like he meant it.

“I told him that one of the ideas that some teachers gave students was that, since everything is empty, there weren’t really such things as attachment and suffering. ‘You can’t do it that way,’ Luang Por said, ‘you have to use the conventions.’ I said that many people contend that since the mind is inherently pure, since we all have Buddha nature, it’s not necessary to practice. His answer was, ‘You have something clean, like this tray. I come and drop some shit on it. Will you say, “This tray is originally clean, so I don’t have to do anything to clean it now?” ’

“On another occasion, I told him how some people think they’re happy, so they don’t want to practice. He said, ‘If a child won’t go to school but tells his parents, ‘It’s OK, I’m fine like this,’ is that right?’ Then there are those who say that suffering is Dharma, therefore it’s good, so we should ‘honour’ it, not try to end it. He said, ‘Right. I tell them, don’t let go of it, just hold on to it as long as you can and see what it feels like.’ He admitted that it was true that Nirvāna and saṃsāra are inseparable, like the palm and the back of the hand, but that one has to turn the hand over. Finally, he said that if people present all these invincible arguments and don’t want to be convinced of the truth, ‘Just let them be like that. Where will they get to?’ i.e. such people have to see it for themselves.”

### Keeping the House Clean

It was now two years since Luang Por had become familiar with the idea of lay meditation retreats. Although he was impressed with the application of the people who attended them, he pointed out the pitfalls of a Dhamma practice focused on retreats but lacking a continuity of effort in the periods between them. Short periods of intense retreat followed by much longer periods of heedlessness could not lead to true progress. The experiences on retreat should be providing meditators with insight into the suffering inherent in heedless living, and leading them to give up unwise behaviours and live more mindfully. If retreats were not inspiring a new perspective on daily non-retreat life, then even if they gave access to some temporary, elevated states of mind, they were not effective tools for awakening. People who took this approach were not dealing with the root causes of suffering. He said it was like a thief who gets caught by the police and hires a very good lawyer to defend him. As soon as he is acquitted, he goes back to thieving. When he gets caught again, he hires the same lawyer, and the whole process repeats itself, again and again.

The goal of meditation is not just a temporary respite from suffering or a rest from the turmoil of your life. You must investigate the causes of suffering and uproot the craving that is the root of unrest in the mind. Only then will you experience true peace of mind.

He compared meditation to building a house:

You think that you practise meditation for a while and then you stop. That’s not it. You must maintain constant mindfulness. Know the mental states that come and destroy your concentration and put you in a bother. Constantly know yourself. Developing concentration is not difficult; what’s hard is looking after it. It doesn’t take long to build a house, but maintaining the house and keeping it clean is something you have to keep doing for the rest of your life.

Consistency, continuity was all.

If you don’t maintain continuity of practice, you won’t see results, or only very minor ones. That’s still better than nothing. But not always. Without results, some people can get bored with meditation, and start to think it’s a waste of time. Other activities may come to seem more important, and they leave it behind them.

He said failure occurred because meditators were not sincere enough, and did not persevere to the point where results appear:

In fact, everything is constantly ready to teach us. All we need to do is to cultivate wisdom, and then we will clearly penetrate the truth of the world.

When someone asked him to describe how he prepared his mind for meditation, he said:

I just keep it where it always is.

On a visit to Mount Rainier, Luang Por saw snow for the first time. He was underwhelmed. It looked more beautiful in photographs, he said. More to his liking was the herbal medicine given to him by a traditional Chinese doctor in Seattle. It gave him an unexpected new burst of energy that sustained him for the rest of his journey.

### Too Many Teachers, Too Little Learning

Certain themes appeared in Luang Por’s teachings early on and were developed throughout his time in America. He emphasized the inseparable connections between the different factors of the path, especially the relationship between outer conduct and inner cultivation. He spoke on many occasions of the importance of continuity. He cautioned against unqualified teachers. He critiqued the dilettante approach to spiritual teachings in which people cherry picked the teachings from various traditions that did not threaten the deepest attachments. He said that it was only by making a long-term commitment to the training, that a meditator developed the qualities of grit and perseverance vital to success.

Luang Por gave his first ever public address in America on the first of June at the Friends Meeting House in Seattle. Initially Paul was surprised by the subject of the talk:

“It was mostly about sīla. He started right out by scolding everyone in a kindly way, sort of like, ‘Now you know you shouldn’t be doing all these things you do.’ I was a little surprised by it, and it certainly wasn’t as interesting or exciting as a talk about meditation, emptiness, etc. However, as time went by and I saw him returning to this over and over, I began to appreciate it. And in the months and years to follow, I saw more and more how accurate he was. I think that was when he began telling people to be wary of meditation teachers. In subsequent talks and conversations, he went into a lot of detail on this subject. He saw a great difference between merely being able to practice meditation and giving the techniques to people on the one hand, and incorporating the practice into your whole life so that one’s being is Dharma. He felt that those who were not really liberated from their cravings would naturally teach people according to their opinions and would be very indulgent with their students’ habits and desires.”

The one thing that I’m afraid of in this country is that there are too many meditation teachers: Tibetan, Zen, Theravadin – its chaotic! So many meditation teachers, but few people who are really meditating. I’m just afraid that you will fall foul of fake things, fake teachers. I’m very concerned about that.

He gave the example of a religious seeker in the Buddha’s time:

He kept changing his teacher, constantly searching for new ones. Whenever he heard people praising a teacher, he would go to practise with him and listen to his Dhamma. Then he’d start comparing between Ajahn A and Ajahn B and Ajahn C. But the teachers’ opinions did not coincide with each other, nor were they the same as his own opinion. His doubts grew and grew.

Sometime later he heard that Gotama, the great founder of a religion, was nearby. His desire to hear the teachings from a Buddha were especially strong, and he couldn’t resist going to listen to him teach. After he’d paid his homage, the Buddha said to him, ‘You will never put your doubts to rest through the words of another. The more you listen, the more you’ll doubt. The more you listen, the more odd ideas you’ll pick up. To end your doubts, all you need to do is to investigate your body and mind. Throw away thoughts of the past. Throw away thoughts of the future. They’re both changeful. Look at the present moment. Look at what you’re doing right now. Don’t look elsewhere.’

Luang Por emphasized the point to his audience:

Wisdom has never arisen from having a lot of knowledge; it’s never arisen from jumping from one meditation method to another. It is born of a heartfelt knowledge and understanding of the profundity of the guiding principles and then practising accordingly.

Someone asked:

“Zen teaches people to live naturally, but you seem to be saying the exact opposite. Would you please explain?”

I can’t just teach what pleases people. Do that and they will never change. If the teacher refrains from saying those things that run counter to people’s defilements, then those defilements will never disappear. Nothing will come of practice.

You feel lazy, and so you let yourself be lazy; you want to sleep, so you just let yourself sleep; you feel like working, so you do some work – that’s what it would be like to live a completely natural life. The Buddha taught us to live naturally, but with a wisdom that fully comprehends nature. If that’s the case, then it wouldn’t be wrong.

But I’m afraid that you’d all be monkeys. You’d just allow yourself to be monkeys, and you’d never get to be human beings. When Zen teachers say these things, they are speaking wisely: they are teaching us to have the wisdom that knows the nature of nature.

Nature is Dhamma; Dhamma is nature. If you understand nature, then that’s how it is. But I’m afraid people’s knowledge won’t reach that far. The Buddha teaches people to go against the grain: if the mind is greedy, then go against the greed in order to eliminate it; if there is anger in the mind, then go against the anger in order to eliminate it; if there is delusion in the mind, then go against it in order to eliminate delusion.

### Don’t Let the Thief In

Luang Por had always presented the path of practice as one demanding an integrated approach in which the trainings of conduct, of the heart and of wisdom, as laid down by the Buddha, were to be seen as inseparable parts of one whole. In America, he found something rather different. A new eclectic Buddhism was emerging, one characterized by the quest for a distinctly American Dhamma suited to the prevailing society and culture, and without any necessary adherence to traditional Asian forms (often referred to as ‘baggage’). The talk was of extracting the essence of all the different Buddhist traditions that had found their way to America. Luang Por’s concern was, firstly, whether the leaders of the Buddhist community were up to such a profound task, and secondly, that in a pick and mix approach, the organic relationship between practices fundamental to the Eightfold Path could easily be overlooked. Furthermore, adopting only those elements of the tradition that conformed to a non-Buddhist society’s current views and values risked narrowing the tradition, or even distorting it.

Luang Por was particularly concerned to point out the vital connection between the practice of sīla and the more profound levels of inner cultivation. He arrived in America with a reputation as a great meditation master, and it was not only Paul who was surprised by how much time he devoted to talking about sīla. He asserted that when people committed themselves to meditation practices without a commensurable effort to purify their actions and speech, no lasting benefit would ensue. This was not the Thai Theravada view of things, he said, it was the law of nature. Sīla was the indispensable foundation of practice. It was the fundamental tool needed to build a noble life. It was the quality that made a human being a fitting vessel for the Dhamma.

Take what I have said away with you and think about it. Breaking any of the precepts has consequences. Reflect on this well. Meditate on the precepts. If you clearly see the consequences of transgressing the precepts, you will be able to abandon transgression.

Most of the questions he received about individual precepts centred on the third one, dealing with sexual misconduct, and the fifth one, with the consumption of alcohol and drugs.

He explained that the third precept is intended to prevent splits and turmoil over sexual matters and to promote moderation, ‘just-rightness’. Sexual promiscuity creates unrest: ‘It’s not Dhamma practice, and it is not the Middle Way.’

Whatever practitioners do, they should have boundaries, a frame for their actions, honesty and sincerity towards each other.

He summarized that celibacy was most conducive to progress in Dhamma. Those unable or unwilling to lead a celibate life should cultivate contentment with their partner. For a moderate lifestyle that supported the practice of Dhamma, one sexual partner was more than sufficient.

Transgression of the fifth precept did not require intoxication: any amount of alcohol or drugs was sufficient. Luang Por said that you did not need to be drunk before alcohol undermined your sense of right and wrong. The consumption of alcohol, even in so-called ‘moderation’, created the conditions for suffering to arise. Heedlessness was like a thief always ready to steal your good qualities. Why would you want to give a thief even the smallest opportunity to run off with your most valued possessions?

If you knew someone was a thief, would it be a good idea to let him into your house?

Luang Por’s manner was noticeably different in the West. He was almost comically polite to his audience. He apologized (unthinkable in Thailand) when he said anything even slightly controversial. It was an approach that might have simply been the expression of a natural reticence in a new land, but it is hard to imagine – experienced rhetorician that he was – that Luang Por was unaware of how charming and lovable, and therefore persuasive, it made him appear.

Today I’ve given you some things to reflect on. And I’d like to ask your forgiveness. Today I’ve talked a lot. I’ve talked a lot because of a love of the Dhamma. I’ve never been to America before, you know. Now that I’m here, I’m going to leave a lot of good things for you to reflect on. If they’re wrong, please don’t blame me, blame the Buddha. He was the one who sent me and made me say these things.

I’d like to ask your forgiveness for the Dhamma teachings today. Sometimes I’m not aware of the weight of my words. I’ve given various perspectives which might differ from the customs in this country, and so I ask your pardon. I want there to be goodness and nobility. If you practise Dhamma, then I want you to know the true flavour of the Dhamma in your hearts. So I would like to really thank you all for coming to listen today and ask your forgiveness for everything.

It was over the top (was he teasing them? some wondered), but irresistible.

### Free Through Rules

As a predominantly Protestant country since its inception, America, unlike Europe, has few historical associations with monasticism, and little sympathy with it. One of the topics on Buddhist lips at the time of Luang Por’s visit was the likelihood of American Buddhism developing as a predominantly lay-based tradition, and of that being a strength rather than a weakness.

It is hard to say to what extent Luang Por’s comments were prompted by knowledge of this debate, but he did speak on a number of occasions of the importance of the monastic vocation. After a screening of the BBC documentary, The Mindful Way, filmed in Wat Pah Pong, he was asked the question, ‘Is it possible for householders to practise as well as monks?’

The most convenient way to practise is as a monastic because monastics are celibate. They’re free to come and go, they have no family. Householders can practise, but the path is a roundabout one, there are bends in the road. It’s hard because you have a spouse, children, all kinds of things to see to. A householder can practise, but it’s a little bit indirect.

More tongue in cheek perhaps, was the salutary effect he suggested an increased monastic presence might have on overpopulation. The world was already in a turmoil because there were too many people in it. As they struggled for meagre resources, violence and killing was rife. If more people adopted the celibate life, they would be helping to reduce the number of new people coming into it.

On a more serious note, he said that, in his opinion, monastics make the best teachers. They need make no compromises with the Dhamma. Untrammelled by family responsibilities, they make a fulltime commitment. Having very few personal needs or distractions, they are able to give themselves whole-heartedly to teaching the Dhamma to themselves and others. Not needing to make a livelihood from teaching, they are not easily led into diluting or distorting the teachings or catering to their audience.

This view encountered a certain amount of scepticism from members of his audience, some of whom were disciples of married clergy in the Zen and Tibetan traditions. He said that the responsibility of each practitioner was to reach the stage of certainty where there was no longer any need to rely on an external guide. But in the meantime, he was suggesting caution rather than prejudice. And in important matters, was it not wiser to exercise caution than to dispense with it?

### Vancouver

Luang Por spent the sixth of June in Vancouver, meeting with members of the Thai community during the day and teaching in the evening at the University of British Columbia. The program was organized by Ajahn Tiradhammo, a Canadian disciple of Luang Por, who had arranged for his visit to his family in British Columbia to coincide with Luang Por’s trip.

At the university, Luang Por led an audience, containing only a minority of serious meditators, in a one hour meditation session. For most of his audience, it was a far longer period than they had ever sat before. Adding to the challenge was the fact that Luang Por had given no prior indication of how long the meditation would last. It was one of the unpredictable ‘let-go-and-watch-your-mind-or-else-suffer-and-want-to-die’ experiences with which the monks were all too familiar. Luang Por had perhaps decided to give his audience the opportunity to investigate expectation, discomfort, boredom, aversion, doubt and attachment to timetables: the Dhamma teaching before the Dhamma talk. How many appreciated the gift was hard to tell.

Luang Por had perceived a pervasive fear of death in Western society. It was not so much that this fear was absent in Thailand, but in the West it appeared more extreme. Seeing elderly people adopting youthful styles of dress and behaviour, as if they were proclaiming, ‘I’m not old!’ confirmed him in this view. In his Dhamma talk at the university, he spoke about the inevitability of death. Of course, medical research was a good thing, he said, but if people didn’t die of one illness, they would die of another. Death would never be brought to an end by such means. Only by following the path of the Buddha could the sufferings of birth and death be completely transcended.

He said that it was important that everyone investigate this matter of birth, old age, sickness and death. It was a cause of laughter and celebration when a baby was born, and tears when the same person eventually died. In fact, he said, the two were inseparable. One inevitably led to the other. With a smile that softened his words, he said:

If you’re really going to cry, do it at the birth: ‘Here comes another one. Another one to die.’

Being willing to look at life with open eyes could show the importance of the practices of Dhamma. Paul summarized:

“The bottom line, he said, was to give up everything for Dharma. ‘What does everyone love most of all? Their own life. We can sacrifice everything for life; if we can give our life for Dharma, there will be no problem for us.’ ”

Luang Por, responding to the university setting, spoke on the topic of worldly versus spiritual knowledge:

These days there are so many fields of knowledge, so many ‘-ologies’ – too many to count – and they don’t concede much to each other, do they? I have many Western disciples who’ve been to university. It made them even more foolish. It made them suffer even more, made them even more contentious than they were before they went, because they weren’t familiar with the owner of their knowledge [themselves]. These sciences are all fine, but they must converge in Buddha science. If they don’t, then they’re of no real benefit. There’s no integration, there’s still jealousy and competition and continual turmoil. But if they can unite within the boundaries of sīla, then they become Buddha science.

Buddha science encompasses all the humanities and sciences. It doesn’t allow them to go awry or to cause problems. When Buddha science encompasses all fields of knowledge, keeping them within the framework of sīla, then everyone becomes like siblings, free of jealousy and malice. If you study some field of knowledge, are proficient in it and merge it with Buddha science, then you are called a Buddhist. Wherever you go, you’re serene.

On the two nights that he gave teachings in Vancouver, people followed Luang Por back to the rented apartment where he was staying. He spoke to them until almost midnight. After they left, he continued speaking to his attendants until three in the morning. For Paul, these were memorable nights:

“The Chinese medicine was clearly doing something for him. Not only was he extremely energetic, but those late sessions were some of the most incredible Dharma I ever heard from him. For much of the time, he had his eyes half closed, and he wasn’t talking to anyone in particular; it was more like he was revealing his stream of awareness …

“He said, ‘We talk about things to be developed and things to give up, but there’s nothing to develop, nothing to give up.’ The way he spoke, it wasn’t exactly clear whether he was referring to himself or just generally speaking about the viewpoint of ultimate truth, but he certainly seemed to know what he was talking about. He mentioned the arahant, and said, ‘The arahant is really different from ordinary people’ – then he coyly added, ‘Of course, we don’t see arahants nowadays, but I’m going by what it says in the books’ – and he said that the things that seem true or valuable to us are false and worthless to an arahant. Trying to interest an arahant in worldly things would be like offering lead in exchange for gold. We think, here is a whole pile of lead, why wouldn’t he want to trade his piece of gold which is so much smaller? …

“There was incredible energy emanating from Luang Por on those nights. We were aching from sitting so long, and Ajahn Pabhakaro and Ajahn Tiradhammo would start nodding off in their chairs until Luang Por would rouse us with something hilariously funny. He talked about religion in the West and said, ‘People here follow Christianity – Santa Claus! He dresses up in his suit, the kids sit on his lap, and he says, “What would you like?” ’ And he did a pantomime of Santa that left us in stitches.”

### Like a Worm

On the ninth of June, back in Seattle, Luang Por took his meal at the house of a Thai family. Afterwards, he spoke about the decline in the Thai Sangha. In what Paul would call his ‘faux-grumbling’ mode, Luang Por spoke of how men were becoming monks to maintain the custom more than to get any real value from the time spent in the robes. It was not like in the old days when people would spend at least three years as monks. The owner of the house had been away from Thailand long enough to have no qualms about openly expressing his disagreement. He said:

“Suppose that every Thai man was to become a monk for four or five years – nothing would ever get done. If everyone became monks, there would be nobody doing any work in the country. That’s how I see it.”

Luang Por chuckled. To laughs all round, he said that was how earthworms thought. He quoted an old folk story that the reason worms excrete the earth that they’ve just eaten is because they are afraid that otherwise there would soon be none left. Of course, it was impossible that worms could digest all the earth in the world. The idea that encouraging people to spend longer in robes was going to destroy the economy was equally unrealistic. It just wasn’t going to happen.

You couldn’t even get everyone to be a monk for seven or fifteen days. Some people become monks for all their life, some for five or six years, some for six or seven days. It’s natural for it to be like that.

On returning to the Kappel house, Luang Por sat talking to Paul, and the conversation turned to a friend of his who had been coming to listen to Luang Por’s teachings.

“Catherine had told me that she felt that Luang Por’s teaching was true, but it was impossible to practice it in this society. He replied that people use similar arguments in Thailand, ‘I’m young so I don’t have the opportunity to practice, but when I’m old I’ll practice.’ Luang Por asked, ‘Would you say, “I’m young so I don’t have time to eat, when I get older I’ll eat?” ’ Again, he poked me with his cane and said, ‘If this were on fire, would you say, “I’m suffering, it’s true, but since I live in this society I can’t get away from it? …” ’

“I mentioned that Catherine’s husband liked to go rock climbing, and she felt that it was like a meditation practice for him. Luang Por asked, ‘When he climbs on the rocks does he see the Four Noble Truths?’ I said that I didn’t know, though perhaps he didn’t. Then I said that sometimes I thought that when someone does a worldly activity with full attention, there can be deep concentration; for example, a musician might have factors of jhāna present when he plays, such as one-pointedness, rapture, and so on, except that it was in an unskilful way. Luang Por just said, ‘No! Nobody plays music and enters jhāna – only Westerners! You people don’t know about jhāna …’

“He asked me about Zen once more, so I recited the Heart Sutra[15] for him, doing the best I could with a spontaneous translation. When I finished he said, ‘No emptiness either … No Bodhisattva …’ He asked me where the sutra came from, and I said it was reputed to have been spoken by Buddha. ‘No Buddha.’ Then he said, ‘This is talking about deep wisdom, beyond all conventions. But it doesn’t mean that we should ignore the conventions. How could we teach without them? We have to use names for things, isn’t that so?’ ”

### Insight Meditation Society

On the tenth of June, Luang Por, Ajahn Pabhakaro and Paul flew to New York en route to the Insight Meditation Society (I.M.S.), a retreat centre in Barre, Massachusetts. They were travelling there at the invitation of one of the centre’s founders, Jack Kornfield, who had spent some months as a monk in Wat Pah Pong a few years before. As they began their journey, Paul found that Luang Por was still having severe difficulties with North American geography. Was Massachusetts also in the United States, he asked; what about Boston, was that in New York?

Luang Por stayed at I.M.S. for eight days and taught at a retreat attended by around seventy meditators. In the mornings, Luang Por would spend time with the staff – mostly old students of the centre – giving them the opportunity to ask questions. In the afternoon, he would conduct a question and answer session with the retreatants, and in the evening, he would lead a meditation session and give a discourse. Paul, who was helping with the translation remembered:

“For his morning sessions with the staff, he quickly established the theme of facing the executioner. When people came in he would ask, ‘Did you do your homework today?’ He told them they should think about death at least three times in a day: once in the morning, afternoon and evening. ‘Don’t be like Po’ (that’s what he’d started calling me – it’s the Thai corruption of the Pali ‘bodhi’, i.e. enlightenment, and commonly used as a name), he’d say. ‘He just walks around, he looks at the trees and the birds, he eats his lunch; he never thinks that he’s going to die someday.’ I became the straight man for him, and would sometimes prompt him with questions. The idea of death is usually remote, I once told him. If I felt some danger, it might be more real. ‘Don’t you see the danger?’ he said. ‘Every breath.’ I said that I usually felt that, for me, death was far in the future. I was destined to live a long time, 100 years or more. ‘That’s the wisdom of Devadatta[16]’, he replied.”

During the retreat, he emphasized the Four Noble Truths and the guiding principles of practice. He answered many questions about meditation:

On the level of access concentration, you can compare the mind to a chicken imprisoned in its coop. It’s still walking around. It’s not motionless, it’s not asleep, it’s not dead. But it has a limit to its movements that is in your control. Once the mind is pacified, then investigate the body. Investigate the thirty-two parts of the body. If your mind is still agitated, then keep your eye on the thoughts and emotions that your mind fabricates; see them for what they are: impermanent, impersonal without any abiding selfhood. In practice, it’s not necessary to know a lot of things, but merely to maintain awareness right at this point until there arises a sense of disenchantment and dispassion. Then you will let go of attachment to the five hindrances, and it is that which is the goal of meditation.

There was a question about the five aggregates:

“Do the five aggregates have any effect on peace? Is meditation practice the basis for understanding the five hindrances?”

With wisdom, the five aggregates will help you to be liberated. If you are foolish, then they will cause you suffering. If you’re foolish, you can say they are like thieves who rob you. But if you understand their true nature, they can make you enlightened. It’s like you don’t know Ajahn Chah. You’ve just heard his name and seen his picture; it’s still not enough. But today you’ve met him and spoken with him which means that you know one part of him. If you realize the Dhamma that he’s taught you, then you would know all of him.

### Ploughing Up the Stump

On the second day of the retreat, Luang Por made a suggestion:

Listening to the Dhamma in a large group is difficult. A large pot of curry doesn’t taste so delicious. There are too many things mixed together, not enough to go around; it doesn’t taste so good. A small pot of curry is more delicious. It would be better to divide into smaller groups for discussion.

So from that day onwards, the retreatants were divided into five discussion groups of about fifteen people each so that everyone would have a chance to ask Luang Por questions more conveniently. To a query on the goal of practice, he replied:

We come here to practise in order that we won’t have to practise in the future. We’re born in order not to be born again. We do this, so we won’t have to do it again … We practise so that the mind may disengage from sensuality and suffering, in order that there will be no more suffering in future.

Paul observed:

“In the group interviews, Luang Por generally gave direct and simple answers to complicated questions. He told people to put the books away, to rely on themselves, to have determination and perseverance.”

Many problems didn’t require a lot of thinking. All that was required was the patience to bear with the unpleasant until conditions revealed themselves as impermanent and empty.

“People would continually talk about the difficulties they faced as lay practitioners. He said that it was difficult to practice as a householder; it’s like trying to meditate in prison. You sit down and begin, and the prison officer comes and shouts, ‘Get up! March over there!’ ”

Luang Por returned to a familiar theme: Dhamma practice as eliminating the underlying cause of suffering, rather than juggling the symptoms. He reprised a favourite simile:

It’s like you go for a walk and you trip over a stump, so you get a hatchet and cut it off at ground level. But it grows back and you trip over it again, so you cut it off again. But it keeps on growing back. This goes on and on. You’d be better off getting a tractor and ploughing it up.

He pointed to the inherent conflict in wishing fervently to be free of the suffering that arises from indulgence in defilement, without having to let go of the defilement itself. Some people couldn’t bear to lose the pleasure they derived from the defilement; others claimed that it was impossible to let go. And yet, they still hoped for a solution. He said it was like sitting on an anthill. The ants are biting, you’re feeling uncomfortable, but you refuse to get up and move somewhere else.

Or you come to the teacher holding something burning hot in your hand, and you complain, ‘Ajahn, this is hot!’ The teacher says, ‘So put it down.’ And you say, ‘I can’t put it down, but I don’t want it to be hot!’ So what can the teacher do for you?

Meditators could spend their whole life going back and forth with themselves, trying to find what exactly they needed to do to let go of the defilements. It was like contemplating a journey.

You ask yourself, ‘Should I go today? Should I? Maybe I’ll go tomorrow.’ Then the next day, ‘Should I go? Should I or shouldn’t I?’ And you keep on doing this day after day until you die, and you never go anywhere. You’ve got to think, ‘Go!’, and be done with it.

Successful translation depends upon the audience being confident that the translator is accurately representing the words of the speaker. Luang Por’s mischievousness appeared while Jack Kornfield was translating for him. Jack remembers him saying:

Even though I don’t speak any English, I know the truth is that my translator leaves out all the really hard things I say. I tell you painful things, and he leaves out all the things that have a sting in them, makes them soft and gentle for you. You can’t trust him.

When asked questions about the state of the world, Luang Por would encourage the questioner to focus on the world of direct experience, rather than the one that could be read about in newspapers:

You’re asking about the world. Do you know what the world is? It’s just the senses and their objects and the ignorance that grasps at them.

Personal experience was the only way to verify the teachings. When asked about enlightenment, he said that it was like the taste of a banana. You had to put it in your mouth before you could know the taste. Every now and then, Paul would get a spontaneous personal teaching:

“One afternoon when the session was over, I was unplugging my tape recorder and I touched the metal prong of the plug while it was still connected. I got a shock and dropped it immediately. Luang Por noticed, and he said, ‘Oh! How come you could let go of that so easily? Who told you to?’ It was a good illustration of what he was trying to teach.

“Finally, he told people that they were always welcome to come to his monastery and stay for a while. ‘Wat Pah Pong is like a factory’, he said. ‘After the product is finished, it can be sent out into the world.’ But it’s easier to train people if they’re far from their home. ‘Po ran away,’ he said. ‘If I were younger, I’d drag him back by his ear.’ ”

Following the retreat, Luang Por met with the Korean Zen master, Seung Sahn Soen Sa Nim. They both seemed to greatly enjoy the meeting. Paul remembered Luang Por being particularly taken with one of his new friend’s stories:

“A Zen monk sneaks into a lecture hall where some great scholar is talking about One Mind. ‘All things come from the One Mind,’ the scholar teaches, at which the Zen monk comes forth and challenges him. ‘You say all things come from the One Mind. OK. So now tell me, where does the One Mind come from?’ When the preacher was unable to answer, the monk beat him. Luang Por laughed and said, ‘He deserved a beating, all right.’ Afterwards, he repeated this several times, laughing and saying what a good story that was, ‘He couldn’t answer where the One Mind comes from, so he really deserved a beating.’ ”

After a couple of days with the Buddhist community at the appropriately named Anicca Farm, Luang Por flew back to England.

### A Rural Seclusion

On the twenty-second of June, shortly after Luang Por arrived, and two years since they first moved in, the Sangha finally left Hampstead Vihāra. Their destination was a ninety-minute car journey away, on the outskirts of the small village of Chithurst in the county of Sussex. It was there that stood a hundred acres of woodland, now formally offered to the Sangha. But southern England was not Thailand: strict laws prevented the monks from simply building huts amongst the trees as they saw fit. Instead, they were to move into a crumbling Victorian manor house nearby, purchased for them by the E.S.T.

Before joining the Sangha at Chithurst House (the soon-to-be renamed Cittaviveka Forest Monastery), Luang Por returned to Oakenholt in Oxfordshire. There he attended the Ordination ceremony of a young Englishman who was entering into the Burmese Sangha with the highly respected master, Mahasi Sayadaw, as his preceptor. The occasion afforded a telling glimpse of the difference between Asian and European sensibilities. For many of the English guests brought up in a non-Buddhist culture, the contrast between the two renowned Theravada monks – the engaging Luang Por (seen as ‘warm’) and the undemonstrative Sayadaw (seen as ‘cold’)[17] – was startling. Luang Por seemed more inspiring. It was clear that in a non-Buddhist country where the arahant ideal was not firmly established[18], the personality of the teacher was much more vital to the arising of faith than it was in a traditional Buddhist nation. It seemed that people were much less likely to ask themselves, ‘Would I like to be as wise as him?’ as they were to ask, ‘Would I like to be that kind of person?’

Luang Por arrived in Chithurst to see the first tangible fruit of the decision he had made to allow his monks to come to the West and the advice he had given. The gifting of the woodland had been a vindication of his insistence that, while in London, the monks maintain their practice of alms-round, even if they received no food in their bowls. He had explained that alms-round is not only about gathering food, but also about being seen. Alms-round provides an occasion in which monastics, simply through their appearance and deportment, may inspire those who see them to try to find out more about the Dhamma. Over the years, Luang Por had often recounted the story of how Ven. Assaji was first seen by a wandering ascetic who would go on to seek out the Buddha and eventually become the great disciple, Ven. Sāriputta.

In the present case, it was not a wandering ascetic, but Paul James, a jogger on Hampstead Heath, who became inspired and followed the monks back to the temple. Some months later, after getting to know and trust Ajahn Sumedho and his fellow monks, Paul revealed to them a non-spiritual problem that he was struggling with. He had received an area of woodland, Hammer Wood, as an inheritance, with the condition that he neither sold it nor cut down the trees. The forest had become a financial burden on him, and he was looking to donate it to an appropriate charitable body. Would the Sangha be interested?

When George Sharp drove down to West Sussex to see the forest for himself, he found Hammer Wood to be an idyllic spot. Not only that, but as if hidden benevolent forces were at work, just a short walk away from the wood, stood a large semi-derelict Victorian house, for sale at a cut-down price. In an imperfect world, it was as near ideal as could be hoped for. Fearful that the house would be sold before he could convene a meeting of the Trust, George agreed on a price for it that very day. It was an audacious gamble given that the funds would have to be raised by selling Hampstead Vihāra.

A number of people excluded from this momentous decision were left disgruntled, one of whom arrived some months later in Wat Pah Pong. He painted for Luang Por a black picture of events. According to him, the move was rash, premature and involved an irresponsible use of funds. Luang Por had listened impassively and reserved judgement.

It was true that the present state of Chithurst House posed considerable challenges to potential inhabitants. Ajahn Sucitto later described the conditions that awaited them there.

“The owner had let the place run to seed: uncleared gutters had broken and spilled water over the walls so that dry rot had spread. As things had broken down, they had been abandoned; when we moved in, only four of the twenty or so rooms were still in use. The electricity had blown, the roof leaked, the floors were rotten and there was only one cold-water tap for washing. The house was full of junk, all kinds of bric-a-brac from pre-war days. The outbuildings were crumbling, roofs stoved in by fallen trees. The cesspit had not been emptied for twenty-five years. The gardens were overgrown: a fine walled fruit garden was a chest-high sea of nettles. Over thirty abandoned cars protruded through the brambles that smothered the vicinity of the old coach-house.”

Luang Por recognized that Chithurst House would require months, probably years, of hard work to renovate. But there was nothing wrong with that. Forest monks had always been accustomed to long, hard work when building their monasteries. The enjoyment he took in his visit can be seen clearly in the BBC documentary shot while he was there. The Buddha Comes to Sussex includes priceless footage of a beaming Luang Por conversing with English vicars and expounding on the Dhamma with the aid of a large apple.

Ajahn Amaro arrived the following year from Thailand. He was unfazed by the work ahead, confident that the training he had received from Luang Por had fully prepared him for it.

“It was not seen as a great imposition on our practice. It was just simply, ‘Well, we practise with this.’ You wear your boiler suit, you put your pack of dry rot fluid on your back, and you climb into your chimney with your spray gun and you meditate … And you see that Luang Por’s concern with our ability to adapt and to develop the right attitude to whatever situation was occurring was far more important than having precise conditions for formal meditation practice. It was making the quality of adaptation the most important thing: the readiness to live in peace with the world, rather than getting the world to fit your idea of what peace is.”

## The Last Night

On the evening of the twenty-seventh of June, his last night at Chithurst before returning to Thailand, Luang Por met with the Sangha for an evening of conversation and exhortation. The tape recording made that night captures wonderfully the warmth and informality of the occasion. ‘Monks’ and ‘zestful’ are two words not commonly linked in one sentence, but the conviviality, punctuated by gales of laughter, is tangible. It was the old magic of Luang Por, making people feel by his presence that they’d never in their lives been so happy and contented. He also took the opportunity to show off his only English phrase. Just a few sentences into a more formal Dhamma talk, a layperson entered the room with a new tray of hot drinks.

Here we go again. Another kappatī[19].

In the Dhamma talk that night, he gave his disciples encouragement and support in their propagation of the Dhamma. He said:

If you make an effort to teach people, you teach yourself at the same time. You become smarter; you reflect more.

Investigating the self-doubts and fears that arose when one first started to teach was part of the benefit to the teacher.

If you’re meditating, if you’re mindful, then teaching others is teaching yourself. Then there’s no harm in it.

As for the subject of talks, he advised:

Giving, morality, heaven, the drawbacks of sensuality, the benefits of renunciation[20] – however many talks you may give, always keep them within the bounds of those topics. Their source is sīla, samādhi and paññā. Throughout your life of teaching, never stray from these topics.

He advised against too much eclecticism. There needed to be a coherent ‘house style’.

If you’re teaching mindfulness of breathing, all of you should teach it in the same way. Similarly, with the investigation of the body. Don’t introduce teachings from other traditions – it’s confusing. One person starts teaching Zen, and another Tibetan Buddhism, and it’s a complete muddle. People here are very confused already. If you give them a bit of this and a bit of that, it will be such a muddle that, before long, they won’t absorb anything at all. You must all teach in a common idiom so that there will be a harmony of approach. If students master the basic practice, then they will understand other traditions by themselves. But if you teach a lot of different traditions, then they won’t grasp the underlying principles.

He warned against sectarianism. Monks should not fall into the trap of comparing traditions or praising their own path at the expense of others.

Tell people that they don’t have to abandon their former practices, they can hold on to them. But for now give this a try. Just do this one thing for the time being and see what happens.

### Don’t Answer the Phone

Luang Por reminded the monks that even the Buddha said that teaching was difficult. People do not relinquish their delusions easily. He cautioned them not to get discouraged and gave an example from his own experience:

Sometimes you get fed up with it. At the beginning, oh! Sometimes I’d lay there in the middle of the night and feel like taking my bowl and running away from my disciples. It was all so frustrating! But when I reflected on the Dhamma, I realized that I couldn’t do that. I asked myself, ‘If you’re not going to teach deluded people, who are you going to teach?’ … I was the one who was deluded, deluded into thinking I was special.

A telephone rang in another room, which nobody wanted to answer. Ajahn Pabhakaro asked, ‘Wouldn’t it be better to be a Paccekabuddha[21]?’

It would be good. The Paccekabuddha has no suffering … But it’s best not to be anything at all. It’s hard work being a Buddha. And don’t be a Paccekabuddha either. As soon as you ‘are’ something, then it gets difficult. Don’t be anything at all. If you think you are Ven. Sumedho or Ven. Anando, then you’ll suffer. Right now, there’s no Anando and there’s no Sumedho. Eh, how can that be? Well, those names are just conventions, aren’t they? The moment that you become them, then you suffer. If there’s a Sumedho, then Sumedho gets angry. If there’s an Anando, then Anando gets angry. If there’s no Sumedho or Anando, then there’s nobody – nobody to answer the phone.

Answering or not answering the telephone became a metaphor for the response to sense impingement.

Ring! Ring! Ring! You couldn’t care less. Nothing happens. There’s no suffering. But if you are somebody, then as soon as the phone rings you go to pick it up. It’s suffering. You’ve got to use wisdom to get rid of Sumedho. Don’t let there be any Anando to pick up the phone. Don’t be Sumedho. Don’t be Anando. Use those words only as conventions. Don’t take things on board. People may call you good or bad, but don’t identify with those qualities. Don’t identify with things but be aware. And when you’re aware, do you take things on? No. That’s the end.

### Earthquakes

In the course of their conversation, Ajahn Sumedho referred to various predictions that the next few years were likely to see a number of major earthquakes and other natural disasters. He said that people who were overly dependent on modern technology attached to the comforts that they provided, and without any inner refuge, were likely to suffer greatly. Luang Por replied:

The Buddha taught us to look at the present. Astrologers say something’s going to happen in another two years, but we don’t have to wait that long. It’s too far away. How could it be two years? It’s happening right now. Can’t you see? Three years before an earthquake? There’s an earthquake right now. Look. America’s shaking really strongly. You think certain things, and this earth shakes [he points at his chest]. We don’t see it. The external earthquakes are rare – I’ve never seen one in my life. But in this earth, there are tremors every day, every minute. As soon as we’re born, we start wailing. There, that’s an earthquake.

Luang Por said that because each person’s earth quaked just a small amount every day, it was overlooked. Movement was natural and inevitable. It was a good thing. If there was no change, then people would stay as babies when they were born and nobody would grow up. If nobody got old and died, where would everybody live? The problem, he said, was that people didn’t look at the nature of things, and so nobody wanted to die:

It’s like you don’t want this glass to be full, but you keep steadily pouring water into it.

When all was said and done, there was only one way to be free from death:

When you see with wisdom that nothing is truly me or mine, you realize the Deathless.

1 ‘The science of truth’. A compound of two Thai words, one derived from Pali and the other from Sanskrit.

2 The four qualities of the Ariya Sangha: ‘They are those who have practised well (supaṭipanno); practised directly (ujūpaṭipanno); practised for liberation (ñāyapaṭipanno); practised fittingly (sāmīcipaṭipanno).’

3 An epithet of the Buddha.

4 Luang Por’s official title.

5 A newly arrived member of the community who went on to continue his monk’s training in Wat Pah Pong.

6 Founded in 1880 by T.W. Rhys Davids, ‘to foster and promote the study of Pali texts’.

7 Luang Por answered the question, ‘what happens to an arahant after he dies’, whereas it appears that the woman’s question was, in fact, a more general one about rebirth. Perhaps the most likely explanation is that she asked, ‘What happens to you after death?’ (with ‘you’ being used idiomatically to mean ‘people in general’) and this was mis-translated to Luang Por as, ‘What happens to you after death?’

8 The analytical knowledge of language.

9 The Buddha compared four levels of spiritual maturity and readiness to receive the teachings with lotuses: i) hidden in mud; ii) rising through the water; iii) emerging through the water and; iv) completely emerged.

10 In the Thai countryside, people catch frogs for food.

11 Somewhat confusingly, it is common in Thailand to point to the chest when referring to both the physical and abstract senses of the word ‘heart’.

12 In Buddhist texts, phenomena (dhamma) are often divided into two categories: the material (rūpa) and the immaterial (nāma).

13 ‘Anāgārika’ means ‘one who has left the household life’, and is equivalent to the term ‘postulant’ that appears earlier in the book. Philip went on to become a monk with the Pali name of Vajiro, and is currently (2017) the abbot of the branch monastery, Sumedharama, in southern Portugal.

14 Strictly speaking, a serious offence (Saṅghādisesa) is only committed if a monk has physical contact with a woman’s body with a lustful intention. But the accepted practice of this rule in the Thai Sangha is to avoid even innocent contact.

15 A seminal text of Mahayana Buddhism in which all the key teachings of the Theravada Buddhist tradition are negated in order to illuminate the meaning of emptiness.

16 The Buddha’s evil cousin who thought his best interests lie in creating a schism in the Sangha, but as a result of his efforts, fell into the deepest of hell realms. ‘The wisdom of Devadatta’ is thus shorthand for foolishness of the most abject variety.

17 This was not, of course, a unanimous perception. One American Buddhist meditator described the feeling he experienced in the Burmese master’s presence as being ‘like falling snow’.

18 The personalities of arahants vary widely. They may be introverted or extroverted, urbane or gruff, outwardly warm or cool. This is widely recognized in Buddhist circles in Southeast Asia.

19 A Pali word from the mealtime blessing. Luang Por’s mnemonic for ‘a cup of tea’.

20 The five factors of the anupubbikathā or ‘graduated discourse’.

21 A silent Buddha, one who does not teach others.