# Foreword

Ajahn Sumedho

This biography of Luang Por Chah[1] will be an important aid in preserving the memories, and sharing the experiences, of those of us who lived and trained with him. I, myself, first met Luang Por Chah in 1967 and was immediately impressed with his silent presence. At that time, I couldn’t speak Thai, and he couldn’t speak English. At first, we relied on two Thai monks as interpreters. But they soon left, and I began to make efforts to learn the Thai language and the Northeastern dialect.

In fact, Luang Por Chah’s teachings were so practical that they were independent of words, explanations and interpretations. Our life at Wat Pah Pong was based on awareness and mindfulness, on being aware of the state of mind, being aware of what you are actually feeling. To do this, you were not dependent on a particular language. This simple teaching was about observing the state of mind, the ārammaṇa, the emotional reality that is present; to be aware of it; to see it in terms of the three characteristics: anicca, dukkha, anattā. I could practice in this way, even during that initial period when I could not, as yet, understand the verbal teachings.

Luang Por’s whole attitude towards life was one that motivated me to want to train and live as a bhikkhu. To me, he was a living example of the result of Buddhist meditation in the Thai Forest Tradition. He inspired me. Through living close to him and getting to trust him, by listening to him as I began to understand the language, I discovered how gifted he was in giving Dhamma talks and reflections. I appreciated how he always had time for the monks and nuns and the lay community.

Nowadays, there is interest throughout the world in the teachings of Luang Por Chah. This was not the case when I first met him fifty years ago. In those days, he was hardly known outside of Ubon Province. Today, his fame has spread worldwide. Although it is now twenty-five years since he passed away, his teachings are so practical that they continue to resonate. Luang Por always emphasized the importance of practice. He pointed out how each one of us can apply the Buddha’s teachings in our life and make them work.

I wish to express my gratitude to Ajahn Jayasaro for writing this biography of Luang Por Chah, and making this publication available. I know that it will be appreciated by a great many people. It gives me joy to think of all the people throughout the world who, through reading this book, will begin to appreciate the teachings of Luang Por Chah.

1 See ‘Honorifics’ in the Preface.