# Out of Compassion

Luang Por and the Lay Community

One by one, little by little, moment by moment, the wise should remove their own impurities, as a smith removes the dross from silver.

– Dhp 239

Wander forth, O monks, for the welfare of the manyfolk, for the happiness of the manyfolk, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare and happiness of devas and humans.

– SN 4.5

Excellent, Lord, excellent! It is as if, Lord, a man were to set upright that which was overturned, or were to reveal that which was hidden, or were to point out the way to one who had gone astray, or were to hold a lamp amidst the darkness, so that those who have eyes may see. Even so, has the doctrine been explained in various ways by the Exalted One. I take refuge, Lord, in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. May the Exalted One receive me as a lay follower; as one who has taken refuge from this very day to life’s end.

– e.g. DN 2

How does the monk minister to the lay Buddhists?

By discouraging them from evil.

By encouraging them in goodness.

By assisting them with loving-kindness.

By giving them new knowledge.

By clarifying the teachings they have heard before.

By showing them the path to happiness.

– DN 31

## Introduction

Appreciating the kindness and assistance that one has received in one’s life and making efforts to express that appreciation in appropriate ways (Pali: kataññū-katavedi) are, together with generosity, probably the Buddhist virtues most deeply embedded in Thai society. They are clearly apparent in relationships between sons and daughters with their parents and guardians, and in the respect paid to teachers and benefactors of any description. In Thailand, ‘boonkhun’ – the ties and obligations perceived to have been created between people by beneficial actions – underlies most meaningful social intercourse, including that between members of the Sangha and the laity.

In early 1954, it was the request made by a deputation of villagers, led by his mother, which persuaded Luang Por Chah that the time had come to establish a forest monastery near his home village. The villagers’ formal invitation and Luang Por’s acceptance of it reflects well the nature of the relationship between the Sangha and the laity envisioned by the Buddha. The tradition holds that any teaching by monks – even a single Dhamma talk – must always be initiated by the laity. They must want to be taught. It is for this reason that Buddhist monastics are not evangelists: they only speak Dhamma to those who have shown a sincere interest in listening to it and have asked them to teach. Like many forest monks, Luang Por had long harboured plans to eventually return to the place of his birth and propagate the Dhamma there. But it was only when he received a formal invitation from representatives of the local lay community that he felt conditions were ripe for him to do so.

For Luang Por, the establishment of a monastery was the natural, almost inevitable, next step of his life as a monk. He had reached a level of practice with which he was confident there could be no regress. He was in the prime of his life, and a growing number of monks looked to him as their teacher. Furthermore, he was aware that if he was to help his mother to make progress in the Dhamma, he should not leave it for too much longer. Living as a monk, he knew that such assistance was the way – the only way – he could truly repay his great debt of gratitude to her.

In his discourses, the Buddha repeatedly encourages monks to seek out solitude and to be wary of entanglement with lay supporters. At the same time, the number of teachings outlining the correct and incorrect nature of the relationship between monks and laypeople suggests that there was considerable contact between them. For example, certain means of rendering assistance to laypeople are forbidden as being likely to reduce the respect in which the Sangha is held. Monks are not allowed to act as doctors, because to do so would mean they become perceived as healers of the body rather than the mind. They are warned against developing so close a relationship with laypeople that, ‘he laughs when they laugh, he cries when they cry’. It is clear from such guidelines that the Buddha gave considerable importance to creating a framework in which the Sangha could exert the maximum positive influence on society without compromising its own integrity.

Chief amongst the tasks of a monastic in this regard is to uphold the teachings through personal example and to instruct the laity who wish to understand the Dhamma. Although there are references to the inadvisability of monks with no insight trying to teach others (such a monk is compared to a person sinking in mud trying to teach someone else how to climb out of it), the idea that the accumulation of knowledge and experience should issue in its sharing, is taken for granted.

As a mendicant order, the Sangha is dependent upon local communities for material sustenance and for new members. A monastery will only thrive when its inhabitants gain the respect and devotion of their lay supporters. This occurs naturally when monastics determine to lead their lives in such a way as to provide a ‘field of merit’ for their supporters, and when they lead and inspire them on the Buddhist path through example and instruction. This reciprocal relationship is underpinned by many Vinaya training rules and observances that prevent monasteries from becoming materially independent. For example, there are rules prohibiting digging the earth, cooking, the consumption of un-offered food, and the storing of food overnight. All such rules compel monks to have daily contact with the laity, at the very least, on their daily alms-round. The degree to which the Buddha took the laity into account when announcing new Vinaya rules is made clear from a prominent element of his reasoning for doing so: ‘the arousing of faith in those without it and the strengthening of faith in those who already possess it’.

In establishing a monastery near his birth place, Luang Por sought not only to create an excellent training environment for monastics, but also a centre for propagating the Dhamma amongst the local villages and towns. He realized that the two goals were not only compatible, but could reinforce each other. It was through faith in the monks’ integrity that people would start to come to the monastery to hear the Dhamma. It was through promoting authentic Buddhist values in society that the long-term welfare of the Sangha was secured.

Luang Por’s teachings for the laity rested upon the same foundation as those for the Sangha: namely, the Four Noble Truths. His talks invariably returned to the question of suffering, how it arose and how it could be brought to cessation. His instructions on meditation practice were scarcely different from those he gave to the monastics. The differences that could be discerned appeared in the areas where he adapted his treatment of key issues, such as the development of Right View and the importance of moral conduct, to address the particular challenges faced by householders.

In the mid-1950s, when Luang Por established Wat Pah Pong, almost all the people of Ubon considered themselves Buddhist, and yet it was rare to find those who did not also ascribe to conflicting non-Buddhist beliefs of one sort or another. Few people took the Five Precepts as their moral standard. For this reason, in the early pioneering days, Luang Por concentrated on combating local superstitions and explaining the basic principles of Dhamma so as to instil Right View. He taught the local people the meaning of the Triple Gem and what taking refuge in it meant; he encouraged them to give up harmful social vices such as alcohol and gambling, and to establish themselves in Right Livelihood and morality. He encouraged them to come to the monastery on the weekly Observance Day, where they could take a break from their usual routines, rest, read, listen to Dhamma talks and practise meditation.

## To the monastery

To be patient and open to admonishment, to have contact with monastics and to participate in Dhamma discussions on due occasions – this is a great blessing.

– Khp 5; Sn 2.5

A monastery is to be found at the heart of almost every Thai village. Its entrance is usually through an open archway rather than a lockable gate. Lay Buddhists go in and out of the monastery every day: offering food in the morning, visiting the abbot, making merit, or perhaps just taking a short cut to the other side of the village. During Luang Por’s lifetime, the village headman, the head teacher at the local school and the abbot of the monastery were the acknowledged leaders of the community, with the abbot as the senior member of the triumvirate.

On the other hand, the strength of the relationship between rural communities and the forest monasteries was more varied. There were a number of reasons for this, mostly practical: the monasteries might be situated anywhere up to five or six kilometres from a village, and – especially before the advent of motor transport – getting there and back could take a considerable chunk out of a working day.

The Dhammayut forest monasteries established by Luang Pu Mun and his disciples throughout northern Isan were intended to create the most peaceful and secluded environment possible for monastic training, and so, they sought to reduce contact with the lay community to a minimum. Laypeople were welcome to go to the monasteries in the morning to offer food, and to request teachings or advice from the abbot after he had finished his meal. But these wats would not accept invitations for monks to take their meal in laypeoples’ houses on auspicious occasions or to enter the village to chant the verses for the newly deceased. The Observance Day would pass like any other. There would be no laypeople taking Eight Precepts and staying overnight in the monastery; the abbot would rarely give a formal discourse to the lay community. The result was a lack of distractions for the monks, but at the same time, a reduction in the positive impact that a good monastery could produce in local communities.

It is in his policy towards the lay Buddhist community that Luang Por differentiated himself most clearly from the majority of Luang Pu Mun disciples. It is clear to see from the accounts of the lay supporters of Wat Pah Pong, how much importance Luang Por gave to teaching and training them. The time he was willing to put into encouraging them to live good lives, year in and year out, endeared him to them.

Luang Por’s more inclusive style of teaching, integrating the teaching of monastics and lay supporters, was linked to his emphasis on wisdom as the heart of spiritual life. He wanted people to understand themselves and to know how to live their lives wisely. For householders, that included giving advice on everything from basic principles of hygiene and diet, to how to rear children and make an honest living, and extended to the means to develop meditation and insight. It was a seamless teaching. He insisted to his lay disciples that study and insight into the simple undeniable truths of their bodies and minds could transform every aspect of their lives.

In most other forest monasteries, Dhamma practice was seen to demand the development of high levels of concentration or the intensive application of specific meditation techniques. In such monasteries, monks often viewed the laypeople as living in conditions incompatible with the quiet and seclusion required for such profound inner cultivation. Owing to this view, a rather dismissive attitude to the local villagers could take hold, in gist: ‘Practice generosity. Keep the Five Precepts. That’s good enough.’

Perhaps uniquely amongst forest teachers, on every Observance Day, Luang Por would lead the lay community in meditation and chanting and give them discourses that could last many hours at a time. The lay supporters were given a sense of belonging and a pride in themselves as Dhamma practitioners and as disciples of the forest monastery.

People who spent time at the forest monastery were not universally praised. One common view was that monasteries were a last resort for people who had problems they were unable to solve. One reason why there were always fewer men than women amongst the lay supporters was that many men were afraid that going to the monastery regularly would be seen as a public admission that they had difficulties they were unable to deal with – a prospect that few males of any culture can bear with equanimity.

The converse of this idea was that if life was going well, then there was, as yet, no need to go to the monastery. It had long been the custom in Thailand to consider the study and practice of Dhamma to be a pursuit for the elderly. Youth, apart from a rite-of-passage ordination for the men, was for education and enjoyment; the middle years were for raising a family; and old age was for going to the monastery to do good deeds and find some inner peace. In Dhamma talks, Luang Por constantly encouraged people to abandon this way of thinking. The monastery, he said, was a refuge from the stresses and strains of daily life. It was a place where people could take a step back from their lives, take an overview and learn life skills that would stand them in good stead in their daily life. If they left it too long, it might be too late. He teased people who waited to go to the monastery until they could no longer sit on the floor and were too deaf to hear the Dhamma talks. Worse than that, they could die first…

And the only way a corpse gets to go to the wat, is when it’s carried there for cremation.

Apart from the people who believed that they had too little suffering to need to practise Dhamma, there were those who felt that they had too many worries to make it worthwhile. Even if they went to the monastery, they believed, it would be a waste of time. They could never find any peace until their troubles were sorted out. To Luang Por, this was like someone saying that they would not go to see the doctor until they were feeling better. At the monastery, everyone could learn ways to handle the stresses of their situation better.

Did the Buddha wait until he was free of defilements before going to the wat? Was he free of worries?

On a daily basis, contact between the Sangha and the laity revolved around the offering of the daily meal. Every morning, local villagers would walk to the monastery to help the nuns with cooking side dishes to supplement the food gathered by the monks on alms-round.[1] Any food that was left over after the monks and nuns had taken their share would be distributed amongst them and then taken home for their families. One of the women who seldom missed a day for many years said:

“Luang Por taught us about preparing food to offer the monks. Fermented fish, for example: he told us to boil it first before putting it into the chilli sauce and mixing it with the green papaya salad, because raw meat was forbidden by the Vinaya. He said raw fermented fish and meat were food for tigers! ‘We are cultured human beings’, he said, ‘we should eat cooked food.’ That’s the kind of advice he gave. We tried out the things he suggested at home, and it was good and beneficial and had no drawbacks. We didn’t get liver flukes like the people who eat raw foods. Luang Por didn’t want us to smoke or drink alcohol either. And that was good for us too. It was good for our health, and it saved us money as well.”

The monastery kitchen was overseen by the nuns. In it, the Vinaya rules and conventions relating to food were strictly adhered to. The nuns were devoted to cleanliness and order, mindfulness and attention to detail. They achieved a high degree of cleanliness, one especially impressive for a building largely open to the elements. Wooden slats and wire netting might protect the kitchen against rats, but lizards and other smaller creatures were undeterred. Given the rather lax attitude to hygiene found in most farming communities of the time, the spotlessness of the kitchen came as a revelation to the village women who offered their assistance. It introduced them to a whole new standard of hygiene. The influence of the Wat Pah Pong kitchen gradually spread to the villages around it, a tangible reminder of the positive influence that a monastery could exert in its local area, even in mundane matters of diet and hygiene.

### Observance Day

The weekly lunar Observance Day was the day that Luang Por encouraged his lay supporters to come to the monastery and receive teachings. Many would arrive in time to offer the morning meal and not leave until dawn of the following day. During this 24-hour period, Luang Por would give two Dhamma talks: one in the morning and a long – sometimes very long – one at night. During the day, people would rest, read Dhamma books, meditate, sweep leaves. Their numbers would grow in the evening as those who had been working during the day arrived.[2] In the morning, all the lay community would formally request the Eight Precepts for the duration of their stay in the monastery. This entailed, amongst other things, abstaining from food after midday, dressing in simple modest clothes (everyone wore white), and refraining from wearing makeup and jewellery. Every Observance Day, the monastic community would spend the whole night meditating in the Dhamma Hall. The laymen and laywomen would join them.

Luang Por recommended that those who could not find time to go to the monastery should, nevertheless, make the Observance Day a day to give special attention to their actions and speech, and to devote time to reflection and inner cultivation. He advised them to refrain from all entertainments for the day, give up their evening meal and sleep alone on the floor, using the time freed by such renunciation to study Dhamma and to meditate. If they could not manage every Observance Day, then they should at least try on the two ‘big ones’: the full moon and dark moon days.

There are thirty days in a month. Divide them up: give twenty-six to the world and four – the half-moon, full moon and dark moon days – to the monks. For these four days every month, try to get to the monastery. There you can take a rest from worldly activities and keep pure sīla.

On these four days, you don’t make any bad kamma … Four days that’s all; more than four and nobody would want to take it on. As laypeople, I understand that it’s normal to create bad kamma at times, but the Buddha asked you to refrain for at least four days a month. If you find the time every month, then in two months, that’s eight; and in a year, a lot of days. But if you make every day into a People Day (Wan Khon)[3], how are you ever going to truly flourish as a human being? How will your mind ever be radiant and know the way things are if you don’t practise, if you don’t make the time? It’s not possible.

Entering the monastery, all worldly matters were to be left outside. No gossiping about family or work or local scandals was to be tolerated. The elders were encouraged to be good examples to the younger members of the group:

Those of you who want to smoke or chew betel nut, go outside the monastery gate. In the morning, after you’ve taken the Eight Precepts, had your meal and listened to a Dhamma discourse, then go out and practise walking meditation. After that you can take a short nap, but don’t let it be for very long. After a suitable time, get up promptly and do some sitting meditation. Following your evening bath, go to the hall and practise sitting meditation for a while longer before evening chanting. After chanting, relax for a short while, but don’t chat.

This was a time to put effort into practice.

Coming to listen to a talk on Observance Day, it’s not enough to simply turn up at the monastery. Just as a cloth has to be clean before it can absorb any dye, so each person coming to the monastery should prepare themselves in the right way. They should dress themselves in clean and appropriate clothing, cleanse their actions and speech and make a determination to cleanse their mind, to make it ready to receive the Dhamma.

Luang Por’s Dhamma talks were eagerly awaited by the local villagers.

“Sometimes he wouldn’t talk for so long. After a certain time, he would say: ‘From now on, pay attention to a silent discourse.’ And he would start to meditate there on the Dhamma seat. We’d sit there waiting, but he wouldn’t say anything more. The first time, I was drowsy and wanted to sleep, but I didn’t dare with him still seated up there and so I ended up sitting right through the night. In those days Luang Por gave marvellous talks. If you missed one of his talks, you felt hot and dry inside. You never felt bored when he spoke, even if it was something you’d heard many times before, because he always had new ways of saying it that were worth listening to.”

### Receiving Guests

Luang Por became steadily more well-known throughout the 1970s, and the number of visitors to the monastery increased accordingly. Taking advantage of the American-funded upgrading of Isan’s road network during the Vietnam War and the rise in disposable incomes, Thai lay supporters were, for the first time, able to travel to Isan from other parts of the country to pay their respects, make merit and receive teachings from the great forest masters. As a consequence, more and more of Luang Por’s days were spent sitting under his kuti receiving guests.

In later years, particularly on weekends or holidays, he might be sitting on his wicker seat teaching by nine o’clock in the morning and hardly rise from his seat until the afternoon or evening as a steady stream of people flowed in and out of the central area of the monastery. The lack of rest and exercise this entailed started to affect Luang Por’s health. One wealthy lay supporter became concerned and asked permission to build a fence around Luang Por’s kuti so that it would be easier to restrict access to him. Luang Por refused outright. Ajahn Virapon, one of his attendants at the time, remembers him saying: ‘They come a long way. They don’t have much free time. It would be such a shame if they were to come so far to see me and then be disappointed.’

Once, during a period of ill health, a monk asked him how he dealt with all the demands for his attention and blessings. Luang Por replied:

If I still had wrong thinking, I’d probably have died[4] a long time ago, because there are a lot of people here all day. But it’s as if there is nobody at all. If you have Right View, then there is nothing. There’s nobody coming and nobody going. The mind just rests in its native place.

The Buddha’s teaching that it is a great blessing to meet with wise people, is one that has taken deep root in Thai society. Apart from local farmers and their families, Luang Por’s guests came to encompass the whole spectrum of Thai society: government employees, academics, politicians, soldiers, scientists, police officers, businesspeople and bankers, doctors and nurses, university students, school teachers and their pupils.

These people came from the surrounding area and from other parts of Isan, from Bangkok and from other regions of the country. Some came from overseas. People came for different reasons: to pay their respects, to make offerings, to ask questions about private problems or matters of Dhamma, to listen to a Dhamma talk.

Luang Por was never seen to favour any one particular group. It was clear that he tried to give everyone equal time and attention and seemed completely indifferent to social status. His attitude is expressed well by a story told of a great master in Japan. It is said that an old student went to visit the master after a long absence caused by the demands of a burgeoning political career. At the abbot’s residence, the man gave the attendant monk his card, upon which his elevated status in the government was elegantly inscribed. After a short time, the attendant returned with the card and the news that the master knew no such person. The old student, after frowning for a moment, took out a pen and, scribbling on the card, obliterated the characters denoting his title. The attendant monk took the card back to the master, and shortly afterwards returned to usher the man within.

One of the ideals of the Buddhist monastery is that people of all walks of life mingle together, unified by a sense of themselves as fellow Buddhists rather than divided by identification with family background, income or livelihood (if there is an aristocracy, it is one of age: respect for the elderly and close attention to their wishes remains). This temporary suspension of social divisions is an ideal (and one frequently forgotten in Thailand today), but it was one that Luang Por strongly encouraged.

Luang Por was famed for his ability to teach the most profound matters in simple terms that his listeners, whatever their background, could understand. He was adept at tailoring his manner and vocabulary to the needs of his audience. Many people who had grown up with the idea that the Dhamma was far too profound for an ordinary person to grasp, found listening to him an exhilarating experience. A common reaction was that he brought the teachings alive for them for the first time. On one occasion, a visitor who had seen a number of Western monks in the monastery, asked Luang Por how many languages he could speak. He replied:

Oh, lots. I can speak the language of villagers, the language of merchants, the language of soldiers – I know so many languages.

### Invitations

Luang Por did little teaching outside of the monastery. He observed that when laypeople were in their own environment, they were rarely as open to the Dhamma as when they made the effort to come into the forest. In the monastery, the peace and lack of interruptions, the physical separation from worldly concerns and comforts, the emotions that arose from entering an environment devoted to spiritual goals – all assisted in creating the conditions conducive to the absorption of Dhamma.

Luang Por would not accept invitations to the kind of public functions in which it was considered mandatory to include a short homily from a senior monk – the numbers of which steadily increased as he became more well-known. Some organizers of these events were well-intentioned: they hoped that his presence might inspire people, who would otherwise never go to a monastery, to take an interest in the Dhamma. Others simply felt that the presence of such a renowned monk would add prestige to the proceedings. In either case, Luang Por would not accept the invitations. He said that it was a waste of time and disrespectful to the Dhamma to teach in places where much of the audience was only listening in the most perfunctory way, where some were carrying on conversations while he spoke and some had alcohol on their breath.

Luang Por made an exception to his refusal to accept invitations outside the monastery in the case of merit-making ceremonies at the homes of long-time lay supporters. On such auspicious occasions – a wedding or moving into a new house, for example – it was customary for lay Buddhists to invite monks to receive their daily meal in their house, and to chant auspicious verses of blessing for the family and assembled friends and relatives. Luang Por accepted such invitations as a gesture of appreciation for long and devoted support for the monastery. He would administer the Five Precepts, lead the auspicious chanting and, after receiving gifts of food and requisites, would deliver a rousing Dhamma talk. Finally, before leaving, he would sprinkle lustral water on everyone’s heads to the sound of the monks chanting the ‘Jayanto’ protection verses. These were occasions that the families involved would always treasure.

In his fifties, Luang Por contracted diabetes. It strengthened his disinclination to accept invitations outside the monastery, as the increased need to urinate made sitting for long periods impractical. It was for this reason that he was willing to endure the criticisms that resulted from declining highly prestigious invitations from the King and Queen to attend functions at the Royal Palace in Bangkok.

## Sammādiṭṭhi

I see no other single dhamma that is such a cause for the arising of wholesome dhammas that have not yet arisen or for the growth and maturation of those that have already arisen as Right View.

– AN 1.299-300

‘Sammādiṭṭhi’ is usually translated into English as ‘Right View’. The prefix ‘right’ means ‘in harmony with the way things are’; ‘view’ includes opinions, beliefs, values, theories and philosophies. A right view is thus one that corresponds to reality; the conviction, for example, that acts of generosity lead to happiness – would be considered a ‘right view’. Right View is the first constituent of the Noble Eightfold Path and is indispensable for the development of the other seven factors. At its most basic level, Right View consists of the adoption of a certain number of principles – most importantly, the law of kamma – as basic premises or working hypotheses to be relied upon in walking the Buddhist path. On this level, it is referred to as ‘Mundane Right View’. The culmination of the path – an understanding of the Four Noble Truths as a direct experience – is known as ‘Transcendental Right View’.

Unsurprisingly, given the central importance of Right View as the foundation on which all Buddhist practice is to be established, teachings aimed at explaining it constituted a large proportion of Luang Por’s discourses to the lay community. Right View is, he said, like the cool place unreached by the burning sun. It is our true refuge.

Our refuge is the mind that possesses Right View. See into the heart of things. Make your view straight and correct. Then wrong views will be unable to enter into your mind and mingle with it. That is the meaning of a refuge.

Suffering arises whenever there is an incorrect understanding of the way things are. Therefore, Luang Por would emphasize, establishing Right View was the first step to the transcendence of suffering.

If your view of things is correct, if it is sammādiṭṭhi, then nothing can go awry; that is to say, when your way of looking at things is in accord with the true nature of things, then you experience nothing as an obstruction. Your mind remains calm and contented, and problems are resolved.

Without the effort to look closely at the mind, it is difficult to find the motivation to give up mistaken views.

Until then, you’re like somebody who drinks alcohol. Nobody can stop such a person from drinking until he sees for himself the undesirable consequences of his habit.

So, here we change a mistaken view into a correct one, change evil into goodness, and change an unenlightened being into a Noble One. It is Right View that is responsible for these changes. These kinds of changes for the better are called ‘merit’.

He said that people with wrong view had a false kind of contentment, similar to the ease of somebody who doesn’t realize that they have dropped a valuable possession. Right View gave the same kind of inner ease as that experienced by somebody who remembered the exact location of a lost valuable and knew how he was going to retrieve it. Although the object was not yet in his possession, his mind was at ease. On another occasion, he compared Right View to the key that opened the door to the Dhamma. Without that key, there was no way in.

### Kamma

Much of Luang Por’s Dhamma teaching was devoted to instilling confidence in the law of kamma, the central constituent of Mundane Right View. Most frequently, he expounded upon the simple formulation of that law familiar to all Thai Buddhists: ‘Do good, get good results. Do bad, get bad results.’ While the brevity of this version of the formula makes for easy memorization, it also gives ample room for wrong views to accumulate. A common cause of doubt amongst lay Buddhists was that the teaching seemed to contradict everyday experience. So many people who did a lot of good things never saw any good come from it, they said, whereas people who did bad things seemed to prosper everywhere you looked. Luang Por never tired in explaining how the good that results from good actions is not to be understood in terms of worldly notions of good fortune. If someone was disappointed that an act of generosity had borne no good results, then the act itself must have been performed with a desire for some reward.

If you give something away with a wish for something in return, then it’s not true giving.

Luang Por explained that people who doubt that good actions lead to good results simply don’t understand what the Buddha means by ‘good results’. On one occasion, Luang Por said:

In my life, I’ve never once got a bad result from a good action. At the moment that I’ve done anything good, I’ve always got a good result immediately, there and then.

In other words, the wholesome qualities of mind present in a good action were strengthened by the act, and that strengthening was the immediate reward.

I’ll give you an example. Suppose you have a friend who is poor and you take him in, look after him, give him money, an education, until finally he is able to get a job, support himself and, in time, gain success in his career. Sometime later you fall onto hard times and become impoverished. This fellow doesn’t come to visit you and makes no attempt to help you out and repay you for your kindness to him. You feel angry about this and you think, ‘I performed a good action but received no good results from it. Why on earth did the Buddha teach that good actions have good results?’

That would be a foolish way to look at what happened. In helping out that man, your mind was good and just and noble, and the growth in those good qualities are your reward. The fact that he doesn’t repay your kindness is his own affair. It’s nothing to do with you, it’s his own bad action. You’d be a fool to take the bad action of someone else into your heart. No good can come from that.

He went on to give another example as to why the more obvious results of good actions can be disappointing:

Say a person goes to work with a certain group of people – perhaps she is a manager, a director of an institution, a headmistress or whatever – and does a great deal of good. She does the best that can be done, but, in the conventional sense, doesn’t get much good out of it: people gossip about her behind her back, criticize her, stir up trouble for her. As time goes on, she seems to have received no good results from her work, only criticism. The person feels discouraged, she doesn’t want to go on. She thinks that the Buddha taught that good actions have good results but that it hasn’t worked out like that. Perhaps she rebukes the Buddha for lying. Or she thinks the Buddha got it wrong. In fact, it’s she herself that is wrong. She has not reflected on all the conditioning factors involved.

Good actions will only have good results immediately in the absence of opposing forces. A good seed sown in poor soil or in a time of drought, for instance, is unlikely to produce a good plant.

The Buddha taught that good actions have good results, and anyone who commits a bad action gets a bad result. When you’re determined to do good and go to work as part of a group of unprincipled and immoral people, goodness will be unable to manifest. Why is it that, no matter how much good we do, the results won’t appear in that place? Because the time does not allow it, the place does not allow it, the people do not allow it. That is an example of the way that the good results do not appear. The goodness will only appear there and then if the action is good, the place is good, the time is appropriate and the person and group fulfil all the conditions …

That good actions have good results and bad actions have bad results is an unchanging law. We don’t see it because of our own wrong thinking.

### Opposing Wrong Views

At the same time as explaining the nature of Right View, Luang Por pointed out the fallacies he saw in beliefs and practices that were in conflict with it. In the first few years after he established Wat Pah Pong, animist beliefs were still strong in the area around the monastery, and Luang Por was resolute in his attempts to show how such beliefs were ill-founded and brought no real peace.

Animism has always lived alongside Buddhism in Thailand. Just as in the human world, powerless Thais have always sought to align themselves with powerful patrons, so in their relationship to the spiritual world have many sought protection and gain from the powerful unseen forces believed to abound. Making offerings to powerful spirits to placate them or in the hope of enlisting their support in the attainment of certain goals has not been seen as a religious practice, but as a common-sense strategy in a world of both material and unseen forces. To Luang Por, however, such devotions were superstitions that undermined true refuge in the Triple Gem. At the same time as his prestige and the teachings he gave grew in influence, so did belief in his spiritual potency. As a result, animist influences in the area around Wat Pah Pong declined. Por Nudaeng was a local man who became one of Luang Por’s staunchest lay supporters after abandoning his former beliefs:

“Luang Por taught us not to look on spirits as our refuge, not to be gullible and superstitious and not to believe that there are auspicious and inauspicious times for doing things. He said on whatever day you have the opportunity to do something good, if it’s convenient and pleasant, and there are no obstructions – then that is a good day. My family were all inspired by Luang Por’s teachings. When we tried out what he said we got results. It gave me confidence and faith in his reasoning and inspired me to practise according to his teachings.”

Por Nudaeng’s family had always been nominally Buddhist. They regularly went to make merit in the local monasteries, but they had only the most superficial understanding of Buddhist teachings.

“It all started with my wife. She was a medium. My grandparents had all worshipped a kind of spirit called pee tai which they believed was a refuge that could protect them from every danger and misfortune. Their beliefs were passed down to my generation. It’s a depressing story. It’s as if we were fools who’d volunteered to be somebody’s slaves. And it wasn’t easy to give up, it was a real wrench.”

Por Nudaeng, at his wits end as to how to free himself from the thralls of this spirit, went to pay his respects to Luang Por.

“I asked him what we could do so that the pee tai would leave my family alone. We sat talking about it at his kuti until two in the morning. His advice was that my wife and I should keep the Five Precepts strictly for three months, chant the qualities of the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha every day and develop mettā meditation. We should spread kind thoughts to all sentient beings that are in distress – those living in houses, living in trees, in the mountains, everywhere. We should radiate kindness to all our companions in the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness and death, wishing they would bear no enmity against each other.

“In those days, I was pretty poor and my house was just a small hut. I wanted to invite Luang Por and some of his monks to take a meal there, but I was afraid it would be inconvenient for them. He said, ‘Is it big enough for five monks to sit down in?’ I said it was and he said, ‘Then we can go! If you don’t have any money to buy food to eat with the rice, don’t worry, just boil up some cassia leaves and make a curry. That would be fine.’ ”

A few days later, Luang Por took a group of monks to Por Nudaeng’s house. Before the meal offering, they chanted auspicious verses of blessing, and after it Luang Por gave a talk to the extended family and friends, in which he expanded upon the advice he had given Por Nudaeng.

“Because of the respect I felt for Luang Por I did all of what he suggested. My wife and I were able to keep the Five Precepts purely for the whole of the three months. In fact, I’ve kept them ever since. I was thirty-six then, and now I’m almost seventy.

“From the day that Luang Por came to our house, no spirit ever appeared again. There were a lot of other households in the village that had lost their faith in the power of the spirits and wanted to get rid of them and give up their devotions. When the news got around about our success, a lot of people who had never been interested in the monastery before started to go to pay respects to Luang Por, and soon there were more invitations for him to take his meal in the village. After he’d finish his meal, he would teach them to take the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha as their refuge, and then there would be a chak bangsukun[5] ceremony. When Luang Por left the house, he would have the host take the spirit house along and have him burn it by the side of the road as soon as they were out of the village. So, that was the end of the problem. We’ve lived peacefully ever since, and no spirits have come to trouble us.”

One of the more bizarre beliefs still to be found in Northeast Thailand during Luang Por’s lifetime, was that termite mounds were holy and able to grant all kinds of wishes for health, wealth and protection. On this topic, Luang Por pulled no punches:

When your grandchildren get bigger you take them to bow to a termite mound in the forest. It looks strange, you think, so it must have some sacred power. You bow to it and start muttering away with your requests. What you’re really doing is asking a pile of termite shit to make you rich.

Sometimes, a termite mound comes up underneath someone’s house and they’re overjoyed. They rush off to get a monk’s robe to wrap around the mound; they go and get some flowers to offer to it. Meanwhile the termites go on making their home bigger and bigger. In the end, the owners of the house have nowhere to live because it’s full of holy paraphernalia. They don’t know where to live in their own home, and so what do they do? They pray to the termite mound for guidance. It’s the deepest pit of delusion.

### Astrology

Few Thais see a conflict between a belief in astrology and their identity as Buddhists. As with animist practices, the two things are usually seen as occupying different spheres of influence. The underlying assumption is that if life is a venture fraught with dangers, it makes sense to use whatever means lie at one’s disposal in order to maximize the chances of survival and success. If astrology provides access to useful inside information, one would be foolish to ignore it. The assumption that astrology and Dhamma are compatible has been strengthened by the number of respected monks in urban monasteries who, over the centuries, have disregarded the Vinaya prohibition, studied astrology and offered advice based on their charts to lay supporters.

One of the most common occasions on which an astrologer is consulted is to ascertain the most auspicious date on which to stage an important event, such as a business deal, a wedding or an Ordination. This kind of custom may seem relatively benign, even charming. However, for Buddhist teachers like Luang Por, it was important to point out how a belief in the influence of the constellations, is in conflict with the most basic tenets of the Dhamma.

Luang Por held that consulting an astrologer presumes a rejection of the Buddha’s teaching that the auspiciousness of an action is determined not by an alignment of the stars, but by the virtuous qualities that the actor brings to it. In other words, a belief in astrology as a guide to action in the world is a denial of the law of kamma, and thus an undermining of Right View. Luang Por observed that the fascination with astrology was bound up with fear of change:

They’re afraid: afraid something or other is going to happen to them – afraid of this, afraid of that – because they lack a firm faith in the virtues of the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha.

He insisted that our life is the result of our actions. He would quote the Buddha’s words: ‘We are born of our kamma. Our life abides supported by our kamma. It is our refuge.’ Fearful, gullible people who are worried about the future, go to see an astrologer, he said, and are told, ‘This year you should be careful. If you go on a journey, beware of an accident.’ In fact, Luang Por said, whatever day you go on a journey, the most likely cause of an accident is your own behaviour:

Civil servants who’ve been posted from Ubon back to Bangkok or to another province come to see me and ask: ‘Luang Por, what would be a good day to leave?’ I tell them that if they leave in a good way then every day is a good day. Usually when civil servants take up new postings they give a farewell party and everyone gets drunk. That’s not a good way to leave; if they’re not careful, they’ll drive into a ditch.

Establishing firm confidence in the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha, he said, gives clear guidelines for conduct:

Don’t be swayed by hearsay about what is auspicious – to do so is in itself inauspicious. People talk among themselves, reinforcing each other’s claims and before you know it, they’ve decided the water in some pond is holy and they’ve started drinking it. It’s not good to get carried away with these things. The Buddha taught us to develop a wise reserve. When people start enthusing about things being holy and auspicious, simply listen with an open mind.

On another occasion, giving advice to a young couple on their wedding day, he said:

People consult an astrologer. They get married on an auspicious day, the monks chant the blessing at an auspicious time and so on. But within a week they can be at loggerheads or bickering, with no interest at all as to whether it’s a good day for it or not. When people start quarrelling, then the astrological concurrences or the day of the week can’t restrain them. The auspicious cotton threads tied around their wrists at the wedding don’t help; nothing can withstand their emotions.

It’s only through trying to create goodness, learning to know what goodness is, that we become good. What date should you get married? What date should you move into a new house? Well, is everything prepared? Is it an appropriate time? Have you got enough money? If the external conditions are fulfilled, then it’s a good time. But whether or not the year is good, the month good, the day good, the time of day good, it is good actions alone that make people good.

### Lottery Numbers

Thailand shares the world-wide love of lotteries. In the countryside, villagers prefer to play an underground version in which bets are laid with local bookkeepers on the last two or three numbers of the national lottery. It is widely believed that monks who have developed deep states of meditative calm are able to predict these numbers. It is by no means as outlandish a notion as might be imagined. In fact, certain monks have shown an ability to make a string of uncannily accurate predictions. The unfortunate repercussions are to be seen in the people whose foremost reason for going to the monastery is a hope of getting the next lottery numbers, rather than the cultivation of generosity, precepts and meditation.

As the Vinaya prohibits monks from promoting any form of gambling, monastics who wish to pass on lottery numbers give broad hints or smuggle them into Dhamma talks. Some people listen to discourses straining for numbers, and given that the Buddha’s teaching is often couched in lists, they are seldom disappointed. Many lay Buddhists who do not listen to talks specifically for numbers, consider it lucky to take their twice-monthly number from the mouth of their teacher. What could be more lucky? The teacher announces that he will be away from the monastery from the third until the seventh of the month and a certain proportion of his audience cannot help but make a mental note: 37.

Over the years, many people enjoyed large winnings on the lottery which they attributed to the kindness of Luang Por, despite his insistence that he would never promote gambling in such a fashion. Logical fallacies may contribute much to such a belief. One syllogism holds that monks share lottery numbers because they feel compassion for the poverty of their disciples who have no other way to make money. Luang Por is greatly compassionate. Therefore, Luang Por must intend to reveal the numbers that appear to him during his meditation.

Luang Por’s concern was with the bad kamma created by people entering monasteries seeking material gain. In the early days, when people came to ask for lottery numbers, Luang Por would scowl at them. Cowed, the applicant would slink away. But to those close to him, Luang Por said:

I can’t tell you. Even if I did know, I couldn’t tell you. Gambling is a ‘path to ruin’. Afterwards, you’d come to grief.

The coded or polite way of asking a monk for lottery numbers is to ask for ‘something good’. One particularly insistent man would not take no for an answer. Finally, Luang Por smiled and said:

Something good? You’re doing fine. You haven’t got scabies, you haven’t got ring-worm, you haven’t got leprosy. You’re already doing very well.

Another time a layperson came to make offerings to Luang Por with the hope that Luang Por would give him the lottery number in return. He made a formal pavāraṇā invitation, requesting permission to provide anything at all that Luang Por needed. He would also bring a regular supply of good food and fine requisites for the monks. Luang Por listened in silence. After he left, Luang Por said to the monks:

Beware of that one. Don’t be swayed by his big pots of curry.

Some days later, after the latest lottery draw, the layman returned, looking glum and resentful. He said that he’d invested a lot of money in the monastery, and he wasn’t even breaking even. When would Luang Por give him the numbers? Luang Por replied bluntly:

What do you think I am? Your servant? If you have any respect for me, why are you talking like that? If that’s your reason for coming to the monastery, then you’ve come in the wrong way.

The layman disappeared for three or four days. He returned with a tray of flowers, candles and incense to ask for forgiveness.

The sixteenth of January, 1993 was the day of Luang Por’s cremation. It was also Lottery day. In the preceding week, there had been an unprecedented surge of bets on 16 throughout the towns and villages of Ubon and beyond. It was with a weird sense of inevitability that, when the announcement of the national lottery draw was made over the radio, the last two numbers were, sure enough, 1 and 6. It became known as Luang Por’s farewell gift to the people of Isan.

### Lustral Water

Lustral water is generally understood to be water that a monk has chanted over and invested with psychic energy. It is widely believed that lustral water prepared by an enlightened monk possesses miraculous potency. Many laypeople came to Wat Pah Pong with the hope that Luang Por would sprinkle lustral water over their heads before they departed. For a long time, Luang Por would resist such requests, but in later years he became more tolerant. Although he insisted that he was using ordinary water, his guests would plead with him to sprinkle it over them anyway. The tangible connection provided by this ritual proved such a joyful and moving experience for its recipients that Luang Por often did not have the heart to refuse it.

One day, just before taking leave of Luang Por, a guest crawled towards Luang Por and, prostrating himself at Luang Por’s feet, asked to be sprinkled with lustral water. After a moment, Luang Por said, ‘I haven’t boiled any water today.’ The man looked up with a baffled look on his face.

People come and ask to be sprinkled with lustral water, and I’ve been thinking that it might be a good idea to do it with boiling water. People’s defilements are so callous that it might be a good idea to blister them a bit, make the teaching hurt. I tell people to meditate, and they won’t do it. All they want is lustral water to ease some problem, relax some tension. And I sprinkle their heads in a perfunctory way. But if they come again, I’ll do it with boiling water. People are so childish. What can lustral water do to help you? If people get what they want, they laugh; if they don’t, they cry. Everyone is the same. That’s why there are so many fools in the world. Intelligent people come here to seek the way out of suffering, to seek the path of practice that will give rise to true wisdom in order to know Dhamma, to realize Dhamma in their hearts. They have peaceful minds and teach themselves all the time. They have a deep sense of well-being. They don’t have to laugh, and they don’t have to cry.

Sometimes the people who came to visit Luang Por had become so intoxicated by their studies of the Dhamma, that rather than receive teachings from him, they could not help but show off their knowledge. In extreme cases, where words would have little effect, Luang Por might simply sit in silence, patient and still. If the voluble layman (it was always a man) was a person of rank (he almost always was), Luang Por might say a few words before the man left that would not embarrass him in public, but would give him food for thought.

This was the case on one occasion when a senior army officer accompanied by his entourage came to visit Luang Por. As soon as the opportunity presented itself, the man began to expound on Dhamma at great length, quoting by heart from the Buddha’s discourses. Some two hours passed with Luang Por hardly speaking a word. Finally, the army officer said:

Army officer: Luang Por, we would like to ask to take our leave now. Please sprinkle us with lustral water before we go.

Luang Por: I already have.

Army officer: When was that? I’d know about it if you had.

Luang Por: I’ve been sprinkling for the last two hours. Didn’t you feel anything?

The army officer had read and remembered the gist of many books, but his look of confusion revealed that he had no understanding of the nature of blessings.

One amongst many lustral water stories concerns Luang Por’s teacher, Luang Pu Kinaree, who at the end of his life found it hard to co-ordinate his limbs. Placed in front of him as he spoke to his guests, would be a bowl of lustral water for blessings and his spittoon, usually containing red betel nut saliva. One day, some laypeople asked for lustral water and he mistakenly dipped the wand in the spittoon and sprinkled them with red saliva. When they shouted out his mistake, he said simply:

“Betel nut saliva. Lustral water. Same thing.”

### Amulets

Amulets engraved with images of the Buddha or of revered monks have long been treasured by Thai lay Buddhists. They are worn like crucifixes around the neck. It is widely believed that such amulets may be empowered by monks with psychic powers and provide protection against harm. There are many stories of people wearing such amulets becoming immune to bullets and knives. Unsurprisingly, they have always been highly sought after by soldiers and gangsters.

Amulets may be commissioned by groups of disciples of a teacher, or by monasteries in order to raise funds. Over time a market has developed. Newly minted amulets are advertised in full-page advertisements in the daily newspapers. People collect, buy and sell amulets on a large scale. Rare amulets change hands for thousands of dollars. Amulets have become big business providing large rewards, and the participation in this business by monks has been a cause of corruption in the monastic order.

Luang Por was not against amulets as such, particularly if they were engraved with images of the Buddha rather than of individual monks. He also never denied that it was possible for amulets to be empowered. He was, however, opposed to amulets being taken as a refuge higher and more efficacious than the Triple Gem. In the case that people acquired an amulet they believed could ward off danger, they often became heedless, convinced that even if they acted badly, the amulet would protect them from the consequences. He saw increasing numbers of people paying more attention to the religious symbols themselves, than to the things they were supposed to symbolize. Many senior monks now give amulets with their own image engraved upon them as gifts to visitors. But when guests at Wat Pah Pong asked if Luang Por had an amulet for them in the accepted polite phrase, ‘Luang Por, do you have any good things?’ He would reply:

I don’t have any ‘good things’. Or if I have, it is something that is better than all good things – and that is Dhamma. Those who practise Dhamma can protect themselves.

More and more people came to Wat Pah Pong with requests for permission to produce Luang Por Chah medallions. Once minted, they said, they would offer them to Luang Por to distribute as he saw fit. Many of Luang Pu Mun’s other great disciples had already agreed, they would add, his disciples would appreciate it so much. But Luang Por would not be moved.

He maintained his position on medallions with tact and diplomacy. On one occasion, a high-powered group of laypeople led by an influential politician came from Bangkok to see him. They said that people all over the country had great respect for Luang Por; it would be greatly auspicious if Luang Por would allow them to produce medallions with his image on them; so many people wanted to have some small memento of him to which they could pay their respects. It seemed that the group was acting with pure intentions, and given the social status of its members, a number of monks thought that this time Luang Por would finally relent. Instead, he informed his guests that it would only be possible with the permission of the Sangha.

At the next Sangha meeting, Luang Por raised the issue of the medallions and detailed all of the undesirable consequences of agreeing to the request. He then asked if members of the Sangha could think of any further good or bad points of the proposal. Nobody could. Finally, a unanimous decision was made to refuse permission. Luang Por informed the lay group that the Sangha would not allow the medallions to be made.

Eventually, a group of lay supporters made a batch of Luang Por Chah medallions without asking his permission first, and arrived in the monastery together with their proud offering. Faced with a fait accompli, Luang Por accepted the medallions and distributed them amongst his closest disciples, but afterwards made it clear that he absolutely forbade such productions in the future. It ran against everything that he was trying to teach the laypeople; he didn’t want them to get attached to such things. He was also aware that before long such medallions became merchandise, the subject of buying and selling and bartering and even of theft. Instead of easing the stress and turmoil in the owner’s mind, medallions were as likely to have the opposite effect. On one further occasion, he had the vast majority of medallions produced without his permission buried underneath the Uposatha Hall.

### Ceremonies

In the Buddha’s time, belief in the purificatory power of ritual was a central tenet of the Brahmanist tradition that the Buddha roundly rejected. He maintained that true purification could only be realized through a systematic training of body, speech and mind. It was not, however, that ritual was to be completely eschewed; its psychological benefits were recognized and harnessed for the benefit of Dhamma practice. Luang Por Chah was adept at using ritual in appropriate circumstances, but he was resolute in his opposition to the belief that there was some inherent sanctity in ritual independent of the mental states of the participants.

Luang Por was diplomatic and accommodated non-Buddhist (usually Brahmanistic) customs that did not clash with Buddhist values. On special occasions, perhaps when close lay supporters were celebrating a move into a new house or a marriage, he would accept invitations to take his daily meal at their house. There, he would have no objections to the white saisin thread, tied to the Buddha image at one end, being passed down the line of monks and being held by them as they chanted verses of blessing. During the chanting, he himself would perform the ritual of creating ‘lustral water’ by guiding the wax from a burning candle into a vessel of water. Before leaving the house, to the delight of all, he would sprinkle this water over all the assembled family and friends. He acknowledged their wish to uphold the customs that defined their culture. He also recognized how ceremonies and rituals gave a sense of occasion and provided an emotional impact that made an event a memorable and fitting marker of a major life-change. But Luang Por never gave these things central stage. The main focus of his visit to a household was always the Dhamma talk he gave after the meal.

Tattooing the body with mystic symbols as a protection against misfortune was one custom in which Luang Por could see no redeeming features. The belief that inked skin rather than a judicious mind kept one free from suffering, he considered to be a particularly clear example of a misguided superstition – one which he, as a teenager, had shared. The pain and expense of tattooing for protection (tattooing for cosmetic reasons was uncommon in his time) he considered quite pointless:

In the old days when men got to the age of nineteen or twenty it was the custom for them to get their legs tattooed. They were willing to do it no matter how much it hurt. It would start from the morning and go on steadily – ‘tuup tuup tuup tuup’ – throughout the day. Their blood would be flowing and they’d have to keep driving away the flies. But they’d carry on even though they were in agony – because they believed.

And that, he said, was precisely the danger of belief: the willingness to endure and persevere in the absurd.

Luang Por’s criticisms of local traditions were not based upon a view that having a good time was in itself somehow sinful, only that it should be acknowledged for what it was, and not be dignified by a spurious religious authority. He said that it was a travesty to call annual rocket ceremonies with all the drunkenness and frequent accidents they entailed, a ‘merit-making’ event. ‘Nobody becomes a good person through banging a drum’, he once said wryly. His teachings on the topic may be summed up as, ‘You can’t make something virtuous just by calling it so.’ This was the hub of his criticism: when so-called ‘merit-making’ ceremonies included drunken carousing, then the understanding of merit, and thus of Right View, in the community was undermined. He sympathized with hard working villagers wanting to let off steam every now and again, but as a monk it was his duty to clarify and protect Buddhist values.

Luang Por constantly challenged people to step back from their daily struggles in order to gain an overview of their lives: he said that if you didn’t do that, you could get to your old age without ever realizing what it means to be a human being. He once related speaking with a group of elderly people and asking them about themselves:

You’ve all spent your lives striving for money and possessions and now you’re old and close to death. So, what do you think is truly worth getting in this world? Where’s it to be found?

He said that he asked many members of the group, and found them bemused by the question. The answer he received most often was, ‘I don’t really know.’ He gave them his answer:

What you truly get from your life is the goodness and badness that you take with you into the next. Our minds embed themselves in the things they give meaning to and value: the wholesome and unwholesome, the meritorious and the demeritorious. These are the things – the merit and demerit, goodness and badness – that the Buddha said we take with us. All that you’ve created in the world belongs to the world. Although you’ve cut down a tree in the forest and built a house from it, every part of that house is the property of the world, you can’t take it with you. Some people aren’t aware of what truly belongs to them and what doesn’t. What belongs to them is the goodness or badness that generates their actions.

He continued:

Peace, clarity and purity – these are the things that human beings really need because they are what we can take with us. Wherever goodness arises, then bounty and happiness follow. Wherever a wise person goes, he creates lasting progress. Even if he starts farming on poor soil, he can make it good and productive.

### Faith in the Triple Gem

Since the days of the Buddha, people with faith in his teachings have declared their commitment to them by affirming three times:

Buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi: I go for refuge to the Buddha.

Dhammaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi: I go for refuge to the Dhamma.

Sanghaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi: I go for refuge to the Sangha.

Most simply put, taking refuge in the Buddha means looking to the Buddha as the supreme teacher of the path to peace, compassion and wisdom. Taking refuge in the Dhamma means taking the Buddha’s teachings as the supreme map of that path. Taking refuge in the Sangha means taking the enlightened disciples of the Buddha as supreme leaders on the path, examples that the path is possible to follow and explainers of it.

There is also a more profound way of understanding these three objects of refuge. Luang Por taught that the meaning of the Triple Gem has a transcendental dimension; that the three objects of refuge refer also to timeless immaterial qualities that may be realized in each person’s mind. In this sense, the Buddha refers to ‘inner awakening’, the Dhamma to the ‘way things are’, and the Sangha to ‘the right practice leading to awakening’.

Throughout his teaching career, Luang Por sought to encourage lay Buddhists to go beyond a merely superficial affiliation with their religion, expressed in material support for the monastic order and ritual observances. His concern was that they should learn how to use the Buddha’s teachings to reduce suffering and increase the quality of their lives. He did this by bringing the teachings down to earth, expressing them in the vernacular, and revealing them as tools to be used in daily life, rather than as objects of reverence. This strategy is clearly revealed in the way that Luang Por spoke about the three refuges. He emphasized that ‘Buddha’ does not only refer to the founder of the religion who, some 2500 years ago, lived in India. As it was his realization of the Dhamma that transformed Siddhattha Gotama into the Buddha, his Buddha nature and the Dhamma were one and the same thing.

When you see the Dhamma, you see the Buddha, and all your doubts vanish. The Buddha is the Dhamma; the Dhamma is the Buddha. The historical Buddha did not take enlightenment with him. He left it right here.

Therefore, as the Dhamma is timeless, Luang Por insisted it is still as accessible to one who follows the Buddha’s teachings as it ever was:

The Buddha is still present today. The Buddha is the truth. The truth is always present. No matter who is born and who dies, the truth remains the same. It never disappears from the world. It’s always here in exactly this way.

Seeking to express this idea to a group of teachers, he drew an analogy: there is a body of knowledge and skills that once mastered, allows people to make a living as a teacher. People become teachers for a number of years and then retire. But the knowledge and skills that made them teachers remain.

Similarly, the truth that makes a human being a Buddha still exists, it hasn’t disappeared. Two Buddhas are born: one is physical and the other immaterial. As for the true Dhamma, the Buddha said, ‘Ānanda, keep practising; you will thrive in the Dhamma-Vinaya. Whoever sees the Dhamma sees me. Whoever sees me sees the Dhamma.’ How could that be? It sounds as if the Buddha and the Dhamma are being mixed up and made into the same thing. Actually, to begin with, there was no Buddha. The Buddha could only be called by the name of ‘Buddha’ when he realized the Dhamma. Before that he was Prince Siddhattha. It’s like all of you. Now you’re just unenlightened village folk, but if you were to realize the true Dhamma, then you’d be exactly the same as the Buddha. There would be no difference. So, understand this point – all of you – right now: the Buddha is still present.

Luang Por found the belief, originating in scholarly circles, that it is no longer possible in the present day and age to realize enlightenment, to be a pernicious one. He spoke grimly of the kamma created by scholars who criticized those putting effort into practice of the teachings as wasting their time. He considered the holders of such a view like fools who conclude that because they can see no water beneath their feet, that there can be none beneath the earth they stand on.

To put it simply, practice is like digging a well. In the Buddha’s time, they dug down into the earth in order to find water. When they met roots or rocks, they removed them and eventually they reached water. There was no need to create the water; all they had to do was dig the well to access it. In the present day, you can dig a well in order to get water in exactly the same way. Whenever you get down to the water-bearing strata, you’ll find water.

### Merit

The accepted English translation of the important Pali word ‘puñña’ is ‘merit’ (Thai: ‘boon’). The rationale for this rather puzzling rendering is given by the great contemporary scholar, Bhikkhu Bodhi: ‘… the tenor of our inner being must be raised to a pitch where it is fit for the reception of some new disclosure of the truth … We can only grasp what we are fit to grasp, and our fitness is largely a function of our character. The existential comprehension of truth thus becomes a matter of inward worth, of deservingness, or of merit … The capacity to comprehend truths pertaining to the spiritual order is always proportional to the store and quality of the merit.’

‘Making merit’ is the most popular religious practice of Thai lay Buddhists, and as such, has, over the centuries, been the most misconceived and most subject to distortion. To this day in Buddhist communities, the knowledge that ‘puñña’ means ‘that which cleanses the mind’ (in most cases equivalent to ‘good kamma’) is far less widespread than might be expected.

The Buddha taught that cleansing of the mind takes place through three main activities: acts of generosity (cleansing the mind of attachment to material possessions), moral virtue (cleansing the mind of the intention to harm self and others) and mental cultivation (systematically cleansing the mind of defilements). This last was considered by far the most powerful source of purification. A single moment of deep inner peace was said to create more merit than an offering of alms to the Buddha himself.

Over the centuries, the Thai lay Buddhist community as a whole came to put an overriding emphasis on the first kind of merit-making activity: acts of generosity. The meaning of ‘making merit’ shrunk to offerings of material support to the Sangha. The focus shifted from the inner cleansing of mind to the outer activity that was believed to produce it. Once ‘merit’ was located in the activity rather than the mental cleansing, all kinds of corruption could occur. Unskilful acts such as drinking alcohol and killing a cow or a pig for a feast in a ‘merit-making’ ceremony crept into Buddhist communities. Unscrupulous monks taught that ‘merit’ was to be measured by the amount of money offered to the Sangha (a phenomenon that unfortunately flourishes to this day).

Throughout his teaching career, Luang Por devoted himself to explaining the true meaning of ‘merit’ and to encouraging his disciples to apply themselves to all three kinds of merit, particularly the most neglected area: the cultivation of the mind.

Luang Por did not, however, disparage those who felt unready to apply themselves to meditation practice. It has always been the case in Buddhist societies that most householders view the direct path to enlightenment as too steep and rugged for them to climb. They have considered the gradual accumulation of merit as a more realistic and less unsettling option. Through honesty, kindness, generosity and virtue, they seek to increase their merit in a way that combines a gradual spiritual cleansing with the more familiar worldly fruits of a happy family life and worldly success, both in this world and the next. Although this attitude was accepted by the Buddha as a rational and a legitimate choice, ultimately, it was a waste of the opportunities for profound spiritual progress afforded by a precious human birth.

Luang Por recognized that good health, a stable and happy family life, a fulfilling career, a measure of inner peace and the confidence in a good rebirth awaiting after death, would always be the basic goals of most people in the world. It was the role of merit in promoting the attainment of those goals that needed to be clarified. With a wrong understanding, bad kamma could be performed in the belief that merit was being made, while good kamma could be neglected in the belief that it was too difficult to create.

Luang Por warned that all merit-making acts, beginning with generosity, needed to be performed with awareness. Donors should consider whether their gift would be appropriate for a monk and allowable for him to use. If giving was primarily motivated by desire for praise or reputation or a material reward of some kind, much of the inner cleansing would be nullified. The act of generosity would be little more than a transaction. The admirable impulse of generosity needed to be accompanied by the effort to train the mind. It was the wise means to maximize the merit. On one occasion, Luang Por said to a large group of visitors:

These days everyone wants to make merit, but hardly anybody wants to abandon demerit. In fact, these two things are inseparable.

Luang Por said that a love of making merit unaccompanied by the determination to abandon harmful actions of body, speech and mind, demonstrated a lack of understanding of what merit really was, what supported it and what undermined it. He often explained this point through use of the word ‘kusala’, usually translated into English as ‘wholesome’ or ‘skilful’ (and assumed by most Thai lay Buddhists to be synonymous with ‘merit’). In fact, Luang Por explained, kusala was a wisdom factor that was needed to govern the performance of meritorious acts. Without this kind of wisdom, people could become overly concerned with the anticipated future rewards of their good actions or be influenced by desire for praise or good name in their community. Many would simply bask in the good feelings produced by their good actions and see no need to penetrate any further into the Buddha’s teachings.

Wisdom was needed to avoid problems. Without knowledge of how to look after their minds, the good kamma they had created would be vulnerable to corruption.

Make merit in order to gradually reduce the suffering in your mind. To do that you must, at the same time, develop wholesome qualities in your mind … Merit by itself is just like fresh meat or fish. If you leave it around too long, it will go rotten. If you want to keep it for a long time, you have to salt it or put it in the fridge. As you make merit, keep reflecting. By that I mean using your intelligence or wisdom to destroy defilements.

To explain the discriminative function of mind that was needed, Luang Por drew an analogy with mathematics. The idiom ‘making merit’ points to the prevailing idea of merit as simply something you create or accumulate. This he said was simplistic:

It’s rather like in mathematics where you have to use different methods: multiplying, adding, subtracting and dividing in order to get the right sum.

The mistake people made, he said, was in the zeal to add and multiply: ‘They don’t subtract and hardly ever divide.’ In fact, it is subtraction and division ‘that bring a lightness to the mind’. Luang Por’s point here was that when ‘merit’ was understood to depend upon an inner wearing away of defilement, then merit-makers enjoyed a sense of lightness whenever they let go of the burden of self-concern. When motivation had shifted to the earning of a heavenly reward or enhancing one’s standing in society, the will towards self-aggrandizement added to the weight one had to carry rather than reduced it. Luang Por often returned to this theme of carrying a burden and putting down a burden. He said that if you were on a journey and you just kept piling new gains on your back, you’d eventually collapse. You had to know when to put some down.

Share things. If you get a lump this big, then give some of it away and it will be lighter; if you keep the whole thing, it will be heavy.

Practising generosity was one of the most important factors that matured the mind and made it ready for more profound forms of renunciation, as could be seen in the many previous lives of the Buddha.

Training yourself to give is like learning to walk. Keep increasing the amount. Start with material things and as the power of giving grows stronger, you will be able to give up [attachment to] mental states, immaterial things, matters of the heart and mind and ultimately, to a giving [up] of greed, hatred and delusion,

The point Luang Por returned to again and again was that merit could not be measured by good deeds themselves, but by the mind with which they were performed. At any moment that the mind was filled with Right View, with virtuous qualities and the happiness of their presence, he said, the mind was merit:

If the mind is endowed with merit, then wherever you ‘make merit’ it will always be full of joy. There’s no need to celebrate, no need to let anyone know or see, no need for anything of that kind; there’s just the energy of the mind that believes firmly in goodness.

An unwholesome action does not become wholesome simply because everybody believes it to be so. There is a universal principle involved, independent of human perception. Similarly, a good action bears fruit even if it is not acknowledged as ‘good’ by one’s community.

The Noble Ones perform good acts. Wherever they are, they do their practice. However much other people might deny that what they’re doing is good, the goodness is there, nonetheless. When someone does something bad, no matter how good others may say it is, it’s still not good.

Making offerings at a monastery was nurturing Buddhism, but lay Buddhists were not to consider that Buddhism lay outside of themselves or was owned by the Sangha. With wisdom, nurturing one’s own life and nurturing Buddhism were not different things, because there was no Buddhism outside of the minds of practising Buddhists.

When foolish people suffered, they either became angry or depressed, or sought to forget their pain with sensual pleasures. Less foolish were those who chose to ‘make merit’ as a way of cheering the mind and bringing some goodness into their life. Nevertheless, unless they sought for the causes of their suffering and made efforts to eliminate them, making merit was only a superficial remedy.

Merit and its opposite, demerit, were not measurable entities. They were not to be found in actions. They were the names of states of mind, which each person had to identify for himself.

If you meditate and investigate within until you reach the heart itself, you will see that badness refers to the bad things in your mind and merit to the good and noble things. Badness is inner distress. If you turn the attention within, you will see merit and harm, distress and happiness, for yourself.

For our life to be complete, we need two kinds of eyes. The physical eyes see but incompletely. They can see trees and mountains and so on but they don’t see right and wrong. It’s like the lights on a car. Do you think that it’s the lights that see the road? The same principle applies. The awareness that knows the value of things lies in the heart. We have to bring things inward, to have the inner eye.

This inner eye had to be trained and educated to counter the tendency for the mind to be deceived by sense impressions.

If we have only the external eyes, then we will be continually deceived. We’ll see counterfeit things as real, unattractive things as attractive, bad things as good.

Luang Por often used this simple analogy of the inner spiritual or heavenly eye that had to complement the outer corporeal eyes. It was a concept that would have been familiar to his listeners: everyone knew that when Kondañña, the first disciple of the Buddha, realized the initial stage of enlightenment, he was proclaimed to have gained the ‘Dhamma-eye’.

You’ve got a body and you’ve got a mind – everything you need. Don’t go hankering after some god or other. Don’t go looking elsewhere. Examine, investigate to see whether right now: is there mettā in your mind? Is there compassion? Is there sympathetic joy? Is there honesty? Is there Right View? Is there wrong view? Look at your mind. Even if you say something quite wrong, if your intention is good, then it’s not wrong. Whatever you do, look at your intention. If your intention is undefiled, then there’s no fault.

### Rebirth

Those who have grown up in cultures dominated by the great monotheistic faiths tend to assume that all religious allegiances are founded upon belief in a fundamental and unique set of dogmas. Buddhism, however, does not insist on that kind of belief. Indeed, rebirth, often identified as a defining Buddhist dogma by non-Buddhists, is probably the feature of the teachings that is most controversial amongst modern Buddhists. Nevertheless, wherever there is doubt, there tends to be a desire for an authority figure to take it away. Once, a layperson who came to visit Luang Por with this desire for a definitive answer to the question of rebirth received a reply that confounded his expectations:

Question: Is there truly a life after this one?

Luang Por: If I tell you will you believe me?

Question: Yes, sir.

Luang Por: Then you’d be a fool.

Luang Por went on to explain that it is foolish to base an unquestioning belief on the words of another. As long as beliefs are based on hearsay, he said, wisdom will never arise. Such questions are impossible to finally resolve, and a cause of endless arguments and disputes.

He gave an analogy:

If you ask me, ‘Is there a future life?’ Then I ask you, ‘Is there a tomorrow? If there is, can you take me there?’ No, you can’t. Even if it exists, you can’t take me to see it. If there is today, then there must be tomorrow. But it’s not a material thing that you can pick up and hand to someone to look at.

Luang Por would remind his visitors that Buddhism is not about believing things, but about penetrating the truth of their life right now:

Actually, the Buddha didn’t teach us to expect that degree of proof. It’s not necessary to dwell on doubts about whether or not there’s a future life, or whether people are reborn – that’s not the problem you have to address. You have no obligation to find an answer to such questions. Your obligation is to understand yourself in the present. You must know whether you are suffering. If you are, for what reason? That’s what you have to know. And what’s more, pursuing that knowledge is your personal responsibility.

The advice was always to return to the present moment:

The Buddha taught us to consider the present as the cause of all things. It is the cause of the future. Once today has passed by, then tomorrow will become today. The future or tomorrow comes into existence based on today. The past arises from the present as well. Once today has passed by, it becomes yesterday. This is the cause for their connection. So the Buddha taught us to reflect on all the present causes – just that is enough – because if you create good causes in the present, then the future will be good as well, and so will the past. Most importantly, if you come to an end of suffering in the present, then there’s no need to speak of a future life.

This, Luang Por insisted, was in line with the way that the Buddha himself taught. As in the famous simile[6], wanting to know all of the details of rebirth was missing the point. It was like a man shot with an arrow and refusing to have it removed until being told all the characteristics of the arrow.

In the Buddha’s time there was a certain brahman who wondered what happens to people after death. He went to ask the Buddha and said ‘If you tell me whether or not there is rebirth, then I will ask for admission into the monkhood. If you cannot or will not tell me, then I won’t.’ The Buddha replied, ‘What’s it to me whether you become a monk or not. That’s your business, not mine.’ Then he said, ‘Whether you become a monk or not, and whether a person is born or a person dies, whether a dead person is reborn or he is not, if you maintain this attitude, then you will suffer anguish for many more aeons. The correct thing to do is to pull out the arrow (of suffering) right now.’

Questions about rebirth, said Luang Por, were based on faulty assumptions about what exactly is reborn. Ultimately, the truth of the matter is that, while there is rebirth, ‘Nobody is born and nobody dies.’ But a statement of that profundity can only be truly understood by one who has investigated and thoroughly penetrated the meaning of impermanence, suffering and not-self. Rebirth was one of the topics about which he would say, ‘Take my words away with you and reflect on them. Consider it your homework.’

There is a well-known saying in Thailand that, ‘Heaven lies in your chest, hell in your heart.’ In other words, while experiencing a strong pleasant feeling, it is as if one has been transported to a heaven realm; conversely, experiencing a strong unpleasant feeling is like being transported to a hell realm. Some radical Buddhist teachers have taken this analogy further, rejecting the basic tenets of Buddhist cosmology, and teaching that present mental pleasure and pain are the true meaning of the terms ‘heaven’ and ‘hell’.

Luang Por did not share this rejection of the literal understanding of rebirth. He did, however, make use of the heaven and hell analogy as a means of encouraging his disciples to look more closely at their actions:

These days you know all the stories about people falling into hell and going up to heaven but you don’t know about yourself. Somebody who is in good health physically and mentally, doesn’t cause harm to himself or others and feels at ease – that person is dwelling in a heaven realm. Consider this well.

Whatever place anyone commits a bad action, the Buddha called ‘hell’. Where is hell? Wherever the Buddha said, ‘Don’t do this. It’s wrong.’ If you do that thing, then the wrongness occurs immediately. That wrongness has unpleasant results, and those unpleasant results cause you to suffer. If you’re suffering, you’ve fallen into hell. Hell is the whole environment of your suffering.

The ‘Guardian of Hell’ that grabs hold of people refers to the results of the bad kamma that people have committed. Wrongness leads us on to more wrongness. This Guardian is everywhere. His eyes are wonderfully sharp. Whatever good or bad actions you perform, he sees them all, knows all about them. Your actions are your witness, they are the evidence you leave behind; nothing is lost, nothing falls by the wayside.

But Luang Por made it clear that he was not denying the existence of heaven and hell realms as such, or rejecting the traditional representations of them. It was necessary to employ such vivid images in order to represent something beyond the scope of human imagination:

If you do something bad, then you experience bad results. You become a hell being, which is agony. You climb up a thorn tree and the thorns pierce you, but you don’t ever die. When you get to the top of the tree, crows peck at your head, and you have to climb down. You get down to the bottom, and there are dogs waiting there to bite you. There’s no resting place. Nothing but suffering. This manner of talking is called ‘teaching by means of personification’. Is it true? Yes. It’s true as a personification of things that are not material realities. For instance, ‘heaven’ and ‘hell’ are not actually physical places as they appear in the traditional descriptions. Those descriptions are metaphors.

It’s like you want to explain about the taste of salt but you’re in a place that has no salt. So you put down a handful of sand in front of you and agree on calling it salt for the purposes of your exposition. Does it have a salty flavour? Of course not; it’s not really salt. So why do you pretend that the sand is salt? Because this place you’re in has no salt. You do it in order to give people at least some idea of what salt is like.

But if the colourful descriptions of other realms are only approximations of reality, where does that leave this human realm?

Are you really human? You are in a conventional sense. If you were truly human, then you’d have to possess the human virtues such as mettā, compassion, sympathetic joy and you’d have to keep the Five Precepts the whole time. That is what it really means to be human: to possess all the virtues that confer upon you a complete humanity. Humanity has inner signs. As humans, if all these good qualities have matured within us, then we are fully human. This is where our humanity lies; it’s not that birth with eyes and ears, arms and legs and so on automatically makes us human. It looks like it, but in fact, that’s a counterfeit humanity, not a true one. A true humanity demands human virtues, not causing harm to oneself or others, possessing good qualities.

### Listening to Dhamma

The Buddha taught that listening to Dhamma talks is a great blessing. As a result, there evolved a tradition by which lay Buddhists who went to monasteries on important occasions to make merit would also ask to receive a formal teaching from the abbot. Over the centuries, however, sermons often came to play a ceremonial rather than an instructional role in peoples’ lives. In Northeast Thailand, the monk would sit on the Dhamma seat and read from a palm-leaf manuscript in a stiff, formal style that included many words in the Pali language that were unintelligible to the audience. Unsurprisingly, the audience’s most common response was drowsiness. Even without the Pali words, the central Thai used by educated monks in their sermons was hard to understand, and few could sustain their attention. When Luang Por heard his first Dhamma talk as a child, the common belief in his village was that understanding the meaning of the sermon was not the point.

When I was a child, my parents and grandparents would go to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma on Observance Days. They went for the merit. The monk giving the sermon would talk about this subject and that, and they wouldn’t understand very much of what he was saying at all, but they sat there anyway – for the merit. They believed that hearing the sound of the monk’s voice was meritorious.

In informal situations, monks spoke in dialect and expressed themselves directly. But as soon as they sat down on the elevated Dhamma seat, they would adopt an elevated tone. The forest monks like Luang Por made no such distinction. Sitting on the Dhamma seat, they spoke without preparation in much the same down-to-earth way that they spoke in daily life. It was a small revolution in the propagation of Dhamma and returned the tradition to its long-forgotten roots.

Luang Por explained to his lay disciples the kind of attention that was needed to truly benefit from listening to the Dhamma. He taught that the attitude to a discourse, the desires and expectations, the quietness of mind of the listeners all contributed to the benefits. Listeners, he said, should adopt an attitude of humility and respect to the teacher and the teaching.

Now I am going to give you a Dhamma teaching. Pay as much attention as if the Buddha himself was sitting in front of you. Be attentive. Make your mind one. Close your eyes and sit comfortably.

But not too comfortably.

If you listen to Dhamma for the merit, you’ll get drowsy. As soon as you begin to feel happy and comfortable, the drowsiness will come. When you’re drowsy, then you don’t know what’s being said. When you don’t know what’s being said, you learn nothing.

Merit-making always had to be accompanied by kusala, the wisdom factor, the awareness of what leads towards and what leads away from awakening.

Listening to Dhamma should increase your intelligence. Intelligence is kusala. Kusala and merit are different things. Kusala wakes you up: it lets you know what’s right and what’s wrong, what’s good and what’s bad, what should be abandoned and what should be cultivated. ‘Merit’, on the other hand, is just about putting more stuff into your basket, being comfortable, enjoying yourself. It’s not awakening. It doesn’t like investigating Dhamma.

The benefits of listening to Dhamma with a lucidly calm and discriminating mind were seen clearly when the mind was able to retain the teachings in memory.

The Dhamma is still present in your mind. Whatever you are doing you still think of Dhamma, and Dhamma is protecting you. For instance, the monk has said that you should be patient, put forth effort, don’t be cruel, make your mind good; if you become angry, then endure through it, etc. If you really pay attention so that it sticks in your mind, it will be a supporting condition. Even as you’re walking along the road it’s there in your mind. You arrive home and one of your children does something to annoy you. At the same moment that the annoyance arises in your mind, the Dhamma that you’ve heard arises with it, teaching you to patiently endure, to keep yourself in a good frame of mind, to let go. It arises simultaneously with the mental state and keeps teaching you. For such reasons, the Buddha said that the Dhamma protects us and prevents us from falling into evil ways.

### Heedfulness

‘Appamāda’, commonly translated as ‘heedfulness’, is one of the key Buddhist virtues. The term has also been rendered as ‘unremitting mindfulness’ and ‘vigilance’. It involves constantly bearing in mind the work that needs to be done and how little time may remain to accomplish it. Heedfulness is the antidote to complacency. It was the subject of the Buddha’s last exhortation and has played a prominent part in the teachings of the great Buddhist masters through the ages, including those of Luang Por Chah.

Know what you need to do and what you need to lay down and abandon. Learn how to put your mind at ease and experience lucid calm. Learn how to stop your mind from creating suffering. This is the path of the wise person in the world. Make a firm determination to practise in a way appropriate to this human birth. Don’t fritter your life away.

Luang Por urged his audiences to wake up to the preciousness of their human birth. They were to apply themselves to the task of abandoning the unwholesome qualities in their minds and developing the wholesome while they still could. It was not possible to cheat on the hard work required by turning the mind to spiritual matters just before death and earning a last-ditch passage to a heaven realm.

Some old-timers say that when a person is about to die that you should whisper the mantra, ‘Buddho Buddho Buddho’ in their ear. What use is that? Somebody about to be laid out on a cremation pyre – what are they going to know of Buddho? Why don’t people learn about Buddho when they’re still young? Here they are, their breathing stopping and starting, calling out for their mothers, and you’re whispering, ‘Buddho’ in their ear. Why tire yourself out for no reason? Don’t bother, you’re just making them more confused.

### Sīla

In his Dhamma discourses to lay Buddhists, Luang Por returned again and again to the fundamental importance of sīla. He explained the precepts in exhaustive detail, the reasoning behind them, the value of keeping them, the drawbacks of not doing so.

A wise sense of shame and fear of the consequences of one’s actions, these two things – they’re called lokapālas[7] – protect sentient beings.

Expanding upon the Buddha’s teaching that keeping the Five Precepts is the fundamental cause of rebirth in the human realm, Luang Por, returning to a favourite theme, said that it is only by keeping the precepts that we become truly human in this life:

If people lack sīla for a day, then for that day they are not fully human. If people are without sīla for a year, then for that year they are not fully human. Only when sīla is pure are people completely, fully human.

The Dhamma could only manifest when one’s life in the world was conducted within wise boundaries. Without sīla, people lacked the self-respect to apply themselves to Dhamma practice. Luang Por observed that they felt ashamed to meet with monks, afraid that listening to Dhamma talks would provide painful reminders of their shortcomings.

The Buddha taught that although sīla is an inner quality of restraint, it is nurtured by keeping precepts. The importance afforded to the precepts may be gauged by the fact that almost all Theravada Buddhist ceremonies begin with a formal request from the lay community to the senior monk present to ‘give’ them the refuges and Five Precepts. The monk does this by allowing his audience to repeat the refuges of Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha, and then the precepts after him, one by one. The formula for ‘taking’ each precept does not involve making vows, but making a commitment to educate one’s conduct and speech in the form, ‘I undertake the training rule to refrain from …’

For perhaps a majority of people in the Buddhist world, this short ceremony is rarely more than a ritual: most participants do not genuinely intend to keep all of the precepts after the ceremony has ended. For them, the Buddha’s teaching that virtue enhances merit-making has been received as a belief that the ceremony of requesting the precepts acts as a purification ritual preceding the offering of alms etc., and that it intensifies any good kamma created by the giving.

But for those with a genuine wish to live by the precepts, a formal request from a monk that they respect may constitute a renewal of their commitment to them. In the case that the ceremony is conducted by a monk like Luang Por Chah, the moral and spiritual authority of the monk may give the ceremony a particular binding power. Luang Por emphasized that the essence of sīla was the intention to refrain:

At the moment that you determine to keep the precepts, then sīla immediately arises. It is the intention that is the sīla. If you understand the matter in this way, then your wisdom will become wide-ranging.

On another occasion, he taught lay supporters three ways of keeping precepts:

In the first case, you ask for the precepts from a monk. In the second, you refrain by yourself: you know what all the precepts are and you make a determination to keep them. The third case is the absolute sīla of the Noble Ones. Here, the intention is to refrain once and for all: ‘Whatever is wrong action by body or speech, I will give up from this day forward.’ It’s a decisive sīla. The Noble Ones have this kind of sīla. Constant mindfulness protects their minds. They keep watch over themselves the whole time. These are the three paths by which sīla can arise. All three can be a foundation for Nibbāna …

One of the first generation of lay supporters summarized how she understood Luang Por’s teachings on the precepts:

“Luang Por taught us to keep the Five Precepts. Even if, to begin with, they became sullied every now and again, he told us when that happened to try to make a fresh start.

“For the first precept, he told us not to take the life of living creatures or to cause them pain because doing so is evil and will have unpleasant results.

“The second precept means refraining from stealing or cheating. If anyone was to steal anything of ours, we would be filled with sorrow and regret. Because other people have the same feelings as us, we should not steal from them.

“The third precept means refraining from adultery, not being unfaithful. If this precept is broken, it leads to arguments and recriminations. Couples become suspicious and mistrustful of each other.

“The fourth precept is about lying and deceit. If you lie and cheat, it demeans you. Nobody wants to mix with you. Nobody respects anything you say, and nobody pays heed to your words.

“The fifth precept means refraining from drinking alcohol. Alcohol makes the mind reckless and heedless and forgetful of what is right and wrong. It can lead to every kind of evil action. When people are drunk, their demeanour is just like that of someone crazy; all signs of the manners and dignity of a well-brought up person disappear.”

Luang Por taught that without sīla, families would never know peace and harmony. There would be continual strife and turmoil. Keeping precepts was the indispensable foundation for a happy and nourishing family life as one of the monastery’s lay supporters recalled:

“He taught us to be hard-working and to grow rice and plant vegetable gardens and fruit orchards, to grow chillies and aubergines and then sell our surplus in the market. From that we’d get the money to buy what we wanted. Fish wasn’t expensive and we would be able to buy it in the market and so avoid going fishing – which not only took up a lot of time that we could be using for other work, but also made bad kamma. This was practical advice and made sense to us all.”

Formerly, the local villagers would devote all of their land to rice cultivation. The poorness of the soil meant that they left it fallow for months at a time. Luang Por advised them to change their ways.

“We’d never known much about growing fruit or vegetables. But when Luang Por came to Wat Pah Pong, he taught us to grow vegetables, to plant orchards. He made us more awake to the possibilities. We became more hard-working and developed outer matters and inner qualities together. It was a big improvement. And it wasn’t so difficult. Those who managed to keep the Five Precepts all the time were happy, without distress and found it very beneficial.”

Enumerating the benefits of sīla, Luang Por would sometimes quote the (somewhat spurious) etymology in The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga). After stating that the word sīla and sacca (integrity) are synonymous, he said that ‘sīla’ also means ‘silā’, or ‘stone’. Just as a stone thrown into water sinks down to the solid ground beneath it, sīla adds gravity to a person’s demeanour. Its benefits also include a moral authority that permits fearlessness in public assemblies.

If you possess sīla – if you create no bad kamma through body, speech or mind – you can speak without misgivings, speak directly without fear, be courageous in acting and speaking in important matters. You’re not in awe of anyone, not frightened by anyone. Moral people are fearless in their communities, and fearless at the time of death. When you’ve done nothing bad – or if you have, and you’ve now abandoned that action and there are no grounds for remorse – the mind is at ease.

Keeping precepts is not an end in itself. It creates the conditions for the development of meditation practice.

When your actions and speech are impeccable, the mind cools down; and if you practise meditation, concentration arises easily. The mind is in a state of merit, in a wholesome state, because it has no concerns about past actions.

During the three-month monastic Rains Retreat, Luang Por would encourage the lay community to give special attention to their precepts. One elderly disciple remembered his advice well:

“He taught us to gather a number of small stones and develop a kind of sīla meditation. Whenever we got home from work, he said we should review our actions and if we’d broken a precept, to put a small stone on a pile. At the end of the Rains Retreat, we were to count how many stones there were in the pile, how many times we’d gone wrong. And then go and report to him.

“He said as householders we should all try to keep the Five Precepts purely. If we have sīla, then we feel cool and happy, our families are free of distress and commotion and we live in harmony and friendship with our neighbours as if they were our own flesh and blood. He told us to be truthful and moral, that if we kept the Five Precepts purely then ​[blameless] wealth would follow. If our sīla became broken or sullied or flawed, then our wealth would start to erode away.”

Some people were inspired by Luang Por’s discourses but soon became discouraged when trying to live by his advice. He told the story of a certain Chinese businessman who returned to the monastery a few days after formally requesting the three refuges and Five Precepts, looking distraught. After bowing three times, he blurted out:

“Luang Por, I’ve been ill for the past three days, ever since I received the refuges and the Five Precepts from you. My wife has been complaining; she keeps saying it was a bad idea. I don’t know how I’m going to make a living if the precepts make me ill like this. I’ve come to return them.”

An amused Luang Por replied:

Huh! I heard about this happening in the Buddha’s time and I thought it was just a story. You can’t give the precepts back to me. They don’t belong to me. They belong to the Buddha. You’ll have to send them back to him. Give it a bit more time.

The layman did not return. Some three years later, Luang Por met him and asked him if he’d got past his doubts about the precepts and the layman smiled proudly and said yes, he had, now he didn’t waver whatever anyone said. Luang Por praised him:

Now you’re a true human being.

### Non-harming

The first of the Five Precepts embodies the central Buddhist moral imperative: Do no harm. It can seem puzzling to visitors to Thailand that so many Thai Buddhists appear uncommitted to this core Buddhist teaching of universal harmlessness. One reason put forward to explain the anomaly is that fishing and hunting played a vital role in Thai communities for thousands of years before the adoption of Buddhism. A diet based upon rice and fish survived the change of religious affiliation, and ahiṃsā, the ideal of harmlessness as a non-negotiable ideal, never really stuck. A common justification amongst Isan villagers has been that it is a good and noble thing not to kill, but only really practical for monastics and wealthy people who don’t have to struggle for survival in a tough world. Others shake their head and blame their kamma.

Luang Por was familiar with the life of the villagers and understood their values and the way they thought. He acknowledged their concerns and did not make unrealistically high demands of them. He knew that if he were to do so, many would simply stop coming to the monastery, embarrassed at being unable to follow his advice. With regard to the first precept, he explained that whereas the killing or ordering the killing of living beings was a clear transgression of the precept, the act of buying fish in the market created no serious bad kamma.

This is not an unchallenged interpretation of the teaching in Buddhist communities. There is an argument that buying fish already killed increases the likelihood of the future killing of other fish, and is therefore unethical. The Buddha’s statement in a sutta in the Numbered Discourses (AN 4.264) that the highest level of practice of the first precept includes ‘not approving of or speaking in praise of killing’, is quoted in support of this view. However, the purchase of meat was not considered by Luang Por Chah (or most Theravada teachers) to constitute a sufficiently strong link in the chain leading to the death of creatures for it to be kammically significant, and therefore unacceptable, for lay Buddhists. Luang Por continued a long tradition in taking the renunciation of killing or ordering the killing of creatures as a legitimate and workable standard for rural Buddhist communities.

While Luang Por did not promote vegetarianism, he also did not tone down his critique of the killing of living beings for food. When he visited Chithurst monastery in West Sussex, England for the first time in 1979, Luang Por was much taken by the sight of wild rabbits running around on the lawn behind the shrine room in the early morning. He remarked wryly that it was not a sight he would expect to see in Thailand. On his return to Wat Pah Pong, an account of the Chithurst rabbits – free and fearless, unharmed by the local villagers – joined his list of stock anecdotes. The teaching, often left implied, was that if a non-Buddhist, meat-eating country could refrain from hunting and eating wild animals, then why can’t we Buddhists?

If that was back here, all that would be left of those rabbits by now would be the little pellets of dried dung.

Here, and on other such occasions, Luang Por would speak in ways aimed at stimulating hiri, the sense of wise shame, by pointing, often with humour, to the discrepancy between the professed values of his audience and their actual behaviour, and reminding them that it was in their power to change.

In public talks, Luang Por focused on the more egregious kinds of killing. It had long been a custom to slaughter animals to feed guests at big ceremonial occasions, whether a marriage, a funeral or even a temporary ordination. Luang Por reminded people of the importance of this first precept:

If everyone kept this precept, the country would not be in such turmoil, the world would not be in so much a mess … The Buddha forbade the taking of life right from ants and insects upwards, because if you’re capable of killing ants and insects you’re capable of killing rats and birds, ducks and chickens, cattle and buffaloes, horses and elephants. If you can kill horses and elephants, you have it within you to kill a human being, and in the end, you are capable of killing an arahant – there’s that kind of progression. So the Buddha forbade killing altogether: you shouldn’t kill anything, not even an ant or an insect … In the end, wise people look for a way out of the world, to make as little bad kamma as possible until they can stop making it altogether.

Por Nudaeng was one who yielded to Luang Por’s logic and gave up the taking of life.

“He taught us laypeople to refrain from taking life, to make our living in an honest way. But most laypeople would get stuck on this precept, including me. Because we lived in the countryside we all thought, ‘If we don’t take life, what are we going to eat?’ In my mind, I wanted to argue the point. If all we took to offer to the monks every day to eat with their rice was chilli sauce, wouldn’t all the monks leave the monastery? But Luang Por had the wisdom to be able to lead us out of our delusion. He gave the example of civil servants and the Chinese merchants. He said, ‘They don’t do any rice farming so how is it they eat rice every day? What about the utensils you use, the pots and plates and so on, do you know how to make those things yourselves? Can you make a spittoon? If you can’t, then how is it that you possess those things? How did you get them? You have to find a way out with wisdom. If you don’t take life, you have to use your intelligence to find another method. It’s not always necessary to kill in order to eat meat. Wise people must find a skilful means of avoiding the creation of bad kamma. You must refrain from unwholesome actions of body, speech and mind because it will have unfortunate consequences.’ I considered what he said and agreed with all of his reasoning.”

Por Am was one disciple who had a sudden change of heart.

“I’d been fishing out at Kham Pond. My wife was sitting preparing food in the kitchen, and I was sorting out the fish. Suddenly, out of the blue, the thought arose in my mind, ‘There’s so many lives here. It’s not in the tens of thousands, there’s many hundreds of thousands of lives that I’ve taken out of that pond. And me, I’m just one life.’ So I said to my wife: ‘What do you think? All these creatures have to die just because of the two of us.’ And she said: ‘It’s up to you. Whatever you say.’ Two or three days later was Observance Day, and I went to the monastery to formally declare myself a lay follower. Luang Por asked me whether I could keep from taking life, and I said yes.

Luang Por: For how many years? For your whole life?

Por Am: No sir.

Luang Por: Why not? Well, how many years then?

Por Am: I’d like to ask for three years.

Luang Por: Why such a short time?

Por Am: If I suffer more than I do now, then I’ll ask to be released from my vow. Or if everything stays the same, or if I’m not happy.

Luang Por: All right. If that’s what you want. Look after the precept well. If you can’t, then that’ll be the end of it.

Por Am: After that, I gave up taking life. I planted sugar cane out in the middle of the forest. The strange thing was that I had a dog, and it liked to hunt the mouse deer and would bring them back in its mouth. I spent three years like that. And I ended up keeping the precept for the rest of my life.

The spirit, if not the letter, of the first precept extends to the mistreatment of animals. A man asked Luang Por what he thought about him keeping a dove in a cage.

I’d say letting the dove go would be the best thing to do. You’ve locked it up in a cage even though it’s done nothing wrong. Try to imagine how it feels. Suppose somebody was to capture you, put you in a cage, give you food and drink, clothes and a sleeping place and have you eat and excrete in that cage. Would you be happy? Would you like it? Would you thank your captor for it? Or how would you feel? You can probably imagine …

Luang Por said that it was just as well other species of living beings did not know human languages:

They’d scold and curse us and try to rip us to pieces. Or else they would go on a protest march to some appeals court. It’s like they’ve been framed and punished for something they didn’t do.

### Right Speech

The pathway between the brain and the tongue is so short that refraining from wrong speech is a major challenge, especially in busy and taxing environments. The fourth precept deals with refraining from deliberate falsehood, the most kammically harmful kind of wrong speech. But for Dhamma practitioners, this is only considered to be the bare minimum standard, or bottom line of restraint. Right Speech also requires the effort to abandon harsh and divisive speech, and most difficult of all, idle chatter and gossip.

Be careful of your speech. Speak true words, speak words that are of benefit to the listener. Don’t speak roughly or use coarse words. Be mindful of what you are saying. Make your speech appropriate to the listener, so that when you’ve finished speaking both you and the listener are happy about what’s been said.

### Alcohol

The fifth precept, requiring the renunciation of alcohol (and by extension all other addictive drugs that have similar effects on the mind’s moral compass) is probably the least popular precept amongst lay Buddhists in Thailand. Luang Por once commented that some people feel possessive about their bad kamma and are afraid of being separated from it. He considered that people who drink alcohol or take drugs provide clear examples of a particular failure of intelligence: not wanting the results of bad kamma, but continually creating the causes for it and neglecting the causes of goodness. On one occasion, he recalled trying to coax a heavy drinker into giving up drinking, and the man became as distraught as if he were being asked to abandon the thing dearest to him in the world. Luang Por remembered for once being at a loss for words, when the man moaned, ‘Oh no! Gods above! Just one more year! One more year!’

Despite the precept, alcohol consumption is endemic in Thai society. Luang Por recalled an encounter that took place on a night train:

Two men came stumbling towards me. One of them said, ‘Luang Por give me some Dhamma!’ I looked at them. Their eyes were muddy. I don’t know what they were intoxicated with, but here they were asking for the Dhamma. I said, ‘Don’t build your house yet. Level the land first.’ One was confused, ‘I don’t know what you mean.’ And I said to him, ‘If you get the opportunity, go to Wat Pah Pong … It’ll be easy to listen to the Dhamma there. You’ll be able to listen to it well. Today the occasion and the surroundings and the audience aren’t conducive.’

Teaching the Dhamma to one unfit to hear it was a waste of time and effort.

It would be like filling a car up with petrol just in order for it to run about in circles – a complete waste of fuel.

The husband of one of the monastery’s lay supporters from Bahn Kor was a heavy drinker and made her life a difficult one. Finally, he died. After the cremation, the widow brought an earthenware jar containing his ashes to the wat, and requested that they be placed in one of the niches in the monastery wall designated for that purpose. With many of the dead man’s drinking buddies present, Luang Por said a few blunt words:

Not so long ago he was drinking and carousing, dancing back and forth and now he’s danced his way right into a jar. What’s the use of bringing dead bones to the wat? That’s no good at all. You should bring bones that can still dance. Then they’ll be able to listen to the Dhamma and understand it. What use are these bones? Only cows and creatures that eat bones are interested in them.

Many people gave up alcohol through their faith in Luang Por. The drinking culture in the villages around Wat Pah Pong shrunk appreciably over the years. One of the grateful ex-drinkers summed up the feelings of many when he said:

“I used to really love drinking. I didn’t need a glass – I couldn’t get it down quick enough that way – I’d just swig from the bottle. It got so that two or three bottles wouldn’t affect me at all. I loved the stuff. If Luang Por hadn’t taught me to give it up, I’d probably be down in the gutter by now.”

Talking to people who had no background in Dhamma practice, Luang Por kept it simple. He explained that people addicted to alcohol created bad kamma. Under the influence of alcohol, people lost their sense of right and wrong, their ability to refrain from unwise action. Whatever pleasure they gained from drinking in the present was far outweighed by the suffering they would have to undergo in the future. As one local villager remembered, on this topic, Luang Por could be brutal:

“Luang Por said that I must try to give it up because it’s the path to ruin, to evil and suffering which would burn me up. It would lead me to disaster and a living hell. He said to me, ‘Have you ever seen someone drunk? They look disgusting, their speech is disgusting, they stagger and stumble around. You can’t talk to them. They’re like people that have lost their minds. They create a lot of bad kamma. In their next human life, they’ll be mentally defective … If you don’t want to be like that, you should try to give it up.’ When I thought over what Luang Por said I started to feel afraid, and I gave up drinking.”

### Right Livelihood

Making a living in the world with honesty and integrity was given so much importance by the Buddha that he declared it one of the eight constituent elements of the path to liberation. Luang Por taught that those wishing to develop their Dhamma practice should seek to avoid work that involves harm to self and others and find work that, if not actively conducive to spiritual progress, then at least is not obstructive to it:

Those who know the Dhamma are not lazy. They are intelligent and hard-working. But their diligence in acting and speaking is accomplished with a mind that knows how to let go and is at peace. The Buddha taught that that is the way free from stress. It is Right Livelihood. It feels comfortable. Even if work is hard at times, it still feels comfortable because there is no fault in the work itself.

Some livelihoods were singled out by the Buddha as Wrong Livelihood: trading in weapons, trading in living beings, trading in meat, trading in intoxicants, and trading in poisons. On one occasion, a businessman who had sold many things in his time, including alcohol, had doubts about Right Livelihood and came to Wat Pah Pong to ask for some advice. Luang Por said:

Sell whatever you like, but don’t sell alcohol. The kammic result will be an increase in your suffering and inner turmoil … Sell other things. Even if you don’t get rich, it’s better to avoid selling things that are unethical. Remember: make your living in an honest, moral way and you will experience happiness and peace in your life.

On another occasion, he taught:

Don’t imagine that simply by making a lot of money and amassing a lot of possessions that you’ll be happy – that’s a foolish idea. Whether it’s a lot or a little, work towards those things but know moderation, know when it’s enough. That feeling of ‘enough’ arises the moment that you stop craving for more.

As long as you still have craving in your mind there is never enough. It’s like you give a dog some sticky rice, and it gobbles down three lumps, but can’t manage a fourth. Even so, when a chicken approaches to eat the leftover lump of rice, the dog growls at the chicken and threatens to bite it. Even though its stomach is full, the dog is still possessive of the lump of rice. Its heart is not full. No matter how much it eats, its heart is never full.

## First Meetings

One way of understanding Buddhist practice is to conceive of it as a long series of awakenings: some mundane, easily overlooked and only appreciated in retrospect, others more dramatic and memorable. Meeting Luang Por for the first time was the occasion for many awakenings of both kinds. Some people found the experience electric; for others, it signalled the beginning of gradual but inexorable changes in their values and way of life. Listening to Luang Por teach for the first time, a common perception was that his words seemed to articulate truths – far better than they could themselves – that on one level their hearts already sensed, but which they had never been able to make conscious.

The emotional effect of such revelations could be profound. Some people abandoned addictions or superstitions, began to keep precepts strictly, started to meditate. A certain number became monks and nuns. But not all were so ripe for radical change. In many cases, people were moved by Luang Por’s presence, his charisma, the peace and compassion they sensed in him, but not so much as to take on board too much of the wisdom he shared. What stayed with them was the joy and uplift they’d felt at having been in the presence of such a monk, together with a strengthened faith in the Triple Gem. For these people, the immediate effect on their lives manifested as an increased commitment and pleasure in providing material support to the monastic order.

There were also those who went to pay respects to Luang Por and were unmoved by the experience. Occasionally, people departed the monastery feeling disappointed, angry or offended. Although Luang Por could be diplomatic when the situation called for it, he could also choose not to be, particularly if he saw fit to puncture a guest’s self-importance and conceit. Often, his words or manner would shake the visitor’s complacency and allow them to open to the teachings; occasionally, it did not work at all. The guest would quietly leave, pride bruised, and once safely out of the monastery, fume at how they’d been treated. Although Luang Por’s ability to find a way to get through to people was remarkable, he was not infallible. Sometimes people’s confusion or attachments erected barriers that were not to be breached. The Buddha once said that if a vessel is overturned, then even the sunlight cannot enter within it. Luang Por himself was fond of the simile of the vessel full to the brim with water, allowing no space for more.

### Ta Soei

Ta Soei was so inspired by his first encounter with Luang Por, that it led him to dismantle his simple wooden house and reassemble it on land close to the monastery.

“I first heard about Luang Por Chah from a monk I knew called Ajahn Tongcheua[8]. One day he told me that there are different types of monks. There are monks who practise well and correctly and those that don’t. Monks of the second kind are not true fields of merit; if you associate with them, you gain no benefit. I asked him where I could find a monk of the first sort, and he said there was such a monk at Wat Pah Pong.

“Ajahn Tongcheua took me along the first time. We arrived at about three o’clock in the afternoon and spoke with Luang Por until almost seven in the evening. I completely forgot to get hungry. There were a lot of mosquitoes but I didn’t notice them. After the conversation was over, Luang Por gave a Dhamma talk that lasted until midnight. Then he told me to go and have a rest. But there was nowhere to lie down – the Dhamma Hall hadn’t been built yet – and so I sat and listened to Luang Por talk on through to dawn.

“Before Luang Por left on alms-round he told me to pick some edible leaves because the monks wouldn’t have much to eat with their rice. He was right. When the monks returned, all they had apart from rice were chillies and fermented fish, and so I pounded that all together, roasted the mixture in a pan and made a sauce. There were about six monks altogether and the same number of maechees. The chilli sauce was distributed evenly and we ate it with the rice and raw and boiled leaves.

“I stayed with Luang Por in the monastery for two days and then went home. I made a determination to go again. I don’t know how he was able to explain the Dhamma in such a way that I could understand it so clearly. From that day onwards, I gave up drinking alcohol and fishing and taking the life of even the smallest creatures.”

### Por Nupee

In an early Wat Pah Pong publication, a legendary dialogue is recreated. Written with a certain amount of poetic licence and apparently modelled upon dialogues between the Buddha and sceptical brahmans found in the Suttas, it relates how Por Nupee, one of Luang Por’s biggest critics, was tamed and converted into a loyal lay disciple.

Por Nupee was well-read – unusually so at that time – and known locally for his knowledge and acumen. He took pride in himself as a free thinker, and in the village was generally considered a little too fond of his own views and opinions. On occasions, he would go with family and friends to listen to Luang Por’s weekly Dhamma talk, but afterwards would always be critical of it to his friends. One day on a visit to the wat, Luang Por invited him to speak frankly about his criticisms and not worry about offending him. He wanted to know exactly what Por Nupee’s objections were.

Much later, Por Nupee was to admit that when Luang Por reassured him that he would not get angry whatever was said, he sensed an opportunity for which he had been waiting a long time. If, he reasoned, he spoke strongly and Luang Por listened quietly, he would enjoy getting things off his chest. If Luang Por showed signs of anger, he would admonish him, ‘What kind of meditation monk are you? You can’t even endure a few harsh words.’ And so he jumped straight in, accusing Luang Por of being deluded. All religions are conventions he declared; their teachings are stories for children, made up to control people. Merit and demerit don’t exist. Luang Por had fallen for this idea of kamma so completely that, out of fear of creating bad kamma, he was hiding away in the forest and tormenting his body for nothing, rather than living in the real world. If he wanted to be a monk, then why not live in the monastery in the village instead of in the middle of a forest? Better still, he should disrobe and enjoy life.

Luang Por sat through the whole tirade in silence, and then quietly repeated the Buddha’s analogy of people cut off from the truth of things being like lotuses submerged beneath the mud. He asked a question: if Por Nupee did not believe in bad kamma, why didn’t he take up armed robbery, or perhaps kill someone to see what it was like? Por Nupee snorted that he wasn’t stupid: if he killed someone, their family would hunt him down, or he’d be thrown into prison. Luang Por commented that that was why it was called bad kamma.

On being challenged how he knew that all the effort he was putting into leading a virtuous life in the forest had any point to it, Luang Por chose to reply in terms his questioner might easily understand. Echoing the Kālāma Sutta, he said that given the stakes – torment in a hell realm for a very long time awaiting a wrong-doer if the law of kamma was true – assuming the law of kamma to be true was more intelligent than assuming it was not. Nothing significant was lost, and much stood to be gained.

Luang Por’s practical, down-to-earth answers gradually began to dissolve Por Nupee’s bluster. He finally admitted that he wasn’t really so sure about this matter of kamma. In fact, he’d spent so much time thinking about it that he felt that his head was going to split open. When he asked for some guidance, Luang Por said:

The important thing to understand is that you have to sincerely abandon the bad and cultivate the good before you can know if merit and demerit really exist.

When Por Nupee asked Luang Por how he might do that, he was told that with such serious wrong views, it wouldn’t be good to give him any teaching yet, as he would only distort it. Por Nupee had one more cutting rejoinder:

“Isn’t the Buddha supposed to have more excellent knowledge and wisdom than anyone else in this world? He’s the most sublime teacher, and you’re his disciple. I’m the disciple of Māra.[9] If you can’t teach me, then you’ve got less wisdom than Māra.”

Luang Por, presumably smiling at these words, replied:

Luang Por: If you’re sincere about listening to the Dhamma, then pay attention and I’ll give you a teaching to take away and reflect on and put to the test. Whether you believe it or not, try it out. You don’t believe the teachings that you’ve heard from other monks, is that right?

Por Nupee: Yes, that’s right. I don’t believe anybody but myself.

Luang Por: Well, if you don’t believe others, then you shouldn’t believe yourself either. You’re a carpenter. Have you never made a mistake sawing wood?

Por Nupee: Yes, I have.

Luang Por: Other matters are the same. Have you only ever thought and acted correctly? Have you never got things wrong, never acted incorrectly?

Por Nupee: I’ve made mistakes.

Luang Por: Well, if that’s the case – if your mind is capable of leading you to think wrongly, speak wrongly and act wrongly – you can’t believe it either.

Por Nupee: Then what should I do?

Luang Por: Don’t think so much. And don’t talk so much either.

The text does not elaborate if any further teachings followed these words. It does relate, however, that over the following days, Por Nupee couldn’t put Luang Por’s words out of his mind. He couldn’t help himself, and the more he reflected on Luang Por’s words the truer they seemed and the truer seemed the teachings of the Buddha. He could no longer find any arguments against them.

Por Nupee’s conceit and pride started to wane. He abandoned his stubborn character and offered himself as a disciple of Luang Por. He kept the Five Precepts strictly, started to meditate and became a pillar of the monastery lay support.

### Mae Tiw

It might be argued that many people came into Luang Por’s presence for the first time with such a sense of awe and reverence, that they were fully primed to be emotionally affected by the experience, whatever Luang Por said and did. But there were also cases where people were quite unprepared for the strength of the feelings that he evoked in them. Mae Tiw was a local woman, a scientist with a Masters Degree in Biology from an American university. Meeting Luang Por was a pivotal moment in her life and the first step to her abandoning the world in favour of monastic training.

“When the three of us arrived at his kuti, Luang Por already had guests: there was a monk there with a group of his lay supporters from Bangkok paying their respects. The area underneath Luang Por’s kuti was packed, and so we looked for a place to sit down on the outer edge of the concrete floor. Then something really strange happened: as soon as I began to bow, I felt as if I was being bathed in a stream of coolness emanating from Luang Por. I felt instantly refreshed right through my body and mind. It was like coming out of a hot muggy place and into an air-conditioned room. I stared at Luang Por and my thought at that moment was, ‘So this is what they mean by mettā.’

“After a few moments, the group from Bangkok took their leave. Luang Por picked up a pile of small black and white photographs of himself and distributed them. He told his visitors that since they had taken the trouble to come such a long way to see him, and although he had no real gift to give them in return other than words of Dhamma, he did have these photos that a lay supporter had offered him – if anyone wanted one. Of course, everyone did.

“As soon as I saw Luang Por giving out photographs, desire immediately reared its head. I was worried that there would be none left, and so I spoke up from the back of the crowd: ‘Luang Por, I’d like one as well!’

“Luang Por glanced over at me as he distributed the pictures – just for a split-second – but it made my heart drop down into my feet. I realized that I’d done something inappropriate, exposing my greed in such a coarse way. When all the Bangkok people had left Luang Por called out gruffly: ‘Where is she? The one who wanted a picture so much. Where is she?’ He caught sight of me. ‘Come and get one then.’

“I crawled towards him even though I found myself shaking with fear. I forced myself to glance up at his face. At the moment that I put out my hand to receive the photo, I saw that his complexion was incredibly warm and radiant. It was a face full of a genuine kindness and compassion for sentient beings. It showed no trace of the annoyance or irritation that I’d expected to see. My fear dissolved. From that moment until the time that we bowed and took our leave, my ears were ringing. I can’t remember anything that Luang Por said to us. All I can remember is how blissful I felt.”

### Por Buapah

In Thailand, monasteries have always been the place that people can go to seek respite when their life goes wrong. Many people go to monasteries with a superstitious belief that a particular ceremony or offering to the Sangha will offset their bad fortune. But many who went to see Luang Por desired advice and wise reflections. He once joked:

Living here is like living in a garage. Anyone who has something wrong with them or with their children or with their wife or husband comes to give it to me to sort out – just like someone whose car has broken down pushes it into the garage and gives it to the mechanic.

The Buddha called separation from a loved one, a ‘messenger of Dhamma’. In other words, the suffering caused by such separation wakes people up to the truths of life that they have formerly been able to ignore, but can do so no longer. One of Luang Por’s most devoted lay disciples, Por Buapah, first made his way to Wat Pah Pong during a period of inconsolable grief.

“When I got back from the war, I married a girl from Nah Soom. We had a couple of kids and we were happy. Then the younger one died. My wife and I were overwhelmed with grief. I missed that child so much I couldn’t eat or sleep. I was sad, but life went on. Now though, I felt as if I was just drifting along aimlessly. I couldn’t shake off my depression. At that time, Luang Por had been at Wat Pah Pong for two or three years. A neighbour of mine saw how much I was suffering and suggested that I go to see him. He said he might be able to help me get over it, and I went to pay respects to Luang Por and told him my story. He told me that everyone in the world has to die sooner or later. There isn’t a single village, a single house, where there’s never been a death. Even in monasteries, monks and novices die.”

Luang Por told Por Buapah that he too must die, and perhaps in no long time. Given that his time in the world was limited, endlessly grieving and lamenting for the departed was helpful to no one. Wise people think of the uncertain time remaining to them and find renewed meaning in their life through devotion to goodness and virtue. It is probable that Por Buapah had heard similar words from well-wishers many times before and been untouched by them. But somehow, when they were spoken by Luang Por, it seemed to him that he heard them for the first time, and the truth of them struck him forcibly.

“He said that me and my wife should work together to do whatever was of true benefit to ourselves and others. We should establish ourselves in Right Livelihood, and steadily cultivate goodness and virtue as a supporting condition and provision for the future.

“As I listened to Luang Por’s teaching, I found myself agreeing with everything he said. It was the turning point. And it made me enjoy listening to Dhamma. I started to nip off to see him more often. I learned many things, and my faith and respect in him grew and grew. Luang Por gave me jobs to do helping to clear paths, cutting grass. I felt very proud to be his trusted helper. My happiness returned.”

### Por Am

Some people were impressed by Luang Por’s teachings but were too proud and stubborn to accept them without a fight. One such man was the herbalist, Por Am, who argued with Luang Por until he lost consciousness.

“Before I came to revere Luang Por, I argued with him for four days and nights. During the days, I was helping him plant a row of bamboos around the perimeter of the monastery. Night times, I’d carry on disputing with him right through to dawn. I’d say something like, ‘If the rice is my rice and the flour is my flour, how can it be bad kamma to make it into booze?’ And he’d reply:”

You’ve got a knife, you can use the sharp side to kill and destroy or you can use it to prepare food. The knife is your knife, but if you bring the spine down onto the top of your head, how does it feel?

“So, anyway, we argued for four days and nights. On the fourth day at noon, I felt dizzy and I fainted. Luang Por came to see what was wrong. I said, ‘I don’t know, everything’s gone dark, I can’t see anything.’ Luang Por took me by the hand and led me to the mango grove. Then he rang the bell. There were about six monks in the monastery at that time. He told them to bring a mat and pillow for me to lie on. Then he told them to put four water jars to the north of me and two to the south and fill them up to the brim. I don’t know how long I lay there before I regained consciousness. When I tried to retrace my movements, the last thing I could remember was that I’d been at the Dhamma Hall, so what was I doing in the mango grove? I turned to the west, all confused, and then looked about me. At that moment, I heard Luang Por’s voice calling me from behind my head, ‘Por Am, Por Am.’ I twisted my head back and saw him sitting cross-legged on a bamboo platform watching over me. He said:”

That’s what happens when you contend with a monk teaching the Dhamma. You argued all night, you argued all day. Four days and four nights. It’s not possible to defeat the Dhamma, you know, and that’s why you fainted.

“I was starting to feel better – water vapour is a folk remedy for reviving people when they’ve fainted – and it was making me feel cool, comfortable and refreshed. When I look back now on what happened I see that I had it all wrong. Luang Por said that someone who lives in a high place is capable of seeing a person who is below him, but someone who lives in a low place can’t see someone who is higher. I reflected on that. He was right.”

## The Manyfolk

### Farmers

The majority of Luang Por’s lay disciples and daily visitors were peasant farmers. Speaking to a group of local people, he turned to a favourite theme: ‘knowing what’s what’, not living blindly from day to day, but bearing in mind the guiding principles laid down by the Buddha:

So many Buddhists are still deluded and superstitious. From my reflections, I’d say that it’s through not having grasped the main principles of Dhamma that they’ve gained no real ease in their lives. Just like people farming the soil without understanding about strains of rice or crop rotation, they don’t know how to pick out what’s of use to them and what’s not.

Superstitions and unexamined beliefs were not confined to religious matters. The prejudice against education – the belief that it was a waste of time, that it unnecessarily deprived families of the labour of their younger members – provided a good example of a belief that seemed well-founded at one time in the past and had now been thoroughly disproved. He urged his audience to reflect on how things that once had seemed like common sense and were agreed upon by all, could be so completely mistaken:

When I was a small boy, they built a school in the village and when officials came around registering all the children, some parents hid their children away. If children who did go to school failed an exam their parents would say, ‘Good! Now you can leave school, graze the buffaloes, and look after your younger brothers and sisters.’ And how are those children doing now? When they go into town, they can’t read the signs. In the market, they’re easily cheated.

Dealing well with the raw materials that life gives you, required a knowledge of guiding principles, like working with wood.

The old sages said that no matter how smooth you whittle a piece of wood, if you don’t get the right angles on it, it won’t look beautiful. Think about that – is it true? However smooth it might be, it doesn’t look beautiful. But if you get good angles on it, even if it’s not so smooth, it’s beautiful.

Without guiding principles, Luang Por said, ‘trying to make up a parcel, you tie yourself into it.’ Listening to the Dhamma helped one to reflect on right and wrong, good and evil, and to learn how to distinguish between them. But understanding the drawbacks of unwise actions and the benefits of wise action did not ensure protection from defilements. Indeed, some defilements were provoked by the very effort to do good. Luang Por said that this point would be understood by anyone who had ever planted lettuces:

You prepare the bed with a hoe and then you plant the seeds. You water them, put down some fertilizer and the lettuce grow beautifully. But there’s a problem: this same fertilizer doesn’t only promote the growth of lettuce, it promotes weeds as well. So what are you going to do? Are you going to pull up everything, weeds and lettuce as well? Or are you going to leave everything as it is. You can’t do either. If you want to have anything to eat, you have to pull out the weeds and leave the lettuce. That’s what makes it hard work. You do good, but the bad comes bundled with it. You try to take out the badness but when you get down to it, you find that your desire for the good is accompanied by laziness. Desire and laziness come together. But if you believe in what your laziness is telling you, you’ll never get around to doing good. So, you must try to go against your old habits and patiently withstand the defilements.

### Teachers

Luang Por put particular effort into teaching visiting groups of school teachers. He saw the importance to society of high standards in the teaching profession and was conscious of living through a period in which those standards seemed in decline. There were certainly some fine and dedicated teachers still to be found, and yet, in an increasingly materialistic society where the monetary rewards of a career had become the primary measure of its worth, the status of the school teacher was declining. Teaching had become less and less attractive as a career, and had become the fallback option for those who could not succeed in more lucrative pursuits. An increasing number of people were entering the teaching profession without any real passion for teaching. In the countryside, teachers were notorious for living beyond their means, and male teachers, in particular, were often given to heavy drinking and gambling.

Luang Por had a favourite opening question to visiting groups of teachers:

Oh, you’re teachers. Do you only teach others or do you teach yourselves as well?

In Luang Por’s view, teaching children was not restricted to passing on information, but included acting as a good role model to them:

Some teachers complained to me that the children were hard to teach and quarrelled a lot, and so I asked them whether the teachers all lived together in harmony. They didn’t reply. So I told them it was understandable that the children quarrelled because they were still children and didn’t know any better, but for the teachers to be quarrelling was unacceptable.

By the late 1960s, with the Vietnam War at its height, Western influence in Thailand was at an all-time high, and was often blamed for a decline in the levels of unquestioning deference that many authority figures considered was owed to them by their subordinates. This became a major issue in universities. When teachers asked Luang Por for advice on dealing with disrespect from their pupils, he would tell them that times had changed. Now teachers could no longer expect respect as their due; they had to earn it. The way to earn it was not just to say the right things, but to train themselves so that their students trusted and looked up to them. ‘If you can’t teach yourself,’ he said, ‘how can you teach others?’

Take the Buddha as your model. Once, at the end of a Dhamma talk, the Buddha asked Ven. Sāriputta a question in front of the whole monastic community. ‘Sāriputta,’ he said, ‘do you believe what I just taught?’ Ven. Sāriputta was wise. He raised his hands in anjali and replied, ‘Not yet, Lord.’ On hearing this answer, the Buddha praised him saying, ‘Good, Sāriputta. Wise people shouldn’t believe anything too easily. Whenever you hear something new, the first thing you should do is go away and reflect on it with wisdom. Only when you see that it is correct and well-reasoned, should you believe it. That is the way of the sages.’

See how skilful the Buddha was. If it was us these days and one of our students didn’t believe what we said, we’d probably lose our temper and chase them out of the classroom – that’s what usually happens. So, all of you, teach yourselves as well as others. Then you won’t suffer on account of your students.

Luang Por would often expand upon this theme of being a role model:

Be like the master mould that they use for Buddha amulets. Have any of you seen one? A single mould is enough for a great many amulets. Moulds are made with real expertise. The face, the eyebrows and the cheeks are hollowed out precisely, without distortions or indentations, in order to make beautiful Buddhas. All of you teachers are like moulds for your students. You must make yourself beautiful by cultivating the virtues of a teacher, and by abiding at all times by the moral standards and correct behaviour appropriate to a leader.

If there was to be a return to a higher standard of morality in society, teachers would have to lead the way. They were closest to the children and had great influence over them.

Children are like vines. They have to climb up trees. If one tree is a few centimetres away and another is ten metres, which one do you think the vine will climb up?

Luang Por challenged teachers with a high standard. They needed to be constantly mindful of their behaviour.

Don’t just teach them with words. Standing, walking, sitting, your speech – everything should be a teaching for them. Then the children will emulate you. They are quick-minded, quicker than adults.

Turn towards the moral teachings and take them as guiding principles. Be devoted to them. Don’t get so intoxicated with material things that you just become devoted to having a good time. Fulfil your responsibilities as a leader and teacher just as the Lord Buddha did.

He illustrated his point with a Jātaka tale:

Once, a certain king possessed a thoroughbred horse. This horse was quick and nimble, intelligent and easy to train. One day a new groom came to look after it. The new groom had a deformed leg and walked with a limp. The horse saw him walking around every day and, being a quick learner, before long began walking in the same way. The horse thought that the way the groom walked was a teaching. Soon the horse had lost its graceful movement and went lame. A doctor was called in to treat the horse. He searched for splinters in the horse’s hoof but could find nothing, and although he gave the horse medicine, it continued to walk with a limp. Then the Buddha-to-be came to look. He investigated the stable and the surroundings thoroughly and could see no cause for the horse’s condition. Then when he saw the groom he realized what had happened. He suggested that the king change the groom and find someone without a limp. The horse observed the replacement groom walking around, started to copy him, and before long it regained its beauty and grace.

### Scientists and Academics

One day, a certain scientist came to visit Luang Por. Speaking as someone who had practised meditation and felt qualified to make a comparison, he was of the opinion that as a means of realizing the truth of things, science offered a path that was more effective and more verifiable than Buddhist training. Luang Por was unimpressed. ‘Don’t you think it’s possible,’ he asked, ‘that you’re putting forth this claim without a full knowledge of the results of Buddhist training?’ He gave two similes: it was like a man putting one short arm down a hole who concludes that the hole only goes as far as his arm; it was like a short-sighted man who concludes that there are no such things as airplanes in the sky because he’s never seen one.

On other occasions, he spoke of the study of Buddhist teachings as being the keystone for the study of all other academic subjects, including science. Without Buddhist wisdom, study of any other subject might lead to as many drawbacks for human well-being as advantages. Supported by Buddhist wisdom, drawbacks would be minimized and advantages maximized.

At a time when education based on Western models was being promoted as the great panacea for Thai society, certificates and university degrees conferred great status. Luang Por would try to puncture an uncritical belief that book learning was in itself an invariably good thing:

Some people study so much that they become stupid, impossible to talk to. When they go up high, it’s too high; and when they come down low, it’s too low – they never see the Middle Way. Do you think that just because you’ve studied a lot that now you’re smart? Look closely: there’s such a thing as being too smart. Strong attachments to views and self-importance arise. You stop seeing other people as human beings. You think that you’re more powerful, better, more brilliant – and that way of thinking inevitably leads to contempt for others. Thinking that you’re superior to other people leads to nothing but trouble.

If you see a peasant farmer and see how you are no different from him; if you see an old person and think that one day you will be like that; if you see children in a state of confusion and you think that you used to be like that – if you bring things inwards and reflect on yourself in this way, then it’s easy to understand the Dhamma.

A Thai proverb has it that if held in front of the eye, a single hair can conceal a mountain:

The teacher says that everything is impermanent, unsatisfactory and without self and you say you know, you know; but really, you don’t have a clue. With that kind of knowing, you carry on living like a fool, and then you die.

Luang Por commented on the reasons he believed people who had high academic qualifications were often hard to teach. He said it was what happened when people studied to accumulate knowledge rather than to remove ignorance and defilement:

What they don’t realize is that if they have a bachelor’s degree, then so do their defilements; if they have a master’s degree, then their defilements have got one too; and if they have a doctorate, their defilements do also.

He had a biting simile for people who have pursued academic studies to a high level but, having done nothing to educate their higher faculties, are still in thrall to their appetites:

They’re like vultures that fly high in the sky but when they’re hungry swoop down to gorge on a rotten corpse.

### Troubled Spouses

The Maechee Section in Wat Pah Pong provided women experiencing serious marital problems with a refuge. When distressed women came to ask Luang Por’s permission to stay in the monastery, it was common for them to be so upset that they would pronounce themselves thoroughly disillusioned with life in the world and ready to become nuns. After some opportunity for a little quiet reflection, however, most would return home. Luang Por would sometimes joke at how such a professed determination to leave the world could disappear so quickly:

People ask why the guest house in the nuns’ section is kept empty. It’s kept like that for people who are disillusioned with the world to come and stay. The building was falling apart and I had it repaired for these women. Some are strongly disenchanted. But they don’t stay long – one night and they’re gone.

With women angry with their husbands, he was fatherly, advising them not to make important decisions in the heat of the moment that they might soon come to regret. He said it was better not to storm out of the house shouting, ‘I’m never coming back, I’d rather die!’ The pleasure that came from speaking in absolutes was not worth the embarrassment that would come when feelings had cooled down.

Don’t say you’re going for good. Don’t say you’re never coming back. Say you don’t want to talk about whether you’re going to come back or not, but for the present you want to go to the monastery and think things over and calm down … Say you’re going to stay at Wat Pah Pong with Luang Por for two or three days or so, because you feel unhappy. Just say that much for the time being. Don’t go for the whole thing straight away. Don’t say you want a divorce. Before long, you may well want to go back. Don’t believe your mind.

### The Elderly

Elderly people, Luang Por said, had to learn like him, ‘to be intelligent with regard to their stupidity’. As he passed sixty, he said, his memory started to play tricks on him. He would mean to call one novice over and the name of another would come out of his mouth. It was as if his brain was announcing very quietly that it was taking retirement. He had had to learn to allow for this. For laypeople, taking into account the limitations and distortions of perception brought on by age was important if they were to avoid conflicts in the home.

You’re their parents. You brought them up. You had to be really smart to do that, smarter than them. But that intelligence turns into its opposite. As you get older, that sense of being the one who knows what’s right and wrong, of being more intelligent than your children, makes you stupid.

You argue with your children and you won’t admit it when you’re wrong, and everyone’s emotions get stirred up. Your children are intelligent and sharp. They get fed up with you and walk away. When you’re arguing with your grandchildren you’re even more sure that you’re right. You won’t let them contradict you at all. In fact, they’ve got a point, but you’ve got to win the argument. That’s not the Dhamma.

It was important for elderly people to face up to the decline in their faculties.

Are your eyes as good as they used to be? Are your ears? Is your body? Do you have as much energy as you used to? As good a memory? Is anything as good as it used to be? Why don’t you look at that? … Reflecting in this way is called being heedful, being alert to the way things are. Ignoring the truth of things is being heedless … A heedless person is like a dead person, so don’t be heedless.

Homes for the elderly did not exist at that time. One recourse for a family chafing under erratic and authoritarian elders, was to encourage those elders to devote themselves to good deeds in their old age and leave worldly affairs to the next generation. Grandad becoming a monk and Granma a nun was one acceptable way out of the problem.

In some cases, it’s so bad the family can’t take it anymore. The parents abuse their authority and don’t allow the children to dispute anything they say. Sons, daughters-in-law, daughters, sons-in-law, they’re intelligent, they start making suggestions, ‘Mum, Dad, why don’t you go and live in the monastery?’ They try to encourage you to go to the monastery, because they can’t take your nagging anymore. They’ll build you a kuti in the monastery. They’ll pay for everything to make sure you’re comfortable there. It’s better than having you nagging them all the time at home. Let the monks teach you. Even then Granma and Grandad often don’t get the message. But the family are determined to take you, to entrust you with the old monk at the monastery. It happens. Be careful.

It was Dhamma practice that could prevent relationships in the family from becoming riven with conflict. It started with giving up the fight to maintain a former state of affairs, and by humbly accepting the changes brought about by age.

Your urine smells worse than it used to, your excrement smells worse than it used to; everything smells worse. And you’re becoming a child again, an old child. If you’re meditating, you can solve these problems. You become easy to look after, you don’t forget yourself, you’re easy to talk to. You have mindfulness and alertness. You don’t create bad kamma or enmity with yourself, your children or your grandchildren. That is what it means to cultivate the Dhamma.

### The Dying

In speaking of the inescapable truths of life to the lay supporters that he had known for many years, Luang Por could be direct and challenging, making them chuckle at their own foibles. But as they approached death, his tone would soften. On one occasion, Luang Por was asked to record a cassette message for an elderly, well-practised lay disciple who was on her death bed. He gave a discourse (later transcribed and translated as Our Real Home) that became one of his best-known Dhamma talks and that has, over the years, provided comfort and inspiration to a great many people.

In the talk, Luang Por began by stressing the universal, inevitable nature of her coming death. Death was normal and natural and must be accepted.

You should understand that even the Buddha himself, with his great store of accumulated virtue, could not avoid physical death. When he reached old age, he relinquished his body and let go of the heavy burden. Now you too must learn to be satisfied with the many years you’ve already depended upon your body. Accept that it’s enough.

He said it was like a household utensil that starts off clean and shiny and, over the years, becomes chipped and cracked. It was an inevitable process.

The Buddha said that conditions, whether internal bodily conditions or external conditions, are not-self; their nature is to change. Thoroughly contemplate this truth.

However, the inevitable decay of the body did not have to affect the mind. By contemplating the true nature of things and abandoning attachments, the mind could free itself of this decline.

We must be able to be at peace with the body, whatever state it is in … Now as your body begins to run down and wear out with age, don’t resist that, but also don’t let your mind deteriorate along with it. Keep the mind separate. Give energy to your mind by realizing the truth of the way things are. If your house is flooded or burnt to the ground – whatever the threat to it – let it affect only the house. If there is a flood, don’t let it flood your mind. If there’s a fire, don’t let it burn your heart. Let it be merely the house, that which is outside of you, that is flooded or burned. Now is the time to allow the mind to let go of its attachments.

The Buddha said that what we can do is to contemplate the body and mind to see their impersonality, that neither of them is ‘me’ nor ‘mine’. They have only a provisional reality. It’s like this house, it’s only nominally yours. You couldn’t take it with you anywhere. The same applies to your wealth, your possessions and your family: they are yours only in name. They don’t really belong to you. They belong to nature.

He taught her to examine her body to see how it was subject to change. He told her to look at the unattractive nature of the body and its lack of an abiding essence. There was nothing wrong with the body as such, he said. Our problems come through wrong thinking. Wanting the body not to die was like wanting a duck to be a chicken, or wanting a river to reverse its course and flow towards its source.

Having once been young, your body has become old and is now meandering towards its death. Don’t go wishing it were otherwise. It’s not something you have the power to remedy. The Buddha told us to see the way things are and then let go of our clinging to them. Take this feeling of letting go as your refuge.

Meditation provided a refuge, and if well-developed, could provide some distance from the pain.

Keep meditating even if you feel tired and exhausted. Let your mind be with the breath. Take a few deep breaths and then establish the attention on the breath using the mantra ‘Buddho’. Make this practice constant. The more exhausted you feel, the more subtle and focused your concentration must be, so that you can cope with any painful sensations that arise.

For an experienced meditator, great gains could be expected.

As the breath becomes increasingly subtle we keep following it, while at the same time awakening the mind. Eventually the breath disappears altogether, and all that remains is that feeling of alertness. This is called meeting the Buddha. We have that clear, wakeful awareness called ‘Buddho’, ‘the one who knows’, the awakened one, the radiant one. This is meeting and dwelling with the Buddha, with awareness and clarity. It was only the historical Buddha that passed away. The true Buddha, the Buddha that is clear radiant knowing, can still be experienced and attained today.

The task was to let go of everything that tied her to the world. He spoke at more length about accepting the naturalness of what was happening:

Just think: could you exhale without inhaling? Would it feel good? Could you just inhale? We want things to be permanent but they can’t be, it’s impossible. Once the breath has entered the body, it must leave. Having left, it returns. And that’s natural, isn’t it? Having been born, we get old and then we die. It’s completely natural and normal.

All she needed now was this Buddha-knowing. She had to let go of everything that tied her to the world. She had to relinquish her worries and concerns about her family. It wasn’t that she should try to stop herself thinking about her loved ones, but she should think with wisdom, with an awareness of impermanence and the inevitability of separation from them. He explained the meaning of the word, ‘world’:

‘The world’ is whatever mental state is agitating you at the present moment. ‘What are they going to do?’ ‘When I’m gone, who’ll look after them?’ ‘How will they manage?’ This is all just ‘the world’. Even the mere arising of a thought fearing death or pain is ‘the world’. Throw the world away! The world is the way it is. If you allow it to dominate you, your mind becomes obscure and can’t see itself. So whatever appears in the mind just say, ‘This isn’t my business. It’s impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self.’

Now she had inner work to do – work that nobody else could do for her, and even those who loved her the most could not help her with. She should focus herself on that work exclusively and leave the nursing of her body to others. Nothing around her was substantial. She needed to find her real home. Possessions, pleasures and pains, relationships, all that had made up her life so far, had provided only temporary shelter. Even her own body was now demonstrating that it was something she’d borrowed from nature, and would soon have to return. He began to speak in ways that encouraged nibbidā, the disenchantment with the endless cycle of becoming:

When you realize that’s the way the world is, you’ll feel that it’s a wearisome place. You’ll feel wearied and disenchanted. Being disenchanted doesn’t mean you are averse; the mind is clear. It sees that there is nothing to be done to remedy this state of affairs, it’s just the way the world is. Knowing in this way, you can let go of attachment; you can let go with a mind that is neither happy nor sad, but at peace with conditions through seeing, with wisdom, their changing nature … You see that if you have many possessions, you have to leave a lot behind; if you have a few, you leave few behind. Wealth is just wealth; long life is just long life. They’re nothing special.

He exhorted her to let go of all that she still clung on to and go to her ‘real home’:

Let go. Let go until the mind reaches the peace that is free from advancing, free from retreating, and free from stopping still.

### Por Puang

It has been customary since the time of the Buddha for monks to visit laypeople as they lay on their deathbed, to help them leave this world for the next in the best possible way. In the last hours of his life, Por Puang, one of Luang Por’s closest lay disciples, received such a visit.

Por Puang and his wife Mae Taeng were the first lay supporters of Wat Pah Pong to come from the local town of Warin. After spending a Rains Retreat as a monk, Por Puang asked to disrobe, saying that the monastery still lacked many necessities and he wanted to encourage other people from Warin to help him raise the necessary funds. Before long, he had arranged the purchase of a monastery bell, and sometime later he offered a large grandfather clock for the Dhamma Hall. His greatest joy was to come when he, his family and friends sponsored the casting of the brass Buddha statue that became the central feature of the Wat Pah Pong Dhamma Hall.

After he disrobed, Por Puang would still go to the wat every Observance Day, keep the Eight Precepts and listen to Dhamma. As his health declined in his later years, he offered to donate his skeleton to the monastery after his death as a momento mori, and asked Luang Por to pick up his body straight after his death and to prepare the skeleton in the monastery. At the beginning of 1963, when his doctors announced that there was nothing more they could do for him, Por Puang’s family took him out of the hospital to spend the last days of his life at home.

On the twelfth of January, Por Puang’s condition suddenly became much worse. He became unable to speak or open his eyes. He lay on his bed groaning incessantly. His wife and children sat with him but were unable to relieve his pain.

On the thirteenth of January, Luang Por together with Ajahn Jun and a number of other monks were offered their daily meal in the local army camp. After the meal was over, Luang Por told Colonel Somboon, the commanding officer, that he wanted to visit Por Puang and asked if he could arrange a truck. The colonel said he would order a smaller more comfortable vehicle but Luang Por repeated that a truck would be fine. Por Noo, a lay attendant, asked him whether he was going to visit Por Puang or pick up his corpse. Luang Por said, ‘pick up the corpse’. Por Noo was puzzled, ‘How are you going to do that? He’s still alive. Do you think his family will just give him to you? He said to pick his body up after he’s dead, didn’t he?’ Luang Por was silent for a moment and then he said, ‘Alive or dead, we’re picking him up today’ before turning to Ajahn Jun, ‘Let’s go. Por Puang is waiting.’ It was 12.45 p.m. when they arrived at Por Puang’s house and found him lying on his bed surrounded by his family. Luang Por sat down on the bed looking at the dying man for a few moments. Then he stroked his face gently, calling him:

Por Puang. Por Puang.

After some time, Por Puang opened his eyes and turned his head towards Luang Por.

Por Puang, do you know who I am?

Por Puang nodded his head and looked at Luang Por. While groaning sounds still came from his mouth, tears started to flow down his cheeks. Luang Por put his hand on the old man’s forehead and started to speak to him in a gentle but firm voice:

Por Puang. You are a practitioner. You’ve been fighting this for a long time. When it’s time for death to take your life, let it go. It belongs to death anyway; why are you so possessive of it? You’ve borrowed something and now you’ve got to return it. Keep the sound inside. Why are you letting it out?

As Luang Por finished speaking, Por Puang’s groaning immediately ceased. Luang Por continued:

The body is impermanent and unreliable. It’s not beautiful; it’s old, you’ve used it for a long time. Go and look for a new body in that place that you saw in your vision when you were a monk.

All this time Luang Por was stroking Por Puang’s face. He turned to Colonel Somboon:

Luang Por: What time is it?

Colonel Somboon: 12.55, sir.

Luang Por: Another five minutes and he’ll be gone.

Luang Por kept stroking Por Puang’s face. At exactly 1.00 p.m., the dying man’s eyes drooped and closed. Por Puang had died at peace.

### Killing the Defilements of Ta Soei

After Luang Por became abbot of Wat Pah Pong, he did not completely abandon the practice of tudong. In the early years, in particular, when he was still in good health and there were few monks in the monastery, every now and again he would simply walk out of Wat Pah Pong and into the countryside. Usually he would take monks with him, occasionally laymen. One of the laymen who accompanied him on such journeys later became a monk, and one of the best-loved and colourful characters in the Sangha. Ta Soei, quoted above describing his first meeting with Luang Por, had been a larger-than-life figure in the local community before meeting Luang Por, his dissolute and criminal lifestyle earning him the title of ‘nak leng’[10]. His greed was legendary, and in his old age he had many stories to tell about how Luang Por had set about taming the coarse fellow he had once been.

“He took us on tudong out to Buntarik. There were half a dozen of us to start with but two ran away on the first night. As the days wore on, more and more ran away until in the end there was only me left. I was homesick. He said he’d take me for a year, and the more I wanted to go back the further he’d take me. I just gave in and took what came. Wherever we went I’d always have my eyes out for samors. One night he made me sleep by a bamboo clump even though it was obviously the local toilet place and stunk of excrement. As the dew fell the smell got even worse. When I complained, he scolded me:”

Don’t make such a fuss. There’s more crap in your intestines than there is out there.

“We reached Khu Muang and I came across a beautiful samor tree. He told me to climb up and shake the branches. The samors cascaded down. I made a bundle for them in my khaoma cloth. So now I had to carry Luang Por’s bowl and the samors and his shoulder bag which was also heavy. Luang Por didn’t carry anything at all. As we walked along I wanted to throw some of the samors away, but then we came to another tree, even more bountiful than the last one and Luang Por had me collect another great pile. I thought that he would help me to carry something, but he refused. I tasted a few of the samors from the first tree, a few from the second tree, and diarrhoea came on in a big way. My bags were too bulky and heavy to put down in time. Luang Por had to teach me the field method:”

There’s no need to sit down. Stand and grasp hold of a tree. Crap like a water buffalo. You can do that, can’t you?

“So I stood and defecated until my bowels were empty … Ten o’clock at night and we were still walking. He wouldn’t rest. We reached a stream and he crossed it on a dead tree. I couldn’t manage that and waded through the stream. The water was deep, my baggage was heavy and I couldn’t get up the other bank. Luang Por had to climb down and drag me up. It was midnight before he would stop walking, and I was completely soaked. ‘This is so much suffering!’ I groaned.”

You’ve come on this trip to see suffering so that you can go beyond it.

“Luang Por said this as if it would be some kind of comfort to me.”

It’s through seeing suffering that you become wise.

“I was exhausted. As he spoke I started to drift off to sleep, and so he scolded me again:”

I’m giving you a teaching and you fall asleep.

“But as I lay there, I noticed he was using my khaoma cloth to drive the mosquitos away from my body. I slept for a long time. Whenever I opened my eyes he was still sitting there. I couldn’t help asking him, ‘Luang Por, aren’t you tired? You haven’t lain down at all.’ He responded:”

The more tired I am, the better the meditation.

“And then he had another go at me.”

People without a thought in their heads are only interested in lying about. Even when you set them an example they don’t take it.

“‘Oh, come on! I’m tired!’ I couldn’t stop myself arguing with him. Finally, I asked him if we could go back.”

Alright. If that’s what you want.

“He must have seen that I really was far gone.”

The next morning Luang Por and Ta Soei took the road back to the monastery.

“A car passed. In those days, there weren’t any proper roads; cars had to go along the buffalo tracks. When he saw us, the driver stopped and ran over to invite us to go with him. Luang Por gave a grunt of assent. I prepared to get into the car. But no. The driver came over to repeat his invitation. Luang Por gave another grunt, but he made no move to get into the car and it drove off without us. When I started grumbling, Luang Por turned on me.”

Have you come to ride in cars or walk on tudong?

“Couldn’t we have at least given them the bag of samors?”

And how do we know where he’s going?

“By now I was getting angry. The car was moving farther and farther away. I said, ‘Luang Por, are you trying to kill me or what?’ Luang Por replied quick as a flash:”

Of course, I’ve brought you with me to kill your defilements. Everything that comes out of your mouth is defilement. If you don’t come and do something like this, then how will you ever be free from defilements? Try lying around doing nothing and see if you get liberated. All that’ll happen will be that suffering will overwhelm you. Suffering has to be known before you can go beyond it and realize happiness. I’ve brought you to make merit, to look for merit. Do you see that or not? Merit and defilement both lie within us. Cravings never come to an end. You make ten baht and you want a hundred. You get a hundred and you want a thousand. Now look: your craving has stopped because you feel nothing but physical tiredness, you don’t want anything at all. If you did get anything, what would you do with it? Don’t you realize that you’re going to die? Each day, try to think of death. You’re going to die. You know that, don’t you?

“Luang Por went on like this at great length before turning around to question me further:”

Do rich people die? Do poor people die?

“ ‘Yes, they all die.’ I answered irritably.”

Well then, don’t you think you’re going to die? … The poor die and so do the rich. You have to be liberated before you can be happy. So what’s to be done?

“He ended up asking me a question as usual. ‘Become a monk’ I said, thinking it was a pretty intelligent answer.”

If you become a monk, will you be free of suffering if you don’t practise? Kamma means action. We do good, and we do evil. If we do good, then we get good results. If we do evil, then we get evil results. So what’s there to do except do good. And that’s what you’re doing. I’ve brought you to do good, because passing through trials and tribulations will lead you beyond suffering.

“That afternoon we came to a village and stopped for a rest in one of the adjoining fields. There were people around grazing their cattle and when they came over, Luang Por called out to me:”

Get some soft drinks. Bring over three or four packs.

“I got angry. I wanted to keep the money, and he was having me buy drinks for buffalo herders. In the end they couldn’t finish it all, and he told them to take the remainder home with them. When we got back to the wat he asked me:”

How much money is left? We need bricks and cement.

“I said, ‘It would have been a better idea to keep the whole lot for bricks and cement instead of spending it on soft drinks.’ ”

No, that would have been a bad idea, because we wouldn’t have practised giving, and the buffalo grazers wouldn’t have had their drink. They were tired, and they must have been thirsty. When you drank some, you were refreshed weren’t you?

“ ‘Yes.’ I replied sheepishly.”

Well then …

“He said and started off on another sermon:”

When we make others happy it makes us happy. When you’ve received that kind of happiness, then what more do you want? … You have to raise your mind up high. When the floods come, only the houses built on higher land stay dry. If you indulge in low, coarse things, then your mind becomes baser, and whatever you do you’ll never see the Dhamma.

## Family Life

The first time householders listened to Luang Por give a Dhamma talk or went to ask him for advice, they were usually surprised at the accuracy and penetration of his insights into family life. It seemed common sense to most people that the causes and conditions underlying family conflicts were specific to householders, and impenetrable to a monk who had never married or had the experience of raising a family himself. But leading a large community over a period of many years allowed Luang Por to accumulate a great deal of understanding of the problems that can arise in human relationships. The kind of conflicts that arose in a monastery were not as far removed from those in a family as might be expected. Moreover, the wisdom that arises from cultivation of the Eightfold Path had given Luang Por a comprehensive knowledge of causality in its many modes, including an understanding of the relationships between mental states and behaviour – both destructive and constructive. On one occasion, a visitor was bemoaning her lot and told Luang Por how lucky he was not to have a family, with all of the tangled problems that it entailed. He replied:

I do have a family here in the monastery, and it’s a big one.

Listening to laypeople, monks and nuns unburdening themselves to him over the years was another rich source of material to reflect upon.

Living at Wat Pah Pong is, for me, like being a dustbin. People come and throw their problems at me all the time. This person comes to complain and then that one – it’s given me a lot of wisdom.

His principle in teaching householders was a simple one:

I teach them in the same way that I always teach myself.

### Marriage

In a Buddhist culture, a marriage ceremony involves no religious rituals. It is considered to be a wholly secular affair, in which two people formalize their commitment to each other in the eyes of their family and friends and the state. The bride and groom receive blessings from the elders of both families and sign an official register. Although the presence of the Sangha is not required for the validation of the marriage, it is common on the morning of the wedding for a group of monks to be invited to chant verses of blessing and to receive alms. If the senior monk is the teacher of one of the newly united families, then he may be invited to give some words of advice to the newly married couple. On one such occasion, Luang Por travelled up to a small village which had supported him and his disciples in the period before he established Wat Pah Pong, to bless the wedding of the daughter of an old lay supporter. The house was packed with people who had known him for a long time.

Luang Por gave advice to many newly married couples over the years. In Thailand, a favourite theme for such talks are the four householder virtues[11] (honesty, self-improvement, patience and generosity), as a foundation for a long, happy life together. Luang Por occasionally spoke about these qualities, but on this particular day he adopted a more cautionary note: married life was no bed of roses and couples need to be prepared to work hard on themselves and the marriage to make it work. Dhamma was the only thing that would give them the ability to deal well with the challenges ahead and make their life together ‘auspicious’. His talk was clearly not meant for the young couple alone, but for all the people gathered together to hear him speak.

As he often did when addressing people who had known him for many years, Luang Por taught in a direct, plain-spoken manner, his voice, nevertheless, imbued with an obvious warmth and good humour. He began by telling the couple that the ceremony itself wasn’t particularly important; it was how they conducted themselves afterwards that really mattered (an echo of the words he would use to newly ordained monks). An occasion did not become auspicious because of the ceremonies performed; and if animals were killed for a wedding feast then, on the contrary, the occasion would be extremely inauspicious. Auspiciousness was, in fact, a synonym of goodness and virtue. The couple’s lives would be auspicious if they made efforts to live them in such a way that they grew in goodness, and if they were able to instil goodness in their future children and grandchildren.

Luang Por went on to instruct the couple about the meaning of the word ‘khrop khrua’, the Thai word for ‘family’. He said that the reason why the married life of the Buddha’s great female lay disciple Visākhā had been so free of problems was because she had no unrealistic expectations, having received explanations about the reality of family life from a monk before her marriage. Now, Luang Por was following in this tradition. His explanation of ‘khrop khrua’ involved an etymology that was entirely original to him, and provided an exposition of family life that, at first glance, seems overly grim. But it is difficult to overestimate the importance of context to understanding the tone and import of oral teachings. Here, Luang Por was visiting old lay disciples, and his clever play on words (this is a culture that loves wordplay) would have delighted his listeners, tempering the directness of his words. Luang Por may be imagined to have a gleam in his eye, the audience (with the possible exception of the bride and groom) to have big smiles on their faces and for there to be numerous meaningful glances and nudges amongst them as he speaks:

You still don’t really understand the meaning of this word ‘khrop khrua’ (family). First of all, ‘khrop’ – okay, listen to this carefully: you’re breathing comfortably, moving around at your ease, and then you get hold of something and box yourself inside it (khrop). Can you handle that? ‘Khrua’ means that after you’ve been closed in there, you’re cut open with a knife and gutted (khrua[12]), and you can’t escape. That’s the etymology of the word ‘khrop khrua’. In other words, it means now you’re going to be assailed by all kinds of problems. That’s why I’ve come to give you some advice on how to deal with all this complexity in your lives and cut off the problems. Now you have a khrop khrua, you’re living in a confined space; your livelihood and finding the money to raise a family is more important than anything else. The ceremonies today are superficial. What is important is to create some understanding.

He taught that it was important for family members to try to understand each other’s point of view. They should learn how to be good listeners, easy to talk to, skilful in speaking in ways that did not inflame disagreements. They should not talk about private family matters with other people or bring disruptive issues from elsewhere into the family home. In words first taught to the great laywoman Visākhā, they should not take fire from within the house outdoors, or fire from outdoors into the house:

Some places I’ve been to, family members don’t understand each other at all: the husband and the wife, the father-in-law and the son-in-law, the mother-in-law and the daughter-in-law – they all keep arguing away and then have to drag each other off to the village headman’s house to have him help to adjudicate. Having to rely on the village headman is like somebody being out in the hot sun and not knowing how to get into the shade by themselves, or being thirsty and not knowing how to put water into their own mouth. That’s pathetic. I’ve seen this in one village where the headman was at the limits of his endurance with people going over the same old matter, again and again, with no end to it. People should know how to solve their own problems. In family matters – disagreements with your parents or your children or your grandchildren – you should know how to make decisions and resolve conflicts by yourselves. Patiently talk things through.

You’ve all been children. You know it’s difficult for children to understand their parents … You think you’re teaching your children but they think you’re telling them off or nagging them. So, each side goes off on their own track and you don’t get on any more … As parents, it’s easier because you were once a son or daughter living with parents, and so you’ve seen both sides. An adult can understand a child, but a child can’t fully understand an adult. That’s why it’s difficult to talk to each other.

But no matter the difficulties, the ups and downs of emotion, you’re still able to live together. How? The virtue of respect. Even if your parents complain and nag, they’re still your parents and you respect them for that reason. No matter how angry you are with them, you could never kill your mother or father. If they weren’t your parents, you might have by now! … We get by because of mutual respect.

Parents and children in conflict with each other were to learn how to step back from their feelings of hurt and frustration and reflect on the big picture of their relationship. Each had to learn how to release their attachment to resentments and fixed views.

Don’t give in to your emotions. When your children don’t listen to what you tell them, then remember that you were their age once; as they get older, they will gradually understand. Sons and daughters should bring to mind how their parents have brought them up and cared for them. That’s how it’s done: both sides letting go. Things settle down, you start to feel more comfortable, and the tensions are released.

It was mutual respect that provided the glue that held a family together through its ups and downs.

‘Gāravo ca nivāto ca’[13]. If there is mutual respect amongst all the members of a family – between grandparents, parents and children – then even if there are misunderstandings you can get by. Because respect is Dhamma. It is a principle that binds people together and prevents them from breaking apart.

His message was that married life is one of shared struggles, of sacrifices. By practice of the Dhamma, couples could prepare themselves for coming challenges. They could make something good and auspicious out of their life together.

Getting married, inviting your teacher to instruct you is the beginning of the establishment of your life together. Before, you were a son and a daughter, and now you’re taking the first steps towards becoming a mother and father. Being someone’s child isn’t difficult. When the roof leaks, it doesn’t leak on the children, it leaks on the parents. When there’s no money, the shortages don’t reach the children; it’s the parents that go without. So make your married life a good one, make it auspicious.

Finally, as the accompanying monks chanted auspicious Jayanto protection verses, Luang Por sprinkled lustral water over the bowed heads of his audience.

### Not Breaking the Pot

Luang Por’s talks often contained a current ‘Dhamma riff’. This was a teaching that might be based on a simile or a pun or a passage from the Suttas. For a month or two, this riff would pop up in his Dhamma talks on a regular basis until one day it disappeared without trace. The term ‘khrop khrua’, featured above, formed the basis for one such riff on the pitfalls of the household life. On one occasion, he spoke of how small differences overlooked at the beginning of a marriage can fester over many years and leave elderly married couples with little in common:

Keep a close eye out for this. The stronger the love, the stronger the negative emotion. To begin with, married life is not so bad, but by the time you’re fifty or sixty you can find that your words hardly make any impression on the other one. The old woman says something over here and the old man sits listening way over there. By now he wants to rig up a curtain between them. Why is that? Because of ‘khrop khrua’. They don’t know how to get through to each other.

A child in the family is a source of joy, and yet, at the same time it can be hard and stressful work for the parents.

When a baby’s born the parents have to take responsibility for it. The baby has no idea of the burden it’s placing on its parents. It wants to crap and so it does, without any thought for the parents. It wants to run around, and you have to follow along behind it cleaning up and making sure it’s all right.

Love was not enough. Without cultivation of the ability to reflect wisely on experience, raising children could easily turn sour. He sketched one scenario:

As children grow so does your love for them. Meanwhile, they become even more exuberant and naughty and even more disobedient towards their parents. The child just goes its own way, and the two old grandparents that live with you start complaining. It’s all so troublesome, there’s always some kind of disturbance. Some of you who are sitting here listening today have probably experienced this.

There was no one fixed way to raise children.

Some people teach just a little, and the child turns out well. Some people teach a lot, and their child takes no notice. Then the parents have to harden their heart and be stern.

Luang Por said that parents should take the Buddha’s advice that, in any task, including raising children, they should consider themselves like a potter shaping pots. Their job is to keep their attention on making the best pot they can, given the raw materials at hand and their own skills. They need wisdom to focus on doing their job as parents, in such a way as neither they nor their children suffer in the process. If they are sure that sometimes being stern is the best thing for the child, then so be it. The important thing is not to dwell on it in the wrong way and create suffering. It is not that parents are forbidden from having strong emotions while raising a child but emotions need to be understood for what they are.

The ideal was to solve family problems in the way prescribed by the Thai proverb in which the fish is caught and eaten with the lotus still unbruised and the water unmuddied. But unfortunately, he said, what often happens is that the lotus is bruised, the water muddied, and all the fish die in the water.

But ‘khrop khrua’ – these feelings of confinement and of being skewered by problems – were just part of life. He turned again to his own monastic family:

I try and shape the clay into pots and not to let the pots break. I teach people how not to suffer and don’t let myself suffer either. I teach them and teach myself at the same time continuously. Some people only teach others. They’re like the housewife washing the dishes. She sees they’re dirty and so she cleans them, but her mind is clouded. She is scowling and grumbling away to herself. She’s scrubbing the dishes clean, but her heart is dirty. She’s not looking at her mind. It’s really saddening how she gets the dishes clean and makes her mind dirty at the same time. Is that what you want? Watch out! Sometimes you grab a broom and start sweeping the house. The children have left a mess. They’re completely mindless. You grumble and grumble as you sweep. You sweep the house clean but you don’t sweep your heart, and you’re suffering the whole time.

### Worry

On one occasion, a woman came to see Luang Por full of anxiety for her son.

“My children have no ambition. They have no drive to make anything of themselves. I’m afraid that they’re not going to survive in the world. Luang Por, tell me what to do.”

I’d say that you’ve got the wrong idea as well. It’s like mice living in a hole. When their children are small, the parents search for food for them. But when their children are grown, do they still do that? Do they still dig holes for their children? No, that’s not what happens. The young mice go and dig their own holes. Your children are the way they are. From what I’ve seen, some people, after their parents’ deaths, become richer than their parents ever were. That also happens, and my advice is that you should think more generously of your children, and then you will be at ease. You love your children. When they’re successful, you take their success as your own. When they do something bad, your mind dwells on their badness. You can’t dig it out, you can’t loosen its grip. And so, you don’t get anywhere.

### Bereavement

Luang Por stressed that it was important to face up to the fragility of life and the inevitability of separation. The worst nightmare of a parent is the loss of a son or daughter. The untrained mind shies away from the very thought; as if by accepting the possibility that such a terrible thing might happen, it somehow makes it more likely that it will, in fact, occur. Luang Por maintained that it was wiser to prepare for any eventuality:

It’s as if a snake slithers into the room while you’re sitting there with your eyes closed. As long as you don’t see it you’re unafraid. But the moment that you catch sight of it, then you become terrified. You jump up and rush out … It’s like when there is nothing but love, without wisdom … if you’ve never used your wisdom to reflect on that love, and the one you love dies, then you feel the loss as if 90% of yourself had died with him. It’s a catastrophe; you don’t know how to deal with it.

Meditation and regular contemplation on the nature of change was a preparation for whatever life had to throw at you.

It’s as if you see the cobra slither in. Although it’s poisonous, you are prepared and you may not even feel afraid. Perhaps you shoo it away or simply get out of its way. Despite its poison, it can’t bite you; and if you’re not bitten, then you don’t get poisoned.

On one occasion, he spoke to a woman who had lost her teenaged son some time before and was still unable to let go of the grief. As she was a meditator, he went beyond words of comfort. At one point, he said:

You must understand that he was truly your son, but only on a conventional level. This particular lifetime he took birth with you. The good and the bad things he did were his own. The length or brevity of his life was his own kammic inheritance. Through the processes of becoming and birth, you simply gave him the opportunity to be born. If you look at it in that way, then you can be at ease in your mind.

The time was now ripe to let go and see her grief through the eyes of a Dhamma practitioner. Her suffering now was through attachment to the conditioned perception of ‘son’. Her challenge was to recognize that every thought of her lost child was a conditioned and impermanent event that arose and passed away in her mind and did not belong to her. The question was whether she was willing to let go.

### Cutting the Pie

A wealthy female lay supporter once recounted the advice Luang Por gave her concerning her possessions:

“I used to think I’d divide my wealth – my fields and orchards – amongst my children. I didn’t think much about it beyond that. I just thought I’d distribute what I had and then in my old age rely on my children to look after me. That was the plan in my head, but Luang Por must have known because he warned me about it.”

If you’re thinking about dividing your wealth amongst your children, you should first consider it carefully. It might not be such a good idea to give everything away. It might happen that your children don’t recognize the debt of gratitude they owe to you as their parent, abandon you and refuse to take responsibility. Then, when you’re old, you won’t have anyone to rely on. When you make the division, put one part aside for yourself. As long as your children and grandchildren know that you still have one part of your fortune left, they will look after you. Otherwise, you might end up like a rotten log that has no mushrooms growing on it and nobody paying it any attention.

“I reflected on Luang Por’s advice and followed it. He was right in everything he said. He must have known in advance what would happen. It increased my respect and faith in him, and I tried to follow what he taught me: to accumulate goodness by keeping the precepts and cultivating my mind.”

## Dhamma Practice

We’re like a chicken, that’s all. The chicken’s born, has chicks and spends its day scratching around in the dirt. And then in the evening, it goes to sleep. In the morning, it jumps down to the ground and starts scratching around again, ‘guk, guk, guk’. And then in the evening, it goes to sleep again. Is there any point to it? No.

We’re like chickens, like creatures with no wisdom. The owner comes every day with food. He takes hold of the chicken and lifts it up in his arms to look at it. The chicken thinks the owner’s being affectionate. As for the owner, he’s thinking, ‘Hmm. It’s getting heavy, how much does it weigh? Is it up to two or three kilos yet?’ The chicken doesn’t know what’s going on. The owner brings it rice to eat, and it’s happy; it thinks the owner loves it. It eats it all up, gets fat and thinks it’s got it made. But as soon as the chicken weighs two or three kilos, ‘That’s it! Off to the market.’

That’s how most people lead their lives; they don’t see the danger. They’re deluded, just like the chicken. The owner takes the chicken off to the market. It’s in the back of the truck, and it’s still clucking ‘Ohk, ohk!’, having a great time. Then the car reaches the market, and the owner sells the chicken to a Chinese stall owner. The chicken still doesn’t suspect anything. The Chinese guy tears the feathers off its neck, and the chicken thinks the guy is grooming it. The chicken is that stupid. It’s only when the knife has cut its throat that the chicken realizes, ‘Oh, I’m dead.’ We don’t see our own life. We don’t know how to remedy our defilements.

From the moment that he established Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por began teaching his lay disciples that their responsibilities weren’t confined to offering food to the Sangha and making merit. Dhamma isn’t something far away, he’d say, it’s not something belonging to the monks. Dhamma is the truth of all living things and the freedom from suffering is possible for anybody – monastic or lay – who cultivates the Eightfold Path.

Everyone – monastics and lay Buddhists – have an equal opportunity to practise Dhamma and to reflect on it. And the Dhamma which monastics and lay meditators reflect on is the same Dhamma and leads to the same peace by the same means.

Practising Dhamma was the way to make the best possible use of a human birth that was rare and precious. He said that procrastinating about the effort to cultivate one’s mind and then lamenting about it when you were already old and approaching death was like being an incompetent gardener:

You plant beans, melons, pumpkins, green beans and so on. Once they grow up, they mature, and then they go rotten. Knowing that, you pick them before that happens, don’t you? If you want to cook and eat them or sell or barter them so that you derive some benefit from them, then do it in a timely way. What’s the use of sitting around lamenting when they have gone rotten?

On her retirement, Upāsikā Ranjuan, a highly regarded author and civil servant, left the lay life and went to live in the nuns’ community at Wat Pah Pong.[14] Later, she went on to become a widely respected Dhamma teacher. Her life changed direction after listening to the teachings of Luang Por.

“Like most Buddhists, I’d make merit, listen to Dhamma talks, put food in the monks’ bowls, take the precepts and all those kind of things, and I thought that was enough. I never considered that anything more was required to be a true Buddhist. Then I heard Luang Por give a Dhamma talk for the first time, and I realized that the most important thing that a Buddhist should do is to train his or her mind, and that to do so would be fulfilling the deepest wish of the Buddha.”

For most of the villagers who came to the monastery every week, their basic meditation practice was chanting. Many of them would memorize the entire Pali-Thai chanting book and would chant at home in the morning and evening. It was a calming practice, one that could bring joy into the mind, and the Thai translations provided them with key teachings at their fingertips. But Luang Por encouraged them to practise sitting meditation as well, and to cultivate a more profound understanding of their lives:

Don’t forget to meditate on the mantra ‘Buddho’ and to reflect on ‘head-hair, body-hair, nails, teeth and skin’ so as to see the fragility and impermanence of the physical body. Think about it, reflect on it continually … When your thinking is correct, then your mind will be at ease. Undesirable consequences will disappear, and there will be no suffering. If your thinking is incorrect, suffering will increase.

In Dhamma books written in English, a handy distinction is made between the Pali word ‘Dhamma’ (‘the truth of things’; the teachings and practices that lead towards the realization of that truth) and ‘dhamma’ meaning ‘thing’. In Pali itself and in the Thai language, however, there is no orthographic means of distinguishing the two; and the pronunciation is identical. In fact, there is an organic relationship between Dhamma and dhammas (knowing Dhamma is, in essence, knowing dhammas) that Luang Por frequently referred to when he was trying to bring Dhamma practice down to earth for his audience and emphasize its practicality:

The word ‘dhamma’ means all things. There is nothing that is not a dhamma … dhamma includes all phenomena that make up our body and mind.

The Buddha taught us to understand all things that are inside and outside of ourselves. The practices that enable us to do that are called Dhamma.

The understanding of these different meanings of the word demands that we understand ourself. If we understand ourself, then we understand Dhamma, because Dhamma lies within us.

He said that Dhamma practice consisted of developing the correct relationship to dhammas. The essential nature of dhammas is a constant arising and ceasing. This nature is unaffected by whether or not a Buddha is enlightened. It can never disappear from the world because it is the ‘way things are’.

Dhamma isn’t something that can become extinct. The enlightenment factors are still present and so are practitioners. The reason you don’t get enlightened is because you’re still so lax in your practice.

Dhamma practice wasn’t some esoteric pursuit suitable only for monastics. It was a matter of developing wisdom about your own life. Sometimes, laypeople would come to him and say that they couldn’t meditate because they were illiterate.

Why do you need to be literate? You put your hand in the fire and it’s hot, you put it in water and it’s cool. Do you understand that much? If you do, you can cultivate the Dhamma. The word ‘bhāvanā’ is monks’ language. In ordinary language, we say ‘consider’ or ‘reflect’[15]. Just know whatever arises in your mind. When anger arises in your mind, are you aware of it? Greed arises: are you aware of it? What’s it like to be angry? What’s it like to feel desire? Just keep looking at that. What else did you think it was about?

If you can move and breathe, if you know the difference between hot and cold, and between liking and disliking, then you can still practise the Dhamma because the Dhamma appears in this very body and mind. Don’t think that Dhamma is a long way away. It’s with us. It’s about nothing else but us. Just look: one moment you’re happy and the next, you’re sad; one moment you’re satisfied and the next, you’re not. Then you’re getting angry with that person and hating this one. That’s all Dhamma.

Nothing belongs to us. We don’t even belong to us. In the end, we disintegrate according to the law of impermanence … Head-hair, body-hair, nails, teeth and skin – If you contemplate these things well, then you will see them in their true light. These things are not ours, because they’re not under our control. The whole body is the same. When it wants to hurt, it hurts; when it wants to get old, it gets old; and when it wants to die, then it dies. It never listens to us about any of it. When you get a headache or a stomach ache, has your body ever asked your permission first?

### Mindfulness is Your Business

It was mindfulness – bringing to mind, bearing in mind, all that need to be brought to and held there at any moment – that Luang Por taught was the key to practice. In daily life, one of the most important aspects of mindfulness practice was keeping the precepts in the forefront of consciousness. The meditator had to be constantly aware of the presence or absence of defilements in the mind. When someone asked him whether it was possible to do that all day he replied:

Right up until the day you die! All day’s a bit too short a time.

As long as you were breathing, you could be aware. A woman complained that she had so many tasks to see to that she did not have time to practise mindfulness as well. He said:

That is your task. Maintaining mindfulness is a task. People who are mindful perform their tasks well. If you lose your mindfulness for two minutes, you’re crazy for two minutes; for one minute, then you’re crazy for one minute. Not speaking harshly to anybody – that is a mindfulness practice. You need to be aware of what mindfulness is and how it functions.

Are you thinking of harming others? Is your thinking wrong? Be aware of this. Others can’t see your mind, but you can. With mindfulness encompassing your mind, then morality, concentration and wisdom can arise. Look into this. When you’re going to say something, mindfulness is like having someone there telling you what to say who knows the implications of your words, and whether you’re repeating yourself. When you don’t know what to do, mindfulness knows.

‘Attanā codayattānaṃ’: ‘You must admonish yourself’ – that’s how you become your own refuge. Otherwise, if you think you’d like to do something that’s not right, you look about from side to side. You see your mother’s not around, your father’s not around, there’s no teacher present, nobody can see you – okay! You do it immediately. Someone who thinks like that has already gone to the bad. You’ll do something bad when nobody can see you. But what about yourself? Aren’t you someone as well … Do you think it’s possible to do something without this person seeing?

Luang Por summarized:

With constant mindfulness, everything is Dhamma … If you know the Dhamma, it’s not possible to lie to yourself or others.

Looking at the mind meant constantly monitoring it to see what was causing suffering. There had to be some kind of craving and attachment in the mind for suffering to arise.

It’s very simple: look at where you’re attached. When there’s strong suffering in the mind, or so much happiness that you get carried away by it, then there’s been an error.

The error was in taking ownership of the mental state. By exploring where the mind is stuck, mindfulness arises.

If you have constant mindfulness and alertness in every posture, then you will know right and wrong, you will know pleasure and sadness. And when you know what these things are, then you will know the method of dealing with them so that they do not cause suffering.

This is how I have people learn about samādhi. When it’s time to sit, then sit for a reasonable time. That’s not wrong either – know what sitting meditation is all about. But cultivating samādhi isn’t just sitting. You must allow yourself to experience things and pass those experiences on for contemplation. So, what can you come to know through contemplation? You know that this is impermanent, unsatisfactory and not self. Nothing is fixed. ‘This is beautiful; I really like it!’ You caution yourself, ‘It’s changeful.’ ‘I don’t like this at all!’ Tell yourself, ‘It can change, can’t it?’ That’s utterly correct, no question about it.

But you go for things … ‘I’m going to do that!’ It seems so cut-and-dried, and you’re after it already. Don’t do that. However much you like something, you must remember that the liking can change. You eat some foods and, ‘Oh, this is delicious! I love it!’ That’s how you feel about it. You must reflect that the feeling is not a sure thing. Do you want to know how it’s not a sure thing? Try eating your favourite food every day. Every single day. Before long you’ll be complaining that it doesn’t taste so good anymore. Give it a try. Then you’ll like something else instead. And that won’t be a sure thing either. This needs to be taken up for contemplation. Everything’s like the breath. There has to be inhalation and exhalation. The nature of the breath is to change. Everything that exists does so through this kind of change.

### Boxing Clever

The unpredictable nature of our lives and the importance of making the best use of the time we have, was a major theme of Luang Por’s teachings. Death can come at any time. Luang Por would say that by refusing to face up to the truth of our inevitable death, we don’t see how important it is to abandon bad qualities and develop the good. Cultivating the mind is vitally important because at the time of death, it is the goodness that we have accumulated – the merit – that provides our true refuge.

Wealth and property will all be separated from you but the things which you have built up in your mind will not. If your mind is evil, it will take you on an evil path. If your mind is good, it will take you on a good path. Your possessions can’t make you good or bad. Only your mind can do that. Understand this point.

Wise people prepare not only for physical death, but also for the small deaths of separation from the loved, by reflecting on the truths of life again and again – like boxers training for a fight by working on sandbags.

If they’ve never trained, or if they’ve never burst the sack of sand with their kicks, then when they get into the ring they have their teeth knocked out. When your health goes or your child dies or your wealth is lost then all you’ll be able to do is cry, because you’ve never prepared for it. You’ll be a boxer who hasn’t done his training.

You must keep training yourself with the truths of impermanence, suffering and not-self. Constantly reflect on Dhamma. Then when something happens you’ll recognize it as just an expression of those things: impermanence, suffering and not-self. You won’t suffer too much because you’ll see it for what it is. Prepare yourself. You can’t afford to be indifferent to this. If you were to climb into the ring right now, you’d be knocked straight out of it again. You have to train.

Luang Por said losses may be endured without tears and grief when they are seen through the perspective gained by training the mind. When the mind has developed Right View, it has an inner refuge and doesn’t add any unnecessary pain to the loss.

But usually when there are fires and floods, you allow them to burn and flood your mind as well. When someone dies, you die with them. If that’s the case, then you have no place of rest.

On another occasion, he compared this perception of impermanence to seeing a drinking glass as already broken. He said that the Buddha could see the broken glass within the unbroken. Anybody who could see the glass as already broken would not get attached to it, because they would recognize it as a temporary configuration of its constituent elements that would eventually shatter. All things should be looked upon similarly – as bearing within them their inevitable destruction – including the physical body. This did not mean that, being doomed to death, the body is useless and people might as well commit suicide. It means that it was to be put to good purpose as long as it was in a state to do so.

### The Wisdom of ‘Enough’

Luang Por spoke of elderly lay disciples who became discouraged and depressed by their growing inability to recall the words of the chanting texts, or to learn new ones. Luang Por said that memory loss was not an obstacle to Dhamma practice, because there was far more to Dhamma than chanting. In daily life, the Dhamma was to be found from searching for the right or optimal amount in every matter.

When you’re eating you need to make the mouthful of rice just the right size in order to chew it conveniently. That is Dhamma. If the mouthful is as small as a monkey apple seed or as big as a chicken’s egg, then it won’t be the right size; and that won’t be Dhamma. It’s the same when you’re making a dress or a pair of trousers. They have to be just the right size for the wearer. Make them too small for the wearer and he can’t put them on, too large and they look ridiculous. The clothes that you wear to the monastery, if they’re clean and without holes, that’s fine. If you’re poor, then struggling to find the money to buy more expensive clothes, exceeding your income, just leads to difficulties.

Protect your mind from excessive desires for things which you don’t need and have no right to. Pursue your desires in correct and appropriate ways. When you get what you want, there’s no need to get overly happy about it, and when you lose something, don’t get overly sad. Don’t allow your mind to get carried away with forms, sounds, odours, tastes and touch sensations. Know whenever things coming into the mind are making it dull, sullied and disturbed, and use whatever means necessary to chase them out. This is what it means to practise Dhamma. The mind is most important. Acting well or speaking well depends on the mind. Harmful actions and harmful speech depend on the mind. That is why we need to train ourselves with sitting and walking meditation, and with reflecting on our experience.

### ‘That’s All It Is’

One of the most enjoyable features of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks was his use of everyday words and phrases to convey profound points of Dhamma. One such phrase was ‘mun kor khae nun lae’, rendered here as: ‘That’s all it is.’ It is one of those simple phrases that defy easy translation. It is used to deflate, often employed to tell somebody who is making too much out of a matter that it is less valuable, less important than they think; that it doesn’t affect the main issues at hand; that it is, when all’s said and done, a limited, unsatisfactory thing. The nearest parallel English expression might be the dampening, ‘So what?’.

I’m going to give you a short, abbreviated teaching to use in your daily life. Everyone inwardly recite: ‘That’s all it is.’ This one phrase is enough to reduce your suffering. Everything leaves us, dies to us. However good and noble, beautiful or ugly things might be, they’re all part of the world. You will have to leave them behind when you die. Don’t attach to them at all. If you have a responsibility, then fulfil it. If it’s your responsibility to make a living in order to look after your family, then go ahead. Make enough to live, enough to eat. Be content with what you can make – a lot or a little. Or if you’re unsuccessful, then be at peace with your failure and then try again. Whatever the case, this mantra, ‘That’s all it is’, is always appropriate. Your suffering will naturally recede. That’s what it means to live wisely. Whenever you take things up to reflect on them, through this phrase it will all become Dhamma. These words can be used as a tool.

### Bhāvanā

Some five years or so before the end of his teaching career, Luang Por gave a talk to the lay supporters gathered together on an Observance Day night. It is a talk on the topic of ‘bhāvanā’ that summarizes much of his teaching on Dhamma practice:

‘Bhāvanā’ or ‘cultivation’, means the action of ‘creating’ or ‘improving’.

Any effort put into creating or developing goodness and wisdom was bhāvanā. In fact, giving and virtuous conduct should also be seen as forms of bhāvanā. He said:

In giving, in keeping precepts, there must be Dhamma cultivation at every moment … Even if you give a single lump of rice or a single pair of trousers or give just a small amount of anything, you feel happy because you’ve made a gift of something that belonged to you, with no buying or selling involved. After the gift has been made, both the one who gives and the one who receives feel content. Those feelings didn’t exist before. The creation of those feelings is called cultivation ​[bhāvanā].

The benefits of giving did not end with the act itself. He also urged his audience to practise the meditation of ‘recollection of generosity’ (cāgānussati). By bringing to mind one’s kind actions in the past, great joy could arise in the mind and suppress the hindrances to lucid calm and wisdom.

Cultivation of the Dhamma was to be carried on in every posture. In daily life, the emphasis should be on reflecting on experience in the light of Dhamma.

Whether you’re working or performing some good action, – whatever you’re doing – cultivate the Dhamma by reflecting on what’s going on. Cultivation doesn’t just mean sitting. Standing can be cultivation. Walking can be cultivation. Sitting and lying down can be cultivation. In every posture, it means trying to make your thinking correct.

Luang Por used the word ‘took tong’, translated here as ‘correct’, to mean conforming to the nature of things. Took tong was an important word for him. On one occasion, he summarized the Buddha’s teachings with the words ‘Dhamma means correctness.’ By making thinking correct, he was not necessarily pointing to the cultivation of specific correct thoughts, but rather, to thinking that was free of defilement, thinking that took into account the realities of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self:

Not harming yourself or others, making whatever you do beneficial, doing only what is correct, speaking correctly, thinking correctly. All the kinds of correctness are the merit that arises from bhāvanā.

This effort to cultivate Dhamma by constantly looking at experience with the eye of wisdom, is rendered here as ‘reflection’, a translation of the Thai word ‘pijarana’, which has meanings ranging from ‘investigation’ to ‘consideration’ to ‘contemplation’. He pointed out to his audience that this power of reflection is not esoteric. Everyone already possesses it to some extent, and uses it in their daily life. A lack of it always causes difficulties.

Buying, selling, exchanging – whatever you’re doing – you have to cultivate: you have to reflect, to consider. Your income is so much, your expenditure is so much, you need do this first and then do that, you need to plan things out – it’s all bhāvanā. Correct bhāvanā puts you at ease and makes the mind lucidly calm. Everybody – whether you live in a village, a monastery, wherever you are – if you reflect with a correct understanding of things, then it is bhāvanā.

The ability to consider things with a clear mind prevented being swayed by negative emotions or consumed by fear. He gave an example of the cultivation of wisdom in daily life by reflecting on experience:

I once heard Ajahn Buddhadāsa giving a talk on the radio. He said when he was a boy he was terrified of ghosts. He would take the cattle out to graze in the morning and return in the evening. On the way home, he would pass a cremation forest and he would be afraid and would climb up onto the buffalo’s back. The buffalo would be munching grass indifferently. One day as he sat there on the buffalo’s back he thought about it, ‘Eh, this buffalo is better than me. It’s not afraid of ghosts. It’s happily chomping away on the grass. It’s the one sitting on its back that is afraid of this and that, constantly full of dread.’ As he considered it, he saw that fear arises from thinking. It is a conditioned phenomenon.

Using wisdom in daily life, he explained, is the ability to recognize and reflect on the impermanence of our experience. The wise person takes nothing for granted. Fools assume that tomorrow will be more or less the same as today and that we will be more or less the same person throughout our life. They are heedless of the truth of things, without perspective, caught up in whatever the present state of affairs happens to be.

Wealth, rank, fame, success – none of these things, if gained honestly, were bad in themselves. The problems came when people identified with them too much. The result was a form of intoxication.

Don’t get drunk on these things. If you can get rich, then get rich. If you can’t hold on to your wealth and become poor, then be poor – but don’t get drunk on it. Don’t be drunk with your poverty, and don’t get drunk on your wealth. If you’re suffering, don’t get drunk on your suffering; if you’re happy, don’t get drunk on your happiness. If you’re young, don’t get drunk on your youth; and if you’re old, don’t get drunk on your old age.

This heedlessness, the refusal to face up to these simple truths of life – that all beings are on a path to old age and death – feeds a pride and conceit that lies at the heart of human suffering. Luang Por, comparing relationships to a road, said problems arose the moment that people became lost in self-views:

In this monastery, in this Dhamma Hall, if anyone thinks, ‘I’m better than you are’ or, ‘You’re more stupid than I am’, ‘I’m more intelligent than you are’ or ‘You’re not like me’ and so on, bumps and potholes appear. Whenever anyone says or does anything, they look at each other with mistrust.

But, he said, reflection on the Buddha’s teachings that remind us of our common humanity, ‘will ease your anxieties and attachments’.

He told his audience that despite all the people sitting listening to his talk, there was just one thing really going on: the relentless, ownerless process of change. He said that the teaching that we can find nothing solid in our body or mind that is really who we are or truly belongs to us is difficult to take. People without self-awareness hearing such words get angry and complain that Dhamma talks on such matters are unpleasant or offensive.

When you say, ‘Reflect on this: you were born to die, life is unreliable’ – it’s even worse. People get up and leave, they can’t stand it. They think you’re talking about base, inauspicious things. ‘Things are born, and then they die.’ The more these people hear, the more frightened they become. They don’t want to listen and they leave.

But the truths of life are irrefutable, and it is wise to face up to them and reflect:

The Buddha taught us to cultivate. We are all the same. Rich or poor – we’re born, we get old, we get sick and then we die in very similar ways. When you dwell on this kind of Dhamma reflection, then your mind will find an even consistency wherever you go.

But, as Luang Por would note, most people do not apply their minds in that way:

They grasp on to things until they suffer and then carry that suffering around with them without realizing what’s happening.

He returned to his theme that he was teaching more than a meditation technique:

Bhāvanā doesn’t mean sitting cross-legged with your eyes closed. Some people come to the wat every day, and on the Observance Day they practise sitting meditation. But as soon as they get home they throw it all away. They quarrel with their spouse or their children, quarrel with all the people around them, thinking that they are no longer meditating. When they meditate, they close their eyes in order to make merit. But when they finish meditating, the merit doesn’t go with them. They just take the demerit. They have no endurance. They are not practising Dhamma.

Actually, this practice can be done anywhere – in the wat or outside it. It’s like studying in a good school. Once you’ve learned how to read at school, then you can read at home, in the fields or in the forest. You can read in a group or you can read alone. If you know how to read, you don’t have to run off to the school every time; you can read wherever you want.

His definition of someone who knows how to cultivate was:

When you have wisdom, whether you’re out in the fields or you go into the forest, live in a big group or a small one, whether you’re blamed or praised, you have a constant thorough-going knowledge of what’s going on, and that’s what it means to be a cultivator. You have to know the nature of all mental states. When you do, you’re at ease, you’re someone who knows how to bhāvanā. You have a single object.

Luang Por is using the phrase ‘single object’ (ekaggatārammaṇa) here in an unusual way. Whereas it would usually be used in the reference to the development of samādhi, in this context, Luang Por explained it to mean ‘no entanglement’. There is no entanglement with any object because the mind does not grasp at experience as self or belonging to self. Thus the mind dwelling on a single object does not mean that it is focused on one particular phenomenon, but on the nature of things – anicca, dukkha and anattā.

It is the letting go of attachment to phenomena through seeing their true nature that is correct cultivation.

Standing, you must be a cultivator; walking, you must be a cultivator; sitting, you must be a cultivator; and lying down, you must be a cultivator.

The reason why cultivation must be practised in all postures is because death can occur in any posture. Cultivation is a preparation for death. If you only cultivate in the sitting posture, what will happen if your death approaches while you are in another posture.

The same argument applies to the arising of defilement in the mind. Have you ever been angry? Have you ever been angry while you were lying down? Or are you only angry when you sit with your eyes closed? If you’re going to depend solely on sitting meditation, then how can you cultivate?

Cultivation means a thorough-going and comprehensive knowledge of what’s going on. The Buddha had us be mindful and have self-awareness, wisdom and circumspection while standing, walking, sitting and lying down, able to see the flawed and unflawed[16] states of mind at all times. That’s what it means to be a cultivator. If you have this constant knowing, then nothing can affect you adversely, the mind is constantly smooth and at ease. The mind is in its normal state.

Towards the end of his teaching career, Luang Por read and was impressed by the newly published Thai translations of Chinese Zen Masters such as Huang Po. This became apparent in the way in which he began to talk about the distinction between the mind itself[17] and mental states. He started to use terms like ‘original mind’, not as philosophical positions but as skilful means to be used for looking within. At the end of this talk, Luang Por emphasized that people make a mistake in complaining about their mind being in turmoil. He said that there’s nothing wrong with the mind itself, it’s naturally at ease. It’s the defilements, the craving which are the problem. It was important to separate the two.

It’s like the leaves in the forest. Normally, the leaves are still. So when they flutter about, what’s the cause of that? It’s because of the wind blowing. If there’s no wind, then the leaves remain in their normal still state. Our mind, our ‘original mind’, is the same. It is naturally at peace and clean. What swings about all the time is a new mind, a false mind, constantly dragged here and there by craving: swinging between pleasure and pain. That isn’t the mind itself. Remember this point. When your mind becomes busy and confused, then remember what I’m telling you: this is not your mind. Your mind is free of all this; its nature is pure and clean. This is a false mind, an untrained mind. Go away and think about this, then you will know how to discriminate in your Dhamma practice. Don’t watch over anything else but your mind.

Luang Por said that Dhamma practice meant searching for the natural, original mind. Once that was recognized, then nothing could stir it up. So many people gave up cultivation because they thought their mind was too busy and confused; it was vitally important to know that the mind was never turbulent. The turbulence was the defilements.

The practice began and ended in the mind. It was not a matter of starting with generosity and precepts and gradually working up to meditation. Keeping the Five Precepts was necessary for keeping the mind free of disturbance, but the inner work was vital.

If you reach that place where the mind is in its normal state, there will be nothing to disturb you – like leaves in a windless place. Take this away as your homework … Look into your mind. Keep removing what is not so good until you reach the leaf that no wind blows. Reach the pure mind. The Buddha said that right there lies the path to freedom from suffering.

At the end of the talk, Luang Por gave a rousing call for diligence. Life is short and uncertain. Don’t waste what little time you have.

‘The days and nights are relentlessly passing. Right now, what are you doing?’ The Buddha bashes people like this, and they’re indifferent, they don’t feel anything. The days and nights are passing, passing, never slowing down. What are you up to? What are you doing with your life? That’s what he’s asking. Ordinary people hear that and they’re unmoved, but people who have supporting conditions hear this and they think, ‘What am I doing? Am I suffering? Am I happy? What are the inner causes of that happiness? What would add to it?’ That’s how you should be thinking. You have to practise the Dhamma in order to realize the nature of your own mind.

1 The discipline of the white-robed maechee order does not forbid the growing or preparation of food.

2 Outside of the harvesting period in October/November, members of farming communities could choose their day of rest. People working in the town and city could only manage the full Observance Day when it fell on the weekend.

3 Luang Por often invested this common Thai word, ‘khon’, with connotations of ‘untrained’ or ‘worldly’ in order to contrast it with the more elevated and Pali-derived, ‘manut’, or ‘human being’.

4 This phrase is idiomatic rather than literal, and usually accompanied by a slight shake of the head.

5 A short ritual in which the layperson, covered by white cloth, symbolically dies to his bad habits or bad luck and makes a fresh start. It was one of the rituals that Luang Por agreed to conduct after giving a talk explaining the causes and conditions for making a fresh start in life.

6 MN 63

7 Literally: ‘world protectors’. This term refers to the personal and social benefits to be derived from this wise sense of shame (hiri) and fear of wrongdoing (ottappa), without which morality would be left groundless and the world more vulnerable.

8 One of Luang Por’s former students.

9 See Glossary, Māra.

10 This word ‘nak leng’ is difficult to translate. It lies on the spectrum between ‘rascal’ and ‘villain’. Ta Soei was nearer the rascal end of the spectrum.

11 SN 10.12

12 The Isan pronunciation of the Thai word ‘khrua’ is ‘khua’, meaning ‘to eviscerate’.

13 ‘Respect and humility’; A quote from the Maṅgala Sutta (Khp 5; Sn 2.5) which lists 38 qualities that create auspiciousness in the human heart.

14 When it became clear in 1983 that Luang Por’s illness would prevent him resuming his teaching duties, Upāsikā Ranjuan decided to continue her training under Luang Por’s great contemporary, Ajahn Buddhadāsa.

15 This word is often translated into English as ‘meditation’. Below, Luang Por gives a more traditional definition of the term. Giving a new slant on familiar words was a common rhetorical device which he often employed.

16 cf. the cittānupassanā section of the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta (MN10). This phrase presumably refers to ‘surpassed’ and ‘unsurpassed’ states of mind.

17 The term ‘mind’ can also be translated as ‘heart’ as there is no clear distinction between the two in the Thai language.