# The Heart of the Matter

Meditation Teachings

Good is the tamed mind; the mind that has been tamed brings true happiness.

– Dhp 35

What can be done for his disciples by a Master who seeks their welfare and has compassion and pity on them, that I have done for you, monks. There are these roots of trees, there are empty places. Meditate monks, do not delay, lest you later regret it. This is my message to you.

– MN 19

## Nuts and Bolts

### A Threefold Training

The Buddha declared that all of his teachings could be resolved into two categories: those revealing the nature of human suffering and those that deal with the cessation of that suffering. He taught that true liberation can only be brought about by cultivation of the Noble Eightfold Path, a comprehensive and integrated training or education of body, speech and mind. The ultimate freedom from suffering, realized through a clear vision of the true nature of things, occurs when all eight factors of that path are brought in unison to maturity.

Formal meditation practice – that is to say, the application of specific mind training exercises, usually in the sitting or walking postures – lies at the heart of the Eightfold Path. Nevertheless, it is only truly effective as a means to liberation when cultivated in conjunction with the other path factors. This principle of the holistic nature of the path was fundamental to Luang Por Chah’s meditation teachings.

Luang Por preferred to speak about cultivation of the path in terms of the ‘threefold training’, a convention by which the eight constituent factors are resolved into three related spheres of practice: Sīla (consisting of Right Speech, Right Action and Right Livelihood); Samādhi (an umbrella term for the training of the mind consisting of Right Effort, Right Mindfulness and Right Concentration); and Paññā (consisting of Right View and Right Resolve).

To Luang Por, sīla, samādhi and paññā were different aspects of the same process, divided into three because, at any moment, one of them would take centre stage while the other two offered essential background support. In one analogy, he said the three combined to improve the mind, as a combination of spices enhanced a delicious curry. Correct practice of these three aspects of the path leads, he said, to a Dhamma practice which is ‘beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle and beautiful in the end’.

Meditation at Wat Pah Pong was fully embedded in a way of life designed to minimize the impediments to growth in Dhamma and maximize the supporting conditions. Meditators were celibate. They practised in a forest, secluded from coarser sense impingement, under the guidance of a master and with the support of a community of like-minded friends. The emphasis on such virtues as wise shame and wise fear of consequences, sense-restraint, contentment with little, patience and mindfulness in all postures created the foundations underlying the inner transformation for which meditation practice was to be the catalyst.

Given the Buddha’s famous utterance, ‘Mind is chief, mind is the forerunner of all things’, it might seem sufficient for meditators to focus all their attention on the mind itself. But Luang Por disagreed with the view that simply by training the mind in meditation, appropriate actions and speech would naturally follow:

It’s not possible to simply train the mind, neglecting actions and speech. These things are connected. Practising with the mind until it’s smooth, refined and beautiful is similar to producing a finished wooden pillar or plank: before you can obtain a pillar that is smooth, varnished and attractive, you must first go and cut a tree down. Then you must cut off the rough parts – the roots and branches – before you split it, saw it and work it. Practising with the mind is the same as working with the tree, you have to work with the coarse things first. You have to destroy the rough parts – destroy the roots, destroy the bark and everything which is unattractive – in order to obtain that which is attractive and pleasing to the eye. You have to work through the rough to reach the smooth.

Restraint within voluntarily adopted boundaries for action and speech, – ‘watching over body and speech’, as Luang Por would put it – also requires an inner training. Meditators must be constantly aware of whether or not the volitional impulses behind their behaviour are tainted with defilement. Luang Por said that keeping sīla required catching the outlaw and making him into the village headman. The mind with the intention to transgress must be persuaded to become the mind with the intention not to transgress.

You must sustain awareness at every moment and in every posture, whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down. Before you perform any action, speak or engage in conversation, first establish your awareness.

Practise like this until you are fluent. Practise so that you can keep abreast of what’s going on in the mind. Practise to the point at which mindfulness becomes effortless, and you are mindful before you act, mindful before you speak.

On the initial level of sīla, samādhi manifests as the consistent, unshakeable determination to refrain from breaking any of the precepts, and by an unwavering mindfulness and restraint. As a result, the mind is able to reflect upon experience as right or wrong, wholesome or unwholesome. It is aware of sense experience and is able to investigate inner reactions of like and dislike to that experience. The wisdom faculty is now starting to manifest.

The aspect of the mind which identifies and chooses the good from the bad, the right from the wrong, amongst all the mind-objects within your field of awareness, is a nascent form of paññā.

The threefold training at this point is still quite coarse, but ‘it’s on the refined side of coarseness’.

The coconut palm absorbs the water from the earth and pulls it up through the trunk. By the time the water reaches the coconut itself, it has become clean and sweet, even though it is derived from that plain water in the ground. The coconut palm is nourished by what are essentially the coarse earth and water elements – which it absorbs and purifies – and these are transformed into something far sweeter and purer than before. In the same way, the practice of sīla, samādhi and paññā – in other words, magga, the Path – has coarse beginnings, but, as a result of training and refining the mind through meditation and reflection, it becomes increasingly subtle.

Put simply, when sīla, samādhi and paññā mature, they form the one true path.

### A Base of Merit

Luang Por taught lay meditators that although they were unable to enjoy all the conditions conducive to meditation practice provided by monastic life, they were to give the same attention to an overall cultivation of the threefold training – one that reduced obstacles to Dhamma practice as much as possible and encouraged supporting factors. Everything began with generosity: giving material things created a familiarity with the letting go of selfishness and possessiveness that would stand meditators in good stead when seeking to let go of increasingly subtle levels of attachment during meditation.

Performing acts of generosity is a kind of toraman, that is, training the mind by countering its desires.

He gave an example of a person with two apples who decides to give one to a friend but realizes that he wants to keep the larger one for himself. A Dhamma practitioner would overcome his selfish thoughts and give away the larger.

If you dare decide to give away the big apple, you feel a twinge of grief, but once you’ve made the decision, the grief is gone. This is disciplining the mind in the correct way and achieving a victory over yourself.

Giving dāna – giving happiness to others – is a way of cleansing what is soiled within. You need a warm, kind and benevolent heart. This is something to reflect on. Generosity is the first thing that needs to be maintained in your mind.

Meditators were encouraged to develop new skilful habits by recognizing and consistently turning away from the unskilful habits they had accumulated.

Defilements are like a cat. If you spoil a cat, then it will come around all the time. But suppose one day it starts rubbing up against your leg, and you don’t feed it. It will miaow angrily, but if you refuse to give it any food, within a day or two, you won’t see it anymore. It’s the same with defilements. If you don’t follow them, then before long they won’t come to disturb you anymore – and from then on, you’ll be at peace. Make the defilements afraid of you; don’t make yourself afraid of defilements.

Keeping the Five Precepts was a minimum requirement for those serious about making progress in Dhamma practice. By not keeping them, would-be meditators made bad kamma, threatened their most important relationships and created the conditions for regret, guilt and self-aversion that would fatally undermine their practice.

When your sīla is pure, when you’re kind to others and you treat them honestly, then you feel happy. There’s no remorse in your mind. When, through not harming others, you feel no remorse, then you’re already in a heaven realm. Physically and mentally you’re at ease. Whether you eat or sleep, you feel at ease, you’re happy. Happiness is born of sīla. Certain actions have certain results. The abandonment of evil through keeping precepts leads, by a natural law, to the arising of goodness.

Acts of generosity and a firm commitment to sīla created the basic sense of well-being and self-respect necessary for progress in meditation. But it was also necessary to develop the ability to reflect upon experience. Without it, satisfaction with those positive states of mind might inhibit rather than promote more profound spiritual development.

If we’re happy, we tend to get heedless; we don’t want to go any further. We attach to that happiness. We like it; it’s heaven, and we’re the deities. It’s easeful, and we live in blissful ignorance. So, reflect on happiness but don’t be deluded by it. Reflect on the drawbacks of happiness: that it’s unstable, doesn’t stay with us for long, and once gone, suffering resumes and the tears return.

Luang Por cautioned that, in the long-term, meditation practices would only fulfil their potential if meditators cultivated a spirit of renunciation through reflecting on the drawbacks of all conditioned phenomena – even the most refined and easeful. They had to clearly see the inadequacy of any stopgap, contingent solution to suffering. They needed to recognize that as long as even subtle defilements remained in the mind, there could be no true peace and contentment. And it was only through pursuing Dhamma practice to its conclusion that defilements could be completely eliminated.

Dwelling on the necessity to follow the path to its end furnishes meditators with the enthusiasm and commitment to devote themselves to meditation through the ups and downs, the thicks and thins of practice. Without cultivating the spirit of renunciation, meditators tend to grasp on to the initial fruits of meditation that appear as the coarser defilements are attenuated. Rather than striving for complete liberation from all attachment, they settle for what Luang Por called the ‘thin-skinned’ peace of elevated states of mind:

Look deeply. What is the present state of your mind? Simply stay with that awareness. If you keep that up, you will have a foundation; you will have mindfulness and alertness whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down. If you see anything coming up, then just let it be, don’t attach to it. Liking and disliking, pleasure and pain, doubts and faith are all just the mind commentating upon and reflecting on its experience. Examine its results. Don’t put labels on things. Know what they are; see everything that arises in the mind as merely a mental state, something impermanent that, having arisen, persists for a while and then ceases. Things are merely processes; there’s no self, no real separation between others and ourselves, there’s nothing that should be clung to.

### Technique

There is no specific ‘Ajahn Chah meditation technique’. For him, the important question to be asked about a particular means of training the mind was: what results does it give? He accepted any method that incorporated the cultivation of mindfulness, alertness and appropriate effort; that served to take a meditator beyond the hindrances; and that led to a samādhi which could provide a foundation for insight into ‘the way things are’. Whatever path of meditation leads to letting go and non-attachment, he would say, is a correct method.

Luang Por taught that it was important that meditators used a technique that was compatible with their character. By this he did not mean that there was a particular technique specific to each person, the adoption of which would ensure success. A sense of affinity with a meditation method (he once described it as similar to an affinity with a particular food), would not make meditation smooth and easy, but it would make it workable. An incompatible technique with which the meditator felt no sense of connection or enthusiasm, on the other hand, could lead to discouragement and regress. Meditators should not switch from one method to another too easily. Only after persevering with a method for a reasonable period of time should they conclude whether or not to make a change.

But although Luang Por acknowledged the validity of a number of methods, there were some which he emphasized:

Mental cultivation (bhāvanā) means setting right your thoughts and opinions. Its aim is letting go [of defilements]. The various methods are like different kinds of fish traps. They differ in form, but ultimately, they all share the same purpose. So here, although I don’t insist upon a particular form of meditation, I usually teach people to focus on the word ‘Buddho’ or on the breath for a sufficient period, and then to gradually deepen their knowledge and view of the way things are.

Luang Por referred to mindfulness of breathing as the crown jewel of meditation techniques. He gave various reasons for encouraging its development, beginning with the observation that it is an uncomplicated practice and convenient. The breath is naturally present at all times and in all postures. It can be turned to at any moment. It may be practised by meditators of all character types. It has been the pre-eminent technique since the first days of the Sāsana. The Buddha and many of his great disciples made use of this technique, and it has been praised by meditation masters through the ages. Luang Por himself used this method, and he asserted that through the practice of mindfulness of breathing, the meditator could fulfil the whole of the threefold training:

Compelling the mind to focus on the breath is sīla; the unremitting focus on the breath, bringing the mind to a state of lucid calm, is called samādhi; letting go of attachment through contemplation of the focused breath as impermanent, unstable and selfless is called paññā.

Therefore, the practice of mindfulness of breathing can be said to be the development of sīla, samādhi and paññā. Someone practising it can be taken to be following the Eightfold Path, which the Buddha taught was the foremost, the most excellent of all paths, as it leads towards Nibbāna. If you follow in the way I’ve described, then that may be considered realizing the Buddha-Dhamma in the most authentic possible way.

### Buddho

In order to help meditators anchor their mind on the breath, Luang Por recommended using the mantra ‘Buddho’, mentally reciting ‘Bud’ on the inhalation and ‘dho’ on the exhalation.[1] As one meaning of the word ‘Buddha’ (or ‘Buddho’) is the undeluded knowing of the way things are, meditators employing this method are essentially repeating, again and again, the name of the awareness they are seeking to cultivate. Occasionally returning to the meaning of the mantra during meditation prevents the practice from becoming mechanical.

Meditate reciting ‘Buddho’, ‘Buddho’ until it penetrates deep into your heart. The word ‘Buddho’ represents the awareness and wisdom of the Buddha. In practice, you must depend on this word more than anything else. The awareness it brings will lead you to understand the truth about your own mind. It is a true refuge as it includes both mindfulness and insight …

When your mind is consciously applied to an object, it wakes up. The awareness wakes it up. Once this knowing has arisen through meditation, you can see the mind clearly. As long as the mind remains without the awareness of Buddho, even if there is an ordinary worldly presence of mind, it will not lead you to what is truly beneficial.

Sati or mindfulness depends on the presence of ‘Buddho’ – the knowing. It must be a clear knowing, which leads to the mind becoming brighter and more radiant. The illuminating effect that this clear knowing has on the mind is similar to the brightening of a light in a darkened room.[2] As long as the room is pitch black, any objects placed inside remain difficult to distinguish or else completely obscured from view. But as you begin intensifying the brightness of the light inside, it will penetrate throughout the whole room, enabling you to see more clearly from moment to moment, thus allowing you to know more and more the details of any object inside.

When the knowing of the breath had become clear and stable, when what he called the ‘Buddha knowing’ had become established, Luang Por said the mantra could be discarded. It had served its purpose.

Meditators who felt no affinity with breath meditation at all were encouraged to cultivate more discursive meditations[3] such as the recollection of death or contemplation of the body – specifically the five basic meditation topics of head hair, body hair, nails, teeth and skin. In the latter, meditators could focus on the unattractive (asubha) aspects of these body parts, or on their empty, impermanent nature by considering them in terms of their constituent elements of earth (hardness), water (cohesion or fluidity), fire (heat) and air (motion). Pali names for the five body parts – kesā, lomā, nakhā, dantā, taco – could be internally recited as mantras to keep the mind on track. Visualization could be employed to enhance the contemplation.

Luang Por would encourage monastics cultivating mindfulness of breathing as their main practice to develop meditation on the body as an auxiliary technique. He reminded them that its importance could be seen from the fact that it was included in the novice Ordination ceremony. Furthermore, as the first level of liberation (stream-entry) was reached by the abandonment of ‘sakkāyadiṭṭhi’, or personality view, and the identification with the physical body constituted the most powerful and immediate expression of that ‘fetter’[4], then body contemplation was of immense value.

You must repeatedly investigate the body and break it down into its component parts. As you see each part as it truly is, the perception of the body being a solid entity or self is gradually eroded away. You have to keep putting continuous effort into this investigation of the truth, without pause.

Practise contemplating the body as being ‘just that much’, until it is quite natural to think to yourself, ‘Oh, the body is merely the body. It’s just that much.’ Once this way of reflection is established, as soon as you say to yourself that, ‘it’s just that much’, the mind lets go. There is letting go of attachment to the body. There is the insight that sees the body as merely the body. By sustaining this sense of detachment through continuous seeing of the body as merely a body, all doubt and uncertainty is gradually uprooted. As you investigate the body, the more clearly you see it as just a body, rather than as a ‘person’, a ‘being’, a ‘me’ or a ‘he’ or ‘she’.

### The Single Chair

Meditation practices that involve directing the thinking mind, rather than turning away from it, are based on the principle that sustaining an unbroken stream of awareness on a theme of contemplation, instead of a physical sensation, can also lead to a gathering of the mind’s forces. This produces a rapture that takes the mind beyond the pull of worldly thoughts and desires to a samādhi that provides the platform for the profound work of wisdom.

But whatever meditation practice was adopted, Luang Por emphasized that mindfulness must play a central role. He compared watching the mind with mindfulness and alertness, to a shop keeper keeping a sharp eye on his goods when a group of mischievous children come into his shop. In another simile, he said that the mind is like a room with a single chair. When mindfulness sits firmly on that seat facing the door, then any guest entering the room is known immediately. Without a chair to sit on, no guest stays for long.

Mindfulness, bolstered by confidence in the Buddha’s path to liberation and by Right Effort, resulted in a samādhi that bore within it the seeds of wisdom and liberation.

Mindfulness is the nurse and protector of samādhi. It is the dhamma which allows all other wholesome dhammas to arise in balance and harmony. Mindfulness is life. At any moment that you lack mindfulness, it is as if you are dead. Lack of mindfulness is called heedlessness, and it robs your words and actions of all meaning. Whatever form of recollection mindfulness takes, it gives rise to self-awareness, wisdom, all kinds of good qualities.

Any dhamma which lacks mindfulness is incomplete. Mindfulness is what governs standing, walking, sitting and lying down. It’s not only during sitting meditation that mindfulness is required; outside of formal meditation periods you must have a constant mindfulness and alertness and give care and attention to your actions. If you do that, a sense of wise shame will arise. You’ll feel ashamed of improper actions or speech. As the sense of shame becomes stronger, then so will restraint. With strong restraint, there is no heedlessness.

Wherever you go, mindfulness must be present. The Buddha said, ‘Practise mindfulness a great deal, develop it a great deal.’ Mindfulness is the dhamma that will guard over your past and present actions and those that you are about to perform. It is of great benefit to you. Know yourself at every moment and then you will have a constant sense of right and wrong. That awareness of the rightness or wrongness of everything that occurs in your mind will arouse a sense of wise shame, and you will refrain from acting in bad or mistaken ways.

### A Meditation Instruction

Attention to the finer details of the sitting posture has never been a prominent feature of the Theravada meditation tradition. Very few forest monks sit in full lotus with each foot upturned on the opposite thigh, or fold their hands in a perfect mudra[5]. The basic instructions are simply to establish a posture that is stable and erect, with the main criterion being that the posture be one in which the meditator can sit for a reasonably long time with the minimum of unnecessary discomfort. Luang Por treated posture as a straightforward matter. At the beginning of a meditation session, he would simply give instructions to take the cross-legged posture[6], place the right leg on the left, the right hand on the left[7], keep the back straight, make oneself comfortable – not too tense and not too relaxed – and close the eyes.

Having paid homage to the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha, meditators either turned to their main meditation object or began with a preliminary practice. Luang Por sometimes suggested going through the thirty-two parts of the body[8] before turning to the breath. Apart from being a good mindfulness practice in itself, this reinforced skilful perceptions of the body that could then be taken up for deeper investigation when the mind had been strengthened by samādhi. Luang Por also taught less experienced meditators to follow the breath in and out of the body for a certain period before focusing on one particular point, such as the tip of the nose:

Focus your mindfulness so that it follows the breath entering your body and leaving it. Follow the beginning of the breath, the middle of the breath, the end of the breath. With mindfulness, keep the breath in mind; and with alertness, be aware that right now you are breathing. On the inhalation, the beginning of the breath is at the nose tip, the middle at the heart and the end at the abdomen. On the exhalation, the beginning of the breath lies at the abdomen, the middle at the heart and the end at the tip of the nose. Focus on these three points.

The mind, your awareness, has no time to sneak off and take hold of other objects because it’s preoccupied with being aware, right here, of both the inhalation and the exhalation. If the mind goes off in search of other objects, it shows that mindfulness has slipped. Establish it again. Be aware of exactly where the breath is passing at each moment. Keep looking. Sometimes your mind runs off for a long time without you being aware of it. Suddenly you realize that mindfulness has been lost again. Start afresh. If you practise in this way, then you will develop a good working knowledge of the beginning, middle and end of the breath. After you’ve trained in this way for a sufficient time, mindfulness will be constantly present on the inhalation and the exhalation. There will be mindfulness at the beginning of the breath, its middle and end.

Initially, you will have a few difficulties. But later, as you become more experienced, it will no longer be necessary to follow the breath in and out. Now anchor the awareness at the tip of your nose. Stop right there and note whether the breath is long or short, be aware of the inhalation and the exhalation at that point. When you first start to practice sitting meditation, give this method a try.

When you’re concentrating on the breath, there’s no need to force it. It’s similar to learning how to use a pedal sewing machine. To sew properly you need to find a rhythm between your hand and foot. So when you’re first learning to use a sewing machine, what do you do? You practise pedalling freely without sewing anything. Once you can pedal fluently, then you start on some cloth.

Your breath is the same, there’s no need to make it a certain way; it doesn’t matter whether it’s long or short provided that it feels comfortable … If the breath is too long or too short or too strong, don’t force it, allow it to find its own balance. All you have to do is focus on the inhalation and the exhalation. You don’t have to contemplate anything else. It’s enough to be aware of the breath.

When you do this, certain thoughts will arise, ‘What’s the use of this?’ and so on. Keep going. Don’t get caught in doubts. There’s no need to answer them. There’s no need to think. It’s not your job. Your job is simply to be aware of the breath as it enters and leaves the body. You don’t want to see deities or Brahma gods, but you want to see the breath. It is sufficient merely that you don’t forget the breath. Understand and then cut off the various objects that pass in and out of awareness, and let them go.

Thoughts and moods are changeful. Perhaps when you start sitting you begin to feel homesick, and the mind starts proliferating about this matter and that. The moment you start thinking of home, then remind yourself, ‘It’s changeful (mai nae)!’ Fond thoughts of home are impermanent and so are negative ones. You can’t believe any of it. Your mind lies to you. You have to assert this changeful nature of things. Sometimes you hate this person and that, but it doesn’t last. Sometimes you love this person and that, but it doesn’t last either. Pin the mind down right there and where can it go? When you hate someone, you fabricate a certain image of them. When you love someone, you do the same. The mind starts to suffer. Sometimes you may detest someone so much that whenever you think of them tears of fury start to flow. Do you see what I mean? How could that be real and lasting?

See mental states as merely mental states. All of them are impermanent. We have to cut things off because they will delude us if we don’t. We perceive something as good, and we remind ourselves that the good is changeful. Something else is experienced as bad, and that is changeful too. Don’t let your mind grasp on to the good; don’t let it grasp on to the bad. If you have the measure of mental states in this way, then they lose their significance. Just keep working away at it. The states that arise, good or bad, have no intrinsic value, and they will gradually fade away. If you follow them and keep an eye on them, you’re bound to see this truth of changefulness. Your initial practice has to be like this. Be mindful.

Subsequently, you will see the breath, mindfulness and the mind simultaneously at one point. The word ‘see’ here doesn’t refer to ordinary vision. It’s a seeing with awareness, by the internal, not the external, eye. The awareness of the breath is here, mindfulness is here, the sense of knowing – the mind – is here. They converge in one harmonious whole. When we see that harmony, the mind will detach from sensual desire (kāmacchanda), ill-will (vyāpāda), sloth and torpor (thīnamiddha), worry and agitation (uddhaccakukkucca), and indecision (vicikicchā). These five hindrances will be gone completely. All that you will see is the breath. There will be just mindfulness and the mind in one point. With the absence of the five hindrances, you can take it that the mind has entered samādhi.

You must know when the breath is coarse and when it is fine, and you have to know right there. After that, you must focus on the breath to make it more and more subtle and fine until its coarseness has disappeared. The refinement of the breath is such that as you sit and contemplate the breath, it becomes so subtle that there’s almost no breath, or so it seems. Don’t be alarmed. The breath is still there, it’s just that it’s extremely subtle. So, what do you do then? You must use your mindfulness to make the absence of breath your meditation object. At this point, some people may become alarmed, afraid that their breathing will stop and that it’s dangerous. You must reassure yourself that it’s quite safe and that there’s no danger. All that is necessary is that you maintain mindfulness, the awareness, the knowing.

The mind is now in a very subtle state. At this level, it doesn’t have to be controlled, you don’t have to do anything. All that is needed is to maintain mindfulness and alertness. You should be aware that at that moment the mind is acting automatically, it’s not necessary to adjust its quality. Now simply maintain a steady mindfulness and alertness. The mind has fully entered the state of lucid calm. Sometimes the mind will enter and leave this state at short intervals. Sometimes when it has withdrawn, it will become lucidly calm again for a short time, and then it will emerge once more and become aware of sense objects. The mind, having withdrawn from samādhi, comprehends the nature of various things that arise in awareness. There will be a rapture in the Dhamma, wisdom will arise. Many kinds of knowledge will arise at this point.

The mind, at this moment, will have entered the stage of vipassanā[9]. You must firmly establish mindfulness, concentration and alertness. When wisdom arises, the mind is in vipassanā, which is a continuation of samatha[10]. This is called the process of the mind. You must attain mastery (vasī) in entering and leaving states of tranquillity. When you have done so, then you will know the nature of the states of mind and the nature of the mind that withdraws. You must be astute in entering and leaving samādhi, establishing a strong degree of mindfulness and alertness at these points. Here the mind has come to an end of turmoil. Whether it’s moving forwards or back, all the states of mind lie within the lucid calm.

On reaching the appropriate time for the meditation to end, review what you did before you entered samādhi. How did you establish your mind so as to be so peaceful? Then, the next time you sit, you must consider the first thing to do. Recall how you focused your mind when you withdrew from samādhi. You must know this. Although you have ended your sitting meditation, you should not look on it as an end to samādhi. You should be determined to continue being aware and focused and mindful. Whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down, you must be constantly mindful.

### An Aside

The meditation instruction in the previous section is long and detailed. It includes a number of technical terms and references to some advanced levels of practice and subtle states of mind. However, it should be borne in mind that this instruction was not intended by Luang Por to be a definitive account of the meditation process. The text is a transcription of one particular instruction given on one particular day to one particular group of monastics. Luang Por did not write a meditation manual, and he rarely spoke about more advanced levels of practice in public. For this reason, some of his views on meditation practice will always remain obscure. And this is also true about his advice on more basic matters.

In the paragraph above dealing with the choice of a meditation technique, the statement is made that meditators should stick with a practice ‘for a reasonable period of time’ before deciding to change it. But how long is a ‘reasonable’ time? Certainly a reasonable question – but not, unfortunately, one that can be answered with words from Luang Por’s mouth. (A period of time measured in weeks or months – rather than hours or minutes – would be the answer that he would probably, but did not actually, give.)

Accurately conveying Luang Por’s meditation teachings is thus somewhat hampered by the unevenness of the body of recorded evidence; some topics are well-covered, others not so well at all. Complications are also caused by the fact that the material that is available is transcribed from instructions given ad hoc and which are reflective of time, place and audience. Luang Por’s response to questions about the importance of the cultivation of jhāna (absorption), for example, varied according to the character and accumulated foundational virtues of the questioner. In other words, if he saw meditators had a well-developed capacity for jhāna, he would encourage it (and it would appear that he considered this the superior path). But if he saw meditators had only a weak capacity, or were getting caught up in the trap of craving for jhāna, he might de-emphasize it. If he saw that meditators possessed strong powers of analysis, he might encourage them to make use of those powers when the mind had gone beyond the hindrances, without waiting for the stabilization of mind provided by jhāna. In this, his teaching paralleled that of his great contemporary, Luang Ta Maha Bua, who coined the phrase: ‘paññā cultivating samādhi’.

Another problem is encountered in translating the transcribed records of Luang Por’s meditation teachings, and it springs from the nature of the Thai language. Thai lends itself much more to flexible ambiguity than to scientific precision. For example, it insists much less on the use of third person pronouns than is the case in English. Questions of who or what are acting upon whom or what can be hard to determine with any great degree of certainty. In matters dealing with the physical world, context often comes to the translator’s rescue; in matters dealing with the more profound functions of the mind, the translator is rarely so fortunate.

One last layer of difficulty is furnished by the occasionally idiosyncratic manner in which Luang Por and his contemporaries in the Isan Forest Tradition use Pali technical terms. For readers coming from a more academic Theravada background, this can be a source of frustration. For a translator, it may involve being faced with passages in which the meaning ascribed to a term by the teacher does not correspond exactly to the definition in a Pali-English dictionary. One way to look at this discrepancy is by means of an analogy. If the Suttas might be compared with a photograph of the nature of things, then the teachings of the great masters would be like paintings. In their attempt to bring out their sense of what is before them, painters sometimes slightly manipulate forms or use colours not recognised by the camera. Their intention is to transmit the truth of their experience to the best of their abilities. Similarly, the great forest masters of Isan have, on occasion, put fidelity to the Dhamma that they have realized above a strict fidelity to the texts.

To summarize, the meditation teachings of Luang Por represented in this chapter contain many gems and useful reflections. But, for the reasons given above, they do not coalesce into a complete system. If Luang Por were alive today and speaking to a student of his teachings, he would perhaps give the following advice: ‘Attention to detail is good. Precision and clarity are good. But always be willing to tolerate a certain element of incompleteness and ambiguity.’

### Not Just Sitting

Many Wat Pah Pong monastics practised walking meditation[11] as much as or more than sitting meditation. The Buddha listed its benefits as producing a strong constitution, good digestion, physical endurance, and a readiness to strive. Most importantly, he said that the samādhi arising during walking meditation is more easily sustained outside formal practice sessions than that developed while sitting (AN 5.29).

Walking meditation provides both an alternative and a complement to sitting meditation. It is a good substitute for sitting meditation when physical ailments make sitting impractical or when hindrances that arise strongly during sitting are more manageable or absent while walking. Walking tends to be the best choice following a meal, for example, when mental dullness is likely to make sitting meditation difficult.

Walking complements sitting by requiring cultivation of mindfulness in movement rather than stillness. Although the meditator walks with eyes downcast, the consciousness of forms and sounds, together with the rhythm of walking, prevents the meditator from becoming detached from the world of the senses in the same way that is possible during sitting meditation. As a result, it is often more difficult to pacify the mind while walking. But once the mind has become calm, the experience of varying sense data, combined with the regular physical movements of the posture, is conducive to the development of wisdom. The thoughts that arise from the calmness become dhammavicaya, the investigation of Dhamma.

In Thai forest monasteries like Wat Pah Pong, every kuti has its own walking path, usually from twenty to thirty paces long. Luang Por recommended walking at a more or less normal pace in order to develop a habit of awareness easily integrated into daily life. Hands were to be clasped in front of the abdomen, never behind the back (a style more suited to that of a general inspecting the troops than a monk, Luang Por said), and most definitely not hanging loosely by one’s sides. In addition to being perceived to be unsightly, walking without clasping the hands together was considered too relaxed to promote inner restraint; walking in such a way was too similar to leisurely strolling to be appropriate for meditation.

Luang Por instructed that before beginning the session, meditators should stand and pay homage to the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha in the manner they saw fit and clarify their intention for the following session. Then they should begin to walk back and forth along the path, maintaining a constant mindfulness and alertness as they walked. One method by which this was to be achieved, Luang Por would advise, was through use of the mantra ‘Buddho’, mentally reciting ‘Bud’ as the right foot touches the ground, and ‘dho’ as the left foot touches. This was the basic means of stilling the mind.

Maintain a continuous awareness on the object. If your mind becomes agitated or you get weary, then stop and still the mind, ease it by focusing on the breath. When the mind has become sufficiently calm, then resume the walking meditation. Keep a constant alertness. Establish awareness at the beginning of the path. Be aware of it all: the beginning of the path, the middle of the path, the end of the path. Keep the awareness unbroken while you are walking. Sometimes a feeling of panic or fear may arise. Go against it. It’s changeful. Courage arises and that doesn’t last either. It’s all changeful. There’s nothing to grasp on to. This gives rise to wisdom. Bringing forth wisdom doesn’t refer to a knowledge based on memory; it means knowing the mind that thinks and perceives. All thoughts and perceptions arise in our minds.

Good or bad, right or wrong, just acknowledge their presence, don’t give them any undue significance. Suffering is just suffering. Happiness is just happiness. It’s all a fraud. Hold your ground. Don’t go chasing after them. Don’t chase after happiness and don’t chase after suffering. Know them. Know them and then put them down. Wisdom will arise. Keep going against the stream of the mind.

When you feel sufficiently tired, then stop and come off of the walking path but be careful to maintain the continuity of mindfulness. Standing, walking, sitting or lying down, maintain a constant awareness. Whether you’re walking to the village on alms-round, walking through the village receiving food, eating the food or whatever, be mindful at all times in every posture.

Luang Por recommended that meditators not follow their first thought to end a walking meditation session. He said that after deciding to leave their walking path, they should continue walking for at least a few more minutes. Sometimes, the feeling that it was time to change posture would pass away by itself, and the meditation could be extended. If not, and it was indeed a good time to stop, then a wise habit of not reacting immediately to the impulses of a mind that might well be tainted by defilement had been strengthened.

Luang Por taught that effort had to be sustained from the first moment of consciousness in the early morning until the last moment before sleep – in every posture:

When you lie down, then lie on your right side with the left foot resting on the right. Concentrate on ‘Bud-dho Bud-dho’ until you fall asleep. This is what is called lying down with mindfulness.

On one occasion, he maintained that an adept practitioner could remember whether he fell asleep on the inhalation or exhalation.

Whether meditating while walking, sitting, standing or lying down, the daily practice was to re-establish balance as soon as it was lost. Meditators were to be patient and persevering. Allowing the mind to become discouraged or irritated when it refused to stay on its object would only compound the problem. Taming the mind was like taming a wild animal. If you didn’t give up, then sooner or later the animal was sure to. In another of his favourite animal similes, he compared the practice to herding a water buffalo:

Your mind is like a water buffalo. Mental states are like rice plants. The knowing is like the owner. What do you do when you graze a buffalo? You let it go its way. But you keep an eye on it. If it goes close to the rice plants, then you yell at it. When the buffalo hears you, it moves away. But you can’t afford to let your attention wander. If it’s stubborn and won’t obey you, then you have to get a stick and give it a thrashing.

## Thorns and Prickles

### Hindrances

The immediate obstacles to the development of samādhi and wisdom are a group of defilements that the Buddha called the nīvaraṇa or hindrances. He described them as ‘overgrowths of the mind that stultify insight’. They are five in number:

Kāmacchanda – sensual thoughts.

Vyāpāda – ill-will.

Thīnamiddha – sloth and torpor.

Uddhaccakukkucca – agitation, guilt, remorse.

Vicikicchā – Doubt and indecision.

The Buddha made clear the vital importance of dealing with the hindrances as follows:

Without having overcome these five, it is impossible for a monk whose insight thus lacks strength and power, to know his own true weal, the weal of others, and the weal of both; or that he will be capable of realizing that superior human state of distinctive achievement, a truly noble distinction in knowledge and vision.

– AN 5.51

Elsewhere the Buddha compared the hindrances to the baser metals impairing the purity of gold:

Once the gold has been freed of impurities, then it becomes pliant and wieldy and can be wrought into whatever ornaments one wishes. Similarly, the mind freed of the five hindrances will be pliant and wieldy, will have radiant lucidity and firmness, and will concentrate well upon the eradication of the taints. To whatever state realizable by the higher mental faculties one may direct the mind, one will, in each case, acquire the capacity of realization, if the other conditions are fulfilled.

– AN 5.23

The basic method for dealing with hindrances is to cultivate a mindful, balanced effort combined with positive regard for the meditation object to the extent that as yet unarisen hindrances do not arise in the first place. When that is not possible, and having become aware that they are caught in a hindrance, meditators are taught to abandon it without regret and patiently return to the meditation object. Rather than immediately re-establishing attention on the breath, Luang Por taught that, at that moment of recognizing the hindrance for what it was and letting it go, meditators should also acknowledge the distraction as ‘mai nae’: changeful, impermanent, unstable. By doing so, they introduced an element of wisdom into meditation that would gradually flourish as their meditation skills grew.

When something arises in your mind – no matter if it’s something you like or something you dislike, something you think is right or something you think is wrong – cut it right off by reminding yourself, ‘It’s changeful.’ It doesn’t matter what it is, just chop right through it, ‘changeful, changeful’. Use this single axe to chop through mental states. Everything is subject to change. Where can you find anything real and solid? If you see this instability, then the value of everything decreases. Mental states are all worthless. Why would you want things of no value?

For those struggling with the hindrances and feeling discouraged at their lack of success, he gave the following encouragement:

Even if your mind finds no peace, merely sitting cross-legged and putting forth effort is already a fine thing. This is the truth. You could compare it to being hungry and having nothing to eat except plain rice. You’ve got nothing to eat with the rice, and you feel upset. What I’m saying is, it’s good that you’ve got rice to eat. Plain rice is better than nothing at all, isn’t it? If plain rice is all you’ve got, then eat it up. Practice is the same: even if you experience only a very small amount of calm, it’s still a good thing.

If the simple expedient of patiently returning to the object again and again was not working, then specific antidotes needed to be employed. There was much to be learned in the quest to transcend the hindrances. Luang Por advised looking on them as teachers or tests of wisdom rather than enemies

### Sensual Desire

The first hindrance occurs through indulgence in thoughts bound up with the sensual world. The meditator who is still unable to find satisfaction in meditation tends to seek pleasure, warmth and distraction by turning to the world of the senses. This hindrance’s most powerful expression lies in sexual desires and fantasies, but it also includes taking pleasure in memories or imagination relating to any other aspect of the sensual world that the meditator finds attractive – food, music, movies, sport, politics – any topic at all that is felt to be enjoyable by the one who dwells upon it.

In dealing with this hindrance, Luang Por emphasized the protection of sense-restraint. Eating little, sleeping little, talking little were made key principles for the Sangha at Wat Pah Pong. The mind was to be taught to avoid becoming engrossed in the general appearance or particular features of any sense object. It was not possible to simply turn off a habit of indulgence in sensual pleasures for the duration of a meditation session. There also had to be a constant effort to govern such desires in daily life.

As the key condition for this hindrance is dwelling unwisely on the attractive aspects of sensual experience, the specific antidote lies in replacing it with wise reflection on the unattractive aspects. Sexual desire being the most potent and disruptive expression of the hindrance, it is the one to which most specific remedies are applied.

Visualize the body as a corpse in the process of decay or think of the parts of the body such as lungs, spleen, fat, faeces, and so forth. Remember these and visualize this loathsome aspect of the body when lust arises. This will free you from lust.

If you look at the human body and you like what you see, then ask yourself why. Investigate it. Look at head hair, body hair, nails, teeth and skin. The Buddha taught us to hammer in the reflection on these things. Distinguish them one by one, separate them from the body, visualize setting fire to them or peeling off the skin. Do that until you become fluent.

Contemplation of the body has already been referred to as a meditation object in its own right, and as a preliminary exercise preceding mindfulness of breathing. Here it is employed as a means of hauling the mind back onto the middle path when it has strayed into the realm of the senses. Once the hindrance has been abandoned, meditators may then resume their focus on their original meditation object.

### Ill-will

Ill-will is conditioned by ungratified desire. Its occurrence in meditation is often based on an obsession with things or people that are not doing, saying or being the way we would prefer. The mind picks up a rankling perception or memory and broods on it. In Jack Kornfield’s Notes from a Session of Questions and Answers, Luang Por is asked for advice in dealing with this hindrance:

“How about anger? What should I do when I feel anger arising?”

You must use loving-kindness. When angry states of mind arise in meditation, balance them by developing feelings of loving-kindness. If someone does something bad or gets angry, don’t get angry yourself. If you do, you are being more ignorant than they are. Be wise. Keep compassion in mind, for that person is suffering. Fill your mind with loving-kindness as if he were a dear brother. Concentrate on the feeling of loving-kindness as a meditation subject. Spread it to all beings in the world. Only through loving-kindness is hatred overcome.

Sometimes you may see other monks behaving badly. You may get annoyed. This is suffering unnecessarily. It is not yet our Dhamma. You may think like this, ‘He is not as strict as I am. They are not serious meditators like us. Those monks are not good monks.’ This is a great defilement on your part. Do not make comparisons. Do not discriminate. Let go of your opinions and watch your mind. This is our Dhamma. You can’t possibly make everyone act as you wish or to be like you. This wish will only make you suffer. It is a common mistake for meditators to make, but watching other people won’t develop wisdom. Simply examine yourself, your feelings. This is how you will understand.

Although it makes sense for meditators to seek the most supportive environment for practising meditation, there is almost always something or other that the mind, if it wishes, can latch on to with aversion. When meditators complained about external conditions disturbing them, Luang Por would reply that the problem did not lie in the condition. Conditions were just doing what conditions have always done and always will do: arise and pass away. The problem arose, he said, because the meditator was disturbing the condition. In other words, it was the meditator’s aversion to the condition, rather than the condition itself, that was the true hindrance to meditation.

Often the hindrance of ill-will occurs as a dissatisfaction or frustration with the meditator’s practice. Meditators can become aggravated by their inability to progress as fast as they hoped, angry at the particular problems that arise, resentful of physical pain that makes it hard to focus. They dwell on the things that they don’t like again and again until a deep furrow is dug, into which their mind throws itself repeatedly. Meditation itself can become an object of aversion. A frightening experience or strong painful feelings while sitting may make the mind resist continuing the practice. At this stage, meditators look to fill their time with every possible activity except meditation. When affected by this hindrance, Luang Por encouraged his disciples to keep returning to the basic principle enshrined in the Four Noble Truths: suffering arises through craving. In this case, the root of the problem lies in the desire not to have, not to be, not to have to experience: the ‘I don’t need this’ mind.

Your mind is chaotic because of craving. You don’t want to think, you don’t want to have anything going on in your mind. This ‘not wanting’ is the craving called ‘vibhavataṇhā’. The more you desire not to think, the more you encourage thoughts. You don’t want the mind to think, so why do the thoughts come? You don’t want it to be that way, so why is it? Exactly! It’s because you don’t understand your mind that you want it to be a certain way.

While Luang Por emphasized this understanding of craving as an antidote to this hindrance, the Suttas recommend meditation on loving-kindness. By its systematic development, thoughts of kindness and benevolence are able to replace thoughts of anger and resentment. Interestingly, this meditation was not one that Luang Por greatly encouraged for monastics. He considered it to be a risky practice for a celibate monk or nun as the pure emotion of loving-kindness could easily morph into more sensual feelings. Also, monastics who practised loving-kindness meditation diligently often became very attractive to the opposite sex, which could also jeopardise their monastic vocation.

### Sloth and Torpor

The third of the five hindrances, sloth and torpor, occurs most readily in a mind habituated to a high level of stimulation. In such cases, focusing on a single, unexciting object like the breath tends to induce feelings of boredom followed by dullness. It can lead to meditators losing their awareness altogether, sitting with head bobbing up and down, or slumped on their chest. This hindrance also afflicts meditators who indulge in the relaxed feelings that occur with the elimination of coarse mental agitation. In its more subtle forms, the hindrance can manifest as a state of mind that is calm but stiff and unwieldy. On one occasion, the Buddha compared the mind overcome with sloth and torpor to a prisoner in a dark and stuffy dungeon and, at another time, likened it to fresh water choked by water plants.

For the monastics at Wat Pah Pong, the simple and repetitive way of life, free of most of the grosser kinds of sensual stimulation, reduced the likelihood that their minds would react against the discipline required in formal meditation. Luang Por’s regular reminders to sustain mindfulness and sense-restraint in all postures were thus aimed at reducing the gap between the meditator’s awareness in periods of formal meditation and daily life. Monks were encouraged to observe factors that increased or decreased their tendency towards laziness and mental dullness. Food intake was one obvious variable.

If you find yourself sleepy every day, try to eat less. Examine yourself. As soon as five more spoonfuls will make you full, stop. Then take water until just properly full. Go and sit. Watch your sleepiness and hunger. You must learn to balance your eating. As your practice goes on, you will feel naturally more energetic and eat less. But you must adjust yourself.

Luang Por gave many exhortations aimed at inspiring in his disciples the wholesome desire to strive for freedom from defilement and to realize inner liberation. It was bearing this wholesome desire (Dhamma chanda) in mind that played the largest role in guarding against the hindrance of sloth and torpor. Without cultivating this strong aspiration to penetrate the Four Noble Truths, meditators going through periods of emotional turmoil or strong defilement could find their minds retreating into dullness during meditation as a means of anaesthetizing their mental pain.

The weekly all-night sittings were opportunities for monks at Wat Pah Pong to come face-to-face with drowsiness and to be given no choice but to seek for skilful means to overcome it. Emerging from a period of drowsiness after a steady refusal to give in to it could be an empowering and even rapturous experience. The patience accumulated by a regular practice of working with drowsiness was not an immediately obvious benefit, but many monks would acknowledge that over a period of months and years, it became increasingly evident.

Nevertheless, whenever monks were pushing themselves physically – during monastery work projects, for example – and particularly in periods of hot and humid weather, sloth and torpor could still be a major obstacle. Luang Por gave a number of practical tips:

There are many ways to overcome sleepiness. If you are sitting in the dark, move to a lighted place. Open your eyes. Get up and wash your face or take a shower. If you are sleepy, change postures. Walk a lot. Walk backwards – the fear of running into things will keep you awake. If this fails, stand still, clear the mind and imagine it is full daylight. Or sit on the edge of a high cliff or deep well. You won’t dare sleep! If nothing works, then just go to sleep. Lay down carefully and try to be aware until the moment you fall asleep. Then as you awaken, get right up. Don’t look at the clock or roll over. Start practising mindfulness from the moment you wake up.

Continuity of practice was essential. If meditators allowed sloth and torpor in its guise as laziness or reluctance to hold them back, they were lost. They had to develop a consistent effort, impervious to passing moods.

When you feel diligent, practice. When you feel lazy, practice.

### Agitation and Worry

The fourth hindrance consists of two kinds of mental noise. Firstly, agitation – a busy restlessness of mind; and secondly, worry or guilty thoughts about the past. Only when the mind is asked to sustain attention on an object is the full extent of its habitual unrest revealed. The mad pinballing of the mind that ensues is the first great frustration experienced by the new meditator. As with other hindrances, the default remedy is to patiently bring the mind back to the object again and again until the mind is tamed. But when the mind is agitated, trying to restrain it can be a tiring and thankless task. Luang Por would caution meditators to be wary of falling into the trap of ‘vibhavataṇhā’, the craving to get rid of something. Rather than providing the impetus to free the mind from this hindrance, this kind of craving only made matters worse. A confused meditator asked him:

“So when it darts about, I should just keep watching it?”

When it darts about, it’s right there. You don’t follow it, but you’re aware of it. Where could it go? It’s in the cage. It can’t go anywhere. Your problem is that you don’t want anything going on in your mind. Luang Pu Mun called that vacant state, ‘treestump samādhi’. If your mind is darting around, know that it’s doing that. If it’s motionless, then know that. What more do you need? Just have the measure of both movement and stillness. If today the mind is peaceful, then see it as a foundation for wisdom. But people like the peace, it makes them happy. They say, ‘Today I had a wonderful sitting, so peaceful.’ There! If you think like that, then the next day it will be hopeless, your mind will be a jumble. And then it’s, ‘Oh! Today my sitting was terrible.’

Ultimately, good and bad have the same value. Good things are impermanent; bad things are impermanent. Why give them so much significance? If the mind is agitated, then look at that. If it’s peaceful, then look at that. In this way, you allow wisdom to arise. Agitation is a natural expression of the mind. Just don’t get caught up with it.

A monkey doesn’t keep still, does it? Suppose you see a monkey and start to feel uncomfortable because it won’t keep still. You begin to wonder when it will ever stop moving around. You want to make it still so that you can feel at ease. But that’s the way monkeys are. A Bangkok monkey, an Ubon monkey – monkeys are the same everywhere. It’s a monkey’s nature to move about, and realizing that is the end of the problem. If you’re going to keep suffering all the time because the monkey doesn’t keep still, you’re on your way to an early grave. You’ll be even more of a monkey than a monkey is.

### Doubt and Indecision

The last of the hindrances, sceptical doubt, is the most insidious and crippling member of the group. It is characterized by vacillation, by the hesitation to follow through on a commitment. The hindrance occurs when meditators possess sufficient information about the teachings or the technique to take them through the initial stages of practice, but they become paralyzed by a need to be sure of the effectiveness of the method, or the teacher, or the teachings, or their own capacity to progress, before making the effort and renunciation necessary to verify it.

Not all doubt is a hindrance to meditation practice. On the contrary, some doubts are taken to be signs of intelligence. Speaking to the Kālāmas, the Buddha said, ‘It is good. You are doubting about things worthy of doubt.’ The doubts of those who recognize that they lack the necessary information or the clear criteria to make a good choice are not considered to be defilements of the mind. The hindrance is born from a craving for guarantees that cannot be provided. The Buddha’s simile to illustrate this hindrance is of a traveller lost in a desolate place, whose fear of the possible dangers on the path to safety outweigh his desire to reach that safety.

In the early days of Wat Pah Pong, the majority of the monastics and lay supporters received only the rudiments of a formal education and had strong confidence in Luang Por. They were not given to much pondering over the teachings. Their main doubts would centre on whether or not they wanted to remain as monks. In later years, with more people from the city coming to the monastery, and growing numbers of Western disciples, over-thinking became more of an issue in the monastery. Doubts about the teacher, the teaching, the student’s ability to practise the teacher’s teaching, multiplied. Luang Por’s response to the chronic doubters was always to point out:

Doubting never stops because of someone else’s words. Doubts come to an end through your own actions.

Placing unquestioning trust in the words of an authority figure can suppress doubts on one level, but it is a strategy that can never achieve a lasting security from them. Luang Por taught that the only way to go beyond doubts was through insight into their nature as impermanent, conditioned mental states. On one occasion, he explained why he didn’t conduct daily interviews with the monks as is the practice in many meditation centres:

If I answer your every little question, you will never understand the process of doubt in your own mind. It is essential that you learn to examine yourself, to interview yourself. Listen carefully to the Dhamma talk every few days, then use the teaching to compare with your own practice. Is it the same? Is it different? Why do you have doubts? Who is it that doubts? Only through self-examination will you understand.

If you doubt everything, then you’ll become totally miserable. You’ll be off your food and unable to sleep, spending your whole time chasing after this view and that. What you must bear in mind is that your mind is a liar … Mental states are just that way; they don’t last. Don’t run around with them. Just know them with equanimity. As one doubt passes away and a new one arises in its place, be aware of that for what it is as well. Then you’ll be at ease. If you rush about after your doubts, then not only will you be unhappy, but the doubts will increase.

On reaching a certain point in their practice, some meditators would begin to wonder about the identity of the states they were experiencing while they were meditating. Luang Por would say they weren’t on a highway; there were no signposts in the mind. On another occasion, he said it did not really matter if you were ignorant of the name of a fruit as long as you were aware of its sweetness and fragrance:

Meditation is the same. It’s not necessary to know what things are called. If you know the name of the fruit, that doesn’t make it any sweeter. So be aware of the relevant causal conditions of that state. But if you don’t know the name, it doesn’t matter. You know the flavour … If someone tells you the name, then take note of it; but if they don’t, there’s no need to get upset.

Luang Por once reassured a Western disciple:

Doubting is natural. Everyone starts out with doubts. You can learn a great deal from them. What is important is that you don’t identify with your doubts: that is, don’t get caught up in them. This will spin your mind in endless circles. Instead, watch the whole process of doubting, of wondering. See who it is that doubts. See how doubts come and go. Then you will no longer be victimized by your doubts. You will step outside of them, and your mind will be quiet. You can see how all things come and go. Just let go of what you are attached to. Let go of your doubts and simply watch. This is how to end doubting.

## Ways and Means

### Skilful Means

The hindrances do not appear in the mind as the result of meditation; rather, it is that meditation reveals hindrances that are already latent within the mind but which are difficult to isolate and deal with effectively in daily life. Meditation might be compared to putting the mind under a microscope in order to see the harmful viruses, invisible to the naked eye, that are threatening its health. Luang Por reminded his disciples that encountering the hindrances in meditation should not be a source of discouragement. In dealing with hindrances, meditators were getting to know how the mind worked and how to deal with it most effectively.

He said that meditators should be constantly observing and reviewing what worked in their meditation and what did not. They should treat their mind as parents did a child: expressing a measured appreciation and encouragement when it did well; being consistently firm and fair when it needed admonishment. The untrained mind was like a wilful child that followed its moods and often got into mischief. The meditator was not to smother the mind with overly close attention but to keep a constant eye on it wherever it might go, and prevent it from falling into danger. Learning from mistakes and being creative in finding ways to deal with problems that arose in meditation were good things. At the same time, care should be taken not to develop so many skilful means that the essential simplicity of the practice was forgotten and more harm done than good.

### Physical Pain

Sometimes you may break out in a sweat. Big beads, as large as corn kernels, rolling down your chest. But when you’ve passed through painful feeling once, then you will know all about it. Keep working at it. Don’t push yourself too much, but keep steadily practising.

Physical discomfort arising during sitting meditation can range from a dull ache to cramps to agonizing pain. As the discomfort is dependent upon the meditator’s choice of posture, he or she has the power to bring it to an end by moving. The question arises as to whether the meditator in pain should change posture, and if so, at which point. Luang Por’s usual advice was that meditators should not move out of a reactivity bred from fear or anxiety. At first, they should attempt to turn attention from the pain by repeatedly returning to the meditation object. If that became impossible, meditators should take the physical sensation of pain itself as their meditation object. In the case that mindfulness was still not strong enough to deal with the pain, then the meditator should change posture. Luang Por cautioned his disciples given to pushing the limits of their endurance to ensure that their enthusiasm was always governed by wisdom. Too much wilful endurance of physical pain in meditation by a beginner could gradually lead to a sense of dreariness, an aversion to practice, or in extreme cases, a visit to the doctors.

On some occasions, Luang Por urged disciples to persevere right through the dark tunnel of painful feeling and emerge on the other side. Meditators who can endure pain to the point at which it reaches a crescendo and then dissolves, experience a great rapture and enter a state of deep calm. Having ‘gone beyond’ painful feeling in this way, meditators’ fear of pain and thus, of death, is usually much diminished. Even more importantly, the natural separation of the physical feeling of pain and the awareness of it provides a profound understanding of the impersonality of feeling. The realization of how much of what was assumed to be physical pain is, in fact, the instinctive emotional reaction to the pain, and that it can be released through mindfulness, can be the grounds for a significant breakthrough in practice.

### The Right Approach

In its most elevated form, paññā manifests as the penetrative insight into things ‘as they are’ which eliminates the defilements generating suffering and constitutes the culmination of the Buddha’s path to liberation. But the same training which achieves its consummation through wisdom also begins with wisdom. At this initial stage, it is referred to as Mundane Right View. Its most important feature is a conviction in the law of kamma and the human capacity for liberation through practice of the Eightfold Path.

Luang Por devoted a great deal of time to correcting the misguided views and false assumptions that could lead meditators astray. Time and again, he sought to clarify the principles of Right View, which he called, ‘the cool place where all heat and agitation cease’.

One persistent wrong view involved a belief that the causal process leading to liberation could be bypassed by means of a certain technique or skilful means. Luang Por’s insistence on khanti, or patience, as the fundamental virtue in practice of the Buddha’s path meant he gave short shrift to people impatient for results. When a lay meditator asked him for a short cut, he replied:

If that’s what you want, you might as well just forget about the whole thing.

On another occasion, he said:

If the causes are insufficient, the results will fail to appear. It’s natural. For liberation to take place you must be patient. Patience is the leading principle in practice.

Speaking to a group of lay meditators, he said:

Meditating in order to realize lucid calm is not the same as pressing a switch and expecting everything to be immediately flooded with light. Putting forth effort in meditation is like writing out a sentence: you can’t omit a single one of its words or phrases. All dhammas arise from causes; results will only cease when their causes do.

You must keep steadily doing it, steadily practising. You’re not going to attain or see anything in one or two days … You must try to put forth a constant effort. You can’t comprehend this through someone else’s words. You have to discover it for yourself. It’s not how much you meditate – you can do just a little – but do it every day. And practise walking meditation every day as well. Irrespective of whether you do a lot or a little, do it every day. Be sparing with your speech and watch your mind the whole time. Keep refuting the perception of permanence in whatever arises in your mind, whether pleasurable or painful. Nothing lasts; it’s all deceptive.

How could it fail to be difficult to train the mind, he would say, when people had neglected to do so all their life up to that time, and probably for many lifetimes previously. The army of Dhamma was still vastly outnumbered by the army of defilements. It would take time to make the contest more equal.

Rather than continually looking forward to a desired goal, like a child in a car asking again and again how much longer before they arrived, meditators were encouraged to proceed steadily along their chosen path of practice with attention to the quality of the effort that they were making moment by moment. Meditators should trust that when causes were ripe, results would inevitably appear.

The Buddha taught us to move forward, not too slowly and not too fast, but to make the mind ‘just-right’. There’s no need to get worked up about it all. If you are, then you should reflect that practice is like planting a tree. You dig a hole and place the tree in it. After that, it’s your job to fill in the earth, to put fertilizer on it, to water the tree and to protect it from pests. That’s your duty; it’s what orchard owners have to do. But whether the tree grows fast or slow is its own business; it’s nothing to do with you. If you don’t know the limits of your own responsibilities, you’ll end up trying to do the work of the tree as well, and you’ll suffer. All you have to do is see to the fertilizer, the watering and keeping the insects away. The speed of growth of the tree is the tree’s business. If you know what is your responsibility and what is not, then your meditation will be smooth and relaxed, not stressed and fretful.

When your sitting is calm, then watch the calmness. When it’s not calm, then watch that … If there’s calm, there’s calm; if there’s not, there’s not. You mustn’t let yourself suffer if your mind’s not calm. It’s a mistake to rejoice when your mind is calm, or to mope when it’s not. Would you let yourself suffer about a tree? About the sunshine or the rain? Things are what they are and if you understand that, your meditation will go well. So keep travelling along the path, keep practising, keep attending to your duties and meditating at the appropriate times. As for what you get from it, what you attain, what calmness you achieve, that will depend on the potency of the virtue you have accumulated. Just as the orchard owner who knows the extent of his responsibilities towards the tree keeps in good humour, so, when the practitioner understands his duties in his practice, then ‘just-rightness’ establishes itself naturally.

While Luang Por saw how important it was for his disciples to acquire a firm foundation of knowledge of the Buddha’s teachings, he also warned against the detrimental effect of too much or unwise study:

There are learned teachers who write about first absorption (jhāna), second absorption, third absorption, fourth absorption and so on, but if the mind gets to the level of lucid calm, it’s not aware of all of that. All it knows is that what it’s experiencing is not the same as in the books. If a student of the texts grasps on tightly to his knowledge when he enters states of lucid calm and likes to keep noting, ‘What’s this? Is it the first absorption yet?’, his mind will simply make a complete retreat from the calm, and he’ll get nothing from it. Why? Because he wants something. The moment there’s craving to realize something, the mind pulls back from the lucid calm.

That’s why you’ve got to throw away all your thoughts and doubts, and take only your body, speech and mind into the practice. Look inwardly at states of mind, but don’t drag your scriptures in there with you – it’s not the place for them. If you insist on it, then everything will go down the drain, because nothing in the books is the same as it is in experience. It’s precisely because of this attachment to book knowledge that people who study a lot, who know a lot, tend to be unsuccessful in meditation.

### No Ideas of Gain

Meditators were constantly reminded that they had embarked on a practice of renunciation and letting go. Seeking visions or psychic powers through meditation was to miss the point altogether. If a craving to gain or attain something took root in meditators’ minds, then they had entered upon a path without ultimate resolution. The desire to realize some special experience might lead on to new elevated realms of existence, but not to liberation. Seeking rebirth in refined states of consciousness was like a bird flying deliberately into a gilded cage. At the beginning of practice, the best motto was to be cool, steady and patient. Unwise gaining ideas at this stage could lead to meditators giving up altogether.

Sometimes in meditation practice, people make determinations that are too extreme. They light incense, bow and make a vow, ‘As long as this incense has not burned down, then I will not move from my sitting posture under any circumstances. Whether I fall unconscious or die, whatever happens, I’ll die right here.’ As soon as they’ve made the solemn declaration, they start to meditate and then, within moments, the māras[12] attack them from all sides. They open their eyes to glance at the incense sticks, ‘Oh no! There’s still loads left.’ They grit their teeth and start again.

Their minds are hot and bothered and in a turmoil. They’re at their wits’ end. They’ve had enough, and they look at the incense sticks again: surely, they must be at an end. ‘Oh no. Not even half way!’ This happens three or four times, and then they give up. They sit and blame themselves for being hopeless, ‘Oh, why am I such an idiot, it’s so humiliating’, and so on. They sit there suffering about being insincere and bad – all kinds of things – until their minds are in an utter mess, and then the hindrances arise. If this kind of effort doesn’t lead to ill-will towards others, it leads to ill-will towards yourself. Why? Because of craving. In fact, you don’t have to take resolutions that far. You don’t have to make the resolution to tie yourself up like that. Just make the resolution to let go.

Progress in meditation is, for the most part, incremental – the gradually increasing dampness of a walker’s coat in fog, as one Japanese master has put it, rather than its obvious drenching by rain. But there can also be periods of great intensity. At such times, desire for clear validation of their efforts leads many meditators to give an exaggerated importance to unusual meditative experiences that occur. The intense feelings of rapture that often accompany such experiences seem to confirm their significance. Luang Por’s insistence that all experiences are ultimately of the same value, being equally liable to cause suffering to one who delights in them, was hard to grasp for meditators anxious to believe that all the work they had done was finally bearing fruit. If they did experience a noticeable shift in their practice, it could easily lead to new forms of conceit.

Don’t stick your nose up in the air on account of your practice. Don’t make too much out of your experiences. Let things peacefully follow their course. Don’t get ambitious. There’s no need to crave to get or to become anything at all.

On one occasion, a monk came to ask Luang Por why it was that, despite putting great effort into his meditation, he had still never seen the lights and colours that others claimed to see. Luang Por replied:

See light? What do you want to see light for? What good do you think it would do you? If you want to see light, go and look at that fluorescent lamp. That’s what light looks like.

After the laughter had died down, he continued:

The majority of meditators are like that. They want to see light and colours. They want to see deities, heaven and hell realms, all those kinds of things. Don’t get caught up with that stuff.

### Only the Posture Changes

A recurring theme in Luang Por’s meditation instructions was the necessity to create a flow of mindfulness and alertness independent of posture. This was the only way that the necessary momentum needed to cut through defilements could be sustained.

Meditation isn’t tied to standing or walking or sitting or lying down. As we can’t live completely motionless and inactive, we have to incorporate all these four postures into our practice. And the guiding principle to be relied on in each of them is the generation of wisdom and ‘rightness’. ‘Rightness’ means Right View and is another word for wisdom. Wisdom can arise at any time, in any one of the four postures. In each posture, you can think evil thoughts or good thoughts, mistaken thoughts or correct thoughts. Disciples of the Buddha are capable of realizing the Dhamma whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down.

So where does this practice which is carried out in the four postures find its focal point? It finds it in the generation of Right View, because once there is Right View then there comes to be Right Resolve, Right Speech and the rest of the Eightfold Path.

Thus, it would be better to change our way of speaking. Instead of saying that we ‘come out of samādhi’, we should say merely that we ‘change our posture’. Samādhi means stability of mind. When you emerge from samādhi, then maintain that stability in your mindfulness and alertness, in your object, in your actions, all of the time.

It’s incorrect to think that at the end of a meditation session you’ve finished work. Put forth a constant effort. It is through maintaining a constancy of effort in your work, in your actions and in your mindfulness and alertness, that your meditation will develop.

The obstacles that arise during meditation practice change and evolve. The overall tendency is for the obstacles to become more subtle as the practice progresses. But meditators who forgot Luang Por’s constant injunction to take nothing for granted could be blindsided by the unexpected reappearance of coarse defilements that they had assumed were behind them.

One common mistake was to attach to goodness. This could manifest as irritation with the shortcomings of others or else an exaggerated protectiveness of their peace of mind. Luang Por analysed the fault:

You’re afraid that the mind will become defiled, afraid that your samādhi will be destroyed. You feel a strong devotion to the practice, are strongly protective of it; you are very diligent and put forth a lot of effort. When a sense object impinges, then you’re caught out and terrified by it.

Luang Por reassured his disciples that this was a temporary stage that meditators passed through when there was an imbalance in the practice. It would fade away if they recognized that a certain amount of non-peaceful elements in a meditator’s life were, in fact, the raw material for the work of wisdom.

### Psychic Powers

On many occasions, the Buddha enumerated the various supernormal powers that were possible – but not inevitable – bi-products of deep meditation, and the fact that they are, essentially, mundane: their attainment bears no direct causal link to liberation. Of the two great disciples, Ven. Mahā Moggallāna was acknowledged as foremost amongst all the monks who possessed psychic powers, while Ven. Sāriputta was never known to exhibit any at all. Although the Buddha praised arahants who possessed such powers for having realized all that the human mind is capable of, he emphasized that such powers should never be made a goal of practice. Psychic powers such as telepathy may be of some use in teaching the Dhamma, but on the path to liberation, they are at best, tangential, and at worst, obstacles, to the realization of truth.

There have always been a certain number of monks in the Thai Forest Tradition who have possessed psychic powers, although few have been willing to demonstrate or even speak about them. Indeed, the Discipline only permits monks to reveal such abilities to fellow monks. The reason given for this injunction is that while people might be drawn to Buddhism by a display of miraculous powers, the faith that arises from exposure to the marvellous is not the kind that readily translates into the nurturing of wisdom that the Buddha wished to promote. In addition, a monk who reveals psychic powers will draw upon himself a great deal of distracting attention, and thereby both hinder his own path to liberation and threaten the tranquillity of the monastery in which he lives.

Luang Por emphasized that the power of fascination, irrespective of its object, is a serious obstacle to letting go. Fascination with psychic phenomena and unusual abilities binds the mind to saṃsāra every bit as tightly as fascination with coarse sensual pleasures. The acquiring of psychic powers tends to lead to an overestimation of spiritual attainments and a lack of urgency in pushing on further to realize true liberation.

In more intimate meetings with groups of monks, Luang Por would occasionally recount marvellous stories of the psychic powers of the arahants, but afterwards he would make clear that he had spoken for their information and enjoyment and repeated his warning:

Don’t pursue them. Don’t take any interest in them.

On one occasion, during a conversation with a senior Sri Lankan monk, the talk turned to the subject of psychic powers. Luang Por was asked whether people in Thailand were interested in such matters.

There are people who would like to acquire psychic powers, but myself, I feel that that kind of practice is not in agreement with the Buddha’s teachings. The Buddha taught us to abandon every kind of greed, aversion and delusion. Those people’s practice leads to the growth of those things.

### The Crust of Lucid Calm

The word nimitta is usually rendered in Buddhist texts as ‘sign’. In the context of meditation, it refers to a mental phenomenon which is experienced as a sense perception arising as the mind goes beyond the hindrances. A nimitta is most commonly experienced as a visual form, less often as a sound or tactile sensation, and – rarely – as an odour or taste.

In The Path of Purification, nimittas are treated at some length and divided into three categories.[13] Entry into jhāna is described as being dependent on the meditator shifting focus to a distinctive ‘sign’, most commonly a bright light, that appears as samādhi deepens.

Luang Por and his fellow forest masters were familiar with the treatment of nimittas in The Path of Purification but rarely incorporated it in their accounts of the meditation process. They used the term ‘nimitta’ with a slightly different emphasis. Luang Por employed it in speaking of the mind-made phenomena – colours, lights, visions of beings from other realms – that could appear as the mind became calm. He stressed the importance of maintaining the correct attitude to them. Known for what they were, nimittas were harmless. Obsession with them could lead to a time-wasting detour, and, in extreme cases, to psychosis. Armed with the awareness of their dangers, the basic method of dealing with them was simply to refuse to pay them any attention.

Whatever form the nimitta takes, don’t pay attention to it. While it still persists, re-establish your focus by putting all your attention on the breath. Breathe in and out deeply at least three times and that may well cut it off. Just keep re-establishing your concentration. Don’t see it as being yours, it is merely a nimitta. Nimittas are deceivers: they make us like, they make us love, they make us fear. They’re fake and they’re unstable. If one arises, don’t give it any significance. It’s not yours; don’t chase after it.

The most direct and powerful means of letting go of a nimitta was a change of focus from the perception to that which perceived it.

When you see a nimitta, then shift attention to look directly at your mind. Don’t abandon this basic principle.

Visions could be alluring, and it was not possible for meditators to simply refuse to take pleasure in them by an act of will. What they could do was to immediately recognize any feelings of pleasure that arose as being changeful and based upon false perception.

Not all nimittas are enamouring. Another common problem that meditators face is being startled and frightened by them.

Prepare your mind with the knowledge that nothing can harm you. If something appears during your meditation and you’re frightened by it, then your meditation will come to a halt. If that happens, then bring up the recollection that there is no danger and let it go; don’t follow it. Or you may, if you wish, take up the nimitta and investigate its conditioned nature. After you’ve experienced these things a number of times, you will be unmoved by them. They’ll just be normal, nothing to worry about.

There is, however, a class of nimittas that skilled meditators can use to intensify their practice. These include the mental images of parts of the physical body that ‘appear to emerge and expand from within the mind’, particularly those that occur after the mind emerges from a deep state of samādhi. Such images are significantly more vivid than any that could be produced by ordinary imagination. Contemplation of them – especially visions of the body in a state of decay – can produce a deep insight into the conditioned nature of phenomena, which in turn may lead to a deep dispassion and abandoning attachment to the sense of an embodied self. These potent images are much more likely to arise if the meditator had already devoted time to investigating the body as a discursive meditation.

Luang Por said that whether or not nimittas could be made use of in the cultivation of wisdom was dependent on the maturity of the meditator. Often, he would recommend a meditator to ignore a nimitta, even if it was of the physical body. One day, a lay meditator came to pay his respects to Luang Por and seek his guidance. He said that while meditating, he would see his body appear as a bleached skeleton floating in front of him. Luang Por explained to him that this is what The Path of Purification refers to as the uggaha-nimitta, the acquired image. But rather than going on to explain how to manipulate the object in the way the text recommends, he said that there was no need to do so. It was sufficient to create the conditions of stability and calm lucidity for wisdom to do its work. When the mind had been primed by samādhi in this way, any object that arose in the mind was experienced as if it was a question, and the immediate recognition of it as impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self, appeared as an effortlessly correct answer.

All that is called for is that you calm the mind sufficiently to provide a foundation for vipassanā. When wisdom has arisen, then as soon as anything occurs in your mind, you are able to deal with it; there is a solution to every problem. You become aware of the problem and its resolution simultaneously, and the problem ends. The knowing is important: if a problem arises without a solution, then you’re in trouble, you’re not keeping up with what’s happening. So you don’t have to do a lot of thinking about it; the solution arises in the present moment simultaneously with the problem – even about things that you’ve never thought about or considered before – without you having to hunt around here and there looking for an answer.

He returned to the point that he would make repeatedly with reference to nimittas: having fully acknowledged the object with equanimity, then turn attention away from the object known, to the knowing itself. By doing so, the object would dissolve.

Don’t run after externals, because if you do, then the image will just keep on expanding. Before you know it, the skeleton will have changed into a pig, and then the pig will become a dog, the dog a horse, the horse an elephant; and then they’ll all get up and chase each other about! Be aware that what you perceive is a nimitta, the crust of the lucid calm.

## Calm and Insight

### Samādhi

In his expositions of the practice of samādhi, Luang Por usually preferred to avoid speaking in terms of jhānas. Instead he would refer to the various mental states – known as jhāna factors – that constitute these jhānas. His reasoning was that the jhāna factors such as bliss (sukha) or equanimity were directly experienceable by the meditator, whereas ‘jhānas’ were simply names for different constellations of these factors. They were, in other words, conventions; and as such, they could lead the mind away from, rather than towards, awareness of the present reality.

If the mind is clear, then it’s just like sitting here normally and seeing things around you. Closing the eyes becomes no different from opening them. Seeing while the eyes are closed becomes the same as seeing with the eyes open. There’s no doubt about anything at all, merely a sense of wonder, ‘How can these things be possible? It’s unbelievable, but there they are.’ There will be sustained appreciation (vicāra) arising spontaneously in conjunction with rapture, happiness, a fullness of heart and lucid calm.

Subsequently, the mind will become even more refined, and will be able to discard the meditation object. Now, vitakka, the lifting of the mind onto the object, will be absent and so will vicāra. We say the mind discards vitakka and vicāra. Actually, it’s not so much that they’re discarded; what is really meant is that the mind becomes more concentrated, more compact. When it’s calm, then vitakka and vicāra are too coarse to stay within it, and so it’s said that they are discarded. Without vitakka lifting the mind to the object, and vicāra to appreciate its nature, there is simply this experience of repleteness, bliss and ‘one pointedness’ (ekaggatā).

I don’t use the terms first, second, third and fourth jhāna. I speak only of lucid calm and of vitakka, vicāra, rapture, bliss and unity, and of their progressive abandonment until only equanimity remains. This development is called the power of samādhi, the natural expressions of the mind that has realized lucid calm … So there is a gradual movement in stages, that depends on constant and frequent practice.

Once, Luang Por was asked about the relationship between the first four jhāna factors and the fifth (ekaggatā), usually translated into Thai as meaning ‘single-focused’, and in English as ‘one-pointed’. He replied that ‘ekaggatā’ was like a bowl and the other four factors were like the fruit in the bowl.

A cat watching a mouse hole has a kind of samādhi and so does a safe-cracker, but theirs is a natural, amoral concentration of instinct and desire, not the samādhi that issues from a disciplined gathering of inner forces and which provides the foundation of wisdom. The Buddha distinguished between ‘Right Samādhi’ (sammāsamādhi), an essential element of the path to liberation, and ‘wrong samādhi’ (micchāsamādhi), which leads away from it. Luang Por explained that the term ‘wrong samādhi’ included any state of calm that lacked the awareness necessary to create the foundation for insight:

Samādhi can be divided into two kinds: wrong samādhi and right samādhi. Take good notice of this distinction. In wrong samādhi the mind is unwavering. It enters a calmness which is completely silent and lacking all awareness. You can be in that state for a couple of hours or even all day, but during that time you have no idea where you’ve got to or what the state of your mind is. This is wrong samādhi. It’s like a knife that you’ve sharpened well and then just put away without using. You gain no benefit from it. It is a deluded calm that lacks alertness. You think that you’ve reached the end of the practice of meditation and don’t search for anything more. It’s a danger, an enemy. At this stage, it’s dangerous to you because it prevents wisdom from arising. There can be no wisdom without a sense of moral discrimination.

Right samādhi could be known by the clarity of awareness.

No matter how deep Right Samādhi becomes, it is always accompanied by awareness. There is a perfect mindfulness and alertness, a constant knowing. Right Samādhi is a kind of samādhi that never leads you astray. This is a point that practitioners should clearly understand. You can never dispense with the knowing. For it to be Right Samādhi, the knowing must be present from the beginning right until the end. Please keep observing this.

On another occasion, he said that inner peace could be divided into two kinds: coarse and subtle. The coarse kind occurred when the meditator identified with the bliss that arose from samādhi practice and assumed the bliss to be the essential element of the peace. The subtle peace was the fruit of wisdom, and it occurred when the experience of the mind itself, as that which knows all transient pleasant and unpleasant experiences, was understood to be the true peace.

The pleasant and the unpleasant are states of being, states we are born into, expressions of attachment. As long as we attach to the pleasant or unpleasant, there can be no liberation from saṃsāra. The bliss of samādhi is not true inner peace. That peace comes through dwelling in the awareness of the true nature of the pleasant and unpleasant without attachment. Thus, it is taught that the mind that lies beyond the pleasant (sukha) and the unpleasant (dukkha) is the true goal of Buddhism.

Sometimes, Luang Por made use of the commentarial division of samādhi into three levels, as these were clearly distinguishable on the basis of duration and intensity:

Momentary (khaṇika) samādhi – The initial, short-lived intervals of calm, experienced as the mind becomes focused on its object.

Access (upacāra) samādhi – The state in which the five hindrances have been overcome but not securely so. There is still some background movement in the mind, but it is not distracting.

Absorption (appanā) samādhi – The deepest level of samādhi, a bright stillness in which no sense data appears to the mind or is so fleeting and peripheral as to be inconsequential.

Access samādhi is the state in which the wisdom faculty functions most fluently. It precedes and succeeds attainment of absorption samādhi. The access that follows absorption is a more potent base for wisdom development than that which precedes it. Luang Por compared the mind in access samādhi to a chicken in a coop, not completely still but moving in a clearly defined area, and unable to run off at will. On other occasions, he said it is as if the mind is enclosed within a glass dome. The mind is aware of sense impressions, but is not affected by them. It is the state, he said, in which the mind can see things in their true light:

Having abided in the state of complete lucid calm for a sufficient time, the mind withdraws from it to contemplate the nature of external conditions in order to give rise to wisdom.

### Thinking and Examination

The common Thai word ‘pijarana’ can mean ‘consider’, ‘reflect upon’, ‘contemplate’, ‘examine’ or ‘investigate’, and is found extensively in the teachings of the Thai forest masters. On some occasions, Luang Por equated ‘pijarana’ with dhammavicaya, the ‘investigation of Dhamma’ that arises in dependence on mindfulness and constitutes the second of the seven enlightenment factors (bojjhaṅga). All Buddhists are encouraged to reflect on (or pijarana) the truths of old age, sickness, death, the inevitability of separation from all that is loved, and the law of kamma. By doing so again and again, these truths sink into the mind and become elements of the Right View that must underlie effective meditation practice. Pijarana is also used in the context of discursive meditation practices to mean the examination of a theme of Dhamma in a coherent and disciplined manner.

Whereas the nature and role of pijarana in discursive meditations is straightforward, meditators can often doubt the part it plays in developing insight into the three characteristics, which constitutes the culmination of Buddhist meditation practices.

What degree of intentionality was Luang Por advocating when he instructed his disciples to pijarana the three characteristics? How could meditators be sure that they were not merely thinking about the three characteristics rather than developing insight into them?

It’s a little bit hard to appreciate this because of its similarity to mental proliferation, and when thoughts arise you may assume that your mind is no longer calm. In fact, the thoughts and perceptions that occur at this time arise within the calm. Examination that takes place within the calm does not disturb it. Sometimes the body may be taken up for examination. That doesn’t mean you start thinking or speculating: it’s a process that occurs naturally in that state of calm. There is awareness within the calm, calm within awareness. If it was merely mental proliferation, it would not be calm, it would be disturbing. This isn’t proliferation. It is something that appears in the mind as a result of the calm and is called examination (pijarana). Wisdom arises right here.

Luang Por clarified this point in conversation with a visiting group of American Dhamma teachers. He said that ordinary thinking could be distinguished by the fact that, although it might remain focused on a topic, it was coarse and lacking in penetration. When the mind became calm, the examination (pijarana) arose naturally as a kind of awareness that, while possessing some of the characteristics of thinking, was of a different order. Wise reflection on the three characteristics could be distinguished by the fact that it remained uncorrupted by mental proliferation, was always wholesome, and caused defilements to fade from the mind. Mere thinking, on the other hand, becomes absorbed by defilements and contributes to their increase. The examination that Luang Por was advocating was distinguished by the letting go of attachments:

Ordinary thinking has already been filtered out. If you don’t know the examination for what it is, it will turn into conceptual thought; if you do know, it will turn into wisdom – that is, it will look on everything that arises as impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self.

This wisdom or wise reflection, he said, would gradually mature into vipassanā. In contrast to much contemporary use of the term, Luang Por tended to use ‘vipassanā’ to refer to the insight that arises from wise reflection rather than the reflection itself. Vipassanā was not, he said, something contrived, not something you did. Vipassanā was the discernment of the three characteristics that arose naturally in the mind when all the necessary causes and conditions for it had been cultivated. The intensity of this clear seeing could vary from a weak insight to a comprehensive vision of the way things are.

The degree of calm necessary before this investigation of the three characteristics could take place was not measurable. When Luang Por was asked, ‘How much calm is needed?’, he replied, ‘As much as is necessary.’ In other words, meditators were to proceed by trial-and-error and closely observe the results of their efforts until they knew for themselves. If the contemplation degenerated into mental proliferation, then the mind was obviously not strong enough to do the work of wisdom.

Meditators had different faculties. Some people found it easy to let go of thinking, but found that the very qualities that made such letting go possible, also retarded the cultivation of wisdom. Others, of a more reflective bent, found that their mind’s gift for contemplation prevented them entering deep states of samādhi, but they were able to penetrate the truth through a close, focused attention on the conditioned nature of phenomena.

To illustrate this point, Luang Por adapted two terms from the Suttas – ‘cetovimutti’ (liberation of mind) and ‘paññāvimutti’ (liberation through wisdom). He applied these terms to two paths of practice: one that emphasised the power of mind, i.e. samādhi, and the other that emphasised wisdom. While wisdom-liberation character types were especially sharp and perceptive, the mind-liberation character types needed to take their time and go over the same ground many times before they understood. He gave an analogy:

It’s like two people going to look at a cloth pattern for a few minutes. One of them understands the pattern immediately and can go away and reproduce it from memory. This is ‘liberation through wisdom’. The other person, the mind-liberation character, has to sit and ponder on the details of the pattern and go back for further checks. With mind-liberation, you have to work with the mind a fair amount, you have to develop quite a lot of samādhi. The first person doesn’t need to do all that. He looks at the design, understands the principle and then goes off and draws it himself; he has no doubts. Both paths reach the goal, but they have different features.

Liberation through wisdom is always accompanied by mindfulness and alertness. When anything emerges in the mind, then it knows; it knows, and then lets go with ease. The mind-liberation person can’t see things as they emerge in that way, he has to investigate them – which is also a valid path. Know your own character. In the first case, some people may not realize that there is samādhi present. You walk along observing, and samādhi – meaning firm stability of mind – is inherently present. For someone with wisdom, it’s not difficult. He just develops enough samādhi to create a foundation. It’s like students reaching grade twelve at school. Now they can choose which subject they want to specialize in. Whoever wants to go on to study agriculture does that and so on. It is the point of separation. Samādhi is the same. It reaches its destination in this same way.

### The Work of Wisdom

If the mind was able to enter access samādhi but consistently refused to go deeper, then the investigation of phenomena could begin. The theme that Luang Por would usually suggest to investigate at this point was the thirty-two parts of the body, or else, the first five – head-hair, body-hair, nails, teeth and skin – or, whichever part suits one:

In meditation, it’s not necessary to visualize a lot of things; we visualize only things that will give rise to wisdom. We need to look from the top of the head right down to the soles of the feet and from the soles of the feet up to the top of the head. What is this? How real is it? Why do people attach to it so tenaciously? Why are we so concerned about it? What’s the reason? What does this body consist of? We investigate all these things until we see them in their true light as ‘just that much’. As soon as you see that, understand that, then the grasping on to things as, ‘Oh! I love this so much’ or, ‘I hate it so much’ withdraws from the mind.

Some meditators would find that the investigation of the body or the arising and passing away of sense data would give rise to a rapture that would push the mind over the edge into a state of lucid calm. The mind would then alternate between resting and recharging its powers in the lucid calm and doing the work of wisdom.

A common anxiety was that with the development of deep samādhi, the bliss and sense of completeness that would ensue would be too absorbing to abandon in order to investigate the three characteristics. Luang Por’s answer was that it was indeed a genuine danger for meditators with wrong view or who developed samādhi in an imbalanced way. However, when the time was ripe, and with the meditator’s emphasis placed firmly on mindfulness and alertness, samādhi, if correctly developed, would turn naturally to the work of wisdom.

Look after what you’ve already developed and intensify your mindfulness. If you give more importance to mindfulness than to anything else, then you won’t go wrong: it is the correct way to put forth effort. If your mindfulness is still not fully matured, you must try to increase it so that you have the measure of everything that occurs in your mind. Knowledge will arise whenever mindfulness becomes clear and bright, because wisdom depends on this ability to be aware of everything that passes through your mind. So that’s it: if you have mindfulness, it will give birth to wisdom and you will clearly see and understand. Without mindfulness, you don’t know where your mind has gone.

Develop as much mindfulness as you can. It is of immense value in upholding your awareness and maintaining it on the path of peace. Mindfulness is the Buddha himself supporting and cautioning us. We become Buddha-like when we have mindfulness, because the mind is awake, it knows, it sees and it is restrained. Restraint and composure arise through mindfulness. Wherever defilements still lurk unseen, it’s because the flaws in your mindfulness allow them to evade you. But whenever mindfulness becomes clear, then the mind and your wisdom become radiant.

So don’t make too much out of things, don’t attach to ideas of self and other; just keep putting forth effort. My advice is to simply carry on like that, and as long as nothing comes up, then there’s no need for any investigation. Carry on normally as if you were walking along a road or sweeping the house. When you’re sweeping, you keep going without looking around at anything else. It’s only if someone calls your name, and you know that there’s some business to be seen to, that you look up; without interruptions, you just carry on with your sweeping.

Similarly, in meditation, only when something comes up should you investigate. Otherwise, merely contemplate your present experience. Simply maintain the mindfulness to be aware of that. If nothing comes up, then rest at ease. But that doesn’t mean just letting things go their way and ignoring them. There is care and attention. You’re aware of whatever passes through the mind, but you don’t need a lot of investigation. When something impinges at one of the sense doors and, in turn, impinges on the mind, then keep watch on it. If you don’t lose sight of it, you’ll see it as ‘just that much’, and then you can return to where you were. Don’t run away from that place because, if you do, before long you’ll find yourself carried off to heaven and hell. Be careful.

Luang Por illustrated this point with a simile: meditators should be like a spider at the centre of its web. The spider remains still and wakeful until an insect gets caught in the web. It then darts out, deals with the insect and returns to its still space.

One common view of meditation practice is that the deeper levels of samādhi are unnecessary for liberation: that momentary samādhi provides a sufficient base for the development of vipassanā. When asked about this on one occasion, Luang Por replied with an analogy:

You have to walk all the way to Bangkok, so that you know what Bangkok is like. Don’t just go as far as Korat[14]. Even if you’re going to go and live in Korat, go on to Bangkok. Then you’ll understand exactly how developed Korat is. Go all the way to Bangkok and you’ll have passed through Ubon, Korat and Bangkok. So, with samādhi, if your mind will go all the way, then let it, so that it can know the whole samādhi lineage. Access samādhi is the same as only going as far as Korat.

Extending the analogy, he compared the briefness of momentary samādhi to running through a town, and the longer duration of access samādhi to strolling about the town on frequent visits, repeating his frequent definition of that state as ‘examination within the peace’:

Sometimes the mind stops at one point of the examination and enters into appanā. At that moment, it abandons khanika and upacāra, it abandons everything and goes deep inside – where it’s released from all things. But that appanā develops from khanika and upacāra samādhi. You have to pass through them first, otherwise you won’t reach it.

Athough Luang Por occasionally made use of Pali technical terms, it was not his preferred way of talking about the mind. On being asked how a meditator should assess what level of samādhi had been reached, he replied that it was better to be simply aware of the state of mind itself without reaching for its Pali title:

Whatever level it is, the clear awareness that your mind is in a state of lucid calm will suffice. Clearly see that the mind has truly stopped. Are you confident that the mind is pure and bright? You have to be your own guarantor of that. With such an awareness, you don’t have to worry about whether it’s appanā or khanika or whatever. Don’t bother with all of that, it’s a waste of time. It’s better to simply look at your mind and the truth of what you see.

### Samatha and Vipassanā

In the Theravada tradition, most of the discourse concerning the two chief aspects of Buddhist meditation practice – the calming of the mind and the cultivation of wisdom – has revolved around the terms ‘samatha’ and ‘vipassanā’. ‘Samatha’ means ‘tranquillity, serenity, lucid calm’. ‘Vipassanā’ literally means ‘clear seeing’ and refers to insight into the three characteristics of existence. Although the Buddha himself did not use these terms with any great frequency, they gained much prominence in the centuries following his death, their meaning expanded to include not only the states themselves, but also the practices directly aimed at cultivating them. Focusing on a mantra, for example, came to be called a samatha practice, whereas investigating the impermanent nature of feelings, a vipassanā practice. The two terms have long been the subject of scholarly controversy. Disagreements have tended to centre on the relationship between the two; in particular, as mentioned in an earlier section, the extent to which the lucid calm of samatha must be developed before an authentic vipassanā insight can occur.

When referring to these terms, Luang Por would speak of them as two aspects of practice that were developed in unison, rather than two separate entities[15]. Just as an axe needed to be made with both sufficient weight and sharpness to do its job, so the mind that could penetrate the truth of things needed both stability and discernment. Nevertheless, given that the focus in the early stages of practice is suppression of the hindrances and, in its culminating phase, insight into the nature of things, Luang Por recognized a shift of emphasis which he would characterize as an organic process of maturation. It occurred the way, he said, that an unripe mango became ripe, or a child became an adult. From one point of view, the adult might be seen as an altogether different person to the child; and from another, as an evolved version of the same person. In a similar, but more earthy analogy, Luang Por compared the relationship to that between food and excrement.

Luang Por also coined the terms ‘pacification of mind’ and ‘pacification of defilements’ to clarify his view of the necessary relationship between samatha and vipassanā:

When we develop samādhi, we pacify the mind. But the life of the pacified mind is short. Because it can’t withstand a lot of things going on, it lacks true ease. You go to a quiet place and pacify your mind. But the defilements are still there; they haven’t been pacified. This is where the distinction can be made. The pacification of the mind and the pacification of the defilements are two different things.

The mind can become peaceful easily enough when there are few disturbances. But if it feels some kind of threat, then it can’t. There’s something still there. You can’t let go, you can’t put it down.

Meditators who took refuge in refined states of mind and feared anything that might disturb the bliss of their samādhi, tended to become trapped in doomed attempts to manipulate conditions in order to maintain them. The boldness required to look closely at forms, sounds, odours, tastes, tangible objects and mental states would be lacking in them, and their defilements left untouched. In contrast, meditators, at peace after a training in which the calming and wisdom elements had been developed in tandem, would have no fear of sense contact as such and could let go of attachment at the moment of contact with great fluency. They created no owner of their experience. Luang Por said at this stage the practice was fitting to be called vipassanā, clear seeing of things in their true light:

These conventional expressions: samatha and vipassanā – if you want to discuss them separately you can. But if you want to talk about their relationship, then you have to say that they’re inseparable, they’re connected. A layperson once came and asked me if these days I was teaching people to practise samatha or vipassanā. I said, ‘I don’t know, they’re trained together.’ If you answer in terms of what actually happens in the mind, then you have to answer like that. Develop them simultaneously, because they are synonymous. If you develop samādhi without wisdom, it won’t last long.

In one of his most celebrated discourses, Luang Por captured this idea with a simile:

Wisdom is the movement of samādhi. It’s like the phrase ‘still flowing water’. The samatha and vipassanā of someone who has developed right practice are in harmony and concord, and flow like a single stream of water. In the mind of the practitioner, it’s as if still water is flowing. The peace of samādhi incorporates wisdom. There is sīla, samādhi and paññā together. Wherever you sit, it is still and yet it flows. It is still flowing water. There is samādhi and paññā, samatha and vipassanā.

### The Development of Insight

On one occasion, Luang Por taught about the development of insight in terms of the two jhāna factors of vitakka and vicāra. He said that with the mind in a state of calm, a thought might arise (vitakka), prompting appreciation of it (vicāra) resulting in rapture, which would then propel the mind into a deeper state of lucid calm. On the passing away of that state, the appreciation could resume.

If you maintain awareness, you’ll get a report from the scene. It’s similar to there being a person in a house with six windows. You stand outside watching the windows. From outside you see someone appearing at one window and then someone else at another and you assume that there’s six people in the house. In fact, it’s all just the one person moving from window to window. That one person is named ‘Three Characteristics’. Everything is unstable. The three characteristics of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self are the object of vipassanā. Penetrating them will cut off all doubts.

As the practice of contemplating whatever phenomena arose in the calm, lucid mind as impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self progressed, the meditator would experience a disjunction between the knowing and that which was known.

It’s not that you have to force this disjunction. Through the abandonment, the putting down of attachment, the mind and its object become automatically disjoined.

At this stage, Luang Por said that the distinction between the mind and its present object was like that between water and oil. The separation allowed for a constant examination of phenomena.

If you take your mind to this point, wherever you go, the mind will be analyzing. This is the ‘enlightenment factor’ called ‘investigation of Dhamma’. It rolls along by itself, and you talk with yourself, you resolve and release the feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness that arise. Nothing can get close to the mind; it has its work to do. This happens naturally. It’s not something that you can contrive.

He said that it was at this stage that the Buddha’s teachings on the foundations of mindfulness[16] became clear. When the membrane connecting the knowing from the known had been cut, then the meditator saw ‘the body in the body’, ‘feelings in feelings’, ’states of mind in states of mind’, and ‘wholesome and unwholesome dhammas in wholesome and unwholesome dhammas’. In other words, they were seen clearly for what they were, without superimposing upon them an independent, self-existent owner.

### Attainments

At a certain stage in meditation practice, the ‘defilements of insight’[17] may arise. Here, unenlightened meditators come to mistakenly believe that intensely positive mental states, such as illumination and bliss, are indications of enlightenment.

You attach to the goodness that arises in your practice. You attach to the purity. You attach to the knowledge. This is called ‘vipassanu’.[18]

Through the practise of meditation, defilements can be so effectively suppressed that they may seem to have been completely eradicated. As a result, meditators can develop an unshakeable self-confidence in their perceptions. If their teacher refuses to accept the validity of their assumed enlightenment, they interpret it as either a sad misjudgement on the teacher’s part, or else as jealousy.

Strong measures may be needed in such cases and a short, sharp shock is usually the recommended cure. In the commentaries, there are stories of awakened monks disabusing others of their delusions by mentally projecting hologram-like moving images of elephants in rut or alluring women in front of them. Caught by surprise, the monk who had believed himself to have transcended lust and fear of death is suddenly made painfully aware that the defilements have only been driven underground and are still lying latent in his mind.

Luang Por would tell the story of Luang Por Pao, who replied to a nun’s declaration that she had become a stream enterer with a curt, ‘Eugh, a bit better than a dog.’ In Thailand, comparing a human being to a dog is considered extremely offensive. The shock and anger that arose in the maechee, when spoken to in this unexpected way, immediately punctured her conceit.

Luang Por once used the same method with a similar result when a maechee at Wat Pah Pong mistakenly believed that she had attained a stage of enlightenment. He listened silently to her claim and then, with his face a stern mask, said coldly: ‘Liar.’

It was one of the subjects on which Luang Por could be fierce:

Don’t ever allow yourself to get puffed up. Whatever you become, don’t make anything of it. If you become a stream-enterer, then leave it at that. If you become an arahant, then leave it at that. Live simply, keep performing beneficial deeds, and wherever you are, you’ll be able to live a normal life. There’s no need to go boasting to anybody that you’ve attained this or become that.

### Beyond the Monkey

One sign that the practice was on the right path was the feeling of sober sadness that arose through constant contemplation of the three characteristics, which evolves into ‘nibbidā’ or disenchantment.

An illumination takes place and then disenchantment sets in: disenchantment with this body and mind; disenchantment with things that arise and pass away and are unstable. You feel it wherever you are. When the mind is disenchanted, its sole interest is in finding the way out of all those things … It sees the suffering inherent in the world, the suffering inherent in life. When the mind has entered this state, then wherever you sit there’s nothing but impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self. There’s nowhere to take hold of anything anymore. If you sit at the foot of a tree, you hear a discourse from the Buddha. If you go to a mountain, you hear a discourse from the Buddha. You see all trees as just one tree. You see all creatures as of one species. You see that nothing deviates from this truth: that all things come into existence, become established, begin to change and then cease.

Luang Por made clear that the disenchantment that he was referring to was not an expression of aversion, for that would have been simply another expression of craving. This disenchantment was the feeling that arose through seeing how mistaken it had been to consider impermanent phenomena as self or belonging to self. It was waking up from the enchantment of body and mind.

This is not the monkey feeling disenchanted. It’s feeling disenchanted with being a monkey.

Luang Por maintained that ‘mai nae’ – awareness of the present mental object as changeful, fluid, unreliable, of uncertain outcome – was the unerring guide right from the very beginning of meditation practice until its final conclusion. When mental objects were recognized as ‘changeful’, he said, it was like breaching the boat of conceit below the waterline. The sense ‘I am’ listed to one side and sunk.

Luang Por taught that complete liberation of the mind was the result of creating a momentum where the tirelessly repeated inner contemplation of the three characteristics, in a mind freed from the hindrances, was complemented by a steady effort to be mindful and alert to the three characteristics in daily life. Eventually, the constant repetition and increased profundity of the contemplation reached a tipping point and bore fruit.

Although Luang Por was reticent about talking in detail about the higher stages of practice, he did, on occasion, make some important observations. In one of his discourses, he described the case of the meditator who has ‘a glimpse of Nibbāna’ but is unable to fully integrate his understanding and has to return to the work of wisdom until the mind is fully mature:

It’s like someone who is in the middle of stepping across a stream – with one foot on the near bank and the other on the far side. They know for sure that there are two sides to the stream but are unable to cross over it completely, and so, they step back. The understanding that there exist two sides to the stream is similar to that of the Gotrabhū puggala or the Gotrabhū citta[19]. It means that you know the way to go beyond the defilements but are still unable to go there, and so, you step back. Once you know for yourself that this state truly exists, this knowledge remains with you constantly as you continue to practise meditation and develop your pāramī[20]. You are both certain of the goal and the most direct way to reach it.

Right View has been established; the meditator knows the right and the wrong way of practice. They steer between the extremes of pleasure and pain and gradually move down the path of equanimity, but still make mistakes. They know that treading on thorns is painful, but they still can’t always avoid doing so. But through constantly laying aside the tendency to attach to all that is pleasant and unpleasant in the world of experience, insight deepens until finally they become a ‘knower of the worlds’.

When the mind has completely seen through ‘personality view’, all doubts and attachments to precepts and practices disappear, and now the mind of the practitioner is ‘in the world, but not of it’. Luang Por made a comparison with the natural separation of oil and paint in a bottle:

You are living in the world and following the conventions of the world, but without attaching to them. When you have to go somewhere, you say you are going; when you are coming, you say you are coming. Whatever you are doing, you use the conventions and language of the world, but it’s like the two liquids in the bottle – they are in the same bottle but don’t mix together. You live in the world, but at the same time you remain separate from it.

The mind doesn’t create things around sense contact. Once contact has occurred, you automatically let go. The mind discards the experience. This means that if you are attracted to something, you experience the attraction in the mind but don’t attach or hold on fast to it. If you have a reaction of aversion, there is simply the experience of aversion arising in the mind and nothing more: there isn’t any sense of self arising that attaches and gives meaning and importance to the aversion. In other words, the mind knows how to let go; it knows how to set things aside. Why is it able to let go and put things down? Because the presence of insight means you can clearly see the harmful results that come from attaching to all those mental states.

When you see forms, the mind remains undisturbed; when you hear sounds, it remains undisturbed. The mind neither takes a position for or against any sense objects experienced. This is the same for all sense contact, whether it be through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body or mind. Whatever thoughts arise in the mind can’t disturb you. You are able to let go. You may perceive something as desirable, but you don’t attach to that perception or give it any special importance – it simply becomes a condition of mind to be observed without attachment. This is what the Buddha described as experiencing sense objects as ‘just that much’. The sense bases are still functioning and experiencing sense objects, but without the process of attachment stimulating movements to and fro in the mind.

Having gained such clear and penetrating insight means it is sustained at all times, whether you are sitting meditation with your eyes closed, or even if you are doing something with your eyes open. Whatever situation you find yourself in, be it in formal meditation or not, the clarity of insight remains. When you have unwavering mindfulness of the mind within the mind, you don’t forget yourself. Whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down, the awareness within makes it impossible to lose mindfulness. It’s a state of awareness that prevents you forgetting yourself. Mindfulness has become so strong that it is self-sustaining to the point where it becomes the natural state of the mind. These are the results of training and cultivating the mind, and it is here where you go beyond doubt.

Luang Por said that realizing that the constant arising and passing away of all phenomena in accordance with causes and conditions is a fixed, invariable truth, is to find the only kind of permanence that exists. Realizing this truth of an unchanging changefulness is, he said, ‘the end of the path that needs to be followed’. In terms of the Four Noble Truths – the framework for all of Luang Por’s practice and teaching – by bringing the eight factors of the Noble Path to maturity, suffering is comprehended; and with the factors sustaining suffering abandoned, suffering ceases. Luang Por said:

It is as if an arrow has been pulled out of your heart.

1 ‘Buddho’ is the nominative case of the word usually expressed in the vocative as ‘Buddha’. The long ‘o’ provided by this form of the word is more easily sustained for the duration of an exhalation than the short ‘a’. Inner recitation of ‘Buddho’ can also be practised without reference to the breath.

2 Presumably a reference to kerosene lanterns.

3 Meditations which make use of directed thought.

4 See Glossary, fetters.

5 For example, with the hands folded in the lap and each thumb lightly touching.

6 Meditators generally sat flat on the floor. Luang Por did not however object to the introduction of meditation cushions at Wat Pah Nanachat, the branch monastery he established for his Western disciples.

7 The preference for right over left here is simply a tradition that has been passed down from forest monks of previous generations. Conceivably, it originated in some consideration of internal energy flows, but Luang Por never spoke in such terms.

8 See Glossary, thirty-two parts of the body.

9 Clear insight into the three characteristics of existence: impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self.

10 States of mindful tranquillity resulting from abandonment of the five hindrances.

11 Pali: caṅkama; Thai: jongkrom.

12 Malevolent beings. Here the term is used figuratively to refer to defilements.

13 “The object perceived at the very beginning of concentration is called the preparatory image (parikamma-nimitta). The still unsteady and unclear image, which arises when the mind has reached a weak degree of concentration, is called the acquired image (uggaha-nimitta). An entirely clear and immovable image arising at a higher degree of concentration is the counter-image (paṭibhāga-nimitta).” (Buddhist Dictionary by Ven. Nyanatiloka, 1980.)

14 A city halfway between Ubon and Bangkok.

15 Generally, Luang Por would use samatha and samādhi, vipassanā and wisdom, interchangeably.

16 See Glossary, foundations of mindfulness.

17 Vipassanupakkilesā. A list of ten states first appears in Paṭis 2.100. It consists of illumination, knowledge, rapture, tranquillity, bliss, resolution, exertion, assurance, equanimity and decisiveness.

18 Luang Por’s own coinage, intended, for rhetorical purposes, to form a pair with vipassanā.

19 ‘Gotrabhū’ means ‘change of lineage’, i.e. between the unenlightened and enlightened.

20 Spiritual accomplishments. The Theravada tradition recognises ten: generosity, virtue, wisdom, renunciation, effort, patience, truthfulness, determination, loving-kindness and equanimity.