# A Life Inspiring

Luang Por the Good Friend

People hold dear one who embodies virtue and insight, who is principled, who has realized the truth and who does what ought to be done.

– Dhp 217

## Introduction

From 1954 onwards, Luang Por Chah’s life was focused on his monastery, training the steadily growing number of monks, novices and nuns who were resident there, and teaching its lay supporters. By the late 1970s, he had become one of the most revered monks in Thailand. After travelling to England in 1977, however, Luang Por’s health started to decline. In early 1983, paralyzed and unable to express himself coherently, he stopped speaking. And in January 1992, after over nine years of stillness and silence, Luang Por’s life came to an end.

The years when Luang Por was in his prime do not lend themselves to a chronological narrative, as there is relatively little external incident to relate. Monastic life is intentionally repetitive. Luang Por rarely travelled except to branch monasteries. As a celibate forest monk, his personal life was without drama: he did not marry, fathered no children, had no love affairs. He neither made a single penny nor lost one, and accumulated no more possessions than he would have been able to carry over his shoulder in a cloth bag. For twenty-five years, Luang Por’s life – at least that which has left a record – is primarily the story of the teachings that he gave and the training that he developed.

It is during these years that Luang Por fully matured in his role as the ‘kalyāṇamitta’ or ‘good friend’[1], the Buddhist ideal of a spiritual teacher. Good friendship was not just half, the Buddha famously corrected Ven. Ānanda, but the whole of the Holy Life. In other words, the support of the kalyāṇamitta is fundamental to Buddhist training. The fruit of practice might be a liberation from all need for external supports, but on the path to that liberation, ‘good friends’ are indispensable.

The Buddha described the ideal kalyāṇamitta as one who inspires affection and devotion, respect and emulation in those around him. He is patient with the questions and foibles of his disciples and skilled in communicating with them. The kalyāṇamitta is able to explain profound topics in terms that are clear and easily understood; he never abuses his power to lead disciples astray. The Buddha said that it is association with the kalyāṇamitta that leads to hearing and conversing about the Dhamma, to growth in morality, to diligence and skill in abandoning the unwholesome and developing the wholesome, and to clear discernment of the way things are. On the day of Luang Por’s cremation, the great scholar, Chao Khun Phra Debvedi (P.A. Payutto), was invited to give a discourse to the huge assembly of monastics and lay Buddhists gathered there. He chose to speak on the ways in which Luang Por Chah had been a true kalyāṇamitta to his disciples.

The following chapters of this book will examine in more detail the ways in which Luang Por fulfilled his role as a kalyāṇamitta. These will include chapters on exactly what and how he taught his monastic disciples – monks and maechees, Thais and Westerners – and how he taught his lay disciples. This present chapter, however, will focus on Luang Por himself: how he was seen by others, and in particular, on the qualities that enabled him to fulfil the role of the kalyāṇamitta.

In his references to the kalyāṇamitta, the Buddha showed that he recognized that the feelings and perceptions evoked in the student by the teacher can play a significant role in the learning process. From observing his conduct, the student forms beliefs about the kalyāṇamitta and develops trust and confidence in him. The willingness of students to make the sacrifices necessary for progress in Dhamma and the diligence and passion with which they study and practice, are not simply a function of their understanding of what is involved. They are rooted in their perception of the teacher, by the affection and respect they feel for him, and by the degree to which they take him as a role model. Students tend to receive the strongest boost in the presence of one who they believe has followed the path and is a witness to its fruits. Faith in the attainment of the teacher is a powerful support in the practice of Dhamma.

From the beginning of his teaching career, Luang Por demonstrated, to an unusual degree, a natural charisma that included leadership qualities and a gift for articulating the Dhamma. To Luang Por’s monastic disciples, his compassion for them, and his patience with their foibles, filled them with devotion. The standard of his practice of the Vinaya, his obvious mastery of meditation practices and the wisdom with which he expounded the teachings filled them with respect. They wanted to follow in his footsteps. Central to their commitment to him and his training was a confidence in his liberation from defilements.

## Imponderables Anyway

### Liberation

So this Holy Life, monks, does not have gain, honour and renown for its benefit, or the attainment of virtue for its benefit, or the attainment of samādhi as its benefit, or knowledge and vision as its benefit. But it is this unshakeable deliverance of mind that is the goal of this holy life, its heartwood and its end.

– MN 29

What exactly is meant by the ‘unshakeable deliverance of mind’? The Buddha taught that four stages of inner liberation may be discerned. Once attained, they cannot be weakened or lost, and hence they may all be deemed ‘unshakeable’. In fact, the word ‘attainment’ here has to be used with some caution. The Buddha defined each stage of liberation in terms of the irrevocable abandonment of specific mental defilements: a ‘deliverance’ from them. The changes that take place at each stage are thus experienced primarily in terms of endings rather than gains. In the central Buddhist metaphor, embodied in the word ‘Buddha’ itself, the experience is referred to as ‘awakening’.

Those who have reached the final and highest stage of deliverance are called ‘arahants’; they have transcended even the subtlest expressions of greed, hatred and delusion. Their self-referring motivations are now entirely replaced by wisdom and compassion. All of the inner cravings and attachments that provide the fuel for rebirth are no more. It is believed by many Thai Buddhists, monastic and lay, that Luang Por Chah reached this highest stage.

Did Luang Por himself know or believe himself to be an arahant? There is evidence that he did, but it is surprisingly scanty. Perhaps the most important observation to be made on the topic is that Luang Por made a point of never speaking about it. On a rare occasion, he might refer to himself with the simple and down-to-earth phrase, ‘I have nothing’ – but, in general, Luang Por deflected all questions about his attainments.

His reticence over a matter of such huge significance to him was largely mandatory. The Vinaya restricts the extent to which a monk may speak about his own practice to anupasampannā – anyone not yet fully ordained. The importance of the restrictions may be gathered by the ruling that, irrespective of the audience, a monk who falsely claims spiritual attainments (unless through genuine over-estimation), must be immediately expelled from the Sangha.

At first glance, this may seem disproportionately severe given that the other three expulsion offences consist of murder and theft – universally acknowledged as grossly immoral – and sexual intercourse, a betrayal of a defining principle of monastic life. But with the promulgation of this training rule, the Buddha made it clear that he considered false boasts of spiritual prowess to have potentially disastrous long-term effects on Buddhist communities, every bit as – in fact, more – dire than individual acts of lust or hatred.

The Buddha’s concern about what might appear to be simply a special case of wrong speech was due to the threat that it bore to the relationship between ordained and lay Buddhists, a relationship on which the future of the Buddha Sāsana would depend. By claiming to be enlightened, monks would draw the interest, faith and support of lay Buddhists away from the Sangha as a whole and towards themselves as charismatic individuals. The harmony of the Sangha would be undermined. Personality cults could well develop in which laypeople were exploited. Then, if and when the falsehood was revealed, their faith in Buddhism would be lost. Meanwhile, modest and genuinely liberated monastics might be neglected and disregarded by lay supporters who assumed that, if they were truly enlightened, they would have already revealed it to the world. Lay Buddhists entertaining thoughts of disrespect towards liberated beings could be led to act or speak in ways that created seriously bad kamma.[2] The expulsion offence sought to prevent all of these consequences.

Even in cases where a monk revealed genuine spiritual attainments to lay Buddhists (usually with the intention of encouraging them in their practice), the danger to the ordained-lay Buddhist relationship was not avoided. For this reason, the Buddha also declared a lesser offence of pācittiya for true revelations of spiritual prowess.

Although Luang Por could have revealed his attainments to his fellow monks at Wat Pah Pong without transgressing a training rule, he did not. He would have been aware that any statements made to the Sangha would inevitably leak out to the lay community. The Sangha was not a fixed hermetic group; every year, monks gave up the training and disrobed. Indeed, the testimony of disrobed monks, together with the words of monks praising their teacher to lay supporters, have always been the most common source of rumours about monks’ attainments which spread throughout the wider Buddhist community. Luang Por kept a noble silence.

### He is What He is

As he presumably intended, Luang Por’s lead on this matter created a culture of discretion at Wat Pah Pong. Spiritual attainments were considered private matters. Speculation about the attainments of others or asking questions about them was considered uncouth, and if the person referred to was Luang Por himself, inappropriate. This standard of restraint did much to protect the system of seniority laid down in the Vinaya from being undermined by cliques forming around more junior, but charismatic monks.

There was one occasion, however, when the culture came close to cracking. It occurred when a quite junior visiting monk claimed openly to resident monks that he was an arahant. Some members of the Sangha believed the claim to be true, most were non-committal and a few were dismissive. The authenticity of the monk’s enlightenment became a favourite topic of conversation, especially when it became known, intriguingly, that he spent a lot of the time lying down. The report of one dialogue swept through the wat. Apparently, on being asked what kind of meditation he practised while he was lying down, he had replied that while lying down, he didn’t do anything at all. His questioner had then said that if he lay down without doing anything, he’d fall asleep. The monk replied, ‘Ah yes, but falling asleep would be doing something.’

The visiting monk’s influence spread. Finally, somebody screwed up the courage to ask Luang Por for a definitive answer as to whether the monk was indeed what he said he was. But Luang Por had seen all this before and was not willing to feed the kind of curiosity that lay behind the question. In a neutral voice, he replied:

If he is, he is; if he isn’t, he isn’t. Me, I’m not anything at all. There’s nothing in me to be anything. Our affairs are our own, they’re no business of anyone else. And others’ business is nothing to do with us.

This was a characteristic response. Luang Por had little time for monks who liked to gossip about other monks’ attainments.

Look instead at your own mind. Look at your intention. Why do you want to know? What good does it do you? What is the state of your mind right now? Is there still any greed there? Any aversion? Any delusion? How can you be free of them?

After a while, the visiting monk left, and the small buzz of excitement faded. Some time later, addressing the Sangha, Luang Por returned to a favourite theme. He taught that the right attitude to adopt towards the realization of Dhamma, whether one’s own or that of others, arose through the recollection of uncertainty. No experience whatsoever, however sublime, was to be grasped at. He cautioned his disciples about the ‘defilements of insight’[3] in which identification with elevated states of mind developed through meditation led to erroneous beliefs in realization and a dangerous overestimation of one’s achievements:

Their samādhi is good, but there’s no vipassanā, and so they see only one side of things … They mistake their faith for wisdom and are blind to their wrong thinking.

He reminded his disciples that levels of liberation were not new enlightened identities and counselled them:

Don’t be anything at all. Being something, anything at all, is suffering … Sneak into the presence of the Buddha. Where is the Buddha? Right there in the impermanence, the unreliability of things! Take hold of that to begin with. If your mind is saying, ‘I’m a stream-enterer’, bow to the Buddha, and he’ll tell you ‘Maybe, maybe not (mai nae).’ You think, ‘I’m a non-returner’, and he’ll say the same thing, ‘Maybe, maybe not.’ You think, ‘I’m an arahant’, and the Buddha will really give it to you, ‘Maybe, maybe not!’

Luang Por’s avoidance of the topic of his own experience was matched by his more general reticence on the topic of liberation itself. In this, he followed the Buddha himself, who typically focused on the obstacles to realization and the methods needed to deal with them, and left aspirants to discover for themselves what remained once those obstacles had been overcome. There was only so much about a reality beyond language that could be captured in words. Luang Por held that while teachings about that reality might be inspiring, they could become obstacles on the path. A fixed idea of liberation could easily lead to anticipation, craving and identification with subtle mental states that would hinder the liberation from them.

Towards the end of his teaching career, Luang Por was introduced to the teachings of the Zen tradition. He enjoyed the playful, paradoxical use of language he found there and seemed to appreciate a way to speak about experiences beyond conventions and rational thought. Every now and again, he would speak in a cryptic, poetic style of things about which he had hitherto been more reserved:

In the beginning, I’ve said it’s a matter of, ‘Go quickly, come back quickly, stop quickly.’ If you keep on doing this, eventually there won’t be anything much: things merely what they are. Everything will have come to an end. No need to walk, no need to retreat, no need to stop. No going, coming or stopping. It’s all over! Take this away and reflect on it until it’s clear in your mind. At that point, there’s really nothing at all.

### Speculation

Despite Luang Por’s unwillingness to speak about the results of his practice, there would, nevertheless, seem to be a place in a book such as this one to address some common questions on the matter. For this reason, the following paragraphs will be devoted to the task. Although this section would like to have earned the title of ‘Reflections’, it has had to settle for the much less weighty, ‘Speculations’.

There can never be any cast-iron proof of the presence of spiritual maturity, only of its absence. But there are certain principles that may be relied upon when looking into the matter. The most important one lies in examining the Buddha’s statements about the characteristics of the liberated being and then observing whether or not, over a long period of time, a person’s actions and speech are consonant with those qualities. Also to be taken into account are whether the person believes himself to be liberated, and thirdly, whether other liberated beings confirm that he is.

In the case of Luang Por, there is much evidence that his actions and speech did correspond to those of a liberated being as revealed in the Buddha’s discourses. Although he did not proclaim his liberation, it seems reasonable to assume from certain words by which he is known to have referred to himself, such as ‘finished’ and ‘nothing left’ for example, that he felt assured of it. He was also recognized as liberated by the greatest of his contemporaries in the Thai Forest Tradition. Luang Ta Maha Bua, the acknowledged leader of the tradition, was forthright on the point more than once, declaring, for example, that, ‘Luang Por Chah is a diamond of the first water.’ While none of these points is a proof, each one has provided grounds for Buddhist practitioners to establish a reasoned faith in Luang Por as a ‘Noble One’.

But if Luang Por’s liberation is taken as a working hypothesis, a further query begs to be answered: where and when did the significant breakthroughs in his practice occur? The only way to answer this question with any confidence would, of course, be through Luang Por’s own testimony. But, as has been mentioned above, he was silent on the matter. All that remains is conjecture. As a preface to the following remarks, it must be emphasized that there is no consensus on the matter amongst Luang Por’s disciples – in fact, it is rarely discussed – and no firm conclusions should be drawn from the points that are made.

The first speculation is that Luang Por had realized at least the first of the four levels of liberation – stream-entry – before establishing Wat Pah Pong in 1954. The reasoning behind this assertion is that Luang Por was strongly influenced by teachings of Luang Pu Mun and of the Buddha himself, cautioning monks from teaching before they were truly ready to do so. A Dhammapada verse, for example, states:

One should first establish oneself in what is proper, then only should one instruct others. Such a wise person is not liable to be reproached. As he instructs others, so should he act himself.

– Dhp 158-9

The Buddha taught that unenlightened beings are severely restricted in the degree to which they may offer spiritual sustenance to others. On one occasion, he compared it to a person mired in a cesspit trying to pull another person free. Only when the compassionate person is on firm footing himself can he truly help anyone else.

Luang Pu Mun would sometimes speak of the bad kamma that can be created by one still prey to defilements who teaches others. Amongst his disciples, the most common interpretation of this warning was that only stream-entry provides a monk with the unshakeable Right View that will guard against him leading students astray. In practice, this did not mean that Luang Pu Mun forbade unenlightened monks from all kinds of teaching. Indeed, he encouraged his monks to give Dhamma talks to the villagers they met with on their tudong wanderings. It was the establishment of a monastery, and the formalization of the teaching role, that seems to have been the step too far.

The idea of a monk completing the final three stages of his own practice while fulfilling the role of a teacher was, however, sanctioned by the Buddha. He compared such a monk to the leader of a herd of animals, who is able to take care of his herd without neglecting his own need for grazing. Taking these points into consideration, the fact that Luang Por started to take on disciples from around 1952, and in 1954 agreed to establish a monastery, is significant. They would appear to be clear indications that, by that time, he considered himself to be standing on firm ground.

To proceed further along this path of speculation, it may be deduced that as his visit to Langka Mountain was for the purpose of gaining advice on a problem in his meditation, it must have preceded stream-entry. His experience underneath the wooden Dhamma Hall[4] as he descended the mountain is one of the best candidates for the key breakthrough. The gap between that day and the period when he first accepted monks as his students is around three years. This corresponds to a private comment later attributed to him that he carefully monitored his mind for three years before being absolutely sure that his breakthrough was genuine. Further circumstantial evidence is provided by his declaration that by practising with real diligence, five years is sufficient to realize stream-entry.

One point generally agreed upon is that when Luang Por established Wat Pah Pong, he still had work to do. This may well help to explain the rigour of the training that he developed in the first years of the monastery (and somewhat relaxed in later years). There are few clues as to when he made the remaining breakthrough(s)[5], although one episode is suggestive. It is said that, one day, Luang Por lost his temper with an inattentive novice. The awareness that the capacity to lose his temper still dwelt within him was such a shock to Luang Por that he went into his kuti vowing not to leave it again until he had victory over this remnant of defilement. Ten days later he emerged.

To repeat once more, the preceding passages are speculative. For his disciples, the sense that their teacher was impeccable in Vinaya and absolutely trustworthy in the Dhamma was more important than estimations of his attainment. What they could know for themselves was that Luang Por’s behaviour showed no evidence of the presence of greed, hatred and delusion. On the contrary, he inspired in them a firm confidence that his actions were invariably motivated by wisdom and compassion; his teachings were profound and effective; and his knowledge of the subtleties of mind completely assured. They were confident that he was absolutely reliable and would never lead them astray.

### Supernormal

It was generally believed by his disciples that Luang Por possessed supernormal powers, in particular the ability to read minds. And this was another matter on which he was silent. What can be stated with some certainty is that whether or not Luang Por did, indeed, possess such powers, the belief that he did, definitely influenced his disciple’s perceptions of him, and affected their practice. For many of the monks and nuns, it gave them an added motivation to let go of unwholesome thoughts. The idea that their teacher might know the kind of things their mind indulged in when swept along by a heedless mood was mortifying. It provided a strong support for as yet unstable virtues of wise shame and wise fear of consequences to mature.

But could Luang Por actually read minds? For a Buddhist, it is not a far-fetched notion. A brief trawl through the Buddhist scriptures will confirm that the Buddha acknowledged the existence of many supernormal abilities, and it will also reveal how uncontroversial that acknowledgement was to his contemporaries. It should not be surprising: the possibility that adept meditators may develop such abilities has never been seriously disputed in cultures in which meditation is widely practised. The Buddha debated with philosophers of every persuasion, including radical materialists, and yet he was never challenged over his recognition of psychic powers. It may be presumed that, by doing so, his opponents would have forfeited their credibility.

The Buddha himself possessed the full range of supernormal powers but revealed them sparingly. Of particular note was his refusal to use them as a means to gain converts to his teachings. In the Suttas, most of the infrequent occasions on which he displays his powers feature him teaching individuals with spiritual faculties sufficient for liberation but held back by strongly obstructive mental states. In such cases, the Buddha reveals marvellous abilities as a teaching strategy, providing a thought-stopping shock intended to knock the person off their balance and open them to the Dhamma. Examples may be found in the Buddha’s meetings with his father and the murderer Aṅgulimāla[6].

The Buddha was well aware of the fame and worldly temptations that would pursue monks who revealed psychic powers to the laity. When Ven. Piṇḍola levitated to the top of a pole in a public demonstration and brought down the sandalwood alms-bowl balanced on its peak, the Buddha strongly reproved him for behaving in an unseemly, unfitting manner:

Just as a woman exhibits her private parts for the sake of a wretched little coin, even so, a performance of superhuman miracles is given by you to the laity for the sake of a wretched wooden bowl.

– Cv 5.26

The Buddha announced that an offence of wrongdoing would be committed by any monk who acted in such a way in the future.

The possession of psychic powers such as the ability to fly through the air or walk on water was acknowledged by the Buddha as a considerable accomplishment – one of three marvels (pāṭihāriya)[7] – but also as a potentially serious distraction to the practice leading to liberation. Most importantly, the Buddha made it clear that such powers are not an indication of liberation. There have always been non-liberated meditators with supernormal powers and liberated meditators without them.

Although the disjunction between supernormal powers and liberation was first demonstrated by the Buddha’s evil but psychically gifted cousin, Devadatta, the lesson has never really been absorbed. It is commonly assumed in the Buddhist cultures of Southeast Asia that liberation automatically confers supernormal powers (and that those possessing supernormal powers must surely be liberated). It was, therefore, almost inevitable that Luang Por was widely believed to be blessed with special abilities.

It is irrefutable that spiritual teachers become the objects of a great deal of projection and myth-making. This was certainly true of Luang Por. Many of the marvellous stories told about him must be taken with at least a pinch of salt. And yet, it would be as imprudent to reject all of the stories from principle, as it would be to accept every one of them out of faith.

It is true that the majority of the accounts of people believing that Luang Por read their minds are inconclusive. In many cases, a sceptic could probably attribute them to gullible believers reading specific references into broad or ambiguous statements. But there are also a number of occasions when a sceptical interpretation can only be sustained by stretching the bounds of credibility to its limits. And there are occasions when all common sense explanations are clearly inadequate. The reporters of these incidents were usually monks. A single example will suffice:

One day as a young monk returned from alms-round at Bahn Peung, a village a couple of kilometres to the south of Wat Pah Pong, he remembered thinking to himself, ‘I’m so hungry. I’m going to eat a big meal today. I’ll need to eat a ball of sticky rice the size of my head before I’m full.’ As he entered the monastery, he met Luang Por who, smiling, said:

So hungry you’re going to make a ball of sticky rice as big as your head, huh?

The monk’s face went a deep red. On that day, he said, he ended up eating far less than he did normally, rather than far more.

Over the years, Dr Utai, a close lay disciple and personal physician to Luang Por’s, observed many cases in which it seemed obvious to him that Luang Por knew what was in someone’s mind. One day he couldn’t resist asking him about it. All Luang Por would reply was:

It is related to samādhi. It’s not particularly profound, but it’s not something to speak of lightly either.

Fascination, whatever its object, and by its very nature, impedes the practice of Dhamma – and there are few things as fascinating as psychic powers. Luang Por saw no advantage in feeding people’s hunger for such matters. Whether in his formal discourses or in conversation, he rarely mentioned psychic powers. If people asked him questions about them, he would usually cut them short. Once someone asked him:

Layman: Luang Por, they say you are fully enlightened. Does that mean that you can fly through the air?

Luang Por: What’s that got to do with it? Dung beetles can fly.

Luang Por would redirect conversations about miraculous powers to the Four Noble Truths: suffering, its cause, its cessation and the path to that cessation. When a school teacher asked him about the authenticity of passages he’d read in the Buddhist scriptures in which fully enlightened beings are credited with miraculous powers, Luang Por pointed to the forest around them and replied:

You’re asking about things too far away. Why don’t we talk about the tree stump that you’re stubbing your toe on right here?

Of the three miracles (pāṭihāriya), the Buddha declared the third, the miracle of instruction, to be ‘more sublime and noble’ than psychic powers and the ability to read minds. The ability to lead the deluded human mind to truth was the greatest of marvels. To this day, when senior disciples of Luang Por are asked about his supernormal powers, they prefer to talk about his possession of the marvellous power of instruction.

But accounts of strange events will always survive, simply because they are so enjoyable. One, told by an elderly maechee, recalls the occasion that a huge king cobra[8] appeared in Wat Pah Pong. Seeing its tail ended in a stump, Luang Por gave it the name ‘Stumpy’. As he made his way on alms-round to Bahn Peung every day, Stumpy would slither along behind him. One day, a villager setting off to his fields noticed that Luang Por’s footprints had been obscured by the marks of a large snake. Seeing this, he ran back into the village shouting, ‘The Ajahn brought a snake with him on alms-round!’ The frightened villagers followed the tracks which overlay Luang Por’s all the way back to the monastery. The next morning, they spoke with him angrily:

Villagers: Ajahn, why do you bring a snake with you on alms-round? We won’t put food in your bowl any more. We’re afraid.

Luang Por: It’s nothing to do with me. I didn’t bring any snake.

Villagers: What do you mean? We’ve seen its marks. They completely obscure your footprints.

After Luang Por insisted that he had simply walked on alms-round as usual, a group of villagers went out to investigate. They discovered that the snake had followed Luang Por from the forest, entered the spirit house at the entrance to the village, waited for Luang Por to emerge and then followed him back to the monastery.

Luang Por had not seen the snake itself but had observed the marks it had left. The next morning as he left on alms-round, he stood at the edge of the forest and said loudly:

Stumpy, don’t follow me on alms-round. The villagers are afraid of you. Go and find a place to live deep in the forest. Don’t let people see you again. In the future, there will be a lot of people coming to the monastery, and they’ll be afraid.

After that, the big king cobra was never seen again.

## Sketches

### Inspiring

A number of the qualities that came to define Luang Por in the eyes of his disciples were virtues held in universal regard. Perhaps the most prominent of these was that of patience. Although some accomplishments are necessarily private, the extent of a forest monk’s capacity to endure through physical discomfort and the rigours of monastic life can never be so. As the leader of a monastic community, Luang Por’s patience was visible to all. He earned the particular devotion of the monks of Wat Pah Pong by leading them from the front and by never asking them to do anything that he would not do himself. He also became renowned for his forbearance when dealing with the problems attendant on running a large monastery: listening to and advising on the difficulties and doubts of the monks and novices and maechees and lay supporters. When Luang Por spoke about patience – and he spoke about it often – his words carried great weight.

Luang Por was also seen as a role model for the appropriate expression of gratitude, perhaps the virtue most central to Thai culture. In Thailand, a sense of gratitude is taken to be a key distinguishing mark of goodness. Accusations of ‘ingratitude’ are experienced as serious and hurtful, even devastating. In fact, ‘gratitude’ is a somewhat imprecise translation of the Thai ‘kataññū-katavedi’ (a term taken straight from the Pali) as the latter consists of two related virtues: ‘kataññu’ is the recognition of kindnesses received, and ‘katavedi’ the determination to appropriately express that recognition. Efforts to repay ‘the debt of gratitude’ are given particular emphasis in Thailand, especially in the case of key benefactors, such as parents and teachers.

Luang Por honoured his parents in a manner fitting to a monastic. As a young monk, he postponed his studies in order to nurse his father on his deathbed. During his travelling years, he regularly visited his mother and gave her Dhamma teachings. When he established Wat Pah Pong, he arranged for her to come to live in the monastery and become a nun under his guidance and protection.

Although Luang Por never practised under the guidance of a teacher for any great length of time, the sense of gratitude he felt for those who had helped him on the path was tangible. He always spoke with the greatest reverence of Luang Pu Mun, his spiritual father, meeting whom had been the pivotal experience in his life. He also often spoke with great affection and respect of Luang Pu Tongrat and Luang Pu Kinaree, the other two monks who had most strongly influenced him. Luang Pu Mun passed away in 1949, the year after Luang Por visited him in Nong Peu, while Luang Pu Tongrat died shortly after Luang Por’s return to Ubon in 1956. Luang Por was thus denied the opportunity to express his gratitude to them. But Luang Pu Kinaree lived on until 1980 and for many years prior to that, Luang Por sent a regular shift of monks from Wat Pah Pong to act as attendants and nurses, as the old monk refused to have anything at all to do with the medical profession. When Luang Pu Kinaree died, Luang Por and his disciples organized the funeral and conducted all of the funeral rites.

Luang Por endeared himself to the lay supporters of Wat Pah Pong by showing an unwavering appreciation for their support, never taking it for granted. On important occasions in the lives of his long-time supporters, Luang Por would accept invitations to receive alms in their houses; when they were ill, he would visit them and give them encouragement; and at the end of their lives, he would lead the Sangha in performing the funeral rites. He once said to the Sangha:

When I knew a certain amount about myself, I thought about the laypeople. I saw the debt I owed to them everywhere, even people who’d only put one ladle of rice in my bowl. I wasn’t heedless. I didn’t forget. I thought of the kindness of every single person.

He constantly reminded his disciples to recall how their life depended on the generosity of lay supporters:

Giving food, lodging, and medicine in times of sickness, these aren’t small matters. They’re supporting our journey to Nibbāna. If we had no food, we wouldn’t be able to make it, we wouldn’t be able to meditate.

### Passion

The Buddha distinguished two kinds of desire: that which is rooted in ignorance of the way things are (taṇhā, or craving), and that which is rooted in an understanding of the way things are. The first is to be abandoned; the second is to be cultivated. This second desirable kind of desire is explained as ‘the will towards goodness’ (kusalachanda) or ‘the will towards truth’ (dhammachanda). It manifests as a passion for Dhamma practice.

Luang Por was never short of passion. He once revealed that of the problems that he experienced in his monastic life, the only one that had caused him serious difficulty was the sexual desire that bedevilled him throughout his twenties. Fortunately, his passion was never directed solely towards the world of the senses. The same energy propelled him into the monastery at a young age and manifested itself in his devotion to the Dhamma and Vinaya. As worldly lusts abated, this wholesome passion blossomed. The strength of his commitment to the Vinaya was expressed well in his avowal to his disciples that, ‘I’d rather die than transgress the Vinaya. I’d regret losing my life less than losing my virtue.’; and his enthusiasm for the Dhamma shone through when he compared the joy of facing up to the defilements as like the pleasure of eating extremely spicy food.

His practice was characterized by daring and boldness. The passion for truth gave him what in other ways of life would have been called an excellent work ethic. He remained undaunted in the face of obstacles and declared that, ‘Nibbāna lies on the shores of death.’ His zest for practice was such that his disciples, struggling to keep up, said that for him, it was as if there was no day or night. He once told a newly ordained Ajahn Chon that, ‘If you really knew how to bow to the Buddha, you would have tears in your eyes.’

But the passion that came to the fore in the prime of his life was for communicating his understanding of Dhamma to others. Training monastics was his first priority. They were the ones who were making the most sacrifices for the Dhamma, the ones who were giving their whole lives to the teachings. (In one of the Buddha’s similes, they were compared to the farmer’s most fertile well-drained soil.) He gave everything to this task, creating a system that was not overly reliant on him and which could survive his eventual death. The success of his efforts may be estimated by the steady growth of branch monasteries. When he stopped teaching, there were about sixty, and thirty years later there were over three hundred.

Luang Por’s passion for the Dhamma became clearly apparent whenever he began to teach. Even at times of serious illness, teaching the Dhamma would bring him alive. As he spoke, he would become more animated, his voice stronger, his presence more commanding. It seemed that, by giving voice to the Dhamma, he tapped into a deep source of energy. Between these bursts of vitality, it was as if he shrank back into the shell of his ailing body. It was clear, that to Luang Por, Dhamma was indeed his life.

### Contentment

One of the cardinal monastic virtues praised by the Buddha is the cultivation of contentment with regards to whatever robes, food, lodging and medicines are offered to them with faith. Monastics are to be as light a burden as possible on lay supporters, and they should model a life which proves that happiness does not have to depend on the enjoyment of sense pleasures. It was a virtue much emphasized at Wat Pah Pong, and Luang Por led the way in the practice of it. He was admired for his frugality and the care with which he treated the offerings made to him. He received whatever robes were sewn for him without comment. He was never known to express desires for any particular kind of food. He showed no interest in beautiful things. As his reputation grew, wealthy lay supporters competed to offer him fine requisites, but he did not change.

On one occasion, a group of monks, following the lead of some other well-known monasteries, put forward the idea of registering Wat Pah Pong as a charitable foundation. Luang Por was getting old, and charitable status would guarantee the financial stability of the wat after his death. Luang Por gave them his opinion:

It’s a good idea, but I don’t think it’s a correct one. With a charitable foundation, you would no longer be depending on your own pure practice. If you all practice well and correctly, you won’t go without. The Buddha never set up a charity. He just shaved his head and lived as we do, and he did well enough. He laid out the path, and all we have to do is walk along it. That will, without doubt, be enough to keep you going. The bowl and robe – they are the charitable foundation that the Buddha established for us. With them, you will always receive more than you need.

Luang Por asserted that maintaining a standard of simplicity and cleanliness in the material world led to a clean and uncluttered mind. A popular maxim at Wat Pah Pong said, ‘If you’ve got little, use little. If you’ve got a lot, use little.’

As the number of visitors to the monastery increased, so did the amount of the donations. Nobody would have given a second thought if Luang Por had taken advantage of this increase in funds to permit an upgrade to the comfort of his dwelling place. But he maintained the same frugal lifestyle as when he first established the monastery. It is true that the kuti built for him in the late 1960s was bigger than those of the other monks. But the increased size was simply a means to provide a large enough covered area below it where he could receive guests. The size of the room upstairs in which he slept was less than three metres by three. Almost completely bare, it contained a low wooden bed with an inch-thin mattress, and just the most necessary items of daily use, such as a water jug and spittoon. The toilet was in a small outhouse at the edge of the forest.

Luang Por distributed any gifts offered to him personally to his disciples or else sent them off to poor branch monasteries. All money and requisites offered to him went straight into a central Sangha fund. He had no personal funds or private bank account. He said:

We’ve got enough to eat and a place to live. What’s the point of accumulating things? We only eat once a day.

On many occasions, laypeople would complain to Luang Por that, after they had made an invitation (pavāraṇā) to him for anything personal that he needed, he had never made any use of the funds. He said to the monks:

The more invitations laypeople make, the more wary I am.

Ajahn Anek spoke for many of the monks when he expressed the feelings that arose when he observed Luang Por’s lack of greed:

“The thing which made me feel most proud and satisfied to be Luang Por’s disciple, and the thing that inspired me the most, was his own practice. He was never one to accumulate offerings no matter what their value. He once said that as monks, the moment that we start accumulating things, then it’s the beginning of the end.

“One year, to make merit on her birthday, Khun Ying Tun, [one of Luang Por’s wealthiest lay supporters] offered Luang Por 90,000 baht.[9]

“She insisted that the money should be used for his own personal needs, it was not to be used for the monastery. After she’d gone, Luang Por said that if there was any expense that involved him personally, we should use this money and not leave any over. So we used it to print a beautiful hardbacked edition of his teachings for free distribution.”

There has always been a certain amount of tension between the Isan forest monks and the titled administrator monks in the towns and cities. Whereas the forest monks have been critical of the perceived worldliness of the city monks, the city monks, for their part, have been dismissive of what they see as the forest monks’ rigid attachment to outdated forms, including the ascetic practice of eating out of the alms-bowl rather than from plates on a table. On one occasion, Luang Por was included in a group of monks invited to an offering of alms in the Royal Palace in Bangkok. He arrived at the same time as a certain senior monk, who looked scornfully at Luang Por’s alms-bowl.

“Chah, don’t you feel embarrassed about eating out of your bowl in front of the King?”

Luang Por replied:

Don’t you feel embarrassed about not eating out of your bowl in front of the Buddha?

### Equanimity

For many years, Luang Por was the subject of criticism and slander from a small number of jealous monks in Ubon. At the height of the Vietnam War, he was denounced as a Communist. One year, it was even whispered about that a senior monk had gone so far as to hire a hitman (in the Thailand of the time, not such an outlandish assertion). Although Luang Por did not die, the monk supposedly behind the plot did – from rabies. Time passed and Luang Por’s resolute refusal to add fuel to the flames of conflict allowed the situation to cool. Luang Por, having handled unjustified abuse with equanimity, now faced a new challenge: fame and popularity.

The Buddha was blunt on the dangers likely to beset a monk who becomes famous:

A fatal thing are gains, favour and fame, a bitter, harsh impediment to the attainment of the unsurpassed freedom from bondage.

– e.g. SN 17.1

The temptation they provide to pride and arrogance is strong.

It is just like a beetle, feeding on dung, gorged with dung, standing before a great dunghill, who might despise other beetles saying, ‘I am a dung-eater, full of dung, gorged with dung, and before me is this great dunghill.’

– SN 17.5

In the mobile, connected world of today, it is inevitable that an accomplished monk resident in a monastery for any length of time will, sooner or later, attract the attention of the laity. This was already true in the 1970s. During the Vietnam War, an ambitious program of road building was undertaken in Isan, primarily for military and national security reasons. One result was that it became much easier to visit forest monasteries. At a time of growing secularization and a wide-spread sense that the standard of the monastic order had never been so low, people started to look further afield for monks who were truly worthy of their respect. Luang Por’s name began to be included on the list of inspiring monks worth visiting.

A short biography of Luang Por written in 1968, by his disciple Ajahn Maha Amorn, was another milestone. Local businessmen in the city, civil servants, and army and air force officers posted in Ubon started to arrive in greater numbers. Soon, Luang Por was known to the lay Buddhists of Bangkok. Coachloads of merit-makers started to arrive. This new state of affairs was impressed upon the monastery when two members of the King’s Privy Council visited to ask questions on Dhamma practice. Sometime later, Luang Por was invited to receive alms in the Royal Palace.

The publication of books of Luang Por’s transcribed Dhamma talks both in the Thai originals and in English translation were initiated by his Western disciples in the late 1970s. Following Luang Por’s admonition that the Dhamma should never be bought and sold, they were made available for free distribution. These books, followed by the first set of audio cassette tapes, spread Luang Por’s name throughout Thailand and the English translations gave him an international audience. Before long, his teachings were being translated into German, French, Spanish, Chinese and other languages.

Luang Por seemed as unmoved by this newfound fame and status as he was by abuse and slander. On the fifth of December, 1973, he received from King Bhumibol Adulyadej the monastic honour of Chao Khun, with the title ‘Phra Bodhinyana Thera’. On his return from Bangkok, a large crowd was waiting to greet him at Ubon Railway Station. A long procession of cars and trucks escorted him back to the monastery where many hundreds more people were waiting. Once there, a grand merit-making ceremony took place to celebrate the honour conferred by the King on their teacher. Throughout it all, Luang Por remained a cool, still centre at the heart of the excitement and joy. When the laypeople formally invited him to give a Dhamma talk, he spoke of his feelings at receiving the title. He said the title of Chao Khun was a worldly convention. He was the same Luang Por that he had been a few days before. Worldly dhammas of gain and loss, fame and obscurity, pleasure and pain, praise and blame, are all fickle and changing. Knowing the nature of worldly dhammas, the mind is not moved by them.

The bridge over the River Moon always remains the same. It doesn’t arch up if the waters rise. It doesn’t sag if the waters fall.

### Personality

It would seem obvious that any detailed discussion of a person’s life must, sooner or later, focus on his or her personality. It tends to be assumed that it is in the personality that the essence of a person is to be found. But this apparent truism requires certain qualifications in the case of liberated beings, or those practising for liberation. In such cases, the personality is fluid. Personality traits based on defilements, such as greed and anger, shrink and disappear; those traits free of defilement, like kindness and compassion, grow and mature.

In the case of liberated beings, those character traits, eccentricities and elements of personality that are not sustained by defilement survive their enlightenment. Inarticulate aspirants become inarticulate arahants, stern aspirants become stern arahants, charismatic aspirants become charismatic arahants. There is no fixed mould. And just as bright and radiant people may occasionally prove to be deluded or mentally unbalanced, so too the most unprepossessing figures may, in fact, be fully liberated. Luang Por once compared enlightened beings to birds of different species, differing in size, wingspan, colouring, sound and so on, but all recognizably members of the bird family.

The second qualification that must be made in speaking of the personality of enlightened beings is that they do not have the same relationship to their personality as a normal person: liberation in the Buddhist sense means freedom from all identification with personality and personal history.

Be that as it may, unenlightened beings, identifying with their own body and mind, cannot help but perceive an enlightened person in the same way that they perceive themselves: as embodied agents. And it is because that is so, that the personality of great beings is significant. For many students, it may be a response to the teacher’s personality, rather than an intellectual assent to the teachings, that proves the deciding factor as to whether or not they take up the Buddhist training seriously or, having taken it up, bear with it.

Luang Por was one of the more charismatic kinds of bird. One of his brothers said of him, ‘I wouldn’t exactly say he was a handsome man; but when you were in his presence you couldn’t take your eyes off him.’ Other members of his family had this same magnetism albeit to a lesser extent. For many years, one of the regular features of an Observance Day at Wat Pah Pong would be Luang Por’s eldest brother, Por Lah, sitting in the kitchen surrounded by a small crowd of people expounding on some subject, recounting an anecdote or telling a story. The style was unmistakeable.

Western monks would comment on how Luang Por seemed to be so completely who he was. In other words, they could discern no false notes in his manner, no hints of insecurity or conceit. As the centre of attention, he showed as much self-consciousness as a lion on a plain surrounded by safari jeeps. He remained the same, whatever the surrounding conditions. One monk said he was like a mountain that was unaffected by the rain, snow or shine that came and went around it. And yet, there was a paradox: although he impressed those around him as a figure of absolute authenticity, he could, at the same time, slip personas on and off like items of clothing. But the more unpredictable he might be in what he said, or how he expressed himself at any one moment, the more unchanging he seemed.

Occasionally, as Ajahn Sumedho would remark, it was as if Luang Por withdrew from his personality altogether:

“Sometimes I’d look at him and there’d be just no-one there … The look he had of total emptiness was quite moving because you realized that the personality was just something he used as a compassionate tool.”

Sitting under his kuti receiving guests, Luang Por would flow between quite different modes as the situation required. On any given day, he might have just finished comforting a bereaved father in homely Lao, then switch to Central Thai to explain some point of doctrine with Bangkok academics, and then go on to admonish a monk for a sloppy job of repair work on one of the kutis. This would go on throughout the day. It was not the ‘multi-tasking’ familiar to business executives. He was fully present in every moment, giving no sign of mental stress in moving from one mode to another and no emotional run-over. When telling a favourite story, he would chuckle as he got to the funny part as if it were the first time he had told it. At such times, there was no trace of the vanity and bombast of the ‘great man’ with a captive audience, nor the slightest acknowledgement that many of his audience knew the story well. It was a stronger teaching about being in the moment than any amount of theoretical instruction could impart. Ajahn Chon was one of the monks who marvelled at such sessions:

“One evening, Luang Por was sitting on the wicker seat underneath his kuti talking to a small group of monks about the old days, and I was in my favourite position massaging his feet. His manner was so warm and inspiring that I felt utterly content. I could have sat there the whole night without complaint. Then a torch beam moved through the forest towards us. It was Ven. Dto. He was a quite senior monk who had transgressed a serious Vinaya training rule (Saṅghādisesa) and was undergoing mānatta, the prescribed purificatory practices. Ven. Dto had brought some of Luang Por’s freshly washed robes to put away upstairs. Without any stiffening in his body, Luang Por suddenly barked at him in the harshest possible way. The contrast with the atmosphere in our small group made the hair on my back stand on end. At that moment, Luang Por was utterly ferocious. Ven. Dto quickly did what he had to do, bowed and left. Then Luang Por continued our conversation as if nothing had happened.

“He made no comment about Ven. Dto and didn’t refer to what had just happened at all. It was as if it had never happened. I suddenly felt very heedless. The intimacy I’d felt holding his foot in my hand and the enjoyment of the conversation had made me forget that here was someone who dwelt somewhere far beyond my scope and comprehension. I felt a strong compulsion to be mindful and alert. I realized that I could take nothing for granted.”

Another monk spoke of Luang Por being a mirror in which you always saw yourself. His ability to reflect people’s attention back on their own defilements was not due to him adopting an even emotional tone; rather it was the consistent lack of self in whatever mode he was expressing. And so, his disciples loved him. And feared him in an inexplicable, visceral way.

### Sense of Humour

One of the personality traits that marked Luang Por as a boy and endured throughout his life was his sense of humour. It was a quality that always drew people to him and made them enjoy his company. As a teenage novice, Luang Por was notorious amongst his friends for how much he found funny and how easily he could burst into laughter. As he got older, Luang Por curbed his tendency to lose his composure at the sight of the incongruous, the ridiculous and the self-important – but his enjoyment of them never seemed to fade. He became adept at allowing his sense of humour to shape teachings that, delivered more sternly, might have been less easily received. He pointed to people’s arrogance and superstitions and foolishness in ways that bypassed their habitual defences, leaving them disarmed and wiser. As a teacher, he would have agreed with the saying that comedy is a humorous way of saying serious things.

Luang Por’s rich sense of humour did not mean that he told jokes: to do so would have been considered inappropriate for a samaṇa. He did not set himself up as an entertainer, nor did he try to make people laugh for the sake of it. He never spoke in ways that made fun of others’ ethnicity, religion or sexuality, or that tapped into peoples’ prejudices in any way. He allowed his sense of humour to reveal itself only within the limits provided by the Vinaya. These limits are stringent. It is forbidden, for example, to speak in jest about the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha. The logic behind this is that, by not trivializing the refuges, the uplifting emotions meant to be inspired by them remain uncompromised. Lying in jest is included in the precepts governing unskilful speech and so precludes most kinds of playfulness, and the prohibition against inciting anxiety prevents practical jokes. There is a long list of conversational topics which monks are to avoid altogether, unless to illustrate a point of Dhamma:

Kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, wars, food, drink, clothes, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, carriages, villages, towns and cities, countries, women, heroes, street – and well – gossip, talk of the departed, desultory chat, speculations about land and sea, talk about being and non-being.

– e.g. AN 10.69

From such injunctions, there would seem to be little left for monks to talk about at all, much less to speak about amusingly. This is far from the case. When Luang Por was in the mood, his exuberance was infectious. When telling an anecdote, expanding upon the absurd and incongruous forms in which defilement could manifest, or mimicking someone under the sway of greed or anger, he could provoke a genuine sense of delight in his audience. Luang Por’s gift for physical comedy provoked wide grins and even giggles. One of his favourite stories concerned a mangy dog who blamed his suffering on the places he found himself in, rather than the mange he carried with him. Luang Por liked to accompany this story with bewildered scratchings at his body and armpit. Even the most composed monks would find themselves chuckling. Although he did not tell jokes as such, Luang Por had the timing of a comedian. He was a gifted raconteur and knew well how to ratchet up the expectation during the course of a teaching story, and deflate it expertly with the twist at the end of the tale.

Like most intelligent people brought up in a predominantly oral culture, Luang Por took great delight in puns and wordplay; his discourses are sprinkled with them. Examples from his talks might be cited to show his wit, verbal dexterity and ingenuity but would fail to transmit the essential point of them: the pleasure they provided. It is hard to convey how much people enjoyed it when Luang Por, referring to the corruption of the tudong tradition caused by monks accepting lifts in cars rather than walking, called it ‘talu-dong’ or ‘in one end of the forest and straight out the other’.

Some of the most memorable examples of Luang Por’s sense of humour occurred through off-the-cuff comments or replies to questions. Often, they involved him invoking fresh, unexpected ways of looking at familiar issues, thereby puncturing his audience’s attachments. For those of other cultures, and thus with other conventions and beliefs, such humour – especially in translation – tends to fall flat. However, a couple of examples may give something of the flavour of his humorous comments.

On one occasion, a young man, newly conscripted into the army, asked Luang Por for a Buddha medallion to wear around his neck as a protection against bullets. He was following in an old tradition. Monks have been known to provide empowered amulets to soldiers for hundreds of years. Luang Por, however, always refused to do so. Before explaining why, he pointed to the life-size brass Buddha statue on the shrine:

Take that one if you like. Carry it in front of you and no bullets will get you, for sure.

As the human body does not vary from one culture to another, humour derived from it is more universal. Ajahn Sumedho recalls the time that Luang Por took him to visit some of the great masters of the Luang Pu Mun tradition. In Udon Province, they paid their respects to one elderly master, believed to be an arahant, who was confined to a wheelchair and rarely spoke. Luang Por had recently been offered a cassette recorder and was using it to record Dhamma teachings. It was placed in front of the venerable old monk who sat there quietly smiling at them. After a suitable time had elapsed and it was clear that the he was not going to speak, they prepared to bow to him and leave. At that moment, the great master farted. Back in the car, Luang Por replayed the tape. The sound of the fart was clearly audible. Luang Por looked at Ajahn Sumedho and said:

That was a good teaching.

### Stern and Fierce

The warm, radiant loving-kindness that so many lay Buddhists remarked feeling in Luang Por’s presence in his later years was, for most of his teaching career, eclipsed by its companion virtue of compassion. As Luang Por entered middle age, the young monks in their early twenties saw him more and more as a father figure. Generally, their view of him was not so much as a fount of unconditional love, but rather as the wise parent who found the ways in which his sons created suffering for themselves to be unacceptable. Or to use another analogy, he was seen to be like a doctor with an unwavering determination to help his patients overcome a chronic illness, even if that should entail procedures that the patients might not enjoy, or might even resist. And like patients, his disciples submitted because they were confident that the doctor knew what he was talking about.

Luang Por’s compassion could manifest as fierceness, a trait which he shared with a number of other great teachers in his tradition. In Luang Ta Maha Bua’s biography of his teacher, Luang Pu Mun, the great master is presented as a stern figure who was often harsh with his disciples. Luang Ta Maha Bua himself – until his death in 2011, the most widely revered of the great master’s direct disciples in Thailand – was famed and feared for the same qualities throughout his life. Although many of Luang Pu Mun’s disciples were known for their gentleness and reserve (and some of them felt there were more of those qualities in Luang Pu Mun than was widely acknowledged), the figure of the fierce teacher became something of an icon in the Forest Tradition. Certainly, Luang Pu Mun, the archetypical stern teacher, was astonishingly successful in leading his disciples to stages of liberation. And of his Dhamma heirs, Luang Ta Maha Bua was acknowledged for his excellence in this regard.

Luang Por’s sternness, especially in his middle age, has been referred to in the previous chapter. It was a trait that increased the respect with which the young monks held him. They had grown up in an authoritarian culture, and this kind of sternness and occasional fierce admonishment was something they were familiar with. Too much overt kindness would have endeared Luang Por to his disciples but at the expense of the intensity of purpose he was trying to instill in them. The policy he adopted towards heedless conduct was one of zero tolerance. Not even the smallest of misdemeanours were overlooked. Strong admonishments were dished out from the Dhamma seat almost every night.

The results were mixed. The more dedicated the practitioner, the better it worked. Some monks, however, unable to thrive in the high-pressure atmosphere, disrobed; and it is possible that a number of them might have survived in the robes if they had lived in a more relaxed environment. Most, however, found the fear they felt for Luang Por empowering. They appreciated how the constant demand to be aware kept their defilements at bay – more than mere encouragement could ever have accomplished. Luang Por was not seen so much as an authority figure scolding them personally, as the embodiment of Dhamma-Vinaya censuring their defilements. There was always the danger that this enthusiasm for practice would be too dependent on the presence of Luang Por to be a sustainable refuge. But it was often the case that it jump-started a passion for Dhamma that became second nature.

As Luang Por aged, the fierce side of his personality receded, and the sternness ceded centre stage to a warmer, more grandfatherly persona. But the sharp, clear-eyed discrimination was never completely submerged. The discourse he delivered to the Sangha in 1980, later translated into English as Toilets on the Path[10], demonstrates that even at the end of Luang Por’s teaching career he could deliver one of his legendary stinging admonitions. Luang Por missed nothing. One monk referred to sitting in Luang Por’s presence and feeling as if he was a tiger dwelling within a Cheshire cat.

### Independent

Luang Por treasured his independence. He counselled his disciples to keep a distance from the wealthy and the powerful because association with such people was dangerous to a monk’s integrity. It was a standard he himself upheld throughout his life. Monks can easily find themselves compromising the standards of simplicity and frugality in their monasteries out of consideration for the desire of wealthy donors to make merit. Luang Por never did so.

It is surprisingly common for forest monasteries in Thailand to become dominated by a single lay supporter, usually a woman. These women, often believed to have some ancient kammic connection to the abbot, are ceded power and influence in the running of the monastery. If they have donated the land on which the monastery was built or have contributed substantially to its construction, their position tends to be especially strong. These women are usually of middle age, most often married, and their relationship to the abbot is almost always free from any suggestion of impropriety. They are jokingly referred to throughout the Buddhist community as ‘godmothers’. While such persons may relieve the abbot of tiresome administrative duties, they can seriously skew his relationship with the monastery’s lay community, and even members of the Sangha may become jealous of their influence. Wat Pah Pong never had a ‘godmother’. Luang Por showed great skill and diplomacy in preventing any lay Buddhist, male or female, from establishing a special, favoured position in the wat. His independence and refusal to have favourites or an inner circle of disciples enhanced the trust in which he was held and the harmony and loyalty of his disciples.

An example of Luang Por’s determination to do things as he saw fit, irrespective of the wishes of his lay supporters, may be seen from an account given by Ta Soei who had led a rather colourful life as a layman until Luang Por took him under his wing. On a number of occasions, Luang Por took Ta Soei as his attendant on walking expeditions. During a trip to central Thailand, he accepted the invitation of a devoted couple to rest up at their house situated on the coast outside Bangkok.

“It was a lovely place. I could’ve stayed there for ages, but after three nights, Luang Por tells me to pack his things and arrange some transport; it’s time to leave. I’m a bit disgruntled. I say, ‘Wouldn’t it be better to tell the owner of the house first?’ He said, ‘No. If we do that, they won’t let us leave. We didn’t make any promises about how long we were going to stay. We can’t let them tie us up in obligations.’

“Well anyway, the caretaker must see something’s up and phones his boss in Bangkok. Luang Por tells the taxi driver to take us to Aranya Pratet out on the Cambodian border. We’re only about ten kilometres down the road though, when the lady of the house comes racing up behind us in her car, overtakes us and blocks off the road ahead. She jumps down out of the vehicle, rushes over and bows to him right there in the middle of the road, sobbing and crying: ‘Oh! Luang Por. You can’t leave yet. You’ve only just arrived. I’ve hardly had any time to speak with you, and you’re going to abandon your daughter already.’

“Within moments, her husband arrives in his car, and so there’s a second vehicle blocking the road. But they can beg and plead all day and all night, Luang Por’s not going to change his mind. All he’ll say is wait till the next time. Then the man starts to cry as well. The woman asks the taxi driver how much he’s charging and he says 400 baht. She pulls the money out of her handbag and puts it on the dashboard. Luang Por just sits there impassive. He tells the driver to start the engine. And so, the last we see of the two of them, they’re squatting down by the side of the road, their hands in anjali, looking totally dejected.”

Much later, paying respects to Luang Por in Bangkok, the couple could laugh at the whole affair.

## From Heart to Heart

### Communication Skills

Today, Luang Por’s wider reputation rests, above all, on his ability to communicate the Dhamma. His Dhamma talks circle the world in print, on screens, and as audible files on a variety of modern devices. Throughout his life of teaching, he modelled two qualities of the kalyāṇamitta specifically concerned with communication skills: firstly, the ability to speak effectively, to get through to people, to counsel and admonish; and secondly, the ability to explain profound matters with clarity and accuracy.

From his earliest days as a teacher, even before the establishment of Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por’s gift for articulating the teachings had been clearly apparent. He became highly skilled in adapting his discourses to the needs of his audience, adept at using everyday objects to illustrate profound topics in simple terms. The Buddha taught that Dhamma should be taught in a way that clarified, convinced, roused and gladdened the mind of the listener. Those who listened to Luang Por teaching over a long period would assert that those four words summed it up very well.

The Isan culture into which Luang Por was born has always delighted in the skilful use of language. He grew up in an environment in which the ability to speak eloquently, dextrously and with humour was prized on every level of society. Isan folk music is full of wit and invention. When Luang Por was young, contests that involved the composition of extempore rhymes were a feature of harvest time. Given these conditions, it might be said that Luang Por’s speaking skills were not especially unusual. It was the use to which he put them that set him apart. The unrehearsed and vernacular Dhamma talks he gave retained the energy and spark of folk oratory in a religious context formerly dominated by stiff and mannered text-based sermons.

Luang Por was not the first monk in Thailand to teach in this way. The down-to-earth style of discourse was one of the characteristic features of the teachings given by the great Luang Pu Mun and his disciples as they wandered through the Isan countryside. Luang Por felt himself an inheritor of this tradition and became, perhaps, its finest exponent.

Transcriptions of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks have been read and treasured by huge numbers of Thai Buddhists; translations of the transcriptions have made them available in many other languages. Nevertheless, as written records of oral teachings are necessarily restricted to content, they can only provide a one-dimensional record of the magic and emotional power of the originals. The two hundred or so audio files, salvaged from old cassette recordings, provide a more complete experience. In them, Luang Por’s voice is utterly compelling – the natural, unassailable authority of his voice augmented by a palpable benevolence. The vast majority of the transcribed talks are from the last four years of his teaching career.[11] By this time, he was, in many ways, an old man – his body prematurely aged. There is a pronounced paternal tone to these talks and an ever-present undercurrent of humour and warmth.

The key feature of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks was their spontaneity. Luang Por maintained that Dhamma talks could not, and should not, be prepared beforehand. Although he would often have a general theme in his mind when he began to talk, it might soon be discarded as his mind settled into a more fertile groove. He once mentioned to a disciple that sometimes he ascended to the high Dhamma seat and still would have no idea of what he was going to talk about.

But after I’ve finished the Namo invocation and composed my mind, then it comes by itself and starts to flow.

Referring to this sense of an unforced flow of Dhamma emerging from within him, he compared it to the speech of a scholar learned from a book:

The Dhamma that comes from the heart flows like water from a spring that never runs dry. But the knowledge that comes from memory is like rainwater in a jar. Once the rainy season is over, it soon comes to an end.

In his middle age, Luang Por was still a remarkably vigorous man, and his Dhamma talks reflected that. He would generate an incredible energy as a talk progressed. Ajahn Reuangrit recalled that some of the more fiery discourses would confront the defilements of the listeners in such an uncompromising fashion that:

“It would really hurt. You’d be black and blue from the first night. If you couldn’t take it, you’d leave within three days; if you stayed, you wouldn’t ever want to leave.”

Occasionally, Luang Por would launch straight into a theme that was on his mind. More usually, he would begin a talk with a few general phrases, a familiar riff, even a meander or two, as he eased himself into the talk, biding time, allowing a theme to emerge by itself, which – within a few seconds, a few minutes – it inevitably did. Then, almost visibly, as if something had clicked into place, the talk would assume a clear trajectory. Gradually, as the power and focus of his words began to crank up inexorably, listeners would feel themselves being swept along by a powerful surge of Dhamma.

For newly arrived Western monks, as yet unfamiliar with the language and cultural norms, some of the high-octane Dhamma discourses given in Isan dialect could sound uncomfortably akin to rants. But over time, it would become clear to them that something more profound was taking place. The audience at such talks showed no signs of agitation. Many sat with eyes closed in meditation. Those with eyes open were alert and intent.

### An Evolution

Although Luang Por’s Dhamma talks were largely concerned with universal and timeless truths of the human condition, they were also very much grounded in the time and place in which they were given. Especially in the case of a speaker of Luang Por’s gifts, the impromptu, stream-of-consciousness style of speaking can allow for a profound symbiosis between speaker and audience. It is this unique element to the talks which is impossible to preserve in transcriptions.

On a more mundane level, the power of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks may be explained in terms of the classic principles of rhetoric, whereby the audience’s positive regard for the speaker must precede and underpin the logic of the talk and its emotional impact. Luang Por’s ethos was potent: not only did he radiate a considerable personal charisma, but he also spoke with an authority derived from his age, his role as abbot and his position as their teacher. Most importantly of all, he was believed by his audience to be a fully enlightened master. He gave such a firm impression that he was speaking from direct experience rather than from a memory of the texts, that his words would go straight to the hearts of his listeners.

For many years, Luang Por gave Dhamma talks almost exclusively in the Isan dialect that was his mother tongue, a language that lends itself easily to oratory and storytelling. But as increasing numbers of people from Bangkok started to make their way to Wat Pah Pong, Luang Por began speaking in Central Thai more and more. It was not a huge leap: Isan and Thai share much of the same vocabulary. However, this similarity is not always immediately obvious, masked by a difference in certain consonants and by the different tones in which the words are pronounced. (For example, the high tone Thai word ‘ron’ [hot] is a low tone ‘hon’ in Isan.)

Initially, occasional lapses into Isan or passages of unusual syntax showed that Luang Por was not completely comfortable speaking in Central Thai. These slight glitches disappeared after a few years, but Luang Por’s Thai style always retained a distinctive character. Until the end of his life, he always said ‘michanan’ or ‘otherwise’, when he meant ‘prochanan’ or ‘consequently’. The slightly modified Isan idioms that appeared in his talks, clothed in Thai, conveyed an especial freshness and charm.

Coinciding with this shift into the Thai language, came a move to a less rousing, more reflective style of delivery in Luang Por’s discourses. It is debatable to what extent the change was due to the shift of language itself and how much to his physical decline. It was not exactly the case that he’d never spoken in this way before, but now it became the dominant mode. Ajahn Reuangrit was one of the monks who enjoyed the new style.

“You’d listen and feel an exhilaration in the Dhamma, and you’d feel good after the talk was over. If you had any wisdom, you’d learn a lot because he spoke gently, it was easy on the ear. And so, he changed. The basic content of the talks remained the same, but the flavour was better.”

But whatever changes of tone might have occurred, the primary distinguishing characteristics of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks remained constant from his early talks until his last great discourses in the Rains Retreat of 1982.

They were delivered using simple language with a minimum of theory (as a contemporary of Luang Pu Mun once put it, ‘as simple as could be, but no simpler’) and employed plentiful similes using objects and experiences with which the listeners were familiar to explain the subtle realities of the mind. Occasionally, he would intersperse anecdotes from his own experiences and from those of his teachers, contemporaries and disciples. This gave his listeners an enjoyable and absorbing experience, rather like reading a book that they couldn’t put down.

He said that listening to Dhamma talks requires a special attitude:

Keep listening, keep listening. Don’t just believe what you hear and don’t disbelieve. Make yourself neutral. Keep listening. It will bring good results, and there’s no danger in it. The peril lies in believing too much in what you hear, or in disbelieving. Listen and contemplate. This is what practice is about: being a listener and being one who reflects on things. As you don’t know yet whether the things you like and dislike are true or not, the Buddha said that, for the time being, you should keep listening. If you don’t, you’ll just follow your own opinions about things, and if you do that, then you will develop wrong view, and your practice won’t advance. The wise person is one who keeps looking, contemplating, continually reflecting.

The true Dhamma is not something that can be communicated with words. You can’t appropriate someone else’s knowledge. If you take someone else’s knowledge, then you have to meditate on it. Listening to someone else and understanding what they say doesn’t mean that your defilements will come to an end. You have to take that understanding and then chew on it and digest it until it’s a sure thing and really your own.

In the mid-1970s during the construction of a road up to the peak of Tam Saeng Pet,[12] Luang Por had amazed his disciples with his physical stamina. Within a short time, his health declined to the degree that he had to reduce the number of formal Dhamma talks he delivered to perhaps two or three discourses a month. He told his disciples to look on the bright side: if he gave too many talks, they might simply memorize his words and delude themselves into believing that they truly understood what they did not. Intoxicated by the Dhamma, they might neglect their own practice and get caught in lecturing others about inner peace, with their own minds still hot and confused. For his disciples, who looked forward to his talks so eagerly, it was not one of his most convincing arguments.

On another occasion, Luang Por said that the task of the teacher lay more in providing supportive conditions for practice than in giving frequent discourses. He said that if you provide a bull with a meadow to graze in, then graze is what it will do; its nature is to eat grass, and it doesn’t need to be persuaded to do it. Any animal standing in the middle of a meadow and not grazing, he said, is no bull – maybe it’s a pig. In other words, a monk demonstrates his sincerity (his ‘monk-ness’) by the degree to which he takes advantage of the monastic environment. For those devoted to the training, formal instruction is only an auxiliary support.

### Similes Like Keys for Unlocking the Truth

One of the most prominent features of Luang Por’s Dhamma talks was the use of vivid simile. ‘The untrained mind is like a water buffalo … The different stages of meditation develop like the maturing of a mango …’ So many of Luang Por’s talks are peppered with vivid similes, and it was this ability to draw analogies between abstract principles and everyday objects familiar to his audience that most clearly expressed his gift for communicating the Dhamma. It was his mastery of similes, more than any other rhetorical skill, that helped to make his talks so entertaining and lucid.

Similes demystified the teachings for his audience, brought them down to earth and made them less intimidating, more immediate and practical. Luang Por was particularly skilled in choosing similes appropriate to his audience. Teaching the local villagers (or indeed the monks, most of whom came from farming families), the images were predominantly agricultural: they featured rice plants and buffaloes, fruit orchards and fish nets. Teaching members of the armed forces, the similes would often be martial or draw from the world of Thai boxing. For urban audiences, he would tend to use the objects around him that they could see and hear: a water kettle, a glass, a spittoon. While he used some similes over and over again during his teaching career, others occurred to him spontaneously in the midst of a discourse or while answering questions, as his mind sought a way to translate the truths he had experienced into terms his audience could understand. It was exhilarating for his listeners to see him effortlessly employ elements of the world around him to embody timeless truths.

Animals of all kinds appear in these similes: snakes, dogs, millipedes, water buffaloes, frogs and many more. Chickens were a particular favourite. Seeking to express how mistaken and ridiculous it would be for someone to rest satisfied with gaining an intellectual knowledge of Buddhist teachings and not to use it as an aid to abandon defilement, he said, was like someone raising chickens and eating the chicken shit rather than the eggs. The difference in behaviour between heedless and heedful monks he described in terms of the differing behaviours of domesticated chickens and the wild chickens that lived in Wat Pah Pong.

Some of the most profound and beautiful of Luang Por’s similes shed light upon experiences in meditation. In one memorable image, he compared the mind existing in a state both at peace and yet primed to respond intelligently to conditions, to that of a bell at rest. When a bell is rung and its natural silence disturbed by a forceful stimulus, the bell responds with a beautiful sound that, after a suitable duration, returns to silence. In the same way, he said, the mind should dwell ‘with few wishes’ in the present moment; when a challenge arises, it should overcome that challenge with wisdom, and then, like a bell, return to a natural state of rest.

Visible forms, sounds, odours, tastes, physical sensations and thoughts constantly impinge upon the mind, encouraging like, dislike, attachment. Luang Por explained how the stabilized mind, turning its attention to the three characteristics of existence, is unwavering in the face of sense contact. He said that impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self are like a seashore, and the sense objects surging into the mind are like the waves.

It’s like waves breaking on the shore. After a wave hits the shore, it breaks up and a new one appears in its place. Waves can reach no further than the shore. In the same way, sense objects can now go no further than our sense of knowing. Meeting the perception of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self, they split apart and disappear.

### Zen of a Kind

In the mid-1970s, Luang Por acquired, as it were, another arrow to his rhetorical bow. He was much taken with Ajahn Buddhadasa’s newly published translations of the works of the Chinese Zen Masters, Hui Neng and Huang Po[13]. He found these texts gave him a new and fresh vocabulary to express the Dhamma. Western monks who had practised in the Zen tradition added to his knowledge. The influence that these translated texts had upon the way he taught may be observed in a number of his later Dhamma discourses. There are, for example, a number of references to the mind (citta) in terms comparable to how the phrase ‘original mind’ is used in Zen texts. On one occasion, he compared the mind to a leaf that is naturally still but flutters about because of the wind of mental states:

If it understood the nature of thoughts, the mind would stay still. This is called the natural state of the mind. And why we have come to practise now is to see the mind in this pristine state.

Luang Por affirmed that liberation was known, not through an escape from the world of convention, but from seeing it in its true light. It was the attachment to contingent realities as ultimately real that was the problem. This would seem to be his response to the Mahayana teaching of the identity of saṃsāra and Nibbāna:

Now if we know conventional reality, then we’ll know liberation. If we clearly know liberation, then we’ll know convention. This is to know the Dhamma. Here, there is completion.

In conversation, he would sometimes enjoy using the paradoxical phrasing of profound truths that is characteristic of Zen. On one occasion, he asked one of the Western monks to send a letter to Ajahn Sumedho in England. He said, ‘Ask Sumedho: “If you can’t go forward and you can’t go back, and you can’t stand still, what can you do?” ’

There is no evidence that Zen teachings modified Luang Por’s understanding of Dhamma. It was more as if an artist at the height of his powers had found a new medium in which to express himself, a painter in oils exploring the use of water colours. A characteristic flexibility of his mind allowed him to open to this new way of presenting the Dhamma. He interpreted the texts he read in light of his own understanding, and then integrated them into the teachings which he gave to his disciples.

### In Conversation

As Luang Por got older, more and more of his teaching was conducted informally. He no longer led the morning and evening sessions in the Dhamma Hall. He would spend many hours a day seated on a wide wicker seat in the floored and open-sided space beneath his kuti. There, accompanied by a small number of attendants, he would receive a steady stream of lay visitors eager to make merit, to receive blessings, advice and inspiration. At night time, after the evening chanting and meditation session in the Dhamma Hall was over, more resident monks would make their way through the forest to his kuti. Most would stay until Luang Por retired for the night, some conversing with Luang Por, others sitting quietly in the shadows, enjoying the atmosphere and the warmth and directness of his teachings. Some monks would massage his feet or his hands as he chatted and chewed betel nut.

The monks considered the opportunity to attend upon Luang Por while he answered Dhamma questions to be a special treat. They particularly enjoyed the rare occasion when somebody came to argue with him. After one such occasion, a monk remarked to his friend that it was like watching a great master of martial arts effortlessly dealing with a clumsy opponent who foolishly believed that he was better than he was. Ajahn Chon cherished the memory of being a part of such occasions:

“I’d feel this marvellous sense that I was participating in a long tradition of students sitting in the middle of the forest at the feet of their teacher, receiving words of wisdom straight from his mouth. It was the joy of being in the presence of someone I was convinced knew all that needed to be known. I could not imagine anyone being able to ask him any important question whatsoever about life that he would not be able to answer immediately and with absolute authority. It gave me an intense feeling of well-being.”

Answering questions and engaging in Dhamma dialogue was a mode of teaching that Luang Por seemed to particularly enjoy. On one occasion, following a session with a visiting Western monk from another tradition, some of the resident monks were unhappy with the visitor’s aggressive manner. Luang Por said:

No, it was good, very good. His questions were like a whetstone for my wisdom. The more he asked, the sharper my mind became.

It delighted him when new answers arose spontaneously in his mind in response to unusual questions or to old questions from a new perspective.

Luang Por was particularly skilled in distinguishing between different kinds of questions and varying his replies accordingly. He did not feel bound to always answer questions in the terms in which they were asked. When questions were poorly framed or sprang from a lack of information or from mistaken assumptions, he would answer by separating the various strands of the question, making necessary distinctions, and often dealing with the wrong thinking lying behind the question along the way. Some questions he threw back at the questioner with a counter-question, a method at which he was particularly adept. He would, for example, ask questioners wanting him to free them from some doubt or other whether they would believe him if he told them the answer. When they hastily assured him that they would, he would tell them that, in that case, they’d be fools, because another person’s words could never set one free. He would encourage questioners to look again at their reasons for asking.

Some questions, Luang Por met with silence. In these cases, the problem was often not so much with the question itself, but with the intention of the questioner. If the questioner was caught up in a serious delusion, he was likely to interpret any answer given to him in the light of his beliefs and become even more entrenched in wrong view; it was better to add no more fuel to the fire. If the questioner was asking questions from an impure motive – perhaps to try to gauge Luang Por’s attainment – Luang Por would refuse to play along. If questioners asked about topics way beyond their level of practice, Luang Por would consider the questions to be idle ones and he would refuse to add to the conceptual log pile already clogging the questioner’s brain.

Luang Por had more than one type of silence. Sometimes, he would look blankly as if he hadn’t heard the question; the questioner would usually realize with a jolt that they’d asked something inappropriate and move on to another topic. If the questioner missed the hint and repeated the question, he would receive a fierce look, one that would surge up into his mind more than once in the following hours and days. In a particularly dire case, Luang Por might snub the person by turning to talk to someone else. In some cases, he would say more gently that the questioner was straying a long way from home – why not ask something relevant to his present experience?

### A No-Nonsense Approach

Every now and then, Luang Por would answer long involved questions with a single word or phrase. The brevity and the power with which he would express himself on these occasions could be shocking, and it could also be just what was needed to illuminate the confused mind of the questioner or the excessive elaboration of his questions. As Ajahn Tiang would report, it was an effective tool to use when conversing with people puffed up with their own intelligence and views:

“He wouldn’t be bothered by questions, no matter how long and involved they might be. He wouldn’t interpret or clarify issues like other people. He’d just cut the problems off and throw them away. He’d cut them into little bits and that would be the end of them. Sometimes all he’d need was a single word or counter question … Some people liked to go and listen when others were asking questions, but they’d be disappointed if they thought they were going to hear conventional answers.

“It wasn’t so much that he gave practical advice on how to solve problems, it was more that he showed people how to correct their thinking and attitudes … When people came to him with doubts – they’d heard a monk say this and was it right and so on – he’d say that being aware of your lack of understanding of a matter and your desire to get an answer to it was more valuable than just adopting the opinions of another person. That’s the way that he would answer questions. His answers were immediate and spontaneous, but they would always be spot on.

“Someone once asked him about paṭiccasamuppāda, the teaching of Dependent Origination. Instead of answering in the usual way by going through all the different links, he asked the questioner whether he’d ever fallen out of a tree … You lose your handhold, he said, and the next moment you’re lying on the ground in pain. You don’t know what went on in your mind as you fell, you didn’t have any mindfulness. It was all too quick. All you know is that you’re suffering now because you just fell out of a tree. The reason that you’re suffering like this now is called ‘specific conditionality’. When he finished, the person who asked him was laughing with pleasure at his explanation.”

On one occasion, a diligent lay meditator asked him about her practice:

“Sometimes my mind becomes very concentrated, but there tend to be moments when suddenly my head bobs up and down. It’s like I’m nodding, but I’m aware, there’s mindfulness there. What is that called?”

It’s called hitting an air pocket. When you go up in a plane, that’s what happens.

Although Luang Por would, on occasion, include some technical detail in his explanations, he was more likely to reply to questions by encouraging the person to look into his own mind for the answers. He saw little value in spoon-feeding information that would not be absorbed. Questioners seeking more specific advice about different meditation techniques would often be cautioned that their problem did not lie in a lack of information but in the attitude with which they were applying the information they already had. Gaining ideas could sabotage the application of any method.

The sharpness of his wit was well demonstrated with the visit of a certain Christian missionary who held the Buddhist teaching of not-self to be untenable. He was of the view that the knowledge of not-self presupposes a knower, and that that knower must be the self. The question he asked Luang Por was, ‘Who knows not-self?’ Luang Por’s immediate counter-question was:

Who knows self?

Without getting caught in philosophical wrangling, Luang Por was asserting that, if knowledge of not-self requires something that is not not-self, i.e. self, as its knower, then the opposite must also hold true: knowledge of self presupposes something that is not-self as its knower. If the proponent of the self-view objects that the self knows itself, then the Buddhist may add that by the same token, knowing may be considered a naturally arising property of the not-self mind. Luang Por’s three-word counter-question avoided the need for such a convoluted explanation. The most important point for Luang Por was that without a mind honed through meditation practice, there can be no resolution of the issue of self and not-self, only beliefs and speculation.

This chapter has sought to bring Luang Por into a clearer focus. It has dealt with how he has appeared to the people around him, and the personality traits and qualities that impressed themselves most upon them. In particular, emphasis has been laid on those virtues that enabled him to fulfil the role of the kalyāṇamitta to his disciples. He has been seen to inspire affection, love, devotion and respect, as well as fear and awe. He has been presented as a role model, encouraging his disciples to emulate his practice. He has been shown as ‘Dhammakāmo’, one with a great passion for Dhamma, who, after being willing to put his life on the line in his own practice, exercised great patience and endurance in sharing what he had realized with others. There has been an extended account of his ability to communicate the Dhamma effectively in both formal and informal modes. All of these qualities, and others, will reappear throughout the rest of this book. But now, the focus will shift towards a more systematic presentation of Luang Por’s teaching and training of his disciples, monastic and lay, in the development of the Eightfold Path.

1 ‘Kalyāṇa’ means ‘noble’ or ‘admirable’; ‘mitta’ means ‘friend’.

2 The results of bodily, verbal or mental kamma directed towards an enlightened being, whether wholesome or unwholesome, are understood to be far more intense than that directed at unenlightened beings.

3 Vipassanupakkilesas. See Glossary, vipassanupakkilesa.

4 See A Life Inspired, ‘I walked down from Langka Mountain…’

5 More than one stage may be passed in a single period of meditation.

6 Ja 547; MN 89

7 ‘pāṭihāriya’ – a marvel or miracle. The Buddha spoke of three types of miracles: 1) the miracle of psychic power, 2) the miracle of mind-reading, and 3) the miracle of teaching or instruction.

8 A class of deities called nāgas are found throughout the Buddhist texts. They appear in the world as unusually large snakes, particularly king cobras. After his enlightenment, it is said that the Buddha was sheltered from the elements by the great nāga Mucalinda.

9 Equivalent to approximately $15,000 today.

10 cf. The Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah

11 To mark Luang Por’s 100th birth anniversary in 2018, a new book of ten Dhamma talks is being published in the Thai language. These discourses were originally given in Isan language and recorded on reel-to-reel tapes, with very poor sound quality. The tapes have now been digitally re-mastered, transcribed and translated into Thai. It is hoped that an English translation will follow before too long.

12 See Polishing the Shell, ‘The most legendary…’.

13 Hui Neng (6th Century) was the Sixth Zen Patriarch and author of the Platform Sutra. Huang Po (9th Century) was the subject of the book Record of the Transmission of the Lamp.