Daily panic is not your fault

Having established a foundation for practice, the key point for me was to keep the head from turning intents into ideals. For example, meditation in solitude is strongly renunciate, and certainly this is a skilful intention. Renunciation is an intention to keep things simple, an approach that supports ease of being, lightness of mind, and a wise use of energy. However when that inclination of the heart gets turned into an ideal in the mind, we become ideological about it. Then the Tyrant takes over, and renunciation becomes ‘the less, the better.’ And an ideological mind is mono-focused – it sees everything from the perspective of its ideology. So how much less is less enough? ‘Even less!’ says the Tyrant. An aspiration becomes a compulsion. That’s the way to lose balance. To counteract this, the ‘whole view’ approach is to get a feel for how an idea is affecting your entire system. If it’s causing contraction and pressure, then it’s not been handled properly, and it hasn’t translated into heart.

When you get a feel for energy and intelligence, it’s clear that the fundamental source and footprint of all the greed, hatred, restlessness and dogmatism that you can witness in yourself and others is this contracted and divided heart.  However, in its contracted state the heart is too numb to know itself. So check your body: whether it’s anger that tightens, or dullness that makes you feel compacted, or greed that makes you feel you have to clench around some object – the body tightens up. It doesn’t do denial. Embodiment then serves as a reliable reference to our emotional and psychological states. If we can recognize them at that level and know how to release them, we undercut the base of all the hindrances.

This is not just a personal or internal matter. If you live in an urban environment, you have to deal with a certain amount of bodily tension that comes from impact: fast movements, unknown people, flashing lights, and cars charging at you every time you try to cross the street. The likelihood is that you’re going to feel contracted. That’s not your fault; that’s the body going into ‘defend’ or ‘urgent’ mode. But if that daily panic is not released or relaxed, it resonates emotionally as an ongoing sense of anxiety, irritability and restless need.

Of course, we can be nervous and still look like we’re relaxed and at ease. Since being at ease is what we’re supposed to be, we learn how to do it: we learn to adopt bodily stances that make us look cool and relaxed. But actually feeling it internally, really feeling free and feeling open is a very different thing. The real thing is uncontrived and natural, because the embodied mind is connected directly to the heart, not to what we should be.

*   *   *

Working towards aimless sanity

The aim of such practice goes beyond calm. It deals with intention, the impulse to do; and as creating a self-image is what we do, handling the doing is a key to liberation from self. So: whatever emotive effects we experience give rise to intention; the heart responds to contact. And ‘me’ appears as that which is affected, gladdened or troubled by that contact. Then, because we’re touched, something in us jumps up: intention, our will, our interest to do. ‘I’ appear as an agent, with thoughts such as: ‘Do that,’ or, ‘That’s wrong. Don’t do that.’ So this response to a signal forms who we sense ourselves as being at that time: confident, nervous, threatened or caring. This is kamma: psychological action that forms who we feel ourselves as being.

There is a lot of volitional potential in the human mind. This is good, if it’s used wisely. But when it’s caught up with self-image it’s always restless. You know: ‘I need to fix something, get on with something. Don’t waste time.’ Then: ‘Was that good enough?’ This is especially relevant because these days, intention is not just about grabbing pleasure or bashing your enemies: we’re strongly conditioned by the work-ethic. Self-image gets us twitching with the need to be useful and effective. The drawback is that the work never ends – because the intention that’s associated with the need to achieve and perform is a vehicle for the Tyrant. We may feel that the right place of intention is to spur us ever onwards to the goal, but when the spurring and the rider are not on your side, and the goal is an idea in your head, the chances of arriving at a good place are not that great.

However, the mind doesn’t always have to move into ‘Do that’ or ‘Don’t do that’; it can experience contact and learn to pause, widen and feel what’s going on right now. And with that shift of intention, the actions that form self with regard to that contact are curtailed. Then there isn’t the creation of an ‘I’ that has to hurry, or worry about being inadequate. Of course, thoughts and emotions can still occur, but they’re not knee-jerk reactions that repeat the same old habits. Instead there is freedom to choose, and to disengage from kamma. This letting go around intention is therefore an important aspect of the awakening process.

*   *   *

Consequently, I’ve worked hard at aimlessness! For example I used to get very obsessive about tidying the room I was given as a dwelling. I’d notice that I would endlessly fuss around my room, sweeping it and tidying it any time of the day or night. Then the curtain would look like it needed folding, so I’d do that and sit down again; then the grate of the fire needed sweeping ... and so on. So I determined to spend a week of not tidying the room; just putting things in their proper place, leaving them alone and letting the dust accumulate. I’d feel the volitional twitch and acknowledge it, contemplate the push of that intention and keep letting it go until the mind began to sink into a quiet place. With practice, I could come from that quiet place and then do what felt appropriate.

One of the most wonderful moments in this period came around the mealtime. Having received the meal, I was sitting there contemplating my bowl with the food in it, when the familiar litany of thoughts came up about ‘How much?’ and ‘Am I eating more than...?’ But this time, I really heard how petty the Tyrant’s voice was. Then something clear in me told it to shut up. That I was going to eat my meal, so I needed to pay attention to what was actually happening, and we could get back to the judgements later.  There was a sense of being startled – and the Tyrant slunk off.

So I recommend relaxing intention and having a period of alert aimlessness. Try five minutes of it as an experiment – and feel the sense of: ‘What am I supposed to do right now? I don’t feel very good. This is wasting my time. I should be...’ It doesn’t take long for the Inner Tyrant to get going; action is its primary domain. The Tyrant gets upset with aimlessness: ‘What’s the point of all this? Are you going to spend the rest of your life wasting your time?’ But we’re not doing aimlessness for the rest of our lives; we’re doing it for five or maybe ten minutes, just to feel the urge to do and question how valid it is.

Try it. Just allow whatever thought is there, whatever feeling is there to be felt, to be fully sensed as it is, as a visitor. You can even extend the practice over half an hour. If you feel like standing up, stand up. If you feel like walking, walk in an aware way. While staying attentive and embodied, let yourself loosen. Attune to the watchful space that opens in your mind. Trust it. Notice, but don’t act upon or react to any impulse. Allow a more intuitive sense of direction to arise. When I do this, I don’t go crazy. Instead there’s a gentling of intention that takes me from moving onwards in time and space to deepening into the present moment, to where thinking slows down or stops. So it leads into the meditative process quite naturally.

*   *   *

‘‘allow whatever thought is there, whatever feeling is there to Be felt, to be fully Sensed As it is, as a visitor’’

When we come out of the grip of the Tyrant, intention is no longer dominated from the programmed head-centre, but instead feels the sense of what’s right. We feel balanced within our situation; and because of that the sense of oneself as some alienated object in the world begins to dissolve. It’s a homecoming to the base of right intent. And it’s only from here that we can offer our basic sanity to the world.

Then, even when going somewhere, you have a centre that isn’t going anywhere. Even when the hands and mind are busy, you have a heart that is at ease. It knows that these actions are actions only. They can happen out of compassion and concern, or just to skilfully meet what arises. They don’t need the heart to divide into self and other. Because real actions don’t need actors, they don’t have to employ a Tyrant.

*   *   *