## Unseating the Inner Tyrant

Do you ever find yourself dominated by a chain of thought that tells you that you’re not good enough, that you don’t deserve much, and that other people look down on you or tolerate you out of politeness? Do you find yourself snagging on memories of things you did wrong, or relationships that you didn’t get right? Do you feel that you have to be a success in life like you think someone else is – and are consequently critical of yourself? This piece of psychology is called ‘the Inner Tyrant’. The good news is that it’s not just you who has this, and that you can get free of its grip. And the key to this is through establishing, and continually re-establishing, right intent.

Right Intent

Intent is the attitude or inclination on which we base our actions, and in a life that is full of things to deal with, it’s easy to lose touch with that base. Yet intent is significant; it creates a bias and affects how we see things, and how we will act or speak. If we hold a negative intent, we see things in a negative light; if we clear a hostile or depressed intent, the heart feels light and clear. And our actions and speech follow in accordance. This is the principle of cause and effect, right view, the foundation for the Path out of suffering and stress.

It should be easy to follow that principle, but the snag is that the mind gets confused. It loses right view and gets duped by the appearance of things. It’s fooled by pleasant sights and ideas into wanting to possess them and fearing their loss. It forms comparisons with other people – although we don’t really know how they feel in themselves. But because of believing in appearances, we measure ourselves in terms of gain and loss, success and failure, praise and blame. So, how do we get in touch with right intent?

*   *   *

The simple answer is that right intent has to come from the depth of the heart, not from its turbulent surface. Focusing within, you can notice that wholesome inclinations lead to freedom from turbulence, anxiety and regret. This feels good, whereas inclinations that are pushy, embittered or deceitful don’t feel good. So you can know both the wholesome and the unwholesome, and through steering away from the unwholesome you can come into balance. To live in this balance entails regarding oneself and others with the same intent of kindness and compassion: ‘to others as to myself.’ This is right intent. The heart is in its natural undivided state, and the resulting balance feels good.

So ‘intent’ isn’t an idea in your head, but the inclination of your heart. And right intent, or right motivation (sammā-sankappa) has three inclinations: kindness, compassion and renunciation. These three work together: as you experience warm-heartedness towards yourself and extend it to others, you feel more contented and less needy. So right intent helps us to let go of the pull of the senses and instead focus on conscience and fellow-feeling. Tuning into and sustaining this right intent generates self-respect. Then, if we act in accordance with right intent, we make good friends and cultivate a livelihood that isn’t caught up with greed or manipulation. In such a lifestyle the heart feels stable and comfortable.

Right intent treasures the good and guards it, and it becomes the basis for the efforts we make in our daily life and in meditation. Because that intent feels good, it helps us to meet your difficulties and work on them. It’s like when you’re looking after someone who’s ill: you have to put yourself out and tidy up around them, but because you wish for their welfare, you feel good about doing that. Your energy is joyful rather than driven.

‘‘Sustaining … right intent generates self-respect’’

Self-view and the Inner Tyrant

If right intent isn’t accessed, the mind gets snagged on the moods and thoughts that pass on the surface. Then we don’t recognize the basic goodness in ourselves and get stuck in disputes, fantasies and worries. And if energy goes into thinking about what we are and what we should be, between feeling inadequate and trying to prove ourselves, the mind never consolidates and comes into its strength. The heart is divided by doubt, and in that fluster the mind produces narratives such as ‘not a very good person ... impure, can’t concentrate, not very mindful at all …’ etc. So as the heart loses balance, it divides, and the sense of self creeps in, along with judgements, doubts and comparisons with others. This is anything but right intent! In this respect, even good ideas can be problematic – because they take you up into your head and into ‘self-view’ – a notion of what you should, could or couldn’t be.

*   *   *

Even inspiring teachings get twisted if we approach them with self-view. For example, the Buddha advised the recollection of Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha in order to give rise to gladness and confidence. But if we recollect the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha with self-view we think, ‘Buddha = somebody a lot better than I am; Dhamma = something I haven’t got very far with; Sangha = a bunch of people who belong to something I’m not part of.’ The idea hasn’t translated into a heart-sense, and instead turns into a self-view. Yet if I see a beautiful sunset, I don’t think: ‘I’m not as big and beautiful as that!’ or ‘I’m not part of that.’ I can take it in and appreciate it – because my heart gets the meaning of beauty and receives and relaxes into that. Recollection is like that; it’s a means for lifting the heart by receiving and empathizing with qualities like understanding, joy, freedom and integrity. Then you partake of their beauty, and see them in your own heart. But when we compare and define ‘this is me, this is the other’, then there’s self-view, and even beautiful things make one miserable. This isolated and self-critical view speaks loudly and is very domineering. That’s why I call it ‘The Inner Tyrant.’

The Inner Tyrant wants a perfect self-image. You’ve probably met him or her. The Inner Tyrant is the nagging voice that demands that you achieve impossible standards of perfection, never offers congratulation or appreciation, exaggerates shortcomings, indicts you with total responsibility for events of which you may have been only a part; and based on this, delivers indifference or scolding. Sometimes the Tyrant keeps urging you to do more, or try harder – advice that may have its place, but is inappropriate when it’s applied to a divided heart. It adds more weight to carry when carrying a self-image is already making our lives problematic. So, by trying to make them form a satisfactory self-image, the Inner Tyrant actually impairs our actions.