The Tyrant’s work: seeking acceptance in the world of ghosts

The painful flaw of self-view is that it makes how I feel, and what passes through awareness, into who I am. So, as what comes up in awareness is often a mix of unresolved memories and impressions, this habit of identification gives rise to a hurt or flawed self who keeps rehashing old grudges and disappointments and regrets in an attempt to clear them. This self fixates on the details of ‘she said this five years ago and then yesterday she did this,’ or sinks into ‘I’m always anxious and am never going to make it’ again. So whenever we identify with thoughts and emotions, we stop relating to them with the compassion that could resolve them. Then the Inner Tyrant takes over. It cuts off access to the natural empathy of the heart. It will generally urge you to feel bad about yourself and to give up on yourself; and when that sense of self-respect is out of the way, then the heart is prone to addictive habits and ‘It’s all a waste of time anyway.’

Life is difficult enough already. We live in a realm of separations, needs, brutalities, and the inability to hold on to something that’s satisfying. We can’t prevent pain or sorrow coming to us; we’re all swimming around in this sea of difficulty or ‘dukkha.’ That being so, the most important thing to bear in mind is to not drown in the water; to let go of the weight of identity and learn to swim. This is why the Buddha presented a way to release the heart from seeking or believing in any self-image. Whether that image is bad or good, it will lead to comparisons, conceit, pride, despond and a loss of right intent. And it’s only when we can stop forming a fixed impression of ourselves, the heart finds balance and is clear. Then it can stop taking on dukkha.

‘Stopping’, rather than ‘annihilation’ is the term because self-imaging (and suffering) is something we do; so we’re not trying to get rid a real entity. Identification is a deeply ingrained action of taking hold of feelings, interpretations and impulses and conceiving, ‘this is what I am.’ Whereas if we really were something we could define, we wouldn’t need to keep trying to find it and firm it up. So trying to define what we are is a non-starter: we just need to know that in order to not drown in dukkha, we have to stop holding onto any impression of ourselves or of others. The results of doing that are positive. Whenever the heart drops self-view and picks up right view and right intent, difficult mental states become manageable and are even conducive to growth in terms of compassion, patience and understanding. This approach makes it possible to grow through life rather than feel we have to defend ourselves against it or distract ourselves from facing its limitations. But it entails working on our wishes and fears, rather than identifying with them.

* * *

The Inner Tyrant however is committed to making how I feel into who I am. Or it makes an ideal and an absolute out of ‘stopping’ to the extent that we assume we should even stop feeling: ‘I am that which doesn’t feel.’ Then when one does feel some happiness, the Inner Tyrant takes over and says, ‘Don’t hang on to that, that’s self, let go of that.’ So we attach to an idea of not-self and reject the feeling. The truth about the Tyrant is that it can’t handle feeling. It can’t relate to or be fully with what’s going on. So it adopts ideological positions and control strategies. It’s a judge, whose demands and verdicts come from losing touch with the good heart. The scenarios are exaggerated, the verdicts severe, the punishments only make matters worse – but the Tyrant can’t operate any other way. It’s trapped; the Inner Tyrant is a piece of stuck psychology, a view that relates to the heart through an idea.

The Tyrant arises at the boundary between our inner life and outer context. Internally, we experience ourselves feeling what we’re feeling, with transient impulses, interests and passions, pleasure and pain. We experience inclinations that are either unacceptable by our social world or irrelevant to it, and there are those we’re not sure about. Yet we feel bound to present ourselves as acceptable to the world around us. And we get many messages as to what we should be. Some of these are to do with our intelligence, our physical appearance and our mannerisms. Our natural inclination to belong can keep us trying to catch up with what everybody else is wearing, or with the current jargon. Some of this is job-oriented or partner-oriented. All in all, a huge amount of energy and attention goes into being an object that is acceptable and interesting to others in one’s particular group. Because of the need to belong to or be valued by others we’re under considerable social pressure, so our sense of not acting upon (and not even mentioning) the unacceptable can be based on that pressure, rather than on our own ethical sensitivity. In which case the centre of authority shifts away from our own heart-intelligence. We lose the heart, and become actors seeking an audition before an audience of ghosts.

The heart and how to handle it

Clearly we shouldn’t act upon or express every feeling and impulse that arises; we need to retain the authority to restrain, act or let an impulse pass. Otherwise instead of wisely handling the impulse (with the sense that ‘this doesn’t feel good’) we relate to it from a reflex rejection of it, from the idea that ‘this shouldn’t exist’. And the problem is that immoral, unacceptable impulses do exist. This sets off an escalating inner conflict. If the impulses shouldn’t exist, then: ‘It’s my fault. There’s something wrong with me. So wrong in fact that I can’t tell anyone about it; I just better make sure they don’t find out ...’ etc., etc. The Tyrant appears.

But look around and you’ll acknowledge that the human heart is capable of the most noble and the most selfish, brutal impulses. This is the heart. Handling it is quite a job, so we need all the encouragement that we can get. We need to sieve through the awareness of our own subjective experience, however messy and weird, rather than get stuck in the emphasis that we are seen to be ‘OK.’ (After all, who judges that?)

Now we may very well want to do what’s right and strive to be better and so on. But do you ever investigate the bases of such attitudes? What is wrong with you anyway? And how would that change? Notice what it’s like to believe that some aspect of one’s body or mind is flawed; and the fluster and tirade that occur when you forget something or make a mistake. What does it feel like to think about yourself? That which thinks about you – can it handle and work with your mind, or does it just complain? Does it offer guidance or support? And if not, how is any intent based on that thinker going to be of benefit?

* * *

I’m sure we all have energies and attitudes that need to mature into wisdom. But maybe there’s also a way of helping the heart to grow up – by encouragement rather than through blaming or suppressing what’s unwise. So, how would it be to listen to ourselves with calm and empathy? Because we can tune into our intentions and feel the difference between good and evil; and we can choose goodness. This is wise development. And it only occurs through clearly acknowledging the good and the bad – and making a choice. Then the Tyrant is replaced by wisdom.

This change comes through restoring the undivided heart: through being with, and feeling with the energy and the feel of a mood rather than following it, getting scared of it or believing in it. The heart is then patient, attentive but uninvolved, listening to the voice of your mind. This practice takes us to ‘measurelessness’, the non-measuring of who we are and how long it will take to get better. Calm inner listening is then the primary means of unseating the Inner Tyrant. It encourages kindness, compassion, appreciation of what is good, and equanimity to arise in response to our dukkha. In this way, the heart can both hold the Tyrant in check and support a deepening of awareness. It realizes, ‘I am greater than this Tyrant, I don’t believe this stuff.’ ‘I value just being aware, even of my uncertainties.’ Because to abide in compassionate awareness, without changing anything but without blaming – this is good in itself. It allows our difficulties to be met by a stream of skilful intent rather than by a self-view. And then transformations, through forgiveness and letting go, can occur.

‘‘The Tyrant can’t handle Feeling ... so it adopts ideological positions and control strategies’’

The Great Spoon Race

For spiritual seekers there’s the aspiration to experience purity, bliss and peace. The problem is that these aspirations tend to stick to the ideals but lack the know-how for their realization. And when we stick to such ideals, we look down upon and condemn the non-pure, non-lofty, and non-blissful. In the early years of my practice, this was how it was. We ‘did meditation’ on our own in little huts in silence, and there was just one meal a day. That seemed like a good training: prior to entering the monastery, I’d been living very casually with no restraints and I really wanted to turn that around. But through not being in touch with the heart, I turned restraint into an ideological compulsion.

My meditation practice then was the ‘Burmese satipaṭṭhāna’ method, which entails doing everything very slowly and making a mental note such as ‘moving, touching, lifting, bending.’ However, I’d only recently come out of India, where I’d spent months suffering from amoebic dysentery. So I was grossly underweight, in fact I was as thin as a rake. And with monastic life being so boring, that one meal of the day was of major interest! So when the food came in, the satipaṭṭhāna would go out the door. I’d think, ‘Intending to eat. Note: spoon, food,’ – and then there would be a blur. Something in me was eating the food really quickly. I’d determine to do better the next day ... but lose it again. After a period of time I started to wonder why I was eating the food so fast – it wasn’t going to run away! With some introspection, I recognized I was eating it quickly so that my mind wouldn’t be able to note it; because when my mind took note, it noticed I was feeling some excitement and happiness about eating food. And then it would become critical: ‘You shouldn’t be enjoying this.’ So the impulse was to eat quickly before the Tyrant came in. But the Tyrant always came in, even if he waited until I was washing up. Then he’d say, ‘You lost mindfulness as well. You’ve got a big food-defilement. And you’re not mindful either.’

So I decided to eat less. I got down to eating about the amount of food you could hold in two cupped hands. I felt if I could just eat that much per day, maybe the Tyrant would leave me alone. But he always caught me somewhere. I was meditating somewhere between fourteen to fifteen hours a day and still not feeling I was doing enough. Anything more than four hours sleep was not enough effort. It became obvious that, no matter what I did, there was always more effort than could be made, or more comfort that could be given up. The fact that I’d come from an easy-going kind of life to one of keeping precepts, abstaining from sex, music, entertainment and even companionship to live on one meal a day in a spartan hut in a country where I couldn’t speak the language – I never acknowledged that as being a sign of having made any effort at all.

Of course, we were offered teachings on kindness, compassion, appreciation and equanimity – ‘to others, as to myself.’ But I couldn’t get much out of all this, not because I’m a particularly nasty person but because when I was ‘doing meditation’ I wasn’t coming from the heart. I’d enjoy helping others, and be soft-hearted towards other creatures, but when it came down to ‘doing kindness’, especially to myself, there wasn’t much of a result. I could think, ‘May I be well ... may I be well ... may I be well ...’ ‘May you be well ... may you be well ...’, but then I’d think, ‘What good does that do?’ It was because whenever I was focused on doing, I operated through my non-empathic head. And without the presence of some living being to interact with, there wasn’t a relationship to support empathy.

* * *

Embodied intelligence: body, heart and head

When I did find a way of meditating rather than of trying to meditate, it came through widening my awareness. I knew my mind and approach needed to broaden; I just couldn’t keep working from being uptight and critical. So one of the things I worked on was to widen my attention by attuning to the bodily sense. By this I mean the body’s ‘inner’ sense, not the sensations that come from contact. For example, when you’re standing up and know whether you’re balanced or tilting over, that’s a bodily sense. When you feel tension or when you feel relaxed, that’s a bodily sense. It’s not focused on a particular point, it’s a reference to the whole; and it connects to the emotions. When you feel welcome and when you feel rejected, there’s a bodily sense there. When you feel frightened or angry, there’s a bodily sense. If you bring up images associated with ill-will, you can feel certain energies shift in your body. If you feel you have to defend yourself or prove that you’re good enough, something in your body has to tense up. This bodily sense is affected and responsive. And you can be sure that meditation based on its afflictions and tensions will never arrive at peace. Instead it will be marked by tension and a contraction in which one’s capacity for warmth, or ease is diminished; so much so that one gets too numb to even notice the loss.

Attuning to the bodily sense is a form of mindfulness of the body. It’s essential to embody awareness in order to handle mind and feeling, because otherwise we have to rely solely on our conditioned thinking – and that is Tyrant territory. In other words, if awareness isn’t embodied, then the domineering head is likely to be the default director of the practice. But with an embodied mind, assessment tunes in to the direct feel of anger, worry or craving in the nervous system. It’s a very direct way of dealing with the Tyrant. In my own case, simply attuning to its effect on my bodily would bring around an immediate relaxation; not a slump but a relaxation, especially in the face, the shoulders, the belly and the hands. Rather than judge or complain, embodied awareness allows stress to discharge by softening, widening and releasing.

* * *

To wake up the embodied intelligence we need to tune into, steady and ease the bodily sense. To this end, when we have established an upright and steady body, and attuned to right intent, we bring the heart into the body with the question: ‘How is my bodily sense now? Does this feel right? Do I feel settled here?’ Such a question itself comes from right intent, and so it awakens heart-intelligence. Settling may be supported by walking slowly, standing or sitting ‘as if in a warm and sheltered place’ – whatever works. Then: ‘Where is there balance? Can my body relax what isn’t needed?’ Then when the body eases, settles, and feels more spacious, it becomes possible, and is useful, to focus on breathing. But if I start out with the idea: ‘Get focused on the breathing, and don’t drift off!’, the likelihood is that I won’t have released residual tension in the body, and will therefore generate more stress.

This approach enabled me to note and include the intelligences of body, head and heart. I found this both transformational and at the same time very ordinary and obvious. I could establish kindness from knowing in my body how good it felt to be warm-hearted. Then I could develop the heart by collecting my thoughts on those occasions when others had manifested generosity, helpfulness or sympathy. These didn’t have to be emotionally highly-charged, just instances of the ordinary decency that people manifest towards each other every day. It’s all very natural; but for me it represented a return from the ghost realm of imagined objects to the real world of feeling subjects. And it allowed me to sit in that real world for as long as it took until it felt right to share that space with others, to bring other people into mind and share the kindness, compassion, forgiveness and appreciation with them.

Embodiment shifts us to the real world. And this makes it possible to recollect one’s virtues. The Tyrant really has a problem with doing this! But despite the poor ratings he gave me, I could slowly and deliberately recollect and take to heart: ‘Today I didn’t kill anything. Today I didn’t steal anything. Today I didn’t sexually abuse anybody. Today ... well, I could have said a lot worse! I held back the nasty stuff that was about to jump out. I could have lashed out there, but I didn’t; that was pretty good.’

I imagine that such reflections would be possible for all of us, although they’re not great performance stuff for the ego. But none of this is about making a self out of actions at all. The beauty is in the ordinariness of noticing actions that come from and point to right intent. This intent doesn’t originate with thoughts; it’s a heart-inclination rather than an ideal, but you can use simple sustained thinking to awaken it. This is a skilful use of head-intelligence.