## OUR MIND AS IT REALLY IS

Perhaps we come to the monastery with the idea that we have to develop a self that will become a good Buddhist – kind, compassionate and loving but then we can get into conflict with ourselves because we discover a reality that is quite different. Perhaps we come to experience ourselves as somebody very different from that kind, loving, generous person that we wish to develop. On one level we want to be pure, loving and not driven by sensual desires; we want to be respectful of each other and then we discover other tendencies that we can be so blind to.

For a long time we may think that ‘we’ are in charge of our lives, and can feel quite guilty or blame ourselves when things do not work out. For example, how many times do we feel embarrassed about the way we behave? Even when nobody sees us, we can feel so embarrassed. This beautiful person that we hoped to become is suddenly raging about some silly thing.

We think we are in charge, but as we keep practicing we realize that it is really blind habits that are in charge – blind conditioning, blind responses. They are blind because they are acted upon before our mindfulness can even catch them.

When we are mindful, we are conscious, we can see clearly. But often habits are so strong, they catch us off guard and can manifest like a punch – punching our world, our reality. This is not always obvious to others as habits can be hidden behind a smile, an appearance of politeness. A punch can even look quite sweet.

So in our meditation practice we begin to notice the subtleties of our mind – what is happening right now? Am I at peace? Do I hate what is happening or not? Do I care for it, or not? Do I wish to be somewhere else? Do I force myself to be here? These details are not always acknowledged, and yet this is the material of our practice.

The Buddha said: ‘I teach for those who know and those who see.’ They are very simple words, aren’t they? But for me they mean alot. If we don’t see our mind as it really is, there is nothing much we can do.