## DISCIPLINE AND WISDOM

The word ‘discipline’ is not just an empty word. Discipline is something that requires us to use our intelligence, our wisdom, our knowledge of ourselves and the mind, to assess what is really important in life, to find out what our priorities are, even to write them down if necessary. What is really most important in this life? It is so easy to get lost in a maze of other things. Discipline means using the clear mind to sort out what is really worth following and what is not. Discipline means sticking with what we decide is really important.

The wisdom aspect of our life (paññā) is vital. Paññā is the ability to think clearly, the ability to see things clearly, the ability to understand what is what and not be fooled by thoughts and moods. When we begin to do a bit of work on ourselves and start seeing though our projections and assumptions, we will be amazed at the dream-world we are part of. Actually, it is all ‘dream-world’, but the disconnection we have with reality adds dream upon dream. If they were all nice dreams we might not ever wake up, but at some point they turn into nasty nightmares. That’s when we start becoming interested in getting out of our dreams.

The wisdom aspect also entails a certain amount of effort in taking care of the mind, making the mind a fertile ground for insight. So, for example, if you have a confused mind, you don’t have to see it as a problem. The fertile ground for insight is seeing confusion as it is. It is very simple, but the ego doesn’t think like that. The ego is always saying, ‘I’m confused, and I feel happy when I’m not confused, so obviously I’ve got to get out of my confusion quickly!’ Of course the ego is not very clever, so it usually jumps into another programme of confusion. If it were very clever it could see the way out, but it doesn’t. It jumps into another confusion that feels just a little bit more comfortable. There are uncomfortable confusions and comfortable confusions. We tend to choose between delusions. This is often the ego programme – ‘what is the least uncomfortable?’

But don’t worry. Liberation is much closer than we think. It is not that far away. Liberation doesn’t have a colour or a texture. It is just more space.