## SITTING AT THE BEGINNER’S FEET

When we first start practising, we may notice the amount of arrogance and conceit that fill the mind. We might think that we need the ‘ultimate teaching’, rather than a simple practice. We may think: ‘Simple practice is for beginners, not me!’ But I have been practising myself for many years and I am very glad to still consider myself a beginner, sitting at the feet of the ‘don’t know mind’.

We tend to think, ‘Oh, I don’t need practice. I’ve done this before. I’ve been doing this for ten years.’ Well that may be true, but what have we learned from it? Are we more at peace? Is the heart more content? Are we still angry, frightened or greedy? Is there still lust for things? Are we still jealous or envious? Perhaps there is still a little more work to do. Perhaps we have not quite finished, have not yet reached the end of the path.

No matter how long we may have been practising, remember that the Buddha encouraged his disciples to follow certain ethical guidelines. At the heart of the precepts advocated by the Buddha, we find compassion – not harming ourself, our body or mind, and not harming others – harmlessness. So if we find that it’s really difficult not to harm, steal, misbehave sexually, lie or take drugs and intoxicants, if we can’t accept those guidelines, at least we can reflect on how we can be compassionate. Am I compassionate right now? Am I respectful of this person? Am I respectful of myself? Am I being kind to myself? When I say something, does it hurt me or anyone else? We call this way of investigation ‘wise reflection’. The Pali term for wise reflection is yoniso manasikāra1 . Whatever painful mental state we may be experiencing, whether it is greed, anger, restlessness or worry, is it the result of the absence of yoniso manasikāra? If we are reflecting wisely, any painful mental state can be seen as it truly is through the lens of wise reflection and wisdom.

We can investigate the six senses very easily in our everyday lives. Just looking at something, we can notice our reaction to it – wanting or not wanting, pleasure or pain. Does it bring up tension, anger, frustration? The door to this field of investigation is wide open and it leads to a wonderful path of discovery. We look at a flower or a person or an object, and see how in a space of mindfulness and stillness they resonate in our minds and hearts. The Buddha doesn’t say that when we look at something we should feel good, or that if we feel bad we are not really practicing well. He doesn’t say we should understand everything at once, or that we should have full clarity straightaway or that you should have no desire whatsoever. His teaching is not critical or judgmental. He simply offers us means to watch, observe and see how we are affected.

Sometimes we may feel intimidated by other people. We want to look good, don’t we? But the goal of practice is not to look good. The goal of practice is to understand what is good and what isn’t. Sometimes we may have to bear with looking really silly in order to understand silliness. If you look greedy, don’t be frightened by your greedy mind. We don’t have to become anything in order to investigate this mind. We can just use what we already have.

1 Yoni means ‘origin’, and yoniso, an ablative form of this word, means ‘down to its origin or foundation’. Manasikāra means ‘attention, pondering, fixed thought’. Thus yoniso manasikāra means ‘fixing one’s attention with a purpose or thoroughly.’ It is proper attention with thorough method in one’s thought.