# Chapter 1

Ajahn Candasiri
Reflections fromReflections from
Milntuim HermitageMilntuim Hermitage

I would like to dedicate this beautiful collection of
teachings with gratitude to all the teachers in the tradition
of Ajahn Chah who have inspired and supported me;
to my grandparents, parents and family who, in their differing 
ways, have travelled with me on my journey and to my fellow 
practitioners on the Path in Bath, Banbury and beyond.
SARAH WALLIS

7
Abbreviations
 MN Majjhima Nikāya – The Middle Length Discourses
	 	 of	the	Buddha,	translated	by	Bhikkhu	Ñāṇamoli
	 	 and	Bhikkhu	Bodhi.	Wisdom	Publications	1995.
 DHP Dhammapada – a rendering by Ajahn Munindo.
	 	 Aruna	Publications	2006.
 SN Samyutta Nikāya – The Connected Discourses
  of the Buddha, translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi
	 	 Wisdom	Publications	199 5.

8
Foreword
This little collection was never intended as a ‘collection 
of	 teachings.’	 It	 came	 about	 in	 response	 to	 a	 request	 and	
a	 suggestion.	 The	 request	 was	 from	 Sarah	 Wallis	 who	
wanted	 to	 sponsor	 a	 publication	 in	 celebration	 of	 her	
sixtieth	birthday,	and	to	mark	thirty	years	of	the	Banbury	
Buddhist	 Group.	 The	 suggestion,	 also	 from	 Sarah,	 was	 to	
gather	together	the	reflections	 that	had	been	individually	
prepared	 for	 the	 twice-yearly	 editions	 of	 our	 Milntuim	
Hermitage	Newsletter. 	
It	 was	 a	 surprise	 to	 find	 that	 there	 are	 twenty	 of	 these	 –	
and	 even	 more	 of	 a	 surprise	 to	 find	 that	 the	 reflections	
are	all	quite	different.	 Every	time	I	wrote	a	reflection,	 my	
intention	was	to	offer	encouragement	for	practice	with	the	
prevailing	conditions;	it	seemed	to	me	that	it	was	always	the

9
same	 Dhamma1	practice	 that	 I	pointed	 to.	 However,	 what	
I	 had	 failed	 to	 appreciate	 was	 that	 the	 actual	 conditions	
were	different	each	time! 	
So,	after	an	initial	hesitation,	I	asked	some	of	my	monastic	
and lay friends to read what was there. Ajahn Sucitto, Ajahn 
Munindo	 and	 Ajahn	 Sundarā	 all	 offered	 encouraging	 and	
helpful	feedback,	as	did	several	kind	lay	friends.	Members	
of	the	Lotus	Volunteer	Group	gathered	the	material	in	one	
place,	and	Mariah	O’Neill	gave	it	a	thorough	edit.	Eleonora	
Monti	 has	 helped	 to	 prepare	 the	 text	 for	 publication.	
Nicholas	 Halliday	 offered	 his	 expertise	 in	 preparing	 the	
practical	and	artistic	elements,	patiently	to-ing	and	fro-ing	
with	proof-readers	until	it	was	‘just	about	right’	enough.
May	it	serve	as	an	encouragement	to	attune	to	the	Dhamma,	
the	 Timeless,	 as	 we	 navigate	 the	 uncharted	 waters	 of	 the
times	to	come.
Ajahn Candasirī



1. Walking the Path
WINTER 2012
In	 our	 first	 newsletter	 we	 included	 a	picture	 of	 two	 of	 us	
walking	in	October	sunshine	along	this	wide,	clear	path	in	
the	Milntuim	 Woods.	 The	path	itself	 is	clear.	 To	the	right	
and left are interesting digressions (in this case, there is 
a	 swamp	 on	 the	 left	 and	 a	 thicket	 on	 the	 right).	 Ahead,	
there	is	open	countryside	and	the	radiant	light	of	the	sun.	
It	reminded	me	of	the	journey	that	each	of	us	is	following	
in our lives.
It’s	a	simile	that	the	Buddha	used	to	describe	his	teaching	
and	 way	 of	 practice.	 He	 said	 it	 was	 like	 an	 ancient	
path	through	a	dense	forest	that	he	had	rediscovered	 and	
opened	 up	 –	 for	 anyone.	 Anyone,	 that	 is,	 who	 –	 rather

12
than	 continuing	 to	 follow	 the	 familiar,	 well-worn	 loops	
that go round and round and round – is interested in 
finding	 a	direct	 way	 out	 from	 those	 thickets	 and	 swamps
of	the	mind.
Of	 course,	 it	 takes	 courage	 to	 leave	 the	 familiar	 and	 also,	
perhaps	 more	 importantly,	 a	 sense	 of	 disenchantment	
(Pali:	 nibbidā).	 In	 the	 Thai	 language	 the	 expression	 used	
is:	 bua lok, meaning	 something	 like	 ‘a	 sombre	 weariness	
with	 the	 world’.	 This	 may	 seem	 surprising	 (and	 that’s	
no	 bad	 thing)	 and	 I	 would	 probably	 have	 explained	 it	
differently. I would have described it as having recognised 
the	 limitations	 of	 human	 existence	 –	 even	 the	 wonderful	
things	 –	 and	 the	 way	 we	 readily	 make	 life	 more	 difficult	
than it needs to be, often through turning a blind eye to 
what	is	most	obvious. 	
We	want	something,	and	we	reach	out	for	it;	we	feel	angry	
and	upset	at	anyone	or	anything	that	gets	in	the	way	of	our	
having it – a nd	we	really	believe	 that	that	thing:	whether

13
it	be	a	relationship,	 object,	status	or	mental	state,	is	what	
we	 need	 to	 be	 perfectly	 happy	 –	 forever!	 I	 wonder	 if	 this	
sounds	familiar?
The	 Buddha	 spoke	 of	 three	 fires:	 greed,	 hatred	 and	
delusion.	 He	pointed	 out	that	they	continue	 to	burn	until	
we	 learn	 how	 to	 stop	 feeding	 them	 –	 until	 we	 become	
interested	 in	 the	 possibility	 of	 finding	 the	 way	 out.	
Milntuim	Hermitage	(from	the	Gaelic,	meaning	‘mill	on	the	
hillock’)	is	dedicated	to	that	way	out.	This	path	of	practice	
described by the Buddha is referred to as ‘the Dhamma’,
a	Pali	word	that	means	‘Teachings’,	or	‘Truth’. 	
For	 a	 journey,	 particularly	 one	 that	 may	 take	 us	 through	
unfamiliar	 territory,	 it	is	helpful	 to	have	 good	 friends.	 So	
it	is	very	 fortunate	 that	 the	Buddha	 both	 pointed	 out	the	
path	and	also,	in	the	course	of	his	long	lifetime,	established	
a	community	(sangha)	and	way	of	life	that	can	benefit	many	
many	people.

14
As nuns, we are bound by a code of training that enables 
us	 to	 live	 in	 a	 mutually	 dependent	 relationship	 with	
lay	 people	 who	 provide	 material	 support.	 Through	
contemplating	 our	 own	 lives	 in	 the	 light	 of	 these	
teachings,	 we	 gain	 confidence	 that	 they	 really	 work;	 we	
see	 with	 our	 own	 eyes	 that	 they	 are	 of	 direct	 benefit.
Then, when suitable occasions arise, we can share 
this understanding with others who are interested
in	walking	the	Path	to	Freedom.





17
2. Contemplating 
Interdependence
SUMMER 2013
One	of	the	aspects	of	this	lifestyle	that	I	find	most	difficult	
–	and	most	rewarding	–	is	being	an	alms	mendicant.
For	those	of	us	who	have	grown	up	within	a	culture	where	
independence	 is	 greatly	 valued	 –	 where	 one’s	 status	
is	 measured,	 to	 a	 large	 degree,	 according	 to	 material	
wealth	 and	 power	 –	 putting	 oneself	 in	 a	 position	 of	 total	
dependence	on	others	is	not	easy. 	
Yet	 interdependence,	 in	 fact,	 is	 the	 reality	 for	 all	 of	 us	
sharing	 this	 human	 existence.	 No	 one	 lives	 in	 a	 vacuum.	
The	Rule	for	nuns	and	monks	 of	this	tradition	 makes	 this	
explicit.	 We	 are	 forbidden	 both	 from	 using	 money,	 and

18
from	storing	food	overnight;	what	we	eat	each	day	must	be	
offered	to	us	between	dawn	and	midday.
Milntuim	 Hermitage	 has	 been	 a	 residence	 for	 Buddhist	
nuns	 for	 almost	 two	 years	 now,	 and	 it	 has	 been	 hugely	
encouraging	 that	generosity,	 in	the	form	of	both	material	
and	 practical	 support,	 has	 been	 shown	 to	 such	 a	 degree	
by	local	friends,	 and	by	others	from	further	afield.	People	
seem	eager	to	help:	‘Sister,	please	tell	us	what	you	need!’	–	
occasionally tinged with concern, and always with a sense 
of	joy.	There	is	joy	for	me,	too,	in	being	part	of	something	
that	 enables	 such	 radiance	 of	 heart,	 such	 generosity:	 the	
brightness	of	our	humanity.
In	 the	 past,	 walking	 for	 alms	 near	 our	 monasteries	 in	
England,	 I	 would	 bring	 this	 to	 mind;	 it	 is	 what	 enabled	
me	 to	 rise	 above	 the	 voices	 of	 conditioning:	 ‘What do 
you	 think	 you’re	 doing?...	 Making	 yourself	 vulnerable,	
dependent	 on	 others’	 goodness	 –	 a	 burden	 on	 society!...’

19
Such conditioning	goes	deep,	and	yet,	as	I	stand	there	in	the	
street,	bareheaded,	 holding	my	almsbowl,	it	is	clear	to	me	
that	the	intention	of	the	heart	is	to	bless,	not	to	demand.
‘May	 all	 beings	 be	 well.	 May	 all	 beings	 be	 free	 from	
suffering...’	are	the	thoughts	that	come	to	mind,	and	usually	
someone	approaches	with	an	offering.	It	may	not	be	much	
–	it	may	not	be	a	‘balanced	meal’,	but	it	can	fill	the	belly	for	
the day, and gladden the heart for both giver and given to.
In	 1977,	 when	 Ajahn	 Sumedho	 was	 preparing	 to	 come	 to	
Britain	from	Thailand,	he	too	had	concerns	about	living	on	
alms	in	a	non-Buddhist	country.	However,	when	he	voiced	
these	 concerns	 to	his	teacher,	 Ajahn	 Chah’s	 response	 was	
immediate:	 ‘Are	 there	 no	 kind	 people	 there?’	 Ajahn	 Chah	
also	 reminded	 him	 that	 to	 maintain	 the	 practice	 of	 the	
almsround	was	part	of	his	duty	as	a	monk.
A	 verse	 in	 the	 Dhammapada	 expresses	 the	 spirit	 of	 this	
practice	beautifully:

20
As a bee takes just what it needs, without harming the flower, 
its colour or its fragrance, so too should the samana 2 wander 
in the village. [DHP	49]
At	this	time	of	global	concern	about	the	catastrophic	effects	
of	climate	 change	 (all	 the	more	 poignant	 for	Comrie	 folk,	
many	of	whom	suffered	 extensive	 damage	to	their	homes	
from	recent	flooding)	this	can	be	seen	as	a	timely	reflection:	
What	do	we	need?	Are	there	ways	we	can	alter	how	we	live,	
so as to cause less disturbance to the delicate balance of 
nature?	Can	we	all	live	more	lightly	on	this	precious	earth?





23
3. Letting Go
WINTER 2014
Life	 is	uncertain.	 It	was	this	 reflection	 that	 led	the	young	
prince,	 Siddhartha	 Gautama,	 to	 leave	 the	 apparent	
security	 of	his	family	and	the	palace	where	he	had	grown	
up	in	search	 of	a	different,	 more	reliable	 state	 of	security	
and	 inner	 peace.	 For	 some	 people,	 what	 he	 eventually	
discovered	 during	 his	 search	 may	 seem	 shocking.	 He	
had	 surrendered	 his	 position,	 relationships	 and	 material	
comfort,	and	made	enormous	efforts	to	subdue	the	energy	
of	 desire,	 in	 an	 effort	 to	 find	 peace	 of	 mind	 –	 only	 to
discover	that	that	very	mind	was	not	really	‘his’	at	all!
However, when he reached that understanding, after six 
years of strenuous effort, what was left was a state of un -
shakeable	peace.	He	no	longer	had	anything	to	worry	about

24
or	to	protect.	 There	was	no	longer	 any	reason	 to	think	of	
himself	as	a	separate	person	with	a	personality	that	needed	
to	be	maintained	at	all	costs.	He	was	free. 	
Appreciating	 the	 possibility	 of	 such	 freedom	 for	 each	
one	 of	 us	 –	 that	 we	 too	 can	 find	 and	 know	 such	 peace	 –	
interests	 me	 greatly.	 Glimpsing	 it,	 albeit	 fleetingly,	 is	
what	 keeps	 me	 walking	 this	 path.	 External	 events	 can	 be	
sudden,	 disturbing	 and	 dramatic;	 they	 can	 be	 tragic	 and	
confusing.	 They	 also	 provide	 a	 stark	 reminder	 of	 impermanence	 and	 enable	 a	 deeper	 appreciation	 of	 the	 fragility	 of	 our	 world.	 The	 Buddha	 would	 frequently	 point	
to	 this	 as	 an	 encouragement	 to	 keep	 inclining	 towards
that state of inner stability. 
Then	questions	 arise:	 ‘But	how	do	we	do	it?’	‘How	can	we	
experience	that	state	for	ourselves?…’
Ajahn Chah3	put	it	nicely:

25
If you let go a little, you will have a little peace. If you let go a 
lot, you will have a lot of peace. If you let go completely, you 
will have complete peace...
One	 might	 respond	 by	 saying,	 ‘But	 does	 this	 mean	 that	 I	
just	 let	 go	 altogether	 and	 allow	 everything	 to	 fall	 apart,	
without	 caring	 or	 trying	 to	 do	 anything?’...	 Well,	 no	
– because we do care.	 There	 are	 many	 things	 that	 are	
important	 to	 us.	 We	 would	 like	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 these	
are	 looked	 after	 in	 a	 responsible	 way,	 so	 we	 do	 our	 best	
to	fulfil	those	responsibilities.	 The	key	question	is:	can	we
do	that	with	a	heart	of	letting	go? 	
We	need	to	begin	in	small	ways,	noticing	how	we	respond	
when	 things	 don’t	 go	 according	 to	 plan.	 Are	 we	 angry,	
or	 discouraged?	 Can	 we	 quietly	 accept	 the	 feeling	 of	 not	
getting our way (however noble or altruistic our intention 
might	 have	 been)?	 Can	 we	 take	 a	 deep	 breath	 in,	 can	
we	 let	 the	 out-breath	 happen	 gently?	 Can	 we	 touch	 the

26
earth	 like	 the	Buddha?	 This	 is	how	we	discover	 the	inner	
steadiness that enables our life to be a blessing, both for 
ourselves	and	for	others.	We	incline	away	from	the	habitual	
responses	 of	 reacting,	 struggling,	 or	 blaming	 others	 or
the	Universe	for	our	unhappiness.
When	 we	 begin	 to	 practise	 letting	 go	 like	 this,	 no	 longer	
obsessed	with	trying	to	keep	things	the	way	that	is	familiar	
or	comfortable	 for	us,	we	find	that	we	can	simply	witness	
and	 enter	 into	 the	 flow	 of	 life.	 We	 see	 how	 ‘bad’	 times	
become	‘good’	times,	and	‘good’	times	get	better	–	or	change	
to	‘bad’!	 Just	 as	the	 weather	 –	especially	 here	 in	Scotland	
– is in a constant state of change. There are bright clear 
moments,	sudden	downpours,	 mists	and	gale-force	 winds.	
While	inconvenient	 at	times,	it’s	not	‘bad’:	we	don’t	waste	
our	 precious	 energy	 with	 blaming	 or	 trying	 to	 control	 it.	
Instead,	our	effort	is	to	support	an	inner	attitude	of	clarity	
and	calm	that	can	adapt	to	whatever	comes	along.	Fearful

27
holding	 on	 is	 replaced	 with	 bright	 curiosity.	 Knowing	
that change is inevitable, we love and care for each other, 
cherishing	 the	 moments	 we	 share,	 bearing	 the	 sorrow	 of	
separation	with	courage	and	dignity.
This is life.
We can’t freeze it or hold on to it so, really, there is no 
choice	other	than	to	struggle,	or	to	let	go…



29
4. It Matters What We Think
SUMMER 2014
Whatever a person frequently thinks and ponders upon, that 
will become the inclination of their heart. [MN	19]
In the light of this teaching, it has been interesting to 
notice	the	responses	of	first-time	visitors	to	the	Hermitage.	
Some	see	a	tranquil	 haven;	others	see	only	the	amount	of	
work	to	be	done,	or	worry	about	the	winter	months.	Some	
delight	in	the	quiet	of	the	night	time;	others	are	fearful	of	
intruders,	who	may	be	out	to	cause	harm.	I	suspect	that	all 	
of	us	tend	to	oscillate	between	these	types	of	thinking,	and	
it can be a useful exercise to try to discern which of the 
extremes	is	our	most	usual	response.

30
In	Buddhism	it’s	not	a	matter	of	‘right’ or ‘wrong’, ‘good’ or 
‘bad’	 –	even	 though	 the	 factors	 of	 the	 Eightfold	 Path4 are 
often translated as ‘ right understanding’, ‘ right intention’ 
and	 so	 on	 –	it’s	 more	 an	 appreciation	 that	 different	 ways	
of	thinking,	speaking	or	acting	tend	towards	different	and	
quite	specific	outcomes.	We	call	this	the	Law	of	Cause	and	
Effect,	or	the	Law	of	Kamma.
This	raises	interesting	possibilities.	For	many	people,	it	can	
seem	that	there	is	just	one	way	of	responding	to	things:	‘My 
Way’...	 and	 that	 to	 deliberately	 change	 that	 response	 is	 a	
dubious contrivance likely to result in a sense of confusion 
–	or	worse.	As	we	reflect	on	our	lives,	it	becomes	apparent	
that	 most,	 if	 not	 all,	 of	 our	 patterns	 of	 response	 arise	
because	 of	conditioning;	 we	call	 it	‘upbringing’.	 However,	
having	learned	such	patterns	as	children	we	can,	as	adults,	
consider	the	possibility	of	learning	different	ways	of	seeing 
and	responding.

31
It	 is	 not	 surprising	 that	 the	 Buddha	 emphasized	 the	
importance	of	good	friends,	or	kalyāṇamitta. He encouraged 
association	with	the	‘wise’:	thoughtful,	considerate	people	
whose	inclination	 of	thinking,	 speech	 and	activity	 is	such	
as	 to	 bring	 benefit.	 Such	 people	 can	 guide	 us	 –	 directly,	
and	 through	 their	 example	 –	 towards	 the	 good.	 He	 also	
recommended	the	avoidance	of	foolish	people	who,	unclear	
about	 what	 brings	 real	 benefit,	 tend	 to	 opt	 for	 courses	 of	
action	that	may	bring	only	short-term	benefit	for	themselves,
and that can cause untold suffering to others.
Legal	 systems	 provide	 detailed	 guidelines	 to	 regulate	
outward	 behaviour	 for	different	 societies;	 but,	there	is	no	
such	litigation	 to	govern	our	inner	life.	It	is,	quite	rightly,	
a	 private	 matter	 –	 our	 own	 concern	 –	 and	 yet	 it	 is	 our	
innermost	 fears	and	longing	 that	determine	 our	response	
to the world ‘out there’. 
The suggestion that we could be aware of our thinking 
process	may	seem	a	bit	of	a	quantum	leap,	if	our	habit has

32
always been to identify with thoughts, and  if we never 
challenge	 what	 those	 thoughts	 may	 be	 telling	 us about 
ourselves, each other, the state of the world, or what we 
should	do	about	it.	The	thinking	mind	is	full	of	ideas	about	
everything,	and	what’s	more:	we	tend	to	believe	everything	
it	 tells	 us,	 and	 to	 respond	 accordingly!	 Then	 we	 wonder	
why	we	feel	so	stressed,	confused,	depressed	or	angry.
I	 find	 that	 when	 I	 take	 time	 to	 walk	 up	 and	 down	 my	
meditation	 path	 –	 aware	 of	 the	 feet	 touching	 the	 ground	
and	the	arms	hanging	from	their	sockets	at	my	sides	–	I	can	
begin	to	observe	the	mind	in	a	different	 way.	I	can	notice	
when	there	is	thinking	and	also	when	the	mind	is	quiet,	free	
from	 thought.	 It’s	 possible	 to	 discern	 when	 there	 is	 total	
involvement	with	some	issue	that	has	arisen,	or	if	there	is	
simply	 a	light	touching	 in	to	the	internal	 commentary	 on	
what	is	perceived:	dappled	sunlight,	the	warmth	of	the	air	
on the skin, fragrances, sounds – and thoughts. Little by

33
little	it	becomes	clear	that	we	can	choose	where	we	place	
our	attention;	there	can	be	a	loosening	of	grip	around	the	
persistent	concerns –	whether	they	are	trivial,	or	extremely	
serious:	about	‘me’, my	neighbours	or	the	Universe. 	
There	are	certainly	innumerable	matters	of	grave	concern,	
and it is natural to feel concerned when our attention is 
drawn	to	them.	Can	we	keep	the	heart	light	and	balanced,	
attuned	 and	 yet	 not	 overwhelmed?	 This	 question	 brings	
us	 back	 to	 the	 importance	 of	 noticing	 and	 being	 willing	
to abandon thoughts of greed, ill will, and cruelty and to 
actively	 cultivate	 generosity,	 kindness	 and	 compassion.	
It is this that can lead us to contribute effectively to the 
welfare	of	humanity.



35
5. But What Do You Do...?
WINTER 2014
This	 question	 is	 often	 asked	 as	 we	 approach	 our	 time	 of	
winter	 retreat,	 which	 extends	 from	 January	 until	 the	end	
of	 March.	 The	 answer:	 Actually,	 it’s	 more	 a	 question	 of	
what we don’t do. Anything that is not necessary, or that 
we	can	postpone,	we	don’t	do,	or	we	postpone.	This	way	we	
clear the endless list of ‘things to be attended to, now’, and 
focus	more	exclusively	on	the	inner	work	that	we	could	call	
the ‘work of the heart’.
Rather	than	a	‘doing’,	 this	work	is	more	of	a	watching	 –	a	
witnessing	of	internal	events	and	responses.	It	is	somewhat	
akin	to	those	people	at	the	airport	who	observe	x-ray	images	
of our baggage, watching out for anything that could be 
harmful	 to	ourselves	 or	to	others,	 and	taking	 appropriate

36
action.	 The	difference	 is	that,	for	them,	while	some	effort	
is	needed	 to	maintain	 focus	and	interest	 in	what	they	are	
witnessing, they are unlikely to identify with what they 
observe;	 it	 is	 clearly	 ‘other’.	 For	 us,	 this	 is	 not	 the	 case.	
Whether going about our ordinary daily life or in retreat, 
we are all too ready to identify with our bodies, and with 
the	emotions	and	moods,	ideas	and	thoughts	that	make	up	
our	 mental	 landscape.	 How	 many	 times	 do	 we	 comment:	
‘I	 am	 a	 fat/thin/healthy	 or	 sick	 person’	 or,	 ‘I’m	 a	 good/
bad/jealous/grumpy/easy-going/intelligent	 or	 fantastic	
person’…?
When	we	are	able	to	step	back	for	a	time,	and	to	relinquish	
our usual distracting activities –	 the	 phone	 calls,	 emails	
or	 friendly	 conversations	 –	 the	 mind,	 after	 an	 initial	
rebellion,	begins	to	settle.	Then	we	can	observe	the	flow	of	
life	as	we	experience	it	through	the	senses:	the	eyes,	ears,	
nose,	tongue,	body,	and	the	mind	itself.	We	can	notice	the

37
tension	that	arises	when	what	we	perceive	is	at	odds	with	
how	we	think	things	should	be	or	how	we	would	like	them	
to	be,	and	we	can	calm	the	voices	of	dissent	with	a	simple	
mantra5:	 ‘But this is how it is ...’.	 Settling	 the	 mind	 in	 this	
way, we can allow things to change naturally. We no longer 
need to give in to the belief that following the desire to 
manipulate	 or	 control	 will	 eventually	 produce	 a	 state	 of	
lasting satisfaction. 
The	 methods	 employed	 by	 the	 Buddha	 for	 guiding	 his	
disciples	 were	 practical.	 He	 would	 point	 directly	 and	
repeatedly	 at	 what	 can	 be	 observed	 –	 by	 anyone	 who	
is	 willing	 to	 look.	 Focusing	 on	 our	 mortality	 and	 the	
unsatisfactoriness	 of	 life	 may	 not	 be	 a	 particularly	
comfortable	 way	 to	 spend	 time.	 However,	 this	 is	 how	 we	
learn	and,	for	some	of	us,	the	lesson	needs	to	be	repeated	
many	 times!	 Then	 we	 really	 know	 for	 ourselves,	 and	
there	 is	 a	 readiness	 to	 let	 go	 of	 what	 is	 familiar	 as	 we

38
begin	 to	 explore	 different	 ways	 of	 relating	 to	 life	 in	 this	
human	 realm.	 It’s	 a	 way	 that	 is	 based	 on	 the	 acceptance	
of	the	limitations	of	our	flesh	and	blood	bodies,	and	of	our	
mysterious	and	fickle	minds.	We	no	longer	ask	more	of	life	
than	it	can	offer	or	provide;	instead,	we	make	the	best	of	it 	
as it is.
So	 that’s	 what	 we’re	 up	 to	 as	 we	 go	 about	 quietly,	 sit	 for	
long	 hours,	 or	 pace	 back	 and	 forth.	 We	 are	 just	 watching	
–	 like	 those	 people	 at	 the	 airport	 –	 making	 the	 effort	 to	
maintain	focus,	so	as	to	thoroughly	appreciate	that	none	of	
what we observe belongs to us. 
We	 watch	 life’s	 drama	 as	 it	 unfolds	 –	 irrespective	 of	 our	
desires	to	keep	what	we	like	or	to	get	rid	of	what	we	dislike,	
discovering	 that	 it	 changes	 anyway.	 Only	 then,	 having	
seen	 for	 ourselves,	 can	 we	 speak	 with	 authority	 about	
these	 simple	 yet	 subtle	 truths.	 Yes.	 They	 may	 seem	 like	
reasonable	ideas	–	common	sense	–	but	it’s	the	application

39
of	them	to	our	own	lives	that	allows	real	understanding	to	
take root. 
We	 can	 all	 do	 this,	 moment	 by	 moment.	 Whenever	 there	
is	 stress,	 we	 establish	 ourselves	 in	 the	 present	 by	 taking	
a	 deep	 breath	 in	 and,	 with	 the	 out-breath,	 relaxing	 and	
acknowledging:	‘but	this	is	how	it	is...! ’
That’s what we do.



41
6. Finding the Balance
SUMMER 2015
As	the	only	nun	staying	here	at	Milntuim,	I	have	made	it	a	
practice	to	try	to	enjoy	everything	I	do.	This	entails	being	
vigilant	 in	 regard	 to	 the	 arising	 of	 unhelpful	 states,	 like	
worry	or	ill-will.	
For	me,	decisions	are	often	difficult.	I	tend	to	worry	about	
them,	particularly	when	the	issues	in	question	are	clouded	
with	 personal	 biases	 and	 preferences.	 As	 I	 ponder	 the	
different	 options	 and	 the	 possible	 responses	 to	 ideas	 and	
proposals	 that	 are	 put	 forward,	 I	have	 found	 it	helpful	 to	
keep	 remembering	 the	 aspiration	 for	 this	 Hermitage.	 For	
example,	I	ask	myself:	‘Will	this	particular	course	of	action	
support	 Milntuim	 as	 a	 place	 for	 the	 secluded	 practice	 of	
the	nuns?’	...	‘Will	it	support	a	sense	of	goodwill	within	the

42
local	 community?’	 …	 ’Will	 it	 provide	 encouragement	 and	
inspiration	 for	lay	people	who	look	to	this	Hermitage	 as	a	
place	where	they	can	come	to	be	supported	in	their	spiritual	
practice	–	and	for	those	who	find	joy	and	inspiration	simply	
in	 being	 able	 to	 offer	 support,	 even	 although	 they	 may	
never	have	a	chance	to	visit?’ 	
The	Eightfold	Path	of	the	Buddha6 is a way of balance. The 
prefix	for	each	of	the	different	factors	is	‘samma’,	a	Pali	word	
which	 is	 often	 translated	 as	 ‘right’	 or	 ‘perfect’.	 However,	
these	 words	 can	 imply	 a	 fixity	 that	 may	 not	 always	 be	
helpful	–	since	life	itself	is	not	fixed	in	any	way	at	all.	The	
circumstances	of	our	lives	are	continuously	shifting;	no	set	
formula	can	possibly	 cover	the	myriad	possible	 scenarios.	
It	seems	to	me	that	regarding	the	Path	as	a	way	of	balance	
is	more	accurate.	
We	are	invited	to	be	mindful:	to	wake	up,	to	stay	in	touch	
with	whatever	is	happening	within	and	around	us	–	and	to

43
find	our	balance	with	it	all.	Sometimes	we	may	tip	over	in	
one	direction,	at	others	we	may	tend	towards	the	opposite	
extreme,	 so	 we	 need	 constantly	 to	 watch,	 to	 feel	 things	
out.	 This	 could	 sound	 like	 a	 big	 demand	 on	 our	 time	 and	
attention	but,	as	we	get	used	to	practising	like	this,	we	find	
that	 it’s	 very	 simple	 –	 no	 different	 from	 standing	 up,	 or	
walking	in	a	straight	line.	We	simply	feel,	notice	and	adjust	
our	approach,	re-establishing	that	‘middle-way-balance’. 	
Here	 at	 Milntuim,	 there’s	 a	 balancing	 between	 careful	
consideration and worry. There is the consideration of, 
on	 the	 one	 hand,	 preserving	 the	 quietude	 and	 seclusion	
of	the	Hermitage;	 and,	on	the	other,	enabling	 people	who	
may	 benefit	 to	 be	 informed	 and	 welcomed.	 I	also	 need	 to	
consider	the	balance	between	remaining	here	at	Milntuim,	
and	travelling	–	either	to	teach,	or	to	maintain	supportive	
connections	with	our	other	monasteries.	 I	notice	that	this

44
last	polarity	 seems	to	shift.	As	I	get	older,	I	am	somewhat	
less	inclined	to	travel! 	
However,	I	have	found	that	the	determination	to	enjoy	life	
enables	me	to	maintain	a	lightness	and	sensitivity	 around	
these	 polarities.	 If	 we	 are	 too	 serious,	 we	 become	 tense;	
there is a sense of heaviness – of being burdened by the 
concerns of life – and we lose touch with the beautiful, the 
Dhamma.	The	Buddha’s	‘Words	on	Loving	Kindness’7	speak	
of being ‘unburdened with duties...’, and ‘not holding to 
fixed	 views...’.	 I	 find	 these	 words	 helpful	 in	 enabling	 an	
enjoyment	 of	 this	 dance	 of	 life	 –	 a	 letting	 go	 of	 anything	
unhelpful	with	each	breath,	so	as	to	be	free	to	respond	in	a	
beautiful way to whatever life has to offer...





47
7 . Meeting Fear with Wisdom
WINTER 2016
The	Buddha	himself	and	other	forest	masters	of	old	would	
often	 speak	 of	 practice	 in	 charnel	 grounds	 or	 remote	
wilderness	 areas,	where	there	was	the	possibility	 of	being	
assailed by terrifying ghosts or attacked by tigers or other 
dangerous	 animals.	 They	 would	 encourage	 their	 disciples	
to	 seek	 out	 such	 places,	 and	 to	 contemplate	 the	 fear	 and	
dread that would arise there.
In	our	own	lives	there	can	occasionally	 be	times	when	we	
find	 ourselves	 in	 mortal	 danger.	 Sadly,	 there	 are	 many	
people	throughout	the	world	living	in	situations	of	conflict	
where this is a constant reality. However, there is another 
more	pervasive	and	insidious	type	of	fear	that	can	affect	all	
of	us.	We	may	not	even	recognise	it	as	fear,	or	notice	how

48
we habitually ignore or override it. This fear is related to 
another	kind	of	survival:	the	preservation	of	Selfhood.
I	became	 very	 interested	 in	 this	 some	 years	 ago	 when,	 at	
one	 of	 our	 monasteries,	 someone	 said	 something	 to	 me	
that	 seemed	 to	 threaten	 both	 my	 own	 position,	 and	 also	
the	 standing	 of	 our	 whole	 nuns’	 community	 that	 I	 had	
cherished	 and	 been	 part	 of	 for	 more	 than	 thirty	 years.	 It	
was	a	small	incident.	What	was	surprising	was	the	force	and	
irrationality	 of	 my	 reaction	 –	 which	 seemed	 completely	
out	 of	 proportion	 to	 the	 incident	 itself.	 It	 was	 as	 though	
an	 enraged	 three-year-old	 who	 had	 been	 sleeping	 for	
many	decades	had	suddenly	woken	up,	and	was	unleashing	
her fury – lashing out in the only way she knew – in an 
attempt	 to	 annihilate	 the	 aggressor.	 My	 first	 reaction	 to	
this	 was	 of	 shame	 (even	 though	 I	 hadn’t	 actually	 said,	 or	
done, anything that anyone would have seen as out of the 
ordinary!).	 Then,	when	I	looked	deeper,	I	recognized	 fear,

49
and	saw	that	that	fury	was	part	of	a	primitive	struggle	for	
survival.	Given	my	perception	of	what	was	happening,	the	
reaction	was,	in	a	sense,	completely	appropriate.
	I	was	 glad	 to	see	 this	 so	clearly,	 and	began	 to	appreciate	
that	 this	 is	 something	 that	 happens	 in	 varying	 degrees	
among	people	all	the	time.	We	see	or	hear	something;	 we	
interpret	it	in	a	certain	way,	and	there	is	an	inner	and	outer	
response	to	that	perception.	It	is	a	physiological	response:	
a sense of softening and ease when we receive kindness, or 
a sense of tightness and arousal when threatened.
As long as we identify with our vulnerable bodies and with 
the	 even	 more	 ephemeral	 sense	 of	 Self,	 thinking	 of	 them	
as	 ‘Me’,	 that	 ‘Me’	 can	 be	 destroyed	 –	 or,	 at	 least,	 harmed	
in	some	way.	So	it	is	no	accident	that	the	teachings	of	the	
Buddha	constantly	encourage	a	challenging	of	that	identity:	
are	the	body,	feelings,	perceptions,	mental	formations	and	
sense	consciousness	really	a	Self?	Are	they	really	‘Me’?…

50
Such	questioning	can	bring	us	to	a	place	of	deeper	knowing	
–	a	place	of	true	Refuge	and	peace.	In	these	times	where,	on	
a	daily	basis,	the	media	expose	us	to	atrocities	 happening	
both	nearby	and	far	away,	it	is	more	important	 than	ever	
that	we	discover	such	a	Refuge	–	where	the	mind	can	find	
steadiness	 and	 clarity	 to	 enable	 an	 appropriate	 response.	
Instead of furthering terror, hatred, and confusion, we can 
calmly	consider:
Will this response be for my own welfare?
Will it be for the welfare of others? 
Will it be for the welfare of both myself and others?
(MN	61)
Thus	we	become	a	vehicle	for	peace,	and	for	the	cherishing	
of all beings.





53
8. The Listening Heart
SUMMER 2016
Our	 lives	 tend	 to	 be	 taken	 up	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 doing:	
making	 things,	 fixing	 things,	 taking	 things	 apart,	 putting	
them	together	–	not	to	mention	all	those	conversations	 to	
be	 had	 –	whether	 virtual	 through	 email,	 on	 the	 phone	 or	
face-to-face.	There	always	seems	to	be	plenty	to	do.
Even	our	meditation	practice	can	be	a	subtle	and	intensive	
kind of doing,	 as	 we	 strive	 to	 calm	 or	 focus	 the	 mind,	
develop	 this	 or	 that	 (patience,	 kindness,	 compassion	 are	
all	 close	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 list	 of	 things	 to	 be	 developed),	
restrain	 or	 transform	 the	 negative	 patterns	 of	 thinking,	
and	 so	 on…	 There	 are	 certainly	 many	 good	 things	 to	 be	
doing	in	meditation…
However,	 problems	 can	 arise	 if	 this	 is	 our	 only	 mode	 of	
being:	 doing	 and	 reacting,	 in	 a	 continuous	 effort	 to	 find	
and	maintain	some	sense	of	inner	or	outer	equilibrium.

54
In	 our	 Buddhist	 practice	 we	 are	 reminded	 that	 suffering	
arises	 through	 attachment	 to	 any	 desire	 for	 things	 to	
be	 otherwise	 –	 and	 ceases	 when	 we	 relinquish	 that	
attachment.	 Desire	 and	 attachment	 are	 what	 fuel	 a	
significant	 proportion	 of	 human	 activity	 and	 speech,	
whether	we	actually	say	things	out	loud	or	simply	murmur	
and	grumble	inwardly.
Interesting	questions	that	 we	can	ask	ourselves	include:	‘Is 	
it	possible	to	have	a	desire	without	attaching	to	it?…’	‘What	
would	that	look	like?…’	‘What	would	it	feel	like?…’
We	 can	 also	 ask,	 ‘Is	 it	 possible	 to	 notice	 and	 to	 be	 fully	
conscious	 of	 what	 happens	 when	 a	 desire	 has	 been	
relinquished?’ 
Of	course,	the	answer	is	‘Yes.’
This	is	possible	–	and	libera ting!	
So	 often	 I	 hear	 people	 saying	 things	 like,	 ‘But	 I	 have	 all	
these	attachments,	 and	so	many	desires.	 I’ll	never	be	able

55
to	get	rid	of	them.	It	seems	hopeless;	this	practice	is	much	
too	difficult	for	me.’	My	usual	response	to	such	concerns	is	
something	like,	‘That’s	just	how	it	seems	right	now.	It’s	all	
right;	it	can	change…	this	is	the	very	stuff	of	our	Buddhist	
practice.’	 However,	 in	a	sense,	 it’s	 not	something	 that	 we	
can do anything about or think ourselves out of.
For	the	past	few	weeks,	I	have	been	struck	by	the	level	of	
anxiety	 expressed	 by	 many	 people	 concerning	 the	 result	
of	the	Scottish	independence	referendum.	While	there	will	
be	many	people	who	feel	glad	about	it,	many	I	have	spoken	
with	are	deeply	disturbed.
Some	 have	 asked	 me:	 ‘How	 can	 we	 respond	 skilfully	 to
this	situation?’
One	 of	 my	 favourite s kilful	 means	 (upaya)	 is	 what	 I	 call	
the	‘don’t	know	mind’.	This	works	by	acknowledging	 that	
–	 while	 we	 can	 have	 all	 kinds	 of	 ideas	 about	 what	 might	
happen	 and	 what’s	 best	 to	 be	 done	 –	 in	 reality,	 there	 are

56
times	 when	 quite	 simply	 we	 don’t	 know.	 When	 we	 can	
allow that sense of not knowing to be there, alongside the 
inner chatter of ideas, concerns and strategies, there can 
also	 be	 a	 relaxing	 into	 a	 space	 of	 not-doing.	 I	 would	 call	
this ‘the listening heart’. Instead of objecting, reacting, or 
feeling	 overwhelmed,	 this	 can	 offer	 a	 quiet	 space	 where	
real	listening	can	happen.	Such	listening	is	deeply	peaceful;	
it allows a different kind of knowing, a different kind of 
response:	a	response-ability,	rather	than	mere	reactivity.
In	a	field	of	concern	and	agitation,	the	presence	of	just	one	
person	who	is	able	and	willing	to	do	this	can	make	all	the	
difference.	 The	 listening	 heart	 can	 help	 to	 re-establish	 a	
wise	balance.	Rather	than	simply	adding	to	the	turbulence,	
there can be a subtle settling, within which what is truly 
beneficial	can	be	seen.





59
9. The State of the World
WINTER 2017
Sitting on a train as it heads south, feeling the body weary 
and restless, listening to the sounds of the train creaking 
as	it	moves	 at	speed	 –	of	the	engine	 and	metal	 wheels	 on	
metal	 tracks	 –	 and	 of	 people	 talking,	 while	 watching	 the	
sun	slip	away	to	the	west.
This	is	the	state	of	the	world	as	I	perceive	it	right	now.
My	thoughts	drift	to	the	past	days	spent	at	Milntuim	–	and	
to	the	future:	meetings,	more	travel...	‘my	world’.
Catching	 sight	 of	 a	 newspaper	 headline:	 Terror across 
Europe at Christmas. There is a shard of interest, of fear and 
concern.	 Then	I	come	back	to	the	body:	weary	and	mildly	
uncomfortable…	‘my	world’.

60
But	I’m	privileged;	I	don’t	have	regular	access	to	newspapers	
or	TV.	For	me,	the	big	news	is	of	a	red	squirrel	on	the	apple	
tree,	squirming	as	it	reached	to	pick	a	big	juicy	apple	treat,	
and	the	small	deer	we	passed,	lying	dead	on	the	road,	as	we	
made	our	way	to	the	station…	‘my	world’.
The	media	has	a	lot	to	answer	 for,	and	we	fall	for	it	time,	
and	 time	 again;	 and	 then	 wonder	 why	 we	 are	 so	 stressed	
and	 unhappy.	 Sadly,	 we	 all	 too	 readily	 allow	 impressions	
to	 invade	 the	 mind	 where	 they	 ferment,	 proliferate	 and	
disturb	 what	 is	 our	 birthright	 –	 peace	 of	 mind.	 We	 allow	
the	 mind	 to	 be	 exercised,	 seeking	 solutions:	 ‘There	 must	
be	 something	 that	 can	 be	 done!’	 dreading	 the	 worst,	 or	
sinking into a state of weary outrage. 
This is not to suggest that we ignore what we see or hear 
of	 world	 news,	 or	 that	 those	 making	 a	 sincere	 effort	 to	
influence	 things	 for	 the	 better	 are	 misguided	 in	 any	 way	
at	all.	 What	 seems	 to	be	lacking	 is	a	sense	 of	perspective.

61
We	need	 to	keep	 in	touch	 with	 that	 peace,	 our	 birthright	
from	 which	 true	 wisdom	 and	 compassion	 arise.	 When	 we	
can	 fully	 accept	 our	 fear,	 there	 is	 the	 understanding	 that	
can	let	go	of	it.	We	no	longer	 allow	 it	to	tumble	 us	into	 a	
state of anger, outrage or confusion, as we struggle with 
those	distorting	perceptions	that	we	are	fed	by	our	devices	
day by day, hour by hour.
For	 those	 called	 to	 an	 active	 response	 to	 climate	 change,	
terrorism,	 the	 refugee	 crisis,	 poverty,	 or	 to	 any	 one	 of	
the	 myriad	 helpful	 initiatives,	 the	 challenge	 is	 to	 keep	 in	
touch	 with	 a	belief	 in	the	 essential	 goodness	 and	 wisdom	
of	 humanity.	 Such	 goodness	 and	 wisdom	 is	 there	 in	 our	
own	hearts;	 it	is	a	potential	 within	 each	one	of	us.	Just	as	
there	 are	 the	 fires	 of	greed,	 hatred	 and	 delusion	 that	 our	
practice	 reveals	 (fortunately,	 yet	 to	 our	 consternation!),	
there	 is	 also	 immense	 goodness	 to	 be	 seen	 and	 brought	
forth.	It	puzzles	me	that	so	many	people	still	choose	to	run

62
endlessly,	 like	 hungry	 ghosts,	 after	 material	 wealth	 and	
power	–	ever	fearful	of	their	slipping	away	–	when,	just	one	
breath	 away,	 there	 is	 the	 potential	 for	 lasting	 peace	 and	
happiness.





65
10. Diligence and Vigilance
SUMMER 2017
Sometimes	 I	 reflect	 on	 these	 qualities	 –	 pondering	 how	
each	 of	 them	 can	 be	 applied	 to	 our	 practice	 of	 Dhamma	
in everyday life, as we work towards freeing the heart. It 
seems	that	‘diligence’	 is	about	application	 –	about	making	
an	 effort	 in	 undertaking	 some	 particular	 task.	 ‘Vigilance’	
seems	 more	 concerned	 with	 keeping	 things	 on	 track,	
making	 sure	 that	 our	efforts	 are	bringing	 results	 that	 are	
in	line	with	our	original	aspiration.
I	 will	 always	 be	 grateful	 to	 have	 come	 across	 a	 way	 of	
practice	 that	 offers	 such	 clear	 –	 and	 simple	 –	 guidance	
for	 freeing	 the	 heart	 from	 the	 thing	 that	 makes	 us	 most	
miserable:	 the	 sense	 of	 ‘Me’,	 with	 its	 attendant	 fears,	
longings	 and	 ill-will	 (manifesting	 as	 such	 states	 as	 fury,

66
outrage,	 self-denigration	 –	 call	 it	 what	 you	 will).	 Put	 like	
this,	it	can	seem	like	a	tall	order:	almost	as	though	we	are	
being asked to destroy our very sense of being, and to lay 
aside all of the values that have been inculcated in our 
hearts	 throughout	 our	 entire	 lifetime…	 However,	 there	 is	
another	way	of	putting	it	that,	to	me,	seems	more	do-able.	
It’s	a	matter	of	vigilance:	of	developing	that	natural	quality	
whereby	we	attend	to	each	moment,	and	release	the	heart	
from	entanglement	–	right	here	–	now.
But we need to know what we’re looking for. Mara is 
clever,	 and	 can	 appear	 in	 many	 guises.	 We	 can	 choose	 to	
make	 it	a	pastime	 to	learn	 about	 these.	 Instead	 of	feeling	
overwhelmed	 or	discouraged	 by	our	apparent	 foolishness	
or	inadequacy,	 we	can	come	to	appreciate	 the	laser-sharp	
power	 of	 present-moment	 awareness	 –	 or	 mindfulness.	
Mindful	 vigilance	 enables	 a	 discerning	 of	 the	 myriad

67
stumbling	places	along	the	way	–	just	like	tree	roots	on	the	
path	by	the	river	that	I	could	trip	up	on,	if	there’s	a	moment	
of	inattention	as	I	walk	to	the	village	for	alms.
When	we	can	live	fully	in	Dhamma,	there	is	a	sense	of	inner	
ease.	 It’s	 like	 being	 at	 home	 with	 ourselves	 –	 completely	
normal	 (interestingly,	 the	 word	 ‘Dhamma’	 is	 sometimes	
translated	 as	 ‘the	 Norm’);	 I	 can	 observe	 this	 in	 my	 own	
mind.	I	might	be	quietly	 engaged	 in	some	particular	 task,	
and	then	Mara	comes	along	and	says,	‘You	should	be	more	
diligent,	meditating!’	So	I	sit	down	to	meditate.	Then,	‘What	
about	 that	 job	 you	 were	 doing?	 You	 should	 have	 been	
diligent,	 and	 finished	 that	 first!’	 So	 I	 get	 up	 to	 finish	 the	
job…	 and	 on	 it	 goes…	 Or,	 as	 on	 a	recent	 weekend	 retreat,	
when	 people	 were	 talking	 loudly	 outside	 the	 meditation	
room	where	we	were	sharing	the	blessings	of	our	practice	
for	the	welfare	 of	all	beings.	 It	took	vigilance	 to	quiet	the

68
automatic	 thinking:	 ‘Don’t	 they	realize	 that	we’re	doing	a	
special	practice	of	spreading	blessings	to	all	beings.’!
There	 are	 so	 many	 ways	 it	 can	 happen:	 the	 subtle	 and,	
sometimes,	not	so	subtle	internal	bullying	of	ourselves	and	
others;	 the	 pride	 that	 says,	 ‘I’m	 much	 more	 diligent	 than	
they	are’;	the	fear:	‘Maybe	I’ll	never	be	any	good	at	this.	I	
am	not	diligent	enough!’	–	and	so	it	goes	on...
So	let’s	 learn	 how	 to	stay	 peacefully	 ‘at	 home’.	 Instead	 of	
looking	out	and	comparing	 ourselves	 with	others,	or	with	
some	idea	of	what	or	how	we	should	be,	we	can	be	inwardly	
quiet,	 simply	 attentive	 to	 the	 moment:	 ‘This	 is	 how	 it	 is	
right now. This is what is needed.’ There can be a sense of 
inner	 kindliness	 and	respect,	 as	we	rest	with	the	fount	 of	
goodness and joy that is our birthright. This, we can do for 
the	lasting	benefit	of	ourselves	and	of	all	beings.





71
11. The House is Half-Painted 
WINTER 2018
...and	 it	 looks	 awful.	 The	 little	 hut,	 the	 Santuṭṭhi	 Kuti,	 is	
even worse. Around the base there are big slabs of wood, 
resplendent	 in	 white	 primer	 and	 in	 stark	 contrast	 to	 the	
brick red of the rest of the kuti – while door and window 
frames	 are	 an	 odd	 variety	 of	 dowdy	 colours	 from	 our	
assorted	tester	pots.	Clearly,	something	is	happening	–	and	
that’s	 good;	 to	the	critical	 observer,	 it’s	 a	mess.	 However,	
a	 kinder	 observer	 would	 regard	 it	 as	 a	 ‘work	 in	 progress’	
–	 only	 a	 mildly	 deranged	 optimist	 could	 see	 it	 as	 an	
‘interesting	effect’!
Our	 practice	 can	 also	 seem	 like	 this;	 and	 I’d	 suggest	 that	
a	 ‘work	 in	 progress’	 would	 be	 a	 happier	 way	 to	 regard	 it	
than	 ‘a	 mess’.	 I	 like	 to	 be	 encouraging,	 so	 one	 response	 I

72
have	to	people	who	tell	me	what	a	mess	their	practice	is,	is	
to suggest that – instead of feeling downcast – they could 
celebrate this observation. Having seen that there are 
difficulties,	 now	there	is	an	opportunity	 to	examine	 them	
carefully,	and	to	devise	strategies	for	working	with	them.	It	
becomes	a	‘work	in	progress’.
After	 some	 weeks,	 months	 or	 years	 of	 diligent	 effort,	 we	
might	find	it	hard	to	accept	that	we	are	not	yet	perfect:	that	
we	can	still	be	irritable	or	mean;	that	we	still	occasionally	
have	 a	temper	 tantrum	 when	 things	 don’t	 go	the	way	 we	
want	them	to;	that	we	still	nod	off	during	meditation.	We’d	
like to always live according to our own high standards – 
and	 we	don’t;	 we	can’t…	 What	 we	can	 do	is	acknowledge,	
humbly,	 that	 this	 is	the	case.	 This	 may	 not	be	so	easy	 for	
those	of	us	who	are	in	the	habit	of	making	quick	assessments	
of	our	performance,	and	who	are	ready	to	regard	anything	
short	of	the	perfect	response	to	the	manifold	situations	of

73
our	 lives	 as	 signs	 of	being	 a	total	 failure:	 a	reject,	 flawed,	
worthy	 only	 to	 be	 thrown	 out	 onto	 the	 rubbish	 heap!	
We	 might	 think	 of	 this	 as	 an	 accurate	 appraisal	 of	 our	
shortcomings,	 as	 being	 modest,	 but	 actually	 it’s	 one	 way	
that	we	add	to	the	misery	of	our	lives.	So	it’s	important	that	
we	take	time	to	challenge	these	assumptions.
Of	 course,	 in	 some	 ways,	 it’s	 easier	 simply	 to	 give	 up	 on	
ourselves	 as	 a	hopeless	 case	 but,	 in	a	sense,	 this	 is	 a	copout.	 A	much	 more	 skilful	 response	 is	to	remind	 ourselves	
that	 practice	 is	for	a	whole	 lifetime	 and	that,	 as	with	 any	
skill,	 it	 takes	 patience	 and	 application.	 Also	 fundamental	
is	 the	 spirit	 of	 curiosity;	 this	 is	 what	 enables	 us	 to	 learn	
the lessons of life. We look closely at the root causes of 
our	 unfortunate	 speech	 or	 actions:	 What	 were	 we	 telling	
ourselves?	What	were	we	thinking	about?...	Such	questions	
may	 seem	 strange	 at	 first,	 but	 they	 are	 important…	 They	
are	like	keys	that	allow	a	glimpse	into	the	assumptions	that

74
we	 live	 by	 –	 sometimes	 for	 decades	 at	 a	 time	 –	 the	 ideas	
that contribute to the distorted view of who and what we 
are,	and	of	our	place	in	this	vast	universe. 	
So	 perhaps	 we’d	 be	 better	 off	 if	 we	 experimented	
with	 putting	 any	 assumptions	 to	 one	 side	 and	 taking	 a	
fresh	 look,	 through	 the	 lens	 of	 mindfulness	 and	 clear	
seeing.	 Only	 this	 can	 enable	 both	 freedom	 from	 our	 own
suffering,	and	also	the	capacity	to	live	in	a	way	that	is	less	
harmful:	 to	 ourselves,	 and	 to	 all	 the	 other	 inhabitants
of	this	remarkable	planet.





77
12. Faith and Gratitude
SUMMER 2018
Faith	empowers;	 it	gives	energy.	If	there	is	no	faith	that	a	
particular	project	is	going	to	be	of	benefit,	it	is	difficult	to	
get	started	or	to	carry	it	through	to	completion.	However,	
from	 the	 perspective	 of	 our	 Buddhist	 practice,	 it	 is	
important	 that	our	faith	is	linked	with	a	wholesome,	 wise	
intention.	 For	 example,	 we	 may	 have	 faith	 that	 investing	
in	a	particular	company	will	bring	the	maximum	financial	
return.	However,	if	our	intention	is	simply	to	amass	wealth	
with	its	attendant	privileges,	 it	is	likely	that	any	apparent	
success	 will	 lead	 simply	 to	 more	 wanting.	 It	 will	 keep	 us	
bound	 onto	 the	 treadmill	 of	 accumulation.	 There	 may	 be	
some	 momentary	 satisfaction,	 but	 such	 pleasure	 tends	 to	
be	fleeting	and	quickly	replaced	with	a	renewed	vigour	and

78
effort	to	accumulate	more,	and	better!	This	can	happen	for	
anyone:	the	super-rich,	 those	with	very	little,	and	anyone	
in between.
Once	 we	 have	 recognised	 this	 acquisitive	 tendency	 in	
ourselves,	 it	 can	 be	 helpful	 to	 contemplate	 our	 lives	
noticing	 carefully	 the	 results	 of	 our	 speech	 and	 action.	
In this way, we begin to discern what it is that can enable 
a	 settling	 of	 the	 heart,	 rather	 than	 simply	 fuelling	 this
desire	for	more.	
There’s	 a	 verse	 in	 the	 Dhammapada8	 which	 speaks	 of	
contentment	 (santuṭṭhi)	as	being	the	greatest	 wealth.	 This	
is	not	something	we	see	written	on	buses	or	on	the	sides	of	
buildings!	 Consumerism	 requires	that	we	are	not	content;	
it	 leads	 us	 to	 forfeit	 our	 inherent	 sense	 of	 discernment,	
which	knows:	‘I	have	enough.’ 	
Rev.	Heng	Sure,	an	American	disciple	of	Master	Hua9 wrote 
a cheerful	little	blessing	that	I	sometimes	hum	to	myself:

79
I have enough.
I am grateful.
Share the blessings,
Halleluia!
Of	 course,	 sadly,	 it’s	 true	 that	 for	 many,	 many	 people	 it’s	
simply	 not	the	case	that	they	have	enough	 –	of	anything:	
food, clothing, shelter, love, nurturing – anything. Many 
people	 are	 living	 in	 appalling	 conditions...	 but	 will	 our	
anger,	 fear,	 confusion	 or	despair	 contribute	 in	any	 useful	
way	 to	 the	 general	 state	 of	 things?	 I	 think	 not.	 It	 seems	
better	 that	 we	 generate	 what	 is	 positive,	 what	 brings	
blessing.	 We	 can	 contribute	 materially	 or	 practically,	
if	 we’re	 in	 a	 position	 to	 do	 so.	 At	 the	 very	 least,	 we	 can	
bring	 forth	 kindness,	 compassion,	 joy	 and	 serenity;	
these Brahmavihārās	 are	 qualities	 of	 the	 heart	 described	
as	 ‘abundant,	 exalted	 and	 immeasurable’.	 Although	
our	 contribution	 may	 seem	 insignificant	 in	 the	 face	 of

80
such need, just having the intention to bring forth these 
qualities	 lightens	 the	 heart.	 It	 can	 also	 be	 a	 powerful	
antidote	 to	 the	 pull	 of	 desire	 for	 more,	 and	 the	 deeply	
rooted	fear	of	losing	something	that	seems	important	to	us.	
Furthermore,	 they	 bring	 us	 into	 touch	 with	 what	 is	 truly	
of value, and that can never	 be	 taken	 from	 us:	 our	 sense	
of integrity and goodness, and the faith that enables us
to	continue	to	walk	our	chosen	path	to	wholeness.





83
13. It’s for Nothing
WINTER 2019
One	 bright	 summer	 morning	 earlier	 this	 year	 I	 went	 for	
a	 walk	 up	 the	 glen.	 On	 the	 road	 I	 met	 a	 neighbour	 who	
has lived here all his life. As is usual, we exchanged a few 
words	 and	 I	 made	 some	 comment	 about	 how	 incredibly	
beautiful	 it	 is	 around	 here.	 I	 loved	 his	 response:	 ‘Yes.
And it’s for nothing.’
It	set	me	pondering.	I	realised	that	all	of	the	truly	precious	
and beautiful things in life are ‘for nothing’. All that’s 
needed	 is	 a	 moment	 of	 attention,	 a	 withdrawal	 from	 the	
stream	 of	 thoughts	 and	 concerns	 that	 can	 fill	 our	 minds,	
so	 as	 to	 see	 the	 subtlety	 of	 life:	 the	 changing	 conditions	
throughout	 the	 day	 –	 the	 light,	 the	 cloud	 formations;	 so	
as to breathe in the fragrance of the earth, feel the cool

84
touch of air on the skin, hear bird song or kind words, feel 
a	gentle	touch.	Such	impressions	are	soothing	to	the	mind
and – ‘for nothing’. 
But	can	we	be	that	simple?	Sometimes	it	seems	that	everyone	
in the whole world has been hijacked, and hooded or 
blinkered.	On	trains,	on	buses,	in	cafés	or	dentists’	waiting	
rooms,	 people	 are	 transfixed	 by	 their	 devices;	 fascinated	
by	 the	 movement	 of	 images	 on	 a	 tiny	 screen,	 or	 plugged	
into	some	hearing	experience.	The	intention,	presumably,	
is	to	take	them	away	from	Now.	This	seems	to	have	become	
normal	–	and	it’s	not	for	nothing.	Often,	it’s	really	harmful	
in	 gross	 or	 subtle	 ways.	 Sometimes	 I	 wonder	 whether	 we	
have	 lost	 the	 capacity	 to	 simply	 rest	 in	 awareness	 and	 to	
enjoy a childlike sense of wonder – so intent are we on

85
being	distracted	from	what	is	most	precious,	by	the	forces	
of greed, aversion or delusion.
We	 make	 jokes:	 ‘If	 your	 computer	 doesn’t	 work,	 ask	 a	
three-year	 old	to	fix	it...’	But	it’s	not	a	joke.	It’s	not	funny	
to	see	little	ones	playing	with	mobile	phones.	It’s	not	funny	
to	 hear	 of	 children	 ending	 their	 lives	 because	 of	 some	
malicious	taunt	through	social	media. 	
What’s	 happened?	 How	is	it	that	 have	 we	lost	 touch	 with	
those	 simple	 pleasures	 of	 life	 –	 that	 are	 ‘for	 nothing’?	 …
So	please,	please	breathe,	look,	listen,	taste,	touch!	Even	in	
cities there are trees, there is earth, there are tiny weeds 
struggling	 up	 through	 the	 cracks	 in	 the	 pavement.	 There	
is	human	kindness	too...	and	if	ever	it	seems	that	that	too	
has	 disappeared,	 take	 a	look	 inside	 and	 see	 what	 you	 can	
generate	from	within	your	own	heart.	It’ll	surely	multiply	
–	and	it’s	for	nothing!

86
It’s	for	Nothing…
A smile
A wave
A friendly greeting
…and it’s for nothing
Dry grasses’ dance in the gusty sunshine
Birds’ soars and dives, 
blown about hither and thither
A sharp chill and the warm sun
…and it’s for nothing
Beaver’s splash
Squirrel’s surprise
The mind’s quiet
…and it’s for nothing

87
High ’gainst the sky
Aspen leaves a’tremble…
Fallen aspen – 
chewed right through, leaves a curling – 
Tender, fleeting sorrow
…and it’s for nothing
Snail-like critters 
noticed on sunlit white wood
of a willow stripped bare
How it is…
…and it’s for nothing
Ancient, rugged land, 
holding it all.
It’s for nothing…



89
14. Some Things are
Beyond Our Control
SUMMER 2019
...but	 we	 forget.	 Over	 and	 over	 again,	 we	 find	 ourselves	
trapped	 in	 a	 struggle.	 It	 is	 as	 though	 we	 imagine	 that	 we	
can actually direct the course of events, if we just w ant 
hard	 enough!	 Then,	 when	 things	 don’t	 turn	 out	 the	 way	
we	 think	 they	 should,	 we	 resort	 to	 blame.	 It	 is	 as	 though	
finding	 something,	 or	 someone	 to	 blame	 –	 anyone	 will	
do	 –	 will,	 in	 some	 mysterious	 way,	 bring	 relief	 from	 the	
disappointment;	 or	at	least	provide	a	valid	object	towards	
which we can direct our fury.
Yes.	 There	 is	 plenty	 happening	 that	 seems	 out	 of	 our	
control, that can give rise to a sense of fear, dread or

90
anger.	For	example,	it	is	normal	to	be	concerned about the 
phenomenon	known	as	‘climate	change’,	as	it	manifests	in	
significant	 changes	that	we	see	happening	 all	around	us...	
and	to	look	for	something	or	someone	‘out	there’	to	blame.	
If	only	it	were	that	simple. 	
However,	 the	 result,	 if	 we	 continue	 on	 our	 present	
trajectory will affect everyone – sooner or later. Measures 
to change that trajectory, and to bring about the shift 
needed	 to	 temper	 the	 effect,	 will	 require	 enormous	
adjustments	 by	everyone.	 It’s	all	very	well	to	demand	 the	
closure	 of	 factories,	 the	 termination	 of	 huge	 engineering	
initiatives – the drastic reduction of this or that – but how 
many	millions	of	people	depend	upon	these	very	businesses	
for	their	jobs,	their	livelihood?... 	
It	can	seem	that	there	is	no	easy	solution. 	
...and yet... and yet religious teachings of all traditions, 
if carefull y	 pondered,	 reveal	 insights	 that	 can	 enable

91
members	of	the	human	family	to	work	together	in	harmony,	
sharing	skills	and	resources,	 for	the	benefit	of	all	–	and	of	
our	planet	home.	
For	 example,	 in	 the	 Kosambiya Sutta  (MN	 48.6), the Buddha 
sets	 out	 six	 things	 that	 support	 harmony	 in	 community:	
thoughts,	speech	and	actions	that	are	based	on	kindliness;	
the	 willingness	 to	 share	 resources;	 the	 commitment	 to	
ethical	 guidelines	 that	 support	 us	 in	 living	 carefully	 and	
responsibly;	 and	 Right	 View,	 which	 includes	 the	 regular	
contemplation	that	all	of	us	are	subject	to	ageing,	sickness	
and	death.	No	amount	of	wealth	or	power	can	prevent	that	
happening,	 for	 any	 of	 us.	 This	 is	 what	 all	 of	 us	 share,	 as	
human	beings.	So	let’s	try	to	remember	that	when	we	find	
ourselves	in	a	situation	of	conflict	or	fear	–	not	forgetting	
that	the	power	of	kindness	is	very,	very	great. 	
Let’s	 consider	 a	 different	 approach	 in	 our	 response	 to	
what we see or hear of the current situation in the world.

92
Without denying the severity of it, can we look inward and 
discern	 whether	 or	 not	 the	 heart	 is	 ready	 to	 embrace	 all	
of our sisters and brothers – whatever their creed, colour 
or	political	 persuasion?...	 Or	is	there	still	work	to	be	done	
in challenging those internal barriers that hinder our 
working	together,	for	the	good	of	all?





95
15. Heart Wisdom
WINTER 2020
This	 morning	 we	 began	 our	 day	 with	 meditation	 and	
chanting. We chanted the words of the Bhaddekaratta Sutta 
(MN	135),	the	Verses	on	One	Fortunate	Attachment: 	
Today the effort must be made. Tomorrow Death may come, 
who knows? 
For	some,	the	Buddha’s	stern	and	compassionate	injunction	
may	seem	alarming.	However,	it	is	simply	an	invitation	to	
attend	 and	 to	 be	 concerned	 about	 what	 really	 matters	 –	
to	 the	 point	 where	 we	 discover	 that	 we	 have	 a	choice:	 to	
contribute,	or	not,	to	suffering	or	well-being. 	
I	 find	 this	 terse	 reminder	 helpful	 in	 countering	 the	
enticement	 of	mainstream	 life.	So	often	we	find	ourselves

96
bombarded	 with	 information	 that	 generates	 perceptions	
which	 lead	 automatically	 to	 a	 strong	 inner	 reaction.	 It	
may	 be	 fear,	 rage,	 or	 confusion,	 often	 with	 the	 sense:	
‘Something	has	got	to	be	done!’ (to	enable,	or	to	prevent,	a	
certain	course	of	events)	–	in	order	to	protect	our	interests	
most	 effectively.	 With	 the	 abundance	 of	 such	 messages	
continuously	 presented	 through	 the	 media,	 is	 it	 any	
wonder	that	we	feel	stressed	and	frantic?
And yet, it doesn’t need to be like this. 
Looking closely at the Buddha’s liberating insight into 
Dependent	Arising10,	we	begin	to	see	that	there	is	a	pattern,	
a series of internal events that lead to stress. As our 
mindfulness	 increases	 there	 also	 comes	 an	 appreciation	
that,	with	attention	and	care,	we	can	interrupt	this	pattern,	
this	flow	–	and	end	up	with	a	very	different	result. 	
Instead of feeling ( vedanā)	 leading	 to	 wanting	 (taṇhā)	 [to

97
hold	 on,	 or	 to	 have	 more,	 in	 the	 case	 of	 pleasant	 feeling;	
to	 get	 rid	 of,	 or	 to	 change,	 in	 the	 case	 of	 unpleasant	
feeling];	 and	 instead	 of	 investing	 energy	 towards	
reaching a desired result (upādāna, bhava, jāti)  – we can 
simply	 let	 go.	 We	 can	 recognise,	 if	 we	 like	 something:	
‘This	 is	 pleasant...	 I’d	 like	 more...’;	 and	 if	 we’re	 afraid,	 or	
we	 don’t	 like	 something:	 ‘I	 feel	 afraid,	 angry...’	 We	 stay	
present.	We	breathe,	and	allow	the	focus	to	shift	from	the	
problem-solving	 mentality,	 to	 the	 wisdom	 of	 the	 heart,	
which	 is	 accessible	 here	 and	 now.	 This	 heart-wisdom,	 or	
Dhamma,	 has	a	much,	much	broader	 perspective	 on	what	
seems	 to	 be	 before	 us.	 It	 offers	 a	 clarity	 that	 can	 enable	
a	compassionate	response,	and	the	heart	stays	calm. 	
It	 is	 very	 encouraging	 that	 mindfulness	 training	 has	
become	 readily	 available	 and	 that,	 for	 so	 many,	 there	 is	
an	 interest	 in	 developing	 and	 exploring	 the	 alternative	
strategies that this offers. These strategies, when based on

98
clear	ethical	values,	further	personal	well-being.	They	also,	
quite	naturally,	 have	a	positive	 effect	on	our	families,	 our	
communities	and	the	whole	of	our	society. 	
It	is	no	small	thing.	All	that’s	needed	is	the	courage	to	test	
it	out	for	ourselves	–	and	to	keep	going!





101
16. Nature is Happy
SPRING 2020
Who	would	have	thought	it	possible? 	
A	matter	of	weeks	ago	we	were	deeply	concerned	about	the	
grave	effects	of	human	activity	on	the	climate	and	ecology	
of	 our	 sensitive	 planet.	 Suddenly,	 now,	 there	 has	 been	 a	
shift	of	concern,	as	a	deadly	virus	sweeps	across	the	world.	
It is affecting every town, village and neighbourhood on 
every	continent	–	and	bringing	monumental	 changes	that	
no	one	could	ever	have	envisaged,	or	dared	hope	for.	There	
has	 been	 the	 grounding	 of	 all	 but	 essential	 flights;	 the	
halting	 of	 road	 traffic	 and	 transport	 systems	 (other	 than	
those	needed	 for	work	in	connection	 with	supporting	 the	
sick	 and	 dying,	 and	 for	 maintaining	 relative	 well-being	
of	 the	 populations	 of	 the	 world);	 and	 the	 cessation	 of

102
production	of	countless	industries. 	
The air is cleaner.
Nature	is	happy.	
But,	for	humans,	it’s	tough. 	
This	 disease	 is	 a	 common	 adversary;	 it	 is	 not	 confined	 to	
one	racial,	 religious	 or	political	 group.	 As	such,	 it	has	the	
potential	 to	 bring	 us	 together.	 We	 can	 share	 information	
and	resources;	we	can	co-operate	to	combat	its	devastating	
effects.	 Sadly,	 it	 seems	 that	 only	 such	 an	 immediate,	
extreme	 and	 dangerous	 event	 can	 bring	 this	 about.	 The	
climate	 crisis,	 clearly,	 was	 not	 quite	 immediate	 enough;	
and	 vast	 amounts	 of	 time,	 energy	 and	 resources	 were	
expended	–	to	enable	just	a	fractional	improvement.	So...	a	
window	has	been	opened	on	what	 could	come	about.	
However,	 time	 will	 show	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 humanity	
returns	 to	 its	 former	 competitive	 and	 greedy	 ways,	 once

103
the	 pandemic	 is	 no	 longer	 front-page	 news.	 It	 would	 be	
really	wonderful	if	some	lessons	have	been	learned,	and	if	
we	never	return	to	the	destructive	aspects	of	‘normal’...but	
the	 way	 of	 the	 Buddha	 does	 not	 demand,	 or	 even	 expect,	
this. Instead, it invites each one of us to work on our own 
hearts	 so	 that,	 according	 to	 our	 capacity,	 we	 are	 able	 to	
contribute	in	the	best	possible	way	for	the	betterment	of	all.	
There	 is	 plenty	 to	 do	 –	 both	 directly	 and	 indirectly.	 We	
can	gently	open	to	the	suffering	 and	fear	of	those	around	
us.	 We	 can	 bring	 forth	 the	 heart	 of	 compassion.	 We	 can	
cultivate the inner steadiness that enables us to attune 
to	 the	 impossible	 circumstances	 that	 many	 are	 having	 to	
endure...	The	Buddha	explained	it	well,	using	the	simile	of	
two acrobats 11.	By	helping	ourselves	–	through	cultivating	
mindfulness	–	we	help	others.	By	helping	others	–	through	
patience,	 non-harming,	 friendliness	 and	 sympathy	 –	 we	
support	 the	 well-being	 of	 our	 own	 hearts.	 Contemplating

104
this	 teaching,	 we	 can	 keep	 our	 minds	 bright	 and	 ready	
to	 respond	 to	 every	 conceivable	 challenge	 that	 may
come	our	way.	
We wish you well.





107
17 . Equanimity
SUMMER 2020
What	 is	 it	 about	 our	 lives	 that	 makes	 equanimity,	 or	
upekkhā,	so	significant?	According	to	Buddhist	teaching,	it	
is	the	fourth	(out	of	four)	Brahmavihāras or Divine Abidings, 
the	seventh	(out	of	seven)	Enlightenment	 Factors	and	the	
tenth	(out	of	ten)	Perfections. 	
As	 the	 pandemic	 is	 demonstrating,	 all	 too	 clearly,	 we	
actually have very little control over our lives. Things 
change,	 whether	 we	 want	 them	 to	 or	 not:	 sometimes	 for	
better,	 sometimes	 for	 worse.	 We	 can	 experience	 fame	
and	 shame,	 praise	 and	 blame,	 gain	 and	 loss,	 happiness	
and	sorrow,	 in	rapid	 succession.	 Each	state	 gives	 rise	to	a	
corresponding	reaction:	‘Woopee!’,	or	‘Oh	dear!’	and	that’s	
just	 the	 start	 of	it.	 The	mind	 quickly	 starts	 to	proliferate:

108
creating a wonderful future, or looking around for 
someone	to	blame.	We	may	even	start	blaming	ourselves	–	
tumbling	into	a	sense	of	dreary	pessimism	–	as	we	recollect	
past	failures	and	anticipate	more	of	the	same,	when	things	
don’t work out as we would have liked.  
This	 is	 what	 happens	 when	 we	 have	 overlooked	 the	
significance	 of	 equanimity	 as	 part	 of	 our	 cultivation.	
When	 things	 seem	 fantastic	 or	 wonderful,	 we	 lose	 touch	
with	 reality.	 When	 things	 seem	 really	 dreadful,	 we	 lose	
touch with reality. It doesn’t occur to us to challenge our 
conviction	that	this,	really,	is	the	truth	of	the	situation!
Actually, we don’t know how things will unfold in the future 
– but we can know how it is right now. We can tune in to the 
body,	 as	 it	 is,	 right	 now.	 We	 can	 be	 aware	 of	 impressions	
we	 receive	 through	 the	 senses:	 sights,	 sounds,	 tastes,	
smells,	touch	and,	most	importantly,	thoughts.	How	are	we	
perceiving	things?	How	are	we	reacting?	Can	we	step	back

109
a	little	and	simply	notice,	rather	than	be	convinced	by	our	
limited	perceptions?	
In Truth, we don’t know...  
This	can	be	unsettling,	or	even	alarming.	With	mindfulness	
our	view	of	reality,	and	of	ourselves	as	part	of	that	reality,	is	
gradually	 eroded.	Our	self-centred	 view	begins	to	change,	
and	 there	 is	 an	 opening	 to	 a	 greater	 whole,	 wherein	 life	
is	 experienced	 as	 an	 on-going	 flow	 of	 conditions	 shifting	
and	changing,	subtly	or	grossly,	moment	by	moment.	Over	
time,	 equanimity	 becomes	 the	 only	 response	 that	 makes	
sense.	 What	 might	 seem	 to	 be	 unfortunate	 can	 turn	 out	
to	 have	 consequences	 that	 are	 beneficial	 –	 to	 a	 degree	
that	is	far	beyond	what	our	more	limited	view	might	have	
anticipated.	The	reverse	can	also	be	the	case. 	
For	many,	this	time	of	lock	down	has	been,	and	continues	
to	 be,	 incredibly	 challenging.	 Even	 when	 a	 degree	 of	
‘normality’	 is	 restored,	 it	 will	 take	 a	 very	 long	 time	 for

110
everyone to return to any kind of balance. However, there 
are	also	many	people	who	(slightly	guiltily!)	admit	that,	for	
them,	it	has	been	a	kind	of	blessing.	They	have	enjoyed	the	
solitude,	 the	time	to	take	stock	 of	their	 lives.	 We	have	all	
learned	 about	 Zoom	 and	other	 technologies	 that	 allow	 us	
to	‘meet’	without	travelling	 thousands	 of	miles;	and	there	
are	many	uplifting	stories	of	heroism	and	cooperation.	It’s	
clearly not all ‘bad’.
We	don’t	know…
Can	 we	be	peaceful	 with	 that?	 Can	 we	shift	 our	 intention	
and	effort	–	from	trying	to	sort	things	out	for	an	imagined	
future,	to	attuning	to	Now?...
Just	a	question.	You	might	like	to	give	it	a	go!
May	we	all	enjoy	 equanimity	 and	ease	of	being,	 whatever	
our	outer	circumstances.





113
18. Wise Caution,
Joyous Surrender
WINTER 2021
It’s	the	ending	of	the	year,	and	nature	seems	dormant.	The 	
trees	are	without	leaves.	...Compared	with	the	exuberance	
of	 springtime	 and	 summer,	 and	 the	 quiet	 majesty	 of	
autumn,	 winter	 is	 gentle	 for	 the	 mind	 and	 images	 arise	
of	 the	 past	 weeks	 and	 months:	 the	 strangeness	 and	 fear	
of	 a	 disease	 appearing,	 and	 quickly	 spreading	 to	 affect	
the	 life	 of	 every	 human	 being.	 Impossible	 to	 ignore,	 this	
heavenly	 messenger	 has	 rampaged	 over	 the	 entire	 globe,	
and	 the	 governors	 of	 each	 nation	 have	 responded	 with	
the	imposition	of	different	protocols	in	efforts	to	limit	the	
spread	of	infection.	Many	people	have	died	of	the	disease.	
Many	 have	 endured	 extraordinary	 domestic,	 social	 and

114
financial	 hardships	 brought	 about	 by	 the	 measures	 that	
have	been	taken	to	contain	it...	and,	it	seems,	it	will	go	on...	
perhaps	for	a	long	time	to	come. 	
It’s	a	massive	shock	for	us	all...
Reactions	 have	 varied.	 At	 one	 extreme	 there	 is	 fear,	
together	sometimes	with	a	surprising	rigidity	and	hostility	
towards	 anyone	 who	 doesn’t	 appear	 to	 share	 such	
concern.	At	the	other	extreme,	there	has	been	an	attitude	
of disdain towards the fearful, and a wilful disregard of 
protocols.	 Both	 reactions	 are	 understandable.	 Neither
is	conducive	to	harmony. 	
As	disciples	 of	the	Buddha,	 we	need	to	take	time	to	listen	
deeply	 to	 this	 heavenly	 messenger.	 Can	 we	 allow	 it	 to	
speak	 to	 our	 hearts?...	 Can	 we	 seize	 this	 opportunity	 to	
allow	 ourselves	 this	 glimpse	 into	 the	fragility	 of	our	lives	
–	and	 the	 preciousness	 of	all	 of	our	 relationships?...	 Have

115
we	realised	the	joy	that	can	come	through	simple	gestures	
of	 friendliness,	 of	 kindness?...	 We	 live	 in	 a	 world	 that	
is	 far	 from	 perfect.	 It	 is	 impossible	 for	 any	 of	 us	 to	 only	
experience	 happiness,	 and	to	avoid	 suffering	 altogether	 –	
even	 if	we	spend	 the	 whole	 of	our	 life	 trying	 to	maintain	
an	 environment	 that	 is	 always	 pleasing	 to	 us	 and	 never	
irksome,	or	threatening	to	our	sense	of	well-being. 	
This is how the world is.  
Human	beings	 have	the	remarkable	 capacity	 to	reflect	 on	
experience.	 Having,	 through	 this	 particular	 disease,	 been	
brought face to face with the transience of existence, we 
now	have	an	opportunity	 to	consider	 a	response	 that	can	
benefit	everyone.	This	pandemic,	coupled	with	the	climate	
crisis,	 is	 prompting	 us	 all	 to	 think	 bigger.	 We	 are	 invited	
to	 set	 aside	 our	 immediate	 personal	 concerns,	 and	 to	
consider	what	will	be	best	for	everyone.	This	is	a	huge	step,	
especially	 for	 those	 of	 us	 for	 whom	 it	 has	 been	 ‘normal’

116
to	 be	 concerned	 primarily	 with	 our	 own	 immediate	
comfort	 and	 well-being,	 and	 to	 put	 our	 own	 family
or	community	first.	
How	would	such	a	change	look?…	What	would	it	involve?…
As a start, we can consider following established safety 
protocols	 which,	 though	 frustrating,	 limiting,	 and	 even	
perhaps	 intensely	 irritating, is 	 do-able.	 Wise	 caution	
suggests that at least we do that, to the best of our ability. 
Then,	through	the	practice	of	meditation,	 we	can	learn	to	
stand	 outside	 of	 the	 grumbling	 mind	 and	 to	 listen	 to	 the	
litany	 of	 complaints,	 justifications	 and	 rebellion,	 without	
giving	 that	 internal	 monologue	 too	 much	 importance.	 In	
this	way	we	avoid	falling	into	a	state	of	ill-will	or	judgement.	
We	keep	the	heart	open,	attuned	to	the	sense	of	loss,	deep	
fear	and	exhaustion	 that	is	being	experienced	 by	many	of	
our fellow world citizens.

117
The	 sense	 of	 ‘Me’,	 as	 separate	 from	 all	 other	 beings,	 can	
begin	 to	 fall	 away,	 taking	 us	 to	 a	 place	 of	 peacefulness,	
a	 place	 of	 joyful	 surrender.	 It’s	 not	 that,	 personally,	 we	
need	 to	 believe	 that	 all	 the	 measures	 being	 imposed	 are	
absolutely	 necessary	 –	 but,	 for	 our	 own	 inner	 well-being,	
we	 relinquish	 whatever	 stand	 we’ve	 taken:	 for	 or	 against	
hand	 sanitizer,	 social	 distancing,	 face	 masks	 and	 all	 the	
rest.	 Instead	 of	 cutting	 ourselves	 off	 from	 our	 fellow	
human	 beings	 through	 holding	 to	 our	 strong	 views	 and	
opinions,	 we	 discover	 our	 true	 place	 in	 the	 intimately
connected web of life.



119
19. A Steady Place Within
SUMMER 2021
The	 Dhamma,	 the	 Truth,	 is	 always	 here,	 now...	 It	 was	
‘here’	when	we	were	born,	when	we	were	growing	up,	and	
throughout our adult lives. It can be known – clearly and 
directly, just like the heady scent of honeysuckle – by each 
one	of	us;	whether	we	are	young,	middle-aged	or	old.	It	will	
be	here,	now,	wherever	 we	find	ourselves	 at	any	moment	
as	we	experience	 the	different	 conditions	 that	 come	 with	
nature:	 the	 nature	 of	 our	 own	 minds,	 of	 the	 body	 itself,	
and	the	world	around	us.	For	more	than	a	year	–	alongside	
more	 localised	 catastrophes	 wrought	 by	 the	 climate	
emergency	or	tragic	political	circumstances,	we	have	been	
living	 with	 a	 worldwide	 pandemic.	 Humanity	 is	 ‘dealing	
with’ these events to the extent that conditions allow in 
different regions, with varying	degrees	of	success.	It	seems

120
far	 beyond	 the	 capacity	 of	 any	 of	 us	 even	 to	 glimpse	 the	
full	 complexity	 of	 what	 is	 unfolding:	 globally,	 medically,	
socially,	economically,	politically. 	
It’s	completely	beyond	us. 	
However, if we shift our focus, and go to the Refuge 
of	 Buddha,	 Dhamma,	 Sangha	 –	 here	 and	 now	 –	 we	 can	
come	 to	 a	 steady	 place	 within	 the	 heart	 that	 allows	
a	 clearer	 perspective.	 We	 see	 that	 what	 is	 happening	
now	 is	 simply	 a	 more	 obvious,	 and	 less	 avoidable,	
manifestation	 of	 the	 reality	 that	 has	 always	 been.	 Life	 is	
uncertain, we are not in control, and we could die at any 
moment.	So,	in	a	sense,	this	time	is	a	blessing;	almost	like	
a	 rallying	 cry	 for	 humanity	 to	 wake	 up	 to	 what	 we	 have	
always faced – and avoided acknowledging. It’s been too
awesome,	too	overwhelming.
The	 sages	 of	 the	 past	 all	 pointed	 to	 the	 fragility	 of	 our	
lives, and have offered guidelines on how to live in a way

121
that	 has	 meaning	 and	 value.	 Some	 people	 have	 heard	
these	 teachings,	 understood	 them,	 and	 have	 practised	
accordingly.	Others,	sadly,	have	turned	their	backs	on	what	
they	 found	 inconvenient	 or	 uncomfortable,	 or	 have	 even	
distorted	the	message	for	their	own	ends. 	
What	did	those	sages	say? 	
They said that life is uncertain. They also said that if we are 
willing	to	acknowledge	the	harmful	tendencies	of	the	mind,	
and	to	investigate	them,	we	can	come	to	an	understanding	
whereby	 they	 can	 be	 abandoned.	 Furthermore,	 they	
pointed	 to	 beautiful	 qualities	 that	 can	 come	 forth	 from	
a	 heart	 that	 is	 fearless	 –	 free	 of	 self-concern	 and	 ill-will.	
As	we	learn	 to	respect	 and	to	care	for	ourselves	 and	each	
other,	 we	 can	 live	 with	 joy	 –	 even	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 great	
difficulty	and	uncertainty.	It’s	not	a	particularly	easy	path	
to	follow,	but	having	found	it,	it	seems	to	be	a	pretty	good	
way	of	making	sense	of	this	human	condition. 	
May	we	all	find	and	abide	in	that	steady	place	within. ..



123
20. Difficult to Digest
WINTER 2022
We	 are	 coming	 towards	 the	 end	 of	 a	 second	 year	 of	
the	 pandemic.	 It’s	 been	 dynamic	 –	 with	 frequent	
announcements	 about	 new	 developments	 in	 the	 disease	
process,	and	new	accompanying	measures	to	manage	those	
changes.	 The	 mood	 around	 it	all	 is	also	 changing	 and	 the	
optimistic	thoughts	of	‘return	to	normal’	have	faded,	to	be	
replaced	by	an	eagerness	simply	to	put	in	place	something	
that	may	be	effective	in	protecting	people	and	maintaining	
the services we rely on.
It	all	feels	quite	shaky. 	
Then	there	is	the	climate,	briefly	eclipsed	by	the	pandemic:	
powerful	 storms	 (Milntuim	 lost	 its	 power	 and	 Wi-Fi

124
connection	for	several	days	with	Storm	Arwen),	forest	fires	
(several	 of	our	Sister	 monasteries	 in	the	US	and	Australia 
narrowly	escaped	total	destruction),	flooding	and	drought.	
Such	 happenings	 make	 what	 is	 now	 referred	 to	 as	 ‘the	
climate	emergency’	 harder	than	ever	to	ignore.	Glasgow’s	
COP	 26	 seems	 to	 have	 not	 been	 as	 effective	 as	 some	 had	
hoped	 in	supporting	 necessary	 adjustments	 to	slow	 these	
catastrophic	developments. 	
However,	there	will	be	many	who	are	relieved	that	–	at	least	
for	the	time	being	–	they	can	continue	to	live	according	to	
standards	they	habitually	enjoy.	I	wonder	how	that	feels?…	
I	wonder	too	how	it	must	feel	for	people	whose	livelihood	
requires	them	to	be	involved	in	industries	that	are	known	
to	cause	long	term	damage	to	the	fragile	ecological	balance	
of	our	planet?…
It’s	not	quite	as	clear-cut	as	we	might	have	wished.
On	top	of	this,	there	are	almost	daily	reports	of	individuals

125
and families	leaving	their	homeland	and	almost	everything	
they	 possess,	 to	 escape	 from	 danger	 —	 embarking	 on	 a	
most	 perilous	 journey	 in	 search	 of	 what	 they	 are	 hoping	
will	be	a	better	place.	Sadly,	there	are	also	reports	of	many	
perishing	on	the	journey. 	
Bringing	 all	 of	 this	 to	 mind,	 together	 with	 many	 more	
matters	 of	 concern,	 could	 be	 unbearably	 distressing.	 The	
sense	 of	 helplessness	 and	 hopelessness	 can	 be	 very	 real,	
and	 sometimes	 difficult	 to	 digest.	 Of	 course,	 we	 could	
decide	to	follow	the	option	of	escaping	to	somewhere	‘safe’:	
unplugging	 the	 phone,	 the	 TV	 and	 all	 the	 media	 gadgets,	
and	continuing	to	live	out	our	days	for	as	long	as	possible	–	
hoping	that	nothing	will	go	wrong. 	
We	 might	 feel	 ashamed	 or	 critical	 of	 this	 response	
but	 perhaps,	 in	 fact,	 each	 of	 us	 needs	 to	 take	 time	 to	
‘escape’	 in	 that	 way	 –	 in	 order	 to	 accommodate	 these	
disturbing	 impressions.	 Unlike	 the	 Buddha	 with	 his

126
‘oceanlike	 compassion’,	 our	 capacity	 to	 stay	 attuned	 is	
limited;	 we	 can	 only	 take	 so	 much	 –	 before	 we	 collapse,	
or	 burn	 out	 altogether.	 It	 seems	 more	 important	 than	
ever	 now	 for	 us	 all	 to	 develop	 strategies	 to	 access	 and	
maintain	 inner	 balance	 and	 well-being	 in	 order	 to	 meet	
the	 challenges	 of	 our	 time,	 without	 shutting	 off	 or	 being
overwhelmed	by	it	all. 	
So	 let’s	 hold	 on	 tightly	 to	 our	 meditation	 cushion,	 and	
spend	time	there	each	day.	Through	the	practice	of	honest,	
open,	present	moment	awareness,	the	fixed	views	we	hold	
of ourselves and the world can be revealed for what they 
are	 –	 and	 we	 can	 appreciate	 how	 they	 contribute	 to	 our	
suffering.	Guided	by	the	wisdom	of	the	Buddha,	we	begin	to	
relinquish	 these	distorted	 views,	 and	our	horizons	 widen.	
It	becomes	clear	that	there	is	no	place	for	blame	or	ill-will	–	
however	much	we	may	fear	or	dislike	the	views	or	behaviour	
of	a	difficult	family	member,	neighbour	or	policy	maker.	If

127
we	remember	that,	like	us,	they	would	all	like	to	be	happy	
and	to	not	suffer;	 if	we	reflect	 that	 all	of	them	have	gone	
through	the	process	of	birth	–	now	they	are	ageing,	and	at	
some	point	they	will	die	–	we	can	no	longer	see	anyone	as	
‘other’.	 This	 may	 not	 be	a	comfortable	 insight,	 but	 it’s	 an	
important	 one.	 May	 we	 keep	 remembering	 it	 as	 we	 walk	
together	on	this	remarkable	planet	–	our	home.



129
End Notes
1 (P6) Dhamma:	 a	 Pali	 word	 referring	 to	 Truth;	 also,	 the	 Buddha’s	
teachings	that	point	to	that	Truth.
2 (P18) Samaṇa: Harmless	one,	a	mendicant	disciple	of	the	Buddha.
3 (P23) Ajahn	Chah	was	a	highly	respected	monk	of	the	Forest	Tradition	
in	 Thailand,	 upon	 whose	 teachings	 the	 way	 of	 practice	 at	 Milntuim	
Hermitage	is	based.
4 (P28) Aṭṭhaṅgika Magga :	The	Eightfold	 Path	(aṭṭhaṅgika-magga):	usually	
referred to as
	 1.	 Right View
 2.	Right Intention/Thought
 3. Right Speech
 4.	Right Action
 5.	Right Livelihood
 6.	Right Effort
 7.	Right Mindfulness
 8. Right Concentration 
5 (P35) Mantra:	 A	 word	 or	 phrase	 that	 can	 be	 repeated	 internally	 or	
aloud	to	steady	the	mind	on	what’s	beneficial.
6 (P40) Aṭṭhaṅgika	Magga:	The	Eightfold	Path	(see	4	above).
7 (P42) The Buddha’s ‘ Words on Loving Kindness ’:	see	Amaravati	Chanting	
book,	volume	1	page	37,	also,	Sutta	Nipāta	Ch	1,	section	8	 Metta Sutta.

130
11 (P101)   Acrobat	 sutta	 Saṃyutta	 Nikāya:	 (Bhikkhu	 Bodhi	 translation)	
Book	V	page	1648		Sedaka.
8 (P76) Dhammapada	v.	204	‘A healthy mind is the greatest gain. Contentment 
is the greatest wealth. A trustworthy friend is the best of kin. Unconditional 
freedom is the highest bliss.’
9 (P76) Master	Hua	was	a	highly	respected	Chinese	master.	He	established	
a	 monastery	 in	 California,	 the	 City	 of	 Ten	 Thousand	 Buddhas,	 that	 has	
close	links	with	Western	monasteries	of	our	tradition.
10 (P94)  Dependent	 Arising	 (paṭiccasamuppāda):	 This	 is	 a	 formulation of 
the	 great	 insight	 that	 arose	 in	 the	 Buddha’s	 mind	 on	 the	 night	 of	 his	
awakening.	 It	 describes	 how,	 starting	 with	 ignorance,	 suffering	 comes	
about	through	twelve	links:
 1.	Ignorance (avijjā)
 2.	Mental formations (Saṅkhārā)
 3. Sense consciousness (viññāṇa)
 4.	Body and mind (Nāma-rūpa)
 5.	The six sense bases (salāyatana)
 6.	Contact (phassa)
 7.	Feeling (Vedanā)
 8. Craving/desire (taṇhā)
 9.	 Grasping (upādāna)
 10.	Becoming (bhava)
 11.	Birth (jāti)
 12.	Old age, sickness and death  
  (jarāmaraṇa)	sorrow,
	 	 lamentation,	pain,	grief
	 	 and	despair	( sokaparideva
  dukkha domanassa)

TIMES AND THE TIMELESS
 AJAHN CANDASIRI
AMARAVATI BUDDHIST MONASTERY
ST. MARGARETS
GREAT GADDESDEN
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD
HERTFORDSHIRE HP1 3BZ
UK
AMARAVATI.ORG
+44 (0)1442 842455
ISBN: 978-1-78432-192-5
2022 © AMARAVATI BUDDHIST MONASTERY
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION,
PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE EBOOK AT FSBOOKS.ORG
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT, TRANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN
ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA PLEASE CONTACT AMARAVATI PUBLICATIONS AT
PUBLICATIONS@AMARAVATI.ORG
TRANSLATION MUST BE TAKEN FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH
COVER ILLUSTRATION, BOOK DESIGN AND TYPESETTING:
NICHOLAS HALLIDAY • HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
TO VIEW A COPY OF THIS LICENSE, VISIT:
HTTP:/ /CREATIVECOMMONS.ORG/LICENSES/BY-NC-ND/4.0/
SEE THE LAST PAGE OF THIS BOOK FOR MORE DETAILS ON YOUR
RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS UNDER THIS LICENSE
THIS EDITION, PRINTED IN THE UK 2022

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
You are free to:
• copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
Under the following terms:
• Attribution: You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• Non-Commercial: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• No Derivatives: If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you may not distribute the modified material.
• No additional restrictions: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the
license permits.
Notices:
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material
in the public domain or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use. For example, other rights such as
publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.



Reflections fromReflections from
Milntuim HermitageMilntuim Hermitage
