## Body Contemplation

Ajahn Pasanno Translated from a talk given in Thai February 2006 at Banboon, Pakchong, Thailand

The biggest obstacle to the Dhamma (the Truth or the Lord Buddha’s teachings) tends to be our own selves, the sense of self, carrying the “I” or “me,” carrying opinions, pride, feelings of anxiety or fears, or even suspicion and lack of confidence. Sometimes, carrying the “me” may simply be thinking that we can never reach the Dhamma. So, we need to unload all of the above manifestations of self, and then lean respectfully toward the Dhamma. Our effort to dispel the sense of self will open up the opportunity to reach the Dhamma.

Earlier this afternoon, I talked about balance or what is “just right.” That balance must be reached by relinquishing the sense of self from our heart. This way, no matter where we go and what we do, things feel just right. However, it is difficult to do because the feeling of self always likes to infiltrate. That is why we need to practice mindfulness, to be able to keep up with emotions in the heart. There needs to be two components residing in our mind: concentration (samādhi) to make the mind stable, and wisdom (paññā) to see things as they truly are. We actually do not need to create concentration and wisdom because they have always existed in our mind. Yet, we tend not to make effective use of them. We like to let chaos, distractions and ignorance take up residence.

This is the root of our problem. We make wrong choices because of the lack of clarity in our minds. It is thus important to develop clarity. A continuity of mindfulness will help support this. To train our mind to be more clear and bright, we need to observe and experiment with what will help develop the mind and what will not.

One thing that I would like to bring up tonight is to encourage you to contemplate the body. For those people who have studied the Dhamma through listening or reading, they will know that the ultimate goal of Buddhism is purity of mind, for the mind to be completely free from suffering. Yet, sometimes we don’t know where the mind (citta) really is. We wish we knew. Yet in reality, it resides wherever we place our attention. There is nothing concrete, no object for it to reside in. It is made up of emotions, feelings, and thoughts. As such, it is often difficult to know the citta. Thus if we place our mindfulness (sati) with the body, it is a helpful aid to see this more clearly. Be it citta, which is nama-dhamma, or body, which is rūpa-dhamma, they are all sankhāras, that is, of a compounded nature. Our chanting a few minutes ago emphasized this point. Sankhāras make up body and mind and all are impermanent. Sankhāras arise and cease, leading to dukkha(unsatisfactoriness) because they are born, undergo dissolution and pass away. Because of the challenge of seeing impermanence in the mind, we may find it more helpful to see it in the body. Both are subject to the law of impermanence just the same.

The Buddha’s teachings do not require seeing and understanding everything in the world, simply an understanding of their nature. When the Buddha saw that all things are impermanent, he taught that once we see how it then leads to suffering, we can let go. There is no need to follow up and analyze everything endlessly, as we will easily become confused and have lingering doubts. Yet, with our understanding of the impermanent nature of things, we can see it all clearly. This is an important point to make because people generally like to know for sure and to see for certain. In fact, if we understand only one subject, such as that of the body, we can understand both our mind and the world around us.

This can be illustrated with a simple example. Luang Por Chah is a monk we all highly respect and who we all feel truly reached the Dhamma. But just think, he had very little formal education. As I recall, he only finished first grade, not even completing his elementary education. Yet, Thais and Westerners with college degrees humbly sought him out to

be his disciples. This is due to his mastery of the ultimate truth. Regarding formal Buddhist education, he did not even achieve any higher level than the basic foundational studies. Then, he devoted his time and his life to practicing the Dhamma, investigating within himself, to gain insights in the principles of truth, the Dhamma.

As Luang Por said, education should aim at letting go, not at wanting more. The goal is to reduce defilement and craving — less greed, aversion and delusion. When we see this greed, wants and ambitions surfacing, we realize, “Aha, suffering is still around!” When we feel frustrated, annoyed, angry, or displeased, we can see suffering clearly. These emotions recur time and again and we have suffered many times. Yet we continue in this cycle, making excuses, such as, anger will make us feel relieved. But, when we see the truth, we can let go.

Or when there is delusion it can manifest as confusion, cloudiness, fear, egoism, pride, or stubbornness. Yet, when we see its negative consequences, we can let go of delusion. Thus, Luang Por Chah emphasized knowledge and practice with the aim of letting go. He told monks, especially Western monks, “When you graduated with a Bachelor’s degree, your defilements received the same undergraduate degree. When you received a Master’s degree, so did your defilements (Kilesas). When you receive a Ph.D., your defilements got a doctorate as well.” Kilesas can overwhelm us at anytime. Suffering abounds in the world around us. Letting go is most crucial.

I recall another occasion with us Western monks, who typically have a higher education and many ideals and idealistic concepts. One day Luang Por commented, “Oh, you Westerners are just like vultures. Vultures fly high. But look, what do they come down to eat?” Oh, that really hurt! But what he said is true—thinking about ideals, whether about the world, or about the Dhamma. A lot of thinking goes on while our emotions tend to return to rotten stuff. All of us here too, are preoccupied with thoughts but what do theykeepreturningto? Thisisalessonforremindingourselves to find a way to let go of all things that bring suffering.

When contemplating the body, it is a part of contemplating impermanence. It is obvious that our body is impermanent. Just observe the feeling within our body now. We have been sitting on the floor listening to a Dhamma talk now for half and hour. I don’t know about you, but I started out feeling great. And now, I feel pain in the knee, in my foot and start to feel it in my bottom. What can we do? The body is as it is — starting out stable and fine, and then changes show up — from feeling great to feeling uncomfortable. This is normal, and we can’t stop the changes. When we feel the discomfort from sitting in one position, we move slightly, feeling relieved and contented for a bit. After a while, pain and discomfort return. We really see impermanence within our body.

It is even more apparent about changes in the long term. As the body ages, there are more illnesses and symptoms of aging. It is suffering and is not self (anattā). We cannot stop this natural process. It follows its own course without consulting us or asking us for such permission as, “May I age this week?” or “I have not become ill in a long time. May I now?” The body is not self, doesn’t belong to us, or does n’t listen to us when we command it to stay healthy and young.

We talk about anicca (impermanence), dukkha (unsatisfac- toriness) and anattā (non-self), and say sabbe sankhārā aniccā (all conditions are impermanent). Sometimes it seems to be just something at the philosophical level. However, the Buddha’s Dhamma is not philosophy or theory. It is the truth about our everyday life. This is because the Buddha has just one goal: to help fellow human beings be free from suffering. We have body and mind that creates unsatisfactoriness. They create agitation, confusion, sorrow and pain. All of these conditions mean suffering, whether we are aware or not. The Buddha had compassion for fellow human beings. He wanted us to find a way of relief from suffering. All of the Buddha’s teachings are aimed at setting us free from suffering. But, we must use them in our lives and must realize these teachings.

Contemplation of the body allows us to see more clearly because it is in the domain of the material (rūpa-dhamma). In practicing mindfulness, the Buddha taught us to stay with the present. The past is gone and the future is yet to come. Our mind tends to go back and forth between the past and the future. We project into the future with certain hopes and fears, excitements and trepidation. We look back to the past with regrets, disappointment, happiness and longing. If we were happy, we then are stuck on the “good old days.” The Buddha encouraged us to focus on the present. This is not an injunction to ignore the events of the past or the future. He wished for us to gain an insight leading to clarity in the present. Because the “now” is the moment to be able to decide the skillful course of action — what to improve, what to develop. Focusing on the body supports establishing our mind in the present. Although the mind likes to wander, “cooking up” thoughts, the body remains here and now.

Therefore, we can return to the present by being aware of feelings and sensations in the body. We focus our awareness on the in-breath and the out-breath. As we breathe in, we know clearly. As we breathe out, we know clearly. In walking, we pay attention to the right step and then the left step, again staying with the present moment. As we stay in the present, we can dispel from our mind the thoughts that are stuck on the future and on the past. We must stay with the present relying on mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. It is also possible that our thoughts are able to be in the present, but are depending on greed, anger or delusion. We need to bring our mind back to the present moment established in that which is wholesome.

Keep it simple. We all have to breathe anyway. Observing our breath in and out is a simple method for gaining mindfulness. In addition, we can practice mindfulness through paying attention to our daily activities, our postures of standing, walking, sitting and lying down. This will help the heart lean toward the Dhamma. In the practice, please do not overlook the significance of simple things around you, be it various postures, feelings or sensations in the body. For example, sometimes we are not observant of our body as it comes into contact with food; how much we eat, whether it agrees with us or not, or whether it will make us healthy. Sometimes we eat only what tastes great to our mouth but is awful for our long term well-being. Sometimes we eat not for a healthy body, but for the sense of self. For example, we could order food at a restaurant so that people around us can see that we are welloff or that we are clever in ordering special dishes. The food is thus not for nourishing our body, but for the sense of self or for pleasure.

Before this last trip to Thailand, I visited lay supporters of our monastery. They had recently purchased a new home nearby. In their house there is a storage room for tools and things, enticing mice to take up residence there. They decided to adopt a stray cat from the animal shelter. A luxurious house was built for the cat, almost like a two- to threestory pet condominium. Whenever this fortunate cat wanted to eat, it would push its food bin for automatic feeding. Initially, the cat was quite skinny, but by now it has become a very fat cat! It cannot walk very well and it is rather neurotic. It is easily frightened. When someone enters the house it gets restless and it will start eating. If anyone goes nearby, it will rush to eat. Not out of hunger, but because of anxiety. It is worth noting that sometimes we humans behave in a similar way. We do not want to stay with any suffering or discomfort that is facing us. We get restless and want to find a way out. Usually that way out is not really solving the problem, but creating another one. Just like the cat.

At the very least, if we relied on the body for contemplating our feelings, we would have more clarity. Am I at ease? Am I stressed out? Am I restless? Or, do I feel content? However, the more we contemplate, the more we realize that we can not depend on our body at all. Illnesses are always possible and we never know when death will knock on our door. We should be eager to search for a true refuge in the Dhamma.

This body of ours can fall apart at anytime, no matter what age. At present, I have a little disciple. He is about ten years old, a very good boy. He was ordained at Abhayagiri Monastery. In the photo album of the monastery, you can see the ordination ceremony of a little novice monk last year. He was ordained to help prepare himself for a major medical procedure this year (2005). He has a blood disorder (thalassemia major) and underwent a stem cell transplant to change the blood production system. To begin there was chemotherapy, eliminating his immune system temporarily. He has been hospitalized since September 2005. I have been following news almost every day of late because it is at the most critical period. His body is not accepting the new cells. Initially, he was making good progress but in the past week or ten days, he has taken a turn for the worse. His nose bled unstoppably and he has been in the ICU.1

I am sharing this story with you so that all of us gathering here for Dhamma practice can help send loving kindness to him. His name is Todd. He is a boy whom I have known since he was very little. I have been his Dhamma father and his spiritual teacher. This is also to illustrate to you that all of us leading human lives do face the same danger. I am not trying to scare or discourage anyone. I am simply helping you understand that the truth is such. So, what shall we do when we see this reality about life? One thing is to spread lovingkindness. This helps to establish a generosity and warmth for one another and helps us establish the wisdom that lets go of any sorrow in our hearts. This is what we can do, all we can do and in fact, the best that we can do.

We also need to maintain our mindfulness, reminding ourselves why we do what we do in this world, be it our occupation or our relationships with our fellow human beings. What are we doing and for what reason? I encourage you to return to the goal of generating loving kindness for one another. We do this to further develop our wisdom, to step away from ignorance or self-absorption. This is how we build strength in our heart. In our practice and in our daily life, we can always reach the Dhamma. But to do this, we need to be experienced and circumspect. That is why it is essential to practice consistently, to study and listen to the Dhamma, and to observe ourselves. In this way we will always be able to bring the heart in line with the Dhamma.

For tonight I have taken sufficient time to offer these thoughts on the Dhamma.

1 He was hospitalized for approximately eight months and passed away on April 27, 2006.