## Foreword

This small book has been compiled to commemorate the short but noble life of Todd Piyasīlo Tansuhaj and to share the blessings of the goodness he helped to bring into the world.

Todd was adopted soon after he was born on July 20, 1995 by Patriya and Chusak Tansuhaj in Chiang Mai, Thailand. From the newborn screening tests, it was discovered that his body carried a genetic disorder called thalassemia, a kind of hereditary anemia that is common in countries where there is a lot of malaria. It is the kind of illness that can make you weak and sickly all your life, and need to have a lots of medical treatments, not to mention possible failures in vital organ functioning along the way.

Todd’s parents are Thai but they live in the USA, so that’s where he grew up; their home is in Pullman, a small town in eastern Washington State. Since Todd needed to have special blood treatments at a hospital in Oakland every few months, his parents got into the routine of stopping at Abhayagiri Monastery, which is also in northern California, for a few days whenever they were in the area. The family thus became a familiar sight in our meditation hall and helping out around the buildings and forest that make up Abhayagiri’s property.

When Todd was just nine years old, the family discussed the possibility of a new approach to Todd’s illness — a stem cell transplant that might cure him of the disease completely. They knew it was a little risky and the risk increases as the child gets older, but they all agreed (Todd included) that they wanted to try it. The alternative was the heavy-duty treatments for Todd carrying on for the next twenty to forty years if he survived other complications. While this disorder could be mild for some, allowing one to live up to sixty years, patients with its severe form called thalassemia major are often short-lived.

The family also consulted with a highly revered Buddhist monk in northern Thailand, Luang Por Opaht, before they made the decision. He suggested that it would be a very good idea, in order to tilt the karmic odds in Todd’s favor, if he spent time as a novice monk for a while. This is something that people often do in Buddhist countries so that they maximize the forces of goodness in their lives and thus help to bring events to the best possible result.

Todd could have become a novice at Luang Por Opaht’s monastery but since Todd felt much more at home in America than he did in Thailand, and also because Abhayagiri was his “home monastery,” Chusak and Patriya asked if he might take a temporary ordination with us in California. He thus spent a week in robes at Abhayagiri in May of 2005. He went in for his stem cell transplant at the Children’s Hospital in Seattle in September of that year but,tragically,all did not go well; despite beyond-heroic efforts of the medical staff and his family, he died in the hospital on April 27th 2006.

Even though Todd’s life was brief by some standards, it is also worthwhile reflecting on some of the Buddha’s teachings about how to live in the most wholehearted way:

Even a single dayOf a life lived virtuously and meditatively, Is worth more than a hundred years Lived carelessly and without discipline.

A single day’s lifeOf one who makes great effort, Is better than a life of a hundred years Lived in idleness and sluggishness.

A single day’s lifeOf one who sees the Truth,Is worth more than a life of a hundred years Where the Truth is never seen. Dhammapada 110, 112 &115

What this means is that if we are wholehearted about what we are doing, if we act and speak from a place of kindness and if we pay complete attention to the present, then to our surprise our life has indeed been fulfilled — the number of years we might have been alive is of secondary concern.

Todd’s life was a very good example of someone living in this way: he took every opportunity he had to be generous; he was patient and good-humored with the many discomforts that came with his illness; he was always straightforward and friendly. So, even though ten years might not seem like much time to most of us, Todd used those years very well indeed — thus, despite being brief, his life was also complete in its own mysterious way.

Todd’s cheerful and kindly qualities led him to have many warm and deep friendships — several of his young buddies came all the way from Washington State to attend the memorial for him at Abhayagiri, when we placed his ashes in a shrine in the forest here. It also led, during the seven months that he was in the Seattle Children’s Hospital, to some competition between members of the staff — apparently every one of the nurses was keen to be assigned to his room in the ICU. They spoke very fondly of him and often praised the brightness of his character. When I asked them if they felt and spoke about all the kids on their wards the same way, one of the nurses memorably replied, “Well, we love them all dearly but some are really special — Todd is a great guy . . .” and then her eyes turned teary.

The various elements that comprise this book have come from a range of sources: the family photographs and much of Todd’s own artwork have been provided by his parents, Patriya and Chusak; of the three talks that make up the main body of the book, one was given by Ajahn Pasanno in Thailand, when Todd’s condition was deteriorating, another one was given by me on the occasion of the first anniversary of Todd’s passing away, at a memorial ceremony held at Abhayagiri Monastery, and the third of these talks was from a similar event, a year later (in April of 2008), when Ajahn Pasanno offered his beautiful words on “Friendship”; the book also includes a brief collection of reminiscences and reflections by Venerable Ahimsako, one of the monks at Abhayagiri who became a close friend and mentor for Todd during his short stay as a novice Buddhist monk in 2005.

May the words and pictures contained within these pages serve to bring light into the hearts of all those who pick up this book, and may the spirit of Todd’s good and cheerful nature be a bright light in this world.

Amaro Bhikkhu Abhayagiri Monastery, June 16th, 2008