## Dedication

Todd’s life was like a river that flows gently to make all who came to know him happy. He always cared about others without expecting anything in return. He shared his favorite toys, lunch money and allowances with friends in need, not to mention the many sweet smiles to encourage people to be happy. He taught us to be generous, kind, caring and forgiving. As one of his buddies, Stephen, put it, “Todd was one of a kind, like finding a needle in the haystack. I will miss him.” Adopting Todd is the best decision that we made in our lives, and we continue to be thankful to have had him as our child.

We put together this book with kind assistance from family and friends for readers who are interested in life’s lessons through stories and teachings related to this special boy’s life. We also wish to dedicate it to all who made Todd a good and happy boy. We thank the Abhayagiri community and especially the kind bhikkhus residing near and far in America, Australia, Canada, England, Italy, Switzerland and Thailand who have guided Todd and us with their boundless hearts over the years until now.

We are indebted to the wonderful grandmothers, uncles, aunts, cousins, teachers, friends, neighbors, doctors, nurses, hospital staff, and other children and grown-ups who have helped us. We will not mention any names as we could leave out some unintentionally. You know how your friendship, love and kindness affected Todd’s life in a truly positive way. You are in our hearts and we remain thankful.

Like a River focuses on Todd’s life as a little novice because it was the most special time for him and his family, and it was a true privilege for him to be ordained at one of Venerable Luang Por Chah’s forest monasteries. Although it was for a short time, to a nine-year-old boy it’s quite a significant and meaningful time for spiritual development that grown-ups often do not have. The experience and wisdom were truly precious and memorable to him, his family, and friends even till today.

We hope that all readers will find this book meaningful, leading to a bit more inner peace, wisdom and loving kindness. May you be blessed with peace, good health, and happiness.

Chusak and Patriya Tansuhaj Pullman, Washington, USA, July 20th 2008