## Skipping Stones

Reflections on Todd TansuhajTan Ahimsako November 2007 at Abhayagiri Monastery

I find it interesting how sometimes we can spend just a short while with someone, and yet get to know them very well and become quite close in some ways.  I think this is the case with Todd and me.

I joined the monastery in 2002, and from the start of my time  here  Todd  would  come  with  his  parents,  Patriya  and Chusak, for occasional stays.  During the last eight years of my professional life, before coming to the monastery, I was working with young people in an educational capacity, which I really enjoyed and appreciated.  So when young people come to  the  monastery  I  definitely  find  that  I  have  a  heightened interest in their presence and experience here.

When talk began of having Todd come to spend time here as a novice monk, I was thoroughly supportive and excited by the idea, and right from the start looked forward to it.  But I do remember thinking, “I wonder how this will be?” A few months  before  his  novice  ordination,  Todd  and  his  parents came by for a brief visit, and I helped them gather together the text and audiotape of the chanting that he would need to learn for his ordination ceremony.  I recall how uninterested Todd appeared to be on that day, so when he arrived a few months later for his ordination, once again, I thought, “I wonder how this will be? What will he do with his time? How will he get on with the routine? Will he take it seriously?” Quite a few of my memories of him, before that time, were of seeing him with his computer games, toys and comic books . . .

I find perception to be a very interesting thing and this experience with Todd has really helped remind me, yet again, to understand how we can perceive or think something, and yet be so far offtrack.  And, wow, was I offtrack.

One of the things that touched me about Todd was how natural, sincere and genuine he was, and this became more evident to me during his time here as a novice.  Here he was, not even ten years old, in the ochre-colored robes of a Buddhist monk. Now, what do I mean by “natural, sincere, and genuine?” For me it’s not trying to be something or someone you aren’t, and not creating false impressions of yourself (externally and internally) which aren’t in line with how you really are at that time.  Simple enough — what’s the big deal about that? But when I think back, how many times during my life have I acted in an insincere, disingenuous, and unnatural way?”

The ordination ceremony itself is very formal but before that Todd had to have his head shaved. The ceremonial clipping of hair was done first by his father, then by his mother and uncle and finally a small amount more by Ajahn Pasanno. From then on, many of the Abhayagiri monks finished removing all of his head hair and eyebrows, first with electric clippers and then with a razor blade. Meanwhile, Todd’s family and friends, and other visitors to the monastery that day, all sat around and watched.  A rather public trip to the barbers!

The ordination came next, with Todd starting out wearing white robes for the first part before changing into the ochre robes (which was a multi-person job, trying to get one wriggly little person wrapped up in yards and yards of cloth that should look neat and tidy in the end!).  His chanting was remarkably good, and so well-learned that he was zipping along at a great speed.  I recall that Ajahn Pasanno even had to slow him down at one point. It was during this ceremony that Todd received his monk’s name, Sāmanera	Piyasīlo, which means one with endearing virtue.

Todd truly put effort into being a novice; he came to all but one of the morning meditations (which begin at 5:00 a.m.). The morning he missed was the day following the ordination after a long travel from Washington State.  He knew by heart a great deal of the chanting that we do here, he listened to instructions, did his chores wholeheartedly and learned how to do many tasks that he’d never done before.  And yet he still remained Todd/Piyasīlo, the young boy/novice, not putting on any false act of trying to be a monk or trying to be someone who he wasn’t.

Todd seemed instinctively to know what was appropriate and  when.  For  instance,  when  we  went  out  walking  with our almsbowls (pindapat), making ourselves available in the community  for  food  offerings,  Todd  knew,  without  asking, that this was a time to be more composed and quiet; walking single  file  down  the  road,  not  acting  in  ways  that  were unbecoming for a monk. While out walking we received many food offerings and our bowls were heavy, especially Todd’s as he had been given many large items.  He was a little guy but he managed to get back to the monastery entrance still fully laden. The driveway is extremely steep and he slumped and started moaning as we walked up the hill.  I was in stitches with laughter while, at the same time, both supporting his bowl and pushing him up the hill. He and I had a good chuckle about that. After we arrived at the top and got into the monks’ common  room,  and  our  laughter  had  faded  away,  the  first thing Todd did was to very thoughtfully offer me some of his almsfood — food items that he had received but I hadn’t.

Don’t get me wrong, though. There were a few times when he  was  definitely  Todd-the-nine-year-old,  and  did  things slightly differently than us older monks would do (or would get away with!). One of my favorites was when we were having one of our morning work meetings, when the day’s work tasks are organized. Todd sat next to me as I was the most junior monk at that time, and we sit in order of seniority (not only was there finally someone in ochre robes sitting to my left, but also someone shorter).  During these meetings we are allowed to finish our morning bowl of cereal and hot drink.  At that time Todd seemed to really enjoy slurping his hot drink, taking it in spoonful by spoonful, and was having a great time of it there in the back of the hall, “slurp, sluuurp, slurp . . .” Patriya  was in the hall as well and I could see that she was not having a great time.  With every slurp her shoulders seemed to look higher up on her body and her face in a bit more of a wince. As a professional ballet dancer and teacher, which I did as a career for my entire working life, one of the things we had to know how to do was use stage mime because we don’t generally speak in ballet performances.  At the next slurp I managed to catch Todd’s attention and did my very best drinking mime. Two things happened:  Todd stopped slurping his drink and Patriya relaxed.   Ahhhh . . .

Another  thing  that  touched  me  about  Todd  was  how matter-of-fact he was about his body and the medical stuff he was undergoing.  He had to use a medicine delivery unit at night: a needle would be inserted in the side of his body before going to bed and the small machine it was attached to would slowly deliver his medicine for the next twelve hours or so.  In the morning the needle and device was removed. Todd’s dad, Chusak, was here for the first few days so he was setting up this device for Todd and doing the injection each night.  When Chusak left to go back home, one of monks here (who just happened to have been a nurse in lay life) took over for Chusak. I watched the injection part of the procedure one evening and was surprised at how ordinary it seemed to Todd:  no fuss, no bother, no complaint, just a few jokes. And when Todd would come down in the morning he would remove the needle all on his own: no fuss, no bother, and no complaint (and perhaps a few more jokes).  I can’t imagine many nine-year-olds coping that well and, at this point in my life, I know it would take some getting used to if I had to do that to myself.

Earlier  I  mentioned  morning  chanting  and  meditation. Todd would be there with the rest of us;  twenty minutes of chanting and an hour plus of silent meditation.  On two or three mornings Ajahn Pasanno walked past me on his way into the hall and whispered in my ear, “Tell Todd he can go into the monks’ common room and rest after the chanting,” which I relayed to Todd.  But he didn’t take up the offer.  He stayed right there until the end.  However, on one or two mornings I heard a definite change in Todd’s breathing.  I looked over to see the young lad with his head leaning back in the window frame behind his head, his mouth slightly open, in a blissful looking state of slumber.  He looked so peaceful.  He’d then wake up as we all began the closing chanting at the end of the meditation.  Perhaps he was thinking, “That seemed like a short meditation this morning!”

Probably Todd’s favorite work task while he was with us that week was going around with a large carpenter’s magnet, collecting  nails  and  screws  from  the  ground.  We  were  in the middle of an extensive building project here, with lots of construction debris.  Todd’s task was important because the gravel in the parking area around the compound was full of semi-hidden nails.  He loved this job, was excellent at it and derived great pleasure from letting us all know how many nails he’d collected so far.  As a result of his diligent efforts no one got a flat tire that summer.

At that time I tended to get down for the morning meditation pretty early.  On Todd’s last day here I arrived to find him already there, ready to have us wrap him up in his robes. “Hey Todd, you’re here early this morning.” “Yeah, well, actually, ummm,  this  is  the  third  time  I’ve  come  down.”  “Oh  yeah, why?” “Well, ummm, I woke up really early and thought I’d come down and see what was going on, but no one was around so I went back to my cabin.  Then I came down again, and still no one around.  So I went back again. And, ummm, here I am, again!” The way it turned out, he was just so excited about it being his last day that he simply couldn’t sleep any more.  Not that I think he wanted to leave, but it was definitely a big day, and a day of change.  He’d be leaving the robes of a novice monk, leaving the monastery and heading back to Washington State (and, also, his mom had promised him a trip to the toy store).

So this last day saw Todd leave the robes of the monkhood— his week was up and it was time to head north and back home. We were all out on various work duties when he had his small ceremony to return to lay life, so when I came back to the main compound I saw him back in his jeans and T-shirt out in front of the Dhamma Hall, skipping stones along the driveway, just being  the  nine-year-old-person  that  he  was.  A huge  smile came to my face as, yet again, I saw just how comfortable and natural it all was for him.  I spoke with him a bit and he did seem slightly subdued, but didn’t let on as to why.  I later heard that he had cried a little when he took off the robes and had expressed his wish to be a monk again, sometime in the future.

These are just a few remembrances of Todd and his precious time with us here at Abhayagiri Monastery.  Glancing back over what I’ve written, once again I return to this theme of naturalness, sincerity, and genuineness, and how we can reflect on these qualities, or their absence.  What’s going on around us and being felt and understood inside?  How is the inner feeling being expressed to those around us and is this the right time and place for doing so?  Am I being sincere and genuine or am I acting in ways that could perhaps help me to be seen in a certain way or get what I want?  When I think back on Todd’s time here, more and more I realize that he really helped remind me to keep an eye out for this in myself.  Of course, it’s not like my teachers haven’t talked about this — looking at our minds like this is one of the key encouragements of the Buddha’s teachings.  My teachers often urge us to use experiences in a way that, if we use them wisely, can help us see what’s what in the mind and heart.  Thanks Todd, you’ve been a good teacher by silently and unknowingly reminding of this principle.