## The Ordination of Todd Tansuhaj

Nine-year old becomes a monk at Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery

Tony AnthonyA reprint from Ukiah Daily Journal, May 2005

Something out of the ordinary took place at the Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery in Redwood Valley on the seventh of May. Todd Tansuhaj, at just nine years old, was the youngest boy ever to be ordained a novice monk at the monastery. The ordination took place because of a set of extraordinary circumstances. The adopted son of Chusak and Patriya Tansuhaj has a rare blood disorder that makes his future, including a bone marrow transplant, difficult and uncertain. Young Todd needs transfusions every three weeks plus iron chelation therapy five days a week to keep up his strength. They also learned that a bone marrow transplant might be young Todd’s only possible cure.

During their time in the Far East a knowledgeable Burmese-Thai monk named Ajahn Opaht told Patriya that he felt, “The boy’s treatment would be a major challenge for him.” He suggested that Todd become a novice if even for a brief time “to live a virtuous life.” Ajahn Pasanno, co-abbot, and the monks, kindly accepted this ordination request to help him prepare for a long and risky treatment.

Ordination is not something to be taken lightly. Preparation even to become a novice monk usually takes at least a full year or more of diligent practice. So the Tansuhaj family continued the preparations at home and visited Abhayagiri last December to seek guidance. Todd readied himself above what his parents expected. His mother says, “Todd recognized that he would have to make a real commitment to the practice and he memorized almost all the chanting — something difficult even for an adult.” She says, “Todd knows the importance of meditation.”

A Formal Ceremony Filled with Feeling

Todd’s ordination ceremony as a novice monk was well attended by extended family and friends and many of the lay community as well. A highlight of the traditional ceremony was when the boy’s head was shaved, something the audience enjoyed immensely as the animated Todd squirmed in the barber’s chair.

After making the traditional offerings to Ajahn Pasanno who performed the ceremony, Todd left the hall with the other monks and returned a few minutes later proudly wearing the orange-colored robes of the Theravada tradition. Although the audience remained respectfully silent, Todd was as animated as ever, busily doing his best to keep his robes from unwrapping. It was then that Ajahn Pasanno gave the young novice the name, Piyasīlo which in the ancient Pali language, means “One with Endearing Virtue.” One observer commented that Todd imbued the usually formal ceremony with a special quality of innocence and humanity.

When asked later to describe the experience of having his head shaved, Todd exclaimed, “It felt like a bee sting!” In the way only a nine-year-old can get right to the point, he added, “It feels cold!” For the monks at Abhayagiri, Todd is a breath of fresh air. He adds a natural childlike quality to the normally serene atmosphere of the monastery. Immediately following his ordination, dressed in his monk’s robes and with his head shaved, he could be seen skipping rocks across the driveway, while the other monks went about their chores. “He acts, naturally, like a nine-year-old, and he has a fascination for rocks,” a novice named Lee said.

Ajahn Pasanno explains the more serious side. “What Todd is doing is very much a traditional practice. It is recommended for someone going through a transition to do something that is meritorious and skillful. Todd will be going through medical treatment and convalescence and it’s not sure how it’s going to turn out — it’s very major and he’s just a little guy. So this is something quite big in his life.”

“I was a bit concerned that the life might be too rigorous,” Ajahn added. “Day begins for the monks at five o’clock every morning. It concerned me because we chant for twenty to twenty-five minutes and then we sit for an hour or more. I thought this might be too much for him, but Todd gets up on his own and wants to be doing it. It’s inspiring. He’s putting a lot of effort into learning the chanting,” Ajahn says. “He did almsrounds with another monk and received offerings from six people. It was quite exciting for him. And he was able to recite his blessing chants.”

When asked what he likes best about Abhayagiri Monastery, the young boy immediately answers, “I like to sleep.” But he is also quick to add, “I like to do the chores, I like the brooms. But my favorite thing is using the magnet.” The magnet is one used for picking up nails around a new structure being constructed at the monastery. With typical boyhood exuberance, the young monk says, “I like being a novice because the other monks and I get the food first.”

A monk named Tan Ahimsako says, “All the monks have joined as a group in helping Todd. Everyone here really enjoys him. We’re all trying to be an example.” Tan Ahimsako, who previously worked with four-six-year-olds, adds “It’s been an education for me. He is still just a boy — not trying to be anything he is not.”

Regarding Todd’s illness, it’s fortunate that one of the monks at the monastery, Tan Karunadhammo, which means compassion, is an experienced nurse and is able to administer Todd’s chelation therapy. When the boy leaves the monastery, his mother says there is a good bone marrow match from a donor in Taiwan, so Todd’s operation will most likely take place in Seattle within a few months. 1

Patriya says with a tear in her eye, “Compassion for fellow human beings seems to be the overriding principle at Abhayagiri. In Todd’s case, it is out of compassion that the monastic community allowed Todd to join them. What makes it so special is, I know that if they went by the book they wouldn’t have done it. But here, they go by their heart.”

1 Todd’s unrelated stem cell transplant failed and he passed away on April 27, 2006.