## Victory over Birth and Death

Ajahn Amaro Saturday night talk, April 21, 2007 Todd’s one-year memorial service day at Abhayagiri Monastery

Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassaNamo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassaNamo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassaBuddham Dhammam Sangham namassāmi

I’d like to begin by welcoming everyone who has gathered this evening — this rainy night at Abhayagiri Monastery. This is a weekend of many auspicious events. In Thailand they often say that when something really special, a very blessed occasion, is happening then the sky opens up and the rain falls as a benediction from above. So let’s hope that it’s a good sign from the heavens and let’s also hope that there isn’t so much water in the sky, that all will have come down by the morning and that we’ll have a clear spell for the ordination ceremonies outside tomorrow.

Today we had a memorial, a one-year death anniversary memorial for our dear friend and Dhamma companion, Piyasīlo Todd Tansuhaj. He was a young boy who was ordained as a novice, a sāmanera here for a little while before he undertook a medical treatment. For many months he was in a hospital for a bone marrow transplant and sadly the treatment didn’t work and he passed away on April 27thof last year. So today is a few days shy of that anniversary.

I spent a bit of time with him in his last few months up in the hospital in Seattle. His parents are here and many of his friends have come down for this occasion, other family members also. I was very impressed this evening when some of the young ones were given a choice of going into town for dinner or staying here at the monastery to hear a Dhamma talk. They wanted Dhamma over dinner. When I was eleven, that wouldn’t have been much of a contest. I freely admit dinner would have won out every time. So this has been a special day reflecting on our young friend Todd and his life. Up here on the shrine you can see some pictures of him: here on my right, when he was a novice and, on the other side, when he was in the hospital before he passed away. We’ve been reflecting on him and his life for this last little while.

As I listened to all the rain coming down during the sitting, I was reminded of a poem I read many years ago. It reflects something of my impression of Todd’s life and also some of the things that people were saying this afternoon when we had the memorial service. It’s a very short poem, it goes:

Like water, unconcerned, does only what it can, unexalted, all-sustaining, brings its gift and passes on.

Many of us knew Todd as an unexalted, cheerful little fellow running about just doing his thing, but also all-sustaining, refreshing to all who knew him. He brought great gifts which enriched the lives of so many people, and then he passed on. Just like water flowing down from the sky falling onto the ground, fertilizing the spring plants, moistening the ground and then running down into the creeks, to the streams and then flowing out to the sea. It’s a beautiful image, to think of a being’s life in this way. Just like water: nothing special yet totally special, all at the same time.

This afternoon we took the beautiful, simple marble casket that had been made in Thailand for Todd and which contained his ashes, out into the forest. We had made a little nook under the natural curve of a root, beneath a great oak tree out in the very heart of the forest in the area called Cool Oaks. Three of the main streams come together there and it’s a place where there’s water running all year round. As luck would have it, there was a perfectly shaped little niche so we made a space there for Todd’s ashes.

One of the verses that we chanted at the very end of the ceremony began:

Jayanto bodhiyā mūle Sakyānam nandivaddhano

This is called the Jayaparitta or Victory Protection Verses. It describes the victory of the Buddha as he sat under the Bodhi tree, the tree of enlightenment. When Ajahn Pasanno and I were discussing what we wanted to do for the ceremony, I said “Well, you know when there’s a tree root involved the Jayaparitta is always good because it talks about the Buddha sitting at the root of the Bodhi tree, the tree of enlightenment.” Then thinking about that verse, I considered, “What was the victory of the Buddha? What was the Buddha victorious over — what was the contest?”

According to Buddhist mythology and understanding, the Buddha’s enlightenment is a complete waking up, a breaking through to the total understanding of the way life is. It’s represented as a victory over birth and death, a victory over Māra, the Lord of Death, the embodiment of death. When we look at this kind of language, “victory over birth and death,” this is not the kind of phraseology that normally comes up in a conversation at the laundromat or in the aisles of Safeway. It sounds a bit remote or difficult to relate to, “What’s that got to do with my life?” We recognize that it has a dramatic, mythological flavor to it but what makes such a concept important? It sounds like such a powerful, special thing that often its practical relevance gets missed when we come across such language in spiritual teachings.

The main aim of terms like “victory over birth and death,” particularly in Buddhist teachings, is that these are supposed to be ideas and principles that help our lives in very direct and practical ways. So when we take a theme or a principle like this, maybe it’s a little more helpful to look at it in terms of our own lives. One way we can bring this particular principle home is to reflect that it’s talking about all of the little ups and downs, the births and deaths within our own lives: the times of happiness, the times of sadness, the times of success, the times of failure, the feeling of being praised, the feeling of being criticized. So, if we talk in terms of “victory over birth and death,” we can see it as some sort of strange mythological fable. When we talk instead about being liked, being disliked, winning, losing, being praised, being criticized, that’s a bit more close to home — we know what that’s about! We can relate to that.

When we talk about what we’re aiming to do in Buddhist practice, we’re using the Buddhist wisdom to learn how to break free, to achieve victory over being pulled around by the ups and downs of life and being swept along by the waves of success and failure, praise and criticism. The Buddha referred to such forces as “the worldly winds.” They are classically listed as: happiness and unhappiness, praise and blame, gain and loss, fame and disrepute. These are winds that can become the dominant concern of our lives. We all get blown around by them from time to time.

I was reminded today of when I was young, the age of some of these lads staying here at the monastery. When I was in school we tried out for different specialties in gym or in track and I found out, to my surprise, that even though I have short, thick legs, I was very good at the high hurdles sprint. In that kind of race you have a line of eight or ten hurdles in eighty yards, a hundred yards or a hundred and twenty yards, depending on the age-group. It was very easy for me to get over the hurdles as I had inherited the flexible hips of my mother, who was quite a gymnast when she was young. I was quick over the hurdles and so, whenever we had these races, I always won them.

The school then put me in for the district championships races and to my amazement I won, way ahead of everybody. Oh, that was good! You know what winning feels like? “Yes, I really like that! This is great, going to the competition and leaving everyone in the dust. Oh, this is marvelous!” I won the district championship, I think I was about eleven or twelve years old at the time and then I was qualified to take part in the county competition. Then I won the county championships as well; in quite a good time too. “Ha, I’m really hot stuff! This is great, I really like hurdles! Athletics is great; this is a totally important thing!” I got very excited about all of this.

When you win the championship and you run for the county team, you get a big flash to put on the back of your tracksuit. The county that I lived in had a very short name Kent, just four letters, so that made the letters on the flash really big. I thus got to have this big sign on the back of my track suit that said KENT. It was very noticeable from a distance. There were only three or four guys in my high school who ran for the county, so we could strut about looking incredibly special and pretend that we had forgotten that we had a big sign on our backs saying “Look at me, I’m wonderful, I run for the county.” It was a big status symbol at that time, and I got very pleased with myself. I thought it was a great thing.

When the time for the national championships came, I found out that my county wasn’t going to put forward a full team; most significantly, they weren’t going to put out a team of hurdlers. So I wasn’t going to get to go to the nationals and I felt, “I’ve been robbed! I’m sure I would have won.” You know how one can get pretty deluded: “If only I could have raced I’m sure I would have won!” I had to wait another year or two to go up to the next category of intermediate hurdles so I was about fourteen by this time. Once again I did the district championships and won those, and the county championships and won those. “Ok, now I’m definitely going to be running in the nationals. This time I’ve got a chance . . .”

When you are that kind of age I guess you don’t really see these things coming, however, I do suffer from an over-inflated estimate of my wonderfulness, at times. So there I was at the national championships and strutting about with my big sign saying KENT across my back. But of course everyone else had a big sign on their back of the county that they had come from, so it wasn’t quite so special as it was in my high school. Nevertheless, I was already working on my victory speech when I got back to my school, telling everyone what it’s like to win the national championship.

There we were in the first heat, lined up at the blocks. Some of the other guys looked pretty sporty — long-legged teens with an air of being very fast and serious. I thought, “Well, I’m pretty good at this so I’ll probably just have to pace them, just do enough to win the heat.” And lo and behold, who was left in the dust? Out of the six people in the heat, I think I came fifth. There I was. I couldn’t believe it, coming up to the finish line with all those people way ahead of me. So then there was a feeling of, “Oh! How could this happen? Something has gone terribly wrong.” There was a feeling of enormous disappointment and not wanting to tell anybody. How can I go back to school and not mention where I came in the race, how I got knocked out in the first heat?

So, hope and disappointment, they’re partners for each other, aren’t they? These kinds of lessons are ones that all of us have. My particular lesson there was in the realm of races and athletics, and it was something of shock to me. I didn’t see how much my mind had invested, how much my heart had poured into it. It had become crucial for me to be a winner and the mind had assumed that was something good and real and special, and then the cold fact of being ordinary, being a loser. That was so unbearable, so embarrassing. The fact that I had this big flash on my back saying KENT suddenly said, “So what? Here among all these equally qualified people, it doesn’t mean anything. Besides, I just got knocked out in the first heat. I’m ordinary here, I am nothing special.”

Now, when we begin to look at life, we see that the degree to which we invest in hope becomes the degree to which we invest in disappointment. As in mathematics, that’s a perfectly balanced equation. Moreover, even when you win, even when you do come out on top, you find that a similar chemistry is going on. An American monk who used to be in our community in England was a champion wrestler when he was in high school. This is what they call “Greek wrestling”; this was not World Wrestling Federation — TV wrestling with smoke bombs and rock music and enormous guys with very, very angry looks and lots of costumery. This was a serious sort of Olympic-type wrestling.

Anyway, he was extremely gifted. He came from Tennessee and was the Eastern States champion twice when he was in high school. I remember when we were monks in Thailand and he was telling me the story of his going to competition after competition, winning and winning, and finally he won the whole championship of the eastern states of the USA. And he felt so good, he said it was incredible. There he was at the top of the heap, “I did it, I won! This is great!”

Most interestingly, he said that there was about ten minutes of complete and utter happiness at having won the championship, becoming the big hero and at having made it after so many hours of training, with so much hard work. And then he started to notice the other guys out in the audience looking at him saying, “Next year... just you wait, you reckon you’re so smart but just you wait. Next year I’m going to get you.” So then his delight at victory and success suddenly became the cause for fear, “Oh no, I’m going to have to do it again.” Ever had that feeling? Suddenly we feel we have to repeat the same thing and live up to other people’s expectations.

So victory and winning — it was sweet, it was really sweet and perfect and good but it could not sustain itself. It was only sweet for so long and then it became, “Oh dear, now they’re going to want to get me. They know I’m the winner and they’re going to be looking out, gunning for me in particular.” When we talk about something like victory over birth and death, what we are talking about is learning how to find a place of understanding, a place of peace in relationship to all of these cycles, these up and downs that we experience. And this doesn’t just apply to sports, as you might have guessed. This has to do with all other aspects of our life. When we get hired for a job — yay! Then we find out who we have to work with — aaarrrrgghhhh! We think we want a promotion, so then we get promoted, “Yay! I’m the office manager” and then, “Gee, I gotta look after these people” and then, “Why does everyone think I’m supposed to be responsible here?” “Well, because you’re the manager.” “Oh, that’s right, I actually have to be in charge of things and take responsibility.” That’s the rider that goes with it.

When things come together and it’s successful, it feels so sweet. We get promoted. We fall in love. We get married. It’s very sweet and delightful. Then it gets difficult, it gets strained and then becomes hard work. In many of our lives, things start out so hopeful, so sweet and beautiful, but then it can easily turn into bitterness and difficulty.

These are very, very familiar themes to all of us, whether it’s in sports, our schoolwork, and our relationships or even in monastic life. Coming to the monastery you might think, “I really want to be a monk! I have to be a monk! Yeah, this is really important.” Tomorrow we have an ordination ceremony. Anagarika Lee is going forth as a sāmanera, as a novice, and Sāmanera Thitābho is going forth as a bhikkhu (a monk). So we can take hold of the idea, “Ah, it’s going to be really great. Yeah, I’m going to become a novice, this is great! Hang up these car keys forever, don’t have to worry about money ever again. This is going to be great!” And then we realize after we’ve made the leap and we take on the training of a novice or a monk, “Oh, so I can’t help myself to food anymore.” Or, “I can’t help with the van, I’ve got to find someone else to drive the vehicle. Oh, that’s an inconvenience.”

When we are unwise, then we just keep going through this cycle of hope and disappointment over and over again. When we get disappointed we just look out for the next hope, “Oh, that one didn’t work out. Ok, let’s try the next one. Try a different competition, a different job, a different relationship, a different school, a different subject, a different monastery, a different Buddhist tradition, go back to the Christians, join the Hindus, go back to the synagogue, get back to England, “That’s the answer! Go back to Thailand.” We never learn, we just keep going from one thing to another, “Well, that didn’t work out. Ok, let’s try something else . . . try something else.”

The cycle of birth and death goes around and around: one hope, one disappointment, and then another hope, another disappointment. We never learn that there’s a pattern there. We never see that we’re not ever finding any kind of contentment or any kind of settledness within ourselves — we never find any ease — we’re just riding on one wave of hope after another and we’re not able to deal with disappointment.

One of the things that is the most precious and helpful in Buddhist tradition is that we find, if we pay attention, it’s often the difficult things, the painful things of life — when we are disappointed, when we lose someone that we love, like Todd or when we get fired from a job, or when our relationship goes sour, or our monastery falls apart, or we come second to last in the first heats of the competition — these can teach us a lot. Furthermore and strange as it may seem, we often learn better from painful experiences than we do from pleasant ones. Our teacher, Ajahn Chah, used to say, “If all our experience is happiness and success, we just go to sleep. We end up snoozing through life. Oftentimes it’s only the difficult and painful things that get our attention. It’s then that we wake up.” In the trade, this type of experience and mode of practice is called “the suffering that leads to the end of suffering.”

We don’t go out looking for trouble, we don’t go looking for pain and difficulty, we don’t deliberately lose races or break up relationships or get ourselves fired or disappoint our friends, but these things happen on their own in the natural course of things. Like having this big rainstorm thundering down tonight and having the ordination ceremonies scheduled for tomorrow. How many of us living in the monastery have accessed Accuweather in the last few days, looking at the forecast?

So we don’t go out looking for trouble but we can rest assured that trouble will come on its own. The trick is learning how to see those painful situations, to know them for what they are and to see that they’re an intrinsic part of nature — that life is always this way. There are always going to be difficult and painful things as well as sweet and pleasant and neutral things. If we’re wise, then even when things get difficult or painful, those experiences will help us to learn. We’ll find a quality of peacefulness and ease, a quality of understanding that we wouldn’t find if we were just snoozing our way through life.

When we stop to look and examine life, we recognize that, even when things are successful, it’s a case of, “Well, it’s only success to a certain degree because I remember what happened last time. The last time I was a big winner it just made people more determined to beat me the next time around.” Yes, it was pleasant to win, to be a success, for things to go well, but there were also many difficulties that came along with it. Along with the wedding, you got the responsibility of having to take care of someone. Along with the ordination, you found you had all these extra rules to keep. Along with the delight of having a fancy beautiful new car, then you had to worry about parking it in a place where it was safe and not going to get damaged. Or acquiring a fine new camera and then finding you had to put it away ever-so-carefully and make sure it didn’t get bumped or damaged . . .

“Aha! There’s a downside that goes with every plus. Aha! That’s what happened last time so I should be prepared this time.” Similarly, when things get difficult, sometimes they bring gifts with them. At teatime today we were talking with one of the guests staying here about her long visit to Thailand and her difficult stint of teaching at a university there. She said, “That was just a huge disaster but it also was where I met my two masters.” So a painful episode brought these great blessings along with it as well.

There’s a story that comes out of the Tibetan tradition that illustrates this principle very well. It’s the tale of a young boy living in a country village. His family was very, very poor but the one thing that the family did have was a mare, a female horse, otherwise they didn’t have two coins to rub together.

One day, the horse escaped, she ran away. So all the family lamented and cried, “Oh, what are we going to do!? Our pony ran away. She was the one precious thing we had and now she’s gone. Now we’re really lost, we are helpless. We have nothing, absolutely nothing. We’re ruined.” So mom was crying, dad was crying, the boy was crying, granny was crying. But then granny thought for a moment and said, “Well, maybe it’s not such a bad thing after all.” The rest of the family replied, “How can you say that, granny?” “Well, you never know. Maybe it’s a bad thing, maybe not.”

And lo and behold, a few days later, to their great surprise and delight, the mare came trotting back over the hill and she brought a stallion back with her as well. She’d found a boyfriend. “Oh wow!” the family cried out in delight, “not only have we got the mare back, we now have a stallion too. We can breed them. This is great! Our fortune is made. This is marvelous. This is wonderful! Now we’re going to be rich — they can have lots of foals and we’ll start a whole herd of horses. This is marvelous, hooray!” But granny then said, “Well, I wouldn’t celebrate just yet because it might not be a good thing.”

“How can you say that?”

“Well, you never know. You never know.”

Then, a little while later, and boys being boys, the young son of the family thought, “This stallion is a much bigger and stronger horse than that little slowpoke of a mare. She’s nice and sweet but she doesn’t really go very fast. That stallion, he’s really big. He can move. I think, instead of riding the mare like I used to do, I will go for a ride on the stallion even though mom and dad said I shouldn’t do that, that it’s dangerous. They’re probably not looking anyway, so why don’t I just hop on his back and go for a little bit of a trot around the hill.” So he hops up on board the stallion and boom! Races off, charging over hill and dale. “This is really great!” he thinks.

They were incredibly fast, bounding and leaping over stone walls, streams and rocks — the kid’s having a great time but suddenly, boom! The horse makes a sudden turn and he comes flying off — crash! Broken leg. Other families from the village found the boy lying on the ground, crying, “Ahhhh, my leg, my leg!” They carried him back to his house and told his parents what had happened. “Oh, no, this is our only son and now he’s got a broken leg. He’s never going to walk properly again. How will he run the farm when he grows up? Oh dear, what are we going to do? We’re ruined, we’re ruined.” And then granny said “Well, maybe so . . . it’s sad he has a broken leg, but maybe it’s not such a bad thing.”

“How can you say that?”

“Well, you never know. You never know.”

So the boy lies there at home, his leg is in a splint and he’s sitting there grumbling, he didn’t even have a comic to read. This is Tibet, you know. Maybe there were a few sutras to study but nothing more distracting: no comics, no radio, no iPod. Everyone was upset because the boy had a bad leg and they worried, “Oh, it doesn’t look like it’s healing properly. He’s never going to walk again, and he’s our only child. What’s going to happen? This is a terrible thing, we’re really ruined now.” Again granny said, “Well, you know, maybe it’s not such a bad thing.”

Sure enough, a few weeks later, an army general came through with a battalion of troops and they were recruiting. The country was going to war and the general proclaimed, “All the young men of this village over the age of eleven and under twenty have to come with us and join the army.”

“Oh General, we are so sorry but our son can’t come. He has a broken leg so he has to stay at home.” The general lets him off but all the other able-bodied boys have to go. The family is very happy! And so the story goes on, and on and on and on and on. It tells us that in good fortune, in bad fortune, you never know: even a broken leg can be a blessing.

When we develop wisdom we see that in any success, there’s a shadow. In any failure, we see there’s a brightness. When we hope for something we also develop a wariness, a caution. When we’re disappointed, we see, “this has a bitter taste but maybe there’s some goodness here too.” We see both sides of the coin. Our teacher, Ajahn Chah, would often point out that a hand has a front and a back. With the hand, we get both sides. We don’t just get one part of it. This fact is one reason why we meditate.

When we sit here silently with our eyes closed and not speaking to each other, one of the things that we’re aiming to do is to learn this kind of lesson. We learn to watch the mind as it goes through cycles of hope and disappointment, happiness and unhappiness; as it experiences feelings of the sweetness of being praised and the bitterness of being criticized. When we meditate, we are learning how to watch these feelings — just as if we were standing back and looking at them from a distance. We’re not trying to wipe the feelings out. We are not turning ourselves into zombies, neutralizing or sterilizing the mind so that we won’t feel or sense or think anything. That’s not what we’re trying to do with meditation, although some of it might look like that from the outside.

When I talk about not depending on hope or not getting swept along by the feeling of hope, it’s not meant to mean that we’re trying to make ourselves feel hopeless. It’s not about developing hope-less-ness, instead more hope-free-ness. We’re freeing the heart from being tied to hoping and being tied to disappointment. We’re able to watch those cycles of feelings and moods as they sweep through the mind: the pleasant, the unpleasant, the beautiful, the ugly, the painful, the delightful. As we train the mind, we can see that these are just like waves on the ocean. It is their nature to be transient, to pass: the rain comes and the storm bursts through and the sky is clear again; days follow nights, nights follow days. This is somewhat obvious when we think of the weather or the sea, however, even though it might not always feel that way, our mind works in exactly the same fashion.

The more that we learn to meditate, the more we are able to watch the mind and see that the mind is just an aspect of nature, just like the rain and the clouds, just like the day and the night, just like the tides of the sea. Then we find the tremendous peacefulness in our heart. We find a real ease.

Tomorrow, when we have the ordination ceremonies, whether it’s raining or not, one of the things that you’ll hear being said when the candidates ask for the going-forth, is Sabba dukkha nissarana, Nibbāna sacchikaranatthāya. This means to relinquish, to pass beyond all dissatisfaction, and to realize true peacefulness. This is the purpose of going forth, this is why people like Lee and Tan Thitābho have asked to go forth, to cross beyond all difficulties and to realize true peacefulness, and this is also why we meditate. These further steps on the Buddhist path of commitment are really just to facilitate learning this same kind of lesson.

When we find that quality of serenity of heart through wisdom and peacefulness, it enables us to be sensitive to the cycles of life. It enables us to know, to understand those cycles and not to be confused by them. So that when we meet with success, and pleasure and delight, when everything goes well — we won the race, hooray! Well, ok, it’s sweet but it’s just a sweet taste, there’s no need to get drunk on it. And when we lose, when we fail and things fall apart, when we lose those that we love, well, it’s bitter but it’s only a bitter taste. No need to break into a million pieces on account of that. It’s a bitter taste, it’s a sadness but it’s just a bitter taste. No need to fall apart.

We find that peacefulness is a true harmonizing of our lives; we find ourselves at one with others, at one with the world, at one with the people who like us, who dislike us, the people who we live with and the world around us. We find a true quality of independence so that we can work with the ups and downs of life. We can work with pleasures and pains, successes and failures. We can make the best of each situation that we meet with, so in our heart we find great contentment, great happiness and a great quality of freedom. Nothing can go wrong. Even if it’s pouring with rain all day. We realize, “This is the way it is.” We find that even if everything is not as we would have chosen it to be, we can find true ease, true peacefulness and true contentment. This is because we realize, “Here it is, the world is like this and I can either make a problem out of it or not. This is how the world is.” Thus we find that true quality of peace and ease and then we’re fine, the heart has extricated itself from the cycles of birth and death and thereby those cycles have been conquered. We realize this is the greatest richness in life, the greatest joy and the greatest gift that the world can bring us.

So I offer these words for consideration this evening.

Handa mayam dhammakathāya sādhukāram dadāmase Sādhu sādhu sādhu, anumodāmi