## My Cat Lucky

Todd Tansuhaj A fourth-grade essay, age nine, April 2005

My cat Lucky means a lot to me. My mom and dad got him from an animal shelter in 1987. He is eighteen years old for a human. This is a teenager if he is a boy, but he really is eighty years old for a cat. An old cat!

I was born in 1995. That means I have been with Lucky nine years and ten days. I was adopted too, but not from an animal shelter, but from a human shelter in Thailand where humans give away babies when they don’t want them.

Lucky is a mixed breed of a cat. He looks half Siamese and half raccoon. His neck looks like a ringtail lemur. His feet are white and grey like a tabby cat. His eyes are cat’s eye marbles. He almost got de-clawed. My mom and dad’s friends said, “You should get him de-clawed.” But my mom and dad decided not to.

Lucky is honest, slow and stretchable. When he was young, he liked to jump around. He also watched movies with us. Sometimes he liked to sleep inside my clothes because it was warm. He is kind of a coward. He was chased by some bulldogs and he climbed up a tree. The fire fighters were busy, so my dad climbed up a ladder to rescue him. Another time, a dog bit him and he had a hole on his throat for a week.

When I was about three years old, I tried to eat his cat food. I didn’t know better. I also tried to copy him. I peed and pooped outdoors like him. What I like the best was when he cuddled with me and we fell asleep together.

I love Lucky very much. In fact, I think all girl cats would want to marry him because he is nice, strong, smart and easygoing, but he got neutered. A few years from now he would leave me. He is old and doesn’t walk much any more.

My mom wants me to meditate because it is good for me. She made me do it to calm down. When I sit cross-legged, Lucky would sit on my lap. When I try to float, Lucky tries to float too. When I feel enlightened — that means when you know about the sick, the old, and the dead — Lucky snores on my tummy.

When Lucky passes away, I will treasure his pictures. I shall miss him.