The Island

292

The Eightfold Path which is equated with the stream is often characterized as being composed of three trainings – virtue, concentration (or the higher mind) and wisdom. In this next example there is a relationship drawn between the trainings and the penetration of the goal. If the factors of the path are fulfilled partially, one is able to realize stream-entry. If you fulfill them more completely, you’ll reach the higher attainments. For stream-entry, full accomplishment in virtue is necessary, but only partial accomplishment in concentration and wisdom.

16.21) O monks, the more than a hundred and fifty training rules that come up for recitation every fortnight, in which young men desiring the goal train themselves, are all contained in these three trainings. What three? The training in the higher virtue, the training in the higher mind, and the training in the higher wisdom. These are the three trainings in which the more than a hundred and fifty training rules are all contained.

Here, monks, a monk is one fully accomplished in virtue but only moderately accomplished in concentration and wisdom. He infringes some of the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself. Why is that? Because, monks, this is not said to be impossible for him. But as to those training rules that are fundamental to the holy life, in conformity with the holy life, in these his virtue is stable and steady, and he trains himself in the training rules he has undertaken. With the utter destruction of three fetters he becomes a stream-enterer, one no longer subject to rebirth in a lower world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination.

Then there are comparable sections for the sakadāgāmi, anāgāmi and arahant with increasing refinement, according to the fetters relinquished as explained in the suttas quoted at §16.3, .4 & .5.

Thus, monks, one who is partly accomplished achieves partial success; one who is fully accomplished achieves full success. But these training rules are not barren, I declare.

~ A 3.85, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A partial accomplishment in concentration and wisdom is still enough to take one to a clear vision of the Dhamma. Even a partial attainment, that is, stream-entry,