The Island

298

The Buddha makes clear that the stream-enterer’s knowledge of dependent origination is direct and intuitive, rather than intellectual or rational, learned from books, memorized from others, or arrived at through speculative thinking.

17.8) Bhikkhus, an instructed noble disciple does not think: “When what exists does what come to be? With the arising of what does what arise? [When what exists do volitional formations come to be? When what exists does consciousness come to be?] When what exists does name-and-form come to be? ... When what exists does aging-and-death come to be?”

Rather, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple has knowledge about this that is independent of others: “When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises. [When there is ignorance, volitional formations come to be. When there are volitional formations, consciousness comes to be.] When there is consciousness, name-and-form comes to be ... When there is birth, aging-and-death comes to be.” He understands thus: “In such a way the world originates.”

Bhikkhus, an instructed noble disciple does not think: “When what does not exist does what not come to be? With the cessation of what does what cease? [When what does not exist do volitional formations not come to be? When what does not exist does consciousness not come to be?] When what does not exist does name-and-form not come to

be? ... When what does not exist does aging-and-death not come to be?”

Rather, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple has knowledge about this that is independent of others: “When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases. [When there is no ignorance, volitional formations do not come to be. When there are no volitional formations, consciousness does not come to be.] When there is no consciousness, name-and-form does not come to be ... When there is no birth, aging-and-death does not come to be.” He understands thus: “In such a way the world ceases.”

Bhikkhus, when a noble disciple thus understands as they really are the origin and the passing away of the world, he is then called a noble disciple who is accomplished in view, accomplished in vision, who has arrived at this true Dhamma, who sees this true Dhamma, who possesses a trainee’s knowledge, a trainee’s true knowledge, who has entered the