FIRE, HEAT AND COOLNESS

47

names the standard five, from matter to consciousness, calling each an ‘upādāna-kkhandhā.’ Each is being metaphorically called a bundle of fuel. The normal fuel was firewood, and we can, if we like, extend the image to being one of the brahmin student (brahmacārin), one of whose daily duties was to collect the firewood to feed the sacred fires ...

There is a short text a little later in the Saṃyutta Nikāya, at S 22.61, which states that the five khandhā are on fire (āditta), so that one should stop caring for them. I wonder whether this was not the original form of the metaphor of ‘being on fire’: the experiences of the unenlightened are like five bundles of firewood which are on fire. That would make them very uncomfortable to carry! Indeed, I wonder whether these two short texts, S 22.22 and S 22.61, were not originally together.

~ Richard Gombrich, ‘How Buddhism Began: The Conditioned

Genesis of the Early Teachings,’ pp 65-8

Another influence on the society within which the Buddha was living and teaching, along with the brahmins and their tending of the fires, was the presence of the samaṇas – the varieties of wandering yogis and ascetics amongst whom the Buddha counted himself and his disciples (more often than not he was known by the epithet ‘the Samaṇa Gotama’ by those who were not his followers). Along with putting a damper on the brahmins, and encouraging the three fires to be put out rather than tended and kept alive, he also met the principal focus of the yogic tradition of his time head on and doused their image of the spiritual goal as well.

2.5) For ṛṣis [ascetic yogis] the pivotal word was tapas, ‘heat.’ For the Buddha it was Nirvāṇa, ‘extinction’ [coolness]. Perfect correspondence, poles apart. Inversion. In the land they lived in, extinction was thought of as fire going home, withdrawing into its dark dwelling.

~ Roberto Calasso, ‘Ka,’ pp 369-70

2.6) Tapas: Heat; ardor; from the Indo-European root tap-, which gives the Latin tepeo. Long translated with a range of terms (austérités, penance, Kasteiung, ascèse ... Brütung [Deussen]), ... tapas means at once the cosmic heat and the heat within the mind, that which broods, in the sense of incubates.

~ ibid, p 435