PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

255

with the two others: with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view “Nothing is acceptable to me” and with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view “Something is acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me.” I may clash with these two, and when there is a clash, there are disputes; when there are disputes, there are quarrels; when there are quarrels, there is vexation.’ Foreseeing for himself clashes, disputes, quarrels, and vexation, he abandons that view and does not take up some other view. This is how there comes to be the abandoning of these views; this is how there comes to be the relinquishing of these views.”

And similarly when adhering to the other views of ‘Nothing is acceptable to me’ and ‘Something is acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me’

~ M 74.6-8, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

At the time of the Buddha, religious teachers commonly staked out their philosophical ground in terms of a standard set of ten speculative questions. The Buddha was very circumspect in not engaging in these philosophical speculations as he felt them to be a major distraction rather than an aid in the training that he

himself encouraged.

14.14) “Therefore, Māluṅkyaputta, remember what I have left undeclared as undeclared, and remember what I have declared as declared. And what have I left undeclared? ‘The world is eternal’ – I have left undeclared. ‘The world is not eternal’ – I have left undeclared. ‘The world is finite’ – I have left undeclared. ‘The world is infinite’ – I have left undeclared. ‘The soul is the same as the body’ – I have left undeclared. ‘The soul is one thing and the body another’ – I have left undeclared. ‘After death a Tathāgata exists’ – I have left undeclared. ‘After death a Tathāgata does not exist’ – I have left undeclared. ‘After death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist’ – I have left undeclared. ‘After death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist’ – I have left undeclared.

“Why have I left that undeclared? Because it is unbeneficial, it does not belong to the fundamentals of the holy life, it does not lead to