“AH, WHAT BLISS!”

341

occasion, Saccaka had invited his followers to help in preparing and offering the meal to the Buddha along with the Sangha at his abode.

20.5) Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the park of Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son and sat down on the seat made ready. Then, with his own hands, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various kinds of good food. When the Blessed One had eaten and had withdrawn his hand from the bowl, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, may the merit and the great meritorious fruits of this act of giving be for the happiness of the givers.”

“Aggivessana, whatever comes about from giving to a recipient such as yourself – one who is not free from lust, not free from hate, not free from delusion – that will be for the givers. And whatever comes about from giving to a recipient such as myself – one who is free from lust, free from hate, free from delusion – that will be for you.”

~ M 35.30, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The Buddha was very aware of the effect of generosity and of the merit generated for the donors when the recipients of their gifts are a well-practised Sangha. Hence, in the following sutta, the Buddha encourages the monks to practise diligently in order to attain Nibbāna so as to increase the blessings that accrue to people who give gifts of the requisites. Thus we can see that the motivation encouraged for following the path to arahantship is unselfish and compassionate. This tends to increase the blessings that arise for everyone’s benefit.

20.6) “Recluses, recluses,” bhikkhus, that is how people perceive you. And when you are asked, “What are you?” you claim that you are recluses. Since that is what you are designated and what you claim to be, you should train thus: “We will undertake and practise those things that make one a recluse, that make one a brahmin, so that our designations may be true and our claims genuine, and so that the services of those whose robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites we use