The Island

88

Central to the path of insight into this area is a recognition that the sense of self is a conditioned, natural quality. Neither eternally self-existent nor essentially non-existent, it arises and passes away dependent on causes and conditions.

5.2) “Bhikkhu, ‘I am’ is a conceiving; ‘I am this’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall not be’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be possessed of form’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be formless’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be percipient’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be non-percipient’ is a conceiving. Conceiving is a disease, conceiving is a tumour, conceiving is a barb. By overcoming all conceivings, bhikkhu, one is called a sage at peace. And the sage at peace is not born, does not age, does not die; they are not shaken and are not agitated. For there is nothing present in them by which they might be born. Not being born, how could they age? Not ageing, how could they die? Not dying, how could they be shaken? Not being shaken, why should they be agitated?”

~ M 140.31

There is some controversy as to the definitive meaning in this and related passages of phrases such as: “the sage at peace is not born, does not age, does not die.” Those who uphold the view that the teachings on dependent origination refer only to the passage of events over three lifetimes (past, present and future) assert that this means birth etc. in future lives. This is the view tentatively expressed by Ācariya Buddhaghosa in the ‘Visuddhimagga’ – the principal commentarial compendium on the Theravāda teachings – although it should also be said that he does allow for dependent origination in one lifetime as well.

Those who feel that the dependent origination teachings can refer to both the microcosm of the present moment and present life, and the macrocosm of the span of several lives, tend to interpret such phrases as meaning a psychological birth rather than an obstetric one – i.e. no sense of self is born. This outlook on things – that the pattern of dependent origination follows the laws of scale invariance and thus pertains over a variety of orders of magnitude – is borne out by a number of key statements of the Buddha, most notably:

5.3) Heedfulness is the path to the Deathless,

heedlessness is the path to death;

the heedful never die,

the heedless are as if dead already.

~ Dhp 21