PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES I

245

In a previous sutta the Buddha answers a similar question, “When one asserts thus, this amounts to eternalism.”

“But, Timbaruka, [if one thinks] ‘The feeling is one, the one who feels it is another,’ [then one asserts] with reference to one stricken by feeling: ‘Pleasure and pain are created by another.’ Neither do I speak thus.”

In a previous sutta the Buddha answers a similar question,“When one asserts thus, this amounts to annihilationism.”

“Without veering towards either of these extremes, the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma by the middle: ‘With ignorance as condition, volitional formations [come to be]; with volitional formations as condition, consciousness ... Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations; with the cessation of volitional formations, cessation of consciousness ... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’”

When this was said, the naked ascetic Timbaruka said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama! ... I go for refuge to Master Gotama, and to the Dhamma, and to the Bhikkhu Sangha. From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

~ S 12.18, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

13.27) On one occasion Ven. Sāriputta and Ven. MahāKoṭṭhita were staying near Vārāṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana. Then in the evening, arising from his seclusion, Ven. MahāKoṭṭhita went to Ven. Sāriputta and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven. Sāriputta: “Now tell me, Sāriputta my friend: Are aging & death self-made or other-made or both self-made & other-made, or – without self-making or other-making – do

they arise spontaneously?”

“It’s not the case, Koṭṭhita my friend, that aging & death are self-made, that they are other-made, that they are both self-made & other-made, or that – without self-making or other-making – they arise spontaneously.