“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

101

“Dispassion amidst the world is happiness

for those who have let go of sense desires;

“But the end of the conceit ‘I am’ –

that’s the greatest happiness of all.”

~ Ud 2.1

We now move on to the closely related area of attachment to ‘being’ and ‘non-being.’ The average reader might well believe that such issues are not the burning concerns of an average day, and only of tangential or academic interest. However, there are numerous subtle ways in which our hearts incline towards the longing to be someone, something, and then towards the longing not to be, not to feel,

not to experience...

Does this sound at all familiar? Probably thousands of times a day the heart of the average person tilts towards bhava-taṇhā or vibhava-taṇhā (the former is

defined as the yearning to be, to become; the latter embodying the yearning to switch off, to annihilate experience).

It is in the light of this reality that these teachings take on great meaning and practical value – they describe the habits of the heart which are deeply ingrained and which continually drive the wheel of birth and death: enthusiasm and disappointment, the return of the nemesis we have tried to escape, union and bereavement, the results of impulses to “Just get rid of this...”

If we use the reflective capacity of the mind, we begin to see how these teachings map the terrain of such habits quite precisely. They then also point the way to attitudes which will break the imprisoning spell such habits have woven.

5.19) “Whatever samaṇas or brahmins have described liberation from being to come about through [love of] being, none, I say, are liberated from being. And whatever samaṇas or brahmins have described escape from being to come about through [love of] non-being, none, I say, have escaped from being. Through attachment to existence (upadhi), suffering is; with all clinging exhausted, suffering is no more.

Whatever states of being there are,

of any kind, anywhere,

all are impermanent, pain-haunted

and subject to change.