PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES I

237

The ‘middle’ of the Middle Way is not an easy splitting-the-difference between one’s attachments and unskillful habits, then coming up with a comfortable compromise between the two (see §9.10). It entails a careful and circumspect understanding of the way the mind works and an ability to find the balance that truly cuts through our ignorance and craving. Sometimes this balance is just that: the balancing of two extremes on a continuum that can be harmful on either end, but helpful in the middle. This is especially true in cases where the continuum concerns extremes of behaviour or motivation, as in the Buddha’s first words to his first five disciples:

13.18) Bhikkhus, these two extremes should not be followed by one who has gone forth into homelessness. What two? The pursuit of sensual happiness in sensual pleasures, which is low, vulgar, the way of worldlings, ignoble, unbeneficial; and the pursuit of self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, unbeneficial. Without veering towards either of these extremes, the Tathāgata has awakened to the middle way, which gives rise to vision, which gives rise to knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.

And what, bhikkhus, is that middle way awakened to by the Tathāgata, which gives rise to vision, which gives rise to knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna? It is this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,

right concentration.

~ S 56.11, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Sometimes the balance is internal and directly related to more subtle aspects of training the mind.

13.19) And how, bhikkhus, are the four bases for spiritual power developed and cultivated so that they are of great fruit and benefit?

Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses concentration due to desire and volitional formations of striving, thinking: “Thus my desire will be neither too slack nor too tense; and it will be neither constricted internally nor distracted externally.” And he dwells perceiving after and before: “As before, so