The Island

312

And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be abandoned by direct knowledge? Ignorance and craving for existence. These are the things to be abandoned by direct knowledge.

And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be realized by direct knowledge? True knowledge and liberation. These are the things to be realized by direct knowledge.

And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be developed by direct knowledge? Serenity and insight. These are the things to be developed by direct knowledge.

And how is it, bhikkhus, that when a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path, he fully understands by direct knowledge those things that are to be fully understood by direct knowledge ... he develops by direct knowledge those things that are to be developed by direct knowledge? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops right view ... right concentration, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release. It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path so that he fully understands by direct knowledge those things that are to be fully understood by direct knowledge ... he develops by direct knowledge those things that are to be developed by direct knowledge.

~ S 45.159, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The following sutta is somewhat similar to previous ones. Its primary distinction is its description of the sotāpanna as one who lives with Refuges in the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha firmly established – but has generosity as the other defining characteristic intrinsic within the heart.

The sutta starts with the Buddha in conversation with some chamberlains who have proclaimed their devotion to him, as well as their sadness at seeing him leave for a walking tour and their gladness at his return. A discussion of the difficulties of living in the world then ensues:

18.11) The chamberlains Isidatta and Purāṇa paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and said to him:

“Venerable sir, when we hear that the Blessed One will set out from Sāvatthī on tour among the Kosalans, on that occasion there arises in us distress and displeasure at the thought: ‘The Blessed One will be far