SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT I

293

is sufficient to lay the foundation for understanding the true nature of things and to begin to realize the transcendent fruits of practice. An example of this is when Sāriputta first received a brief teaching from Assaji, one of the original five disciples of the Buddha:

16.22) Now when the wanderer Sāriputta heard this statement of the Dhamma, the spotless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in him: All that is subject to arising is subject to cessation ...

Sāriputta went to Moggallāna the wanderer. Moggallāna the wanderer saw him coming. He said: “Your faculties are serene, friend, the colour of your skin is clear and bright. Is it possible that you have found the Deathless?”

“Yes, friend, I have found the Deathless.”

~ MV 1.23, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli trans.)

This seeing of the Deathless is the ‘uncommon knowledge’ mentioned in §19.11 and it is an essential aspect to the sotāpatti experience. Insight into the nature of the goal gives one the confidence and clarity to practise correctly as one’s vision

is now unclouded.

16.23) “Friend Saviṭṭha, apart from faith, apart from personal preference, apart from oral tradition, apart from reasoned reflection, apart from acceptance of a view after pondering it, I know this, I see this: ‘Nibbāna is the cessation of becoming.’”

“Then the Venerable Nārada is an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed.”

“Friend, though I have clearly seen as it really is with correct wisdom, ‘Nibbāna is the cessation of becoming,’ I am not an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed. Suppose, friend, there was a well along a desert road, but it had neither a rope nor a bucket. Then a man would come along, oppressed and afflicted by the heat, tired, parched, and thirsty. He would look down into the well and the knowledge would occur to him, ‘There is water,’ but he would not be able to make bodily contact with it. So too, friend, though I have clearly seen as it really is with correct wisdom, ‘Nibbāna is the cessation of becoming,’ I am not an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed.”

~ S 12.68