“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

105

5.26) “So most people don’t want to go to Nibbāna, there’s nothing there; nothing at all. Look at the roof and the floor here. The upper extreme is the roof, that’s a ‘becoming.’ The lower extreme is the floor, and that’s another ‘becoming.’ But in the empty space between the floor and the roof there’s nowhere to stand. One could stand on the roof, or stand on the floor, but not on that empty space. Where there is no becoming, that’s where there’s emptiness, and, to put it bluntly, we say that Nibbāna is this emptiness. People hear this and they back up a bit, they don’t want to go. They’re afraid they won’t see their

children or relatives.”

~ ibid, pp 316-7, (adapted)

It is interesting to note that in the Māgandiya Sutta (M 75), a discourse addressed to a dedicated life-affirmer who was of the understanding that the health and well-being of his physical body was Nibbāna (§1.14), the Buddha describes how uninterested in earthly sense pleasures one of the devas would be, since their experiences of pleasure are so much more refined and acute. He then goes on to say to Māgandiya that the reason why he, the Buddha, has renounced sense pleasures is simply because:

5.27) “There is, Māgandiya, a delight apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome states, which surpasses divine bliss. Since I take delight in that, I do not envy what is inferior, nor do I delight therein.”

~ M 75.12

It was not often that the Buddha used this kind of phraseology – intimating as it does, a heart motivated by the love of pleasure, albeit a supradivine bliss. He employed it here because it was the currency that had value for his interlocutor and it succeeded in leading Māgandiya, soon after this exchange, to arahantship. The vast majority of the time the Buddha preferred to use ‘dukkha and the ending of dukkha’ language, as he knew that, ultimately, this would bring the most beings to full realization and unshakeable freedom of the heart.

Another example of the misapprehension of this approach is found in an incident which occurred early on in the Buddha’s teaching career, when he met the wanderer Dīghanakha (‘Long-nails’).