The Island

320

“Venerable sir, when the four factors of stream-entry are completely and totally nonexistent in a noble disciple, would that noble disciple be one who dwells negligently?

“Nandiya, I say that one in whom the four factors of stream-entry are completely and totally absent is ‘an outsider, one who stands in the faction of worldlings.’ But, Nandiya, as to how a noble disciple is one who dwells negligently and one who dwells diligently, listen to that and attend closely, I will speak.”

“Yes, venerable sir,” Nandiya the Sakyan replied. The Blessed

One said this:

“And how, Nandiya, is a noble disciple one who dwells negligently? Here, Nandiya, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is ... teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ Content with that confirmed confidence in the Buddha, he does not make further effort for solitude by day nor for seclusion at night. When he thus dwells negligently, there is no gladness. When there is no gladness, there is no rapture. When there is no rapture, there is no tranquillity. When there is no tranquillity, he dwells in suffering. The mind of one who suffers does not become concentrated. When the mind is not concentrated, phenomena do not become manifest. Because phenomena do not become manifest, he is reckoned as ‘one who dwells negligently.’ [F.L. Woodward translation – “Owing to the teachings being obscure to him, he is reckoned ...”]

“Again, Nandiya, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken ... leading to concentration. Content with those virtues dear to the noble ones, he does not make further effort for solitude by day nor for seclusion at night. When he thus dwells negligently, there is no gladness ... Because phenomena do not become manifest, he is reckoned as one who dwells negligently.’

“It is in this way, Nandiya, that a noble disciple is one who dwells negligently.

“And how, Nandiya, is a noble disciple one who dwells diligently? Here, Nandiya, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is ... teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ Not content with that confirmed