The Island

236

13.17) Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit. When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness. When the four foundations of mindfulness are developed and cultivated, they fulfil the seven enlightenment factors. When the seven enlightenment factors are developed and cultivated, they fulfil true knowledge and deliverance.

~ M 118.15, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A MIDDLE PATH

Although the path follows a natural order of development, progress is by no means assured simply by taking the first step. One needs to monitor one’s progress continually to make sure that one is not wandering off the path, and to make corrections when necessary. This is why the Buddha described the path as a ‘Middle Way,’ and gave instructions for how to detect when one’s practice is straying off to the extremes.

Ajahn Chah once said that as a teacher he simply observed people’s practice like watching someone walking along a road. When they were going off in the wrong direction to the left, he called out to them, “Go right, go right.” And when he saw someone going off on a tangent to the right, he would advise them,

“Go left, go left.”

Although we are fortunate when we can find a teacher like this to help us get started on the path, we can’t rely on the teacher to monitor everything for us. We have to learn how to take on the role of monitor ourselves. In doing so, we are putting the principle of right view and our understanding of cause and effect into practice, thus gradually developing our faculty of discernment to the point where it can gain insights that are truly liberating. At the same time, we avoid the pitfalls that come from focusing too much on the length of time required to complete the path. In this way, we do not fail to recognize the importance of the steps we are taking in the immediate present.

To monitor the ‘middleness’ of our practice in the present requires that we never lose sight of the immediacy of the path. And it also provides us with encouragement in the practice, as we come to see for ourselves that the results of the path are not all saved to the end.