THE UNCONDITIONED AND NON-LOCALITY

161

6. If nirvāṇa were a thing, how would nirvāṇa not be dependent? There does not exist any thing at all that is not dependent.

7. If nirvāṇa were not a thing, how could it possibly be nothing? The one for whom nirvāṇa is not a thing, for him it is not nothing.

8. If nirvāṇa were nothing, how could nirvāṇa possibly be not dependent? There does not exist any nothing which is not dependent.

9. Whatever things come and go are dependent or caused. Not being dependent and not being caused is taught to be nirvāṇa.

10. The teacher taught [it] to be the letting go of arising and perishing. Therefore, it is correct that nirvāṇa is not a thing or nothing.

11. If nirvāṇa were both a thing and nothing, it would follow that it would be a thing or nothing. That is incorrect.

12. If nirvāṇa were both a thing and nothing, nirvāṇa would not be not-dependent, because it would depend on those two.

13. How could nirvāṇa be both a thing and nothing? Nirvāṇa is unconditioned; things and nothings are conditioned.

14. How could nirvāṇa exist as both a thing and nothing? Those two do not exist as one. They are like light and dark.

15. The presentation of neither a thing nor nothing as nirvāṇa will be established [only] if things and nothings are established.

16. If nirvāṇa is neither a thing nor nothing, by who could ‘neither a thing nor nothing’ be perceived?

17. After the Bhagavan has entered nirvāṇa, one cannot perceive [him? it?] as ‘existing,’ likewise as ‘not existing,’ nor can one perceive [him? it?] as ‘both’ or ‘neither.’

18. Even when the Bhagavan is alive, one cannot perceive [him? it?] as ‘existing,’ likewise as ‘not existing,’ nor can one perceive [him? it?] as ‘both’ or ‘neither.’

19. Saṃsāra does not have the slightest distinction from nirvāṇa. Nirvāṇa does not have the slightest distinction from saṃsāra.

20. Whatever is the end of nirvāṇa, that is the end of saṃsāra. There is not even a very subtle, slight distinction between the two.

21. Views about who passes beyond, ends etc. and permanence etc. are contingent upon nirvāṇa and latter ends and former ends.

22. In the emptiness of all things what ends are there? What non-ends are there? What ends and non-ends are there? What of neither are there?