“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

107

5.29) “The Tathāgata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: ‘These good samaṇas and brahmins who describe the annihilation, destruction and extermination of an existing being [at death], through fear of personality and disgust with personality, keep running and circling around that same personality. Just as a dog bound by a leash tied to a firm post or pillar keeps on running and circling around that same post or pillar; so too, these good samaṇas and brahmins, through fear of personality and disgust with personality, keep running and circling around that same personality. All that is conditioned and thus gross, but there is the cessation of formations. Having known ‘There is this,’ seeing the escape from it all, the Tathāgata has gone beyond it.”

~ M 102.12

Perhaps the finest expression of the causes of these two strands of wrong view, eternalism and annihilationism, comes in a passage from the Itivuttaka.

5.30) This was said by the Lord ...

“Bhikkhus, held by two kinds of views, some devas and human beings hold back and some overreach; only those with vision see.

“And how, bhikkhus, do some hold back? Some devas and humans enjoy being, delight in being, are satisfied with being. When the Dhamma is taught to them for the cessation of being, their minds do not enter into it or acquire confidence in it or settle upon it or become resolved upon it. Thus, bhikkhus, do some hold back.

“How, bhikkhus, do some overreach? Now some are troubled, ashamed and disgusted by this very same quality of being and they rejoice in [the idea of] non-being, asserting: ‘Good sirs, when the body perishes at death, this self is annihilated and destroyed and does not exist any more – this is true peace, this is excellent, this is reality!’ Thus, bhikkhus,

do some overreach.

“How, bhikkhus, do those with vision see? Herein one sees what has come to be as having come to be. Having seen it thus, one practises the course for turning away, for dispassion, for the cessation of what has come to be. Thus, bhikkhus, do those with vision see.”

~ Iti 49