The Island

286

away, to breaking apart and dispersal. But his mind, which has been fortified over a long time by faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom – that goes upwards, goes to distinction.

“Suppose, Mahānāma, a man submerges a pot of ghee or a pot of oil in a deep pool of water and breaks it. All of its shards and fragments would sink downwards, but the ghee or oil there would rise upwards. So too, Mahānāma, when a person’s mind has been fortified over a long time by faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, right here crows ... or various creatures eat his body ... But his mind which has been fortified over a long time by faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom – that goes upwards, goes to distinction.

“Don’t be afraid, Mahānāma! Don’t be afraid, Mahānāma! Your death will not be a bad one, your demise will not be a bad one.”

~ S 55.21, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The second factor for stream-entry, hearing the true Dhamma (saddhammas-savāna), is central to realization. The Canon describes numerous occasions when people, whether lay or monastic, attained stream-entry through hearing the teach-ings. The following is an excellent example, in that it comes after the Buddha gives a graduated discourse. These are rather stock phrases in the Pali and appear many times through the Canon, but it is the first time they appear in the Sutta Piṭaka:

16.12) And as Pokkharasāti sat there, the Lord delivered a graduated discourse on generosity, on morality and on heaven, showing the danger, degradation and corruption of sense-desires, and the profit of renunciation. And when the Lord knew that Pokkharasāti’s mind was ready, pliable, free from the hindrances, joyful and calm, then he preached a sermon on Dhamma in brief: on suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. And just as a clean cloth from which all stains have been removed receives the dye perfectly, so in the Brahmin Pokkharasāti, as he sat there, there arose the pure and spotless Dhamma-eye, and he knew: “Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.” And Pokkharasāti, having seen, attained, experienced and penetrated the Dhamma, having passed beyond doubt, transcended uncertainty, having gained perfect confidence in the Teacher’s doctrine without relying on others, said: “Excellent, Lord, excellent! It is as if