The Island

204

forms the Buddha’s most extensive teaching on emptiness in the Pali Canon) the term is used in a somewhat different way, forming a ‘nest’ of contemplations of ever-increasing subtlety, leading to the stopping of the outflows (āsavā) and liberation.

12.14) ‘The Shorter Discourse on Emptiness’

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.

Then, when it was evening, the venerable Ānanda rose from meditation, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, on one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at a town of the Sakyans named Nagaraka. There, venerable sir, I heard and learned this from the Blessed One’s own lips: ‘Now, Ānanda, I often abide in emptiness (suññatāvihārenāhaṃ Ānanda, etarahi bahulaṃ viharāmīti).’ Did I hear that correctly, venerable sir, did I learn that correctly, attend to that correctly, remember that correctly?”

“Certainly, Ānanda, you heard that correctly, learned that correctly, attended to that correctly, remembered that correctly. As formerly, Ānanda, so now too I often abide in emptiness.

“Ānanda, just as this Palace of Migāra’s Mother is empty of elephants, cattle, horses and mares, empty of gold and silver, empty of the assembly of men and women, and there is present only this non-emptiness, namely, the singleness dependent on the Sangha of bhikkhus; so too, a bhikkhu – not attending to the perception of village, not attending to the perception of people – attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of forest. His mind enters into that perception of forest and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He understands thus: ‘Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of village, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of people, those are not present here. There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of forest.’ ... Thus he regards it as empty of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’ Thus, Ānanda, this is his genuine, undistorted, pure entry into emptiness.

“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu – not attending to the perception of