“‘REAPPEARS’ DOES NOT APPLY...”

187

Teacher, applauding him. Then the Teacher asked him about the next three skulls, and Vaṅgīsa answered without making a mistake. The Teacher applauded him for each answer he gave and finally showed him the fifth skull. “Whose skull is this?” he asked. Vaṅgīsa rapped on the fifth skull as he had on the others, but confessed that he did not know in which of the states of existence the person had been reborn.

Then said the Teacher, “Vaṅgīsa, don’t you know?” – “No,” replied Vaṅgīsa, “I don’t know.” – “I know,” said the Teacher. Thereupon Vaṅgīsa asked him, “Teach me this charm.” “I cannot teach it to one who has not gone forth.” Thought the brahmin to himself, “If I only knew this charm I should be the foremost man in all India.” Accordingly he dismissed his fellow-brahmins, saying, “Remain right here for a few days; I intend to go forth.” And he went forth in the presence of the Teacher, obtained acceptance as a monk, and was thereafter known as Elder Vaṅgīsa.

They gave him as his subject of meditation the thirty-two constituent parts of the body and said to him, “Repeat the preliminary words of the formula.” He followed their instructions and repeated the preliminary words of the formula. From time to time the brahmins would ask him, “Have you learned the formula?” and the elder would answer, “Just wait a little! I am learning it.”

In but a few days he attained arahantship. When the brahmins asked him again, he replied, “Friends, I am now unable to learn it.” When the monks heard his reply, they said to the Teacher, “Reverend sir, this monk utters what is not true and is guilty of falsehood.” The Teacher replied, “Monks, do not say so. Monks, my son now knows all about the passing away and rebirth of beings.” So saying, he pronounced the following stanzas:

Who, of beings, knows their death,

Their being born in every way,

Detached, well-faring, enlightened too –

That one I call a brāhmaṇa.

Him whose bourn men do not know,

Neither devas nor minstrels divine,

Pollutions destroyed, an arahant –

That one I call a brāhmaṇa.