The Island

48

2.7) Tapas: Ascetic heat or ardor; a kind of psychic explosion that leads in the case of the gods to the creation of universes, and with humans to the acquisition of such powers that even the gods tremble before them. Shiva as the supreme Ascetic sustains the universe through his tapas.

~ Gita Mehta, ‘A River Sutra,’ p 290

2.8) Through their endurance the pilgrims hope to generate the heat, the tapas, that links men to the energy of the universe, as the Narmada River is thought to link mankind to the energy of Shiva.

~ ibid, p 8

The Buddha countered the concept of tapas (heat), as the most desirable spiritual quality, with his extolling of Nibbāna (coolness). In a single gesture, as with the encouragement to put out the three fires, he thus caught the attention of his listeners through the employment of shock tactics – what an audacious and heretical way to speak! He indicated how his teaching varied from the traditions that they had inherited from elsewhere, and, most importantly, he provided fresh metaphors for the goal of the spiritual life and the path leading to it: put out the three fires of passion, hatred and delusion and you will arrive at the utter spiritual plenitude of Nibbāna – unshakeable and perfect peace.

Having said that, it is also important to recognize that all analogies are partial and that the Buddha didn’t always refer to tapas in a pejorative way, e.g. in the Ovāda Pāṭimokkha, a teaching given to 1250 arahant disciples, the Buddha’s opening words were “Patient endurance is the supreme austerity (tapas),” referring to its central and beneficial role in the spiritual life. Similarly, as it’s pointed out at §§2.2 & 2.3, in reference to ancient Indian physics, the extinction of a fire could be seen as its ‘release’ and thus carry positive connotations as well.

Nevertheless, in common understanding and expressions of the time, the brahmins and fire-worshippers tending their flames, together with the ascetic yogis endeavouring to generate as much psychic ‘heat’ as possible, form the context within which the Buddha formulated these central metaphors of his teaching. This shift of perspective, from fire and heat to coolness, is probably best evidenced in the very first – and most famous – instance that he used such expressions: The Fire Sermon.

2.9) On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Gayā, at Gayā’s Head, together with a thousand bhikkhus. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: