SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT I

289

The significance of yoniso-manasikāra can be seen more clearly in this next passage. The mind’s ability to reflect on and consider the true nature of things affects its ability to penetrate the Dhamma. Particularly, if the heart perceives Nibbāna as something unsatisfactory, it would not conceive the desire to realize it as a goal.

This capacity of the human mind to miss what is important by not paying appropriate attention is quite ordinary – and it has troublesome consequences.

16.16) Truly, O monks, that a monk who considers any formation as permanent ... any formation as pleasant ... anything as a self ... who considers Nibbāna as suffering, can have a conviction that conforms with the Dhamma, that cannot be; and that one who is without a conviction that conforms with the Dhamma should enter into the certainty of rightness, that too cannot be; and that one who has not entered into the certainty of rightness should realize the fruits of stream-entry, once-returning, non-returning or arahantship, that too cannot be.

~ A 6.98 & .101, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The fourth and final factor for stream-entry is dhammānudhamma-paṭipatti. This is usually translated as ‘practice in accordance with the Dhamma,’ but it can have some other subtle nuances, such as practising Dhamma appropriately according to the truth. There are many ways of practice but some of them may, in actuality, not accord with the teachings or the true Way. They may be popular or comfortable, but yet not be Dhamma. For practice to yield results, it must conform to truth or correct principle.

Another nuance which could be teased out of the phrase dhammānudhamma-paṭipatti is ‘practising in perfect accord with all levels and aspects of the Dhamma.’ That is, in the context of a gradual practice, there is the need to attend to fulfilling the foundations before going on to subsequent practices. To accord with Dhamma doesn’t necessarily mean that one has to wait for perfect virtue before beginning to meditate. A common teaching, both in the Canon and in the forest tradition, points out how wisdom fosters virtue and concentration. This still accords with the principles of Dhamma, but is not necessarily following the linear route. Another meaning for the phrase is making sure one follows the Dhamma as one has studied it, rather than studying one thing and then practising in a

completely different manner.