The Island

268

He earlier had aroused energy for the attainment of arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding energy subsided. He earlier had made up his mind to attain arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding resolution subsided. He earlier made an investigation for the attainment of arahantship, and when he attained arahantship, the corresponding investigation subsided.

“What do you think, brahmin, such being the case, is the situation terminable or interminable?”

“Surely, Master Ānanda, such being the case, the situation is terminable not interminable. Magnificent, Master Ānanda! ... From today let Master Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life.”

~ S 51.15, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Although negative qualities must obviously be abandoned on reaching the goal, other, more positive qualities, such as right view, must be abandoned as well, as we noted in the preceding chapter. Even the most exalted states of meditative emptiness, which may contain a lurking sense of self-identification, have to be abandoned in order to reach the goal of total freedom.

15.2) When this was said, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, here a bhikkhu is practising thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine; it will not be, and it will not be mine. What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning.’ Thus he obtains equanimity. Venerable sir, does such a bhikkhu attain Nibbāna?”

“One bhikkhu here, Ānanda, might attain Nibbāna, another bhikkhu here might not attain Nibbāna.”

“What is the cause and reason, venerable sir, why one bhikkhu here might attain Nibbāna, while another bhikkhu here might not

attain Nibbāna?”

“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is practising thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine; it will not be, and it will not be mine. What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning.’ Thus he obtains equanimity. He delights in that equanimity, welcomes it, and remains holding to it. As he does so, his consciousness becomes dependent on it and clings to it. A bhikkhu, Ānanda, who is affected by clinging does not attain Nibbāna.”