The Island

78

The Buddha then concludes his discourse with the following words:

“Bhikkhus, this supreme state of sublime peace has been discovered by the Tathāgata, that is, liberation through not clinging, by understanding as they actually are the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger and the escape in the case of the six bases of sense-contact.”

~ M 102.4-25, (abridged)

To follow on from this teaching, here is an example of an individual applying this skillful analysis to the realm of speculative views. There are, of course, many other areas where the habits of clinging can feed and flourish. For example in the pursuit of sense pleasure, in attachment to societal and religious conventions and, the most insidious and subtle of all, clinging to feelings of ‘I,’ ‘me’ and ‘mine.’ What Anāthapiṇḍika demonstrates here, and which Ajahn Chah explicates with great thoroughness in the passage following, is the fine art of employing a convention, or a point of view, yet simultaneously, and without hypocrisy, seeing it as dependently originated, empty of substance and thus unownable, like all other things.

4.8) Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went to where some wanderers of other sects were staying. On arrival he greeted them courteously and, after this exchange of friendly pleasantries, he sat down at one side. As he was sitting there the wanderers said to him, “Tell us, householder, what views the Samaṇa Gotama has.”

“Venerable sirs, I don’t exactly know what views the Blessed One has.”

“Well, well, so you don’t exactly know what views the Samaṇa Gotama has; well, tell us then what views his monastic disciples have.”

“Venerable sirs, I don’t exactly know what views his monastic disciples have either.”

“Well, well, so you don’t exactly know what views the Samaṇa Gotama has and you don’t exactly know what views his monastic disciples have either. Can you tell us then what views you have?”

“It would not be difficult for me to expound to you what views I have. But if the venerable ones would first please expound their views, each according to their own perspective, then that would make it easier for me to expound to you what views I have.”

When this had been said, one of the wanderers stated to Anāthapiṇḍika: