SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

315

And how does this view that is noble and emancipating lead the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering?

Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, considers thus: “Is there any obsession unabandoned in myself that might so obsess my mind that I cannot know or see things as they actually are?” If a bhikkhu is obsessed by sensual lust, then his mind is obsessed. If he is obsessed by ill will, then his mind is obsessed. If he is obsessed by sloth and torpor, then his mind is obsessed. If he is obsessed by restlessness and remorse, then his mind is obsessed. If he is obsessed by doubt, then his mind is obsessed. If a bhikkhu is absorbed in speculation about this world, then his mind is obsessed. If a bhikkhu is absorbed in speculation about the other world, then his mind is obsessed. If a bhikkhu takes to quarrelling and brawling and is deep in disputes, stabbing others with verbal daggers, then his mind is obsessed.

He understands thus: “There is no obsession unabandoned in myself that might so obsess my mind that I cannot know and see things as they actually are. My mind is well disposed for awakening to the truths.” This is the first knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

Again, a noble disciple considers thus: “When I pursue, develop, and cultivate this view, do I obtain internal serenity, do I obtain stillness?”

He understands thus: “When I pursue, develop, and cultivate this view, I obtain internal serenity, I personally obtain stillness.” This is the second knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

Again, a noble disciple considers thus: “Is there any other recluse or brahmin outside [the Buddha’s Dispensation] possessed of a view such as I possess?”

He understands thus: “There is no other recluse or brahmin outside [the Buddha’s Dispensation] possessed of a view such as I possess.” This is the third knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

Again, a noble disciple considers thus: “Do I possess the character of a person who possesses right view?” What is the character of a person who possesses right view? This is the character of a person