The Island

238

after; as after, so before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so at night; as at night, so by day.” Thus, with a mind that is open and unenveloped, he develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

He develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses concentration due to energy ... concentration due to mind ... concentration due to investigation ... he develops the mind imbued with luminosity.

And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is too slack? It is desire that is accompanied by lassitude, associated with lassitude. This is called desire that is too slack.

And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is too tense? It is desire that is accompanied by restlessness, associated with restlessness. This is called desire that is too tense.

And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is constricted internally? It is desire that is accompanied by sloth and torpor, associated with sloth and torpor. This is called desire that is constricted internally.

And what, bhikkhus, is desire that is disturbed externally? It is desire that is repeatedly distracted externally, repeatedly disturbed, on account of the five cords of sensual pleasure. This is called desire that is

distracted externally.

And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu dwell perceiving after and before: “As before, so after; as after, so before”? Here, bhikkhus, the perception of after and before is well grasped by a bhikkhu, well attended to, well considered, well penetrated by wisdom. It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu dwells perceiving after and before: “As before, so after; as after, so before.”

And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu dwell “as below, so above; as above, so below”? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this very body upwards from the soles of the feet, downwards from the tips of the hairs, enclosed in skin, as full of many kinds of impurities: “There are in this body head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, fluid of the joints, urine.” It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu dwells “as below, so above; as above, so below.”

And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu dwell “as by day, so at night; as at night, so by day”? Here, bhikkhus, at night a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power that possesses concentration due to desire