The Island

318

Again, a monk dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his fellow monks virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblemished, unmottled, freeing, praised by the wise, unadhered to, leading to concentration. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect ...

Again, a monk dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his fellow monks the view that is noble and emancipating and that leads one who acts in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect ...

These, monks, are the six principles of cordiality that create love and respect and conduce to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to concord

and to unity.

~ A 6.12, (Nyanaponika Thera and Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

This next example expresses the qualities of a sotāpanna in the negative, i.e. what he or she would avoid entirely: wrong views of reality and any misconduct which would bring irreversible results, such as rebirth in the lowest realms stemming from these ‘five heinous crimes.’ The phrase ‘possessing right view’ is a synonym for stream-enterer.

18.14) “But, venerable sir, in what way can a bhikkhu be called skilled in what is possible and what is impossible?”

“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could treat any formation as permanent – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: ‘It is possible that an ordinary person might treat some formation as permanent – there is such a possibility.’ He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could treat any formation as pleasurable – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: ‘It is possible that an ordinary person might treat some formation as pleasurable – there is such a possibility.’ He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could treat anything as self – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: