PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

249

who possesses wisdom, the faith that follows from it becomes stabilized, the energy that follows from it becomes stabilized, the mindfulness that follows from it becomes stabilized, the concentration that follows from it becomes stabilized.

It is, bhikkhus, because this one faculty has been developed and cultivated that a bhikkhu who has destroyed the taints declares final knowledge thus: “I understand: Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.”

~ S 48.45, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

14.5) Here, Moggallāna, a monk has learnt this: “Nothing is fit to be clung to.” If a monk has learnt that nothing is fit to be clung to, he directly knows everything; by directly knowing everything, he fully understands everything; when he fully understands everything, whatever feeling he experiences, be it pleasant, painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, in regard to those same feelings he dwells contemplating impermanence, contemplating dispassion, contemplating cessation, contemplating relinquishment. When he thus abides contemplating impermanence, dispassion, cessation, and relinquishment in regard to those feelings, he does not cling to anything in the world; without clinging he is not agitated; being unagitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.

~ A 7.58, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A discourse in the Saṃyutta Nikāya also contains this same phrase, “Nothing is fit to be clung to,” (Pali: sabbe dhammā nālaṃ abhinivesāya). In this particular version, it is translated as “Nothing is worth adhering to.” With this perception and attitude in mind, there can be a radical shift in how one relates to the world, and this shift then opens the way to freedom:

14.6) “But, venerable sir, how should a bhikkhu know, how should he see, for ignorance to be abandoned by him and true knowledge to arise?”

“Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu has heard, ‘Nothing is worth adhering to.’ When a bhikkhu has heard, ‘Nothing is worth adhering to,’ he directly knows everything. Having directly known everything, he fully understands everything. Having fully understood everything he sees all signs differently. He sees the eye differently, he sees forms differently [and so on with all the