“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

103

He also described, in the same discourse, how it was that people gave rise

to such misapprehensions:

5.22) “Here, bhikkhu, someone has the view: ‘This is self, this the universe; after death I shall be permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change; I shall endure as long as eternity.’ They hear the Tathāgata or a disciple of the Tathāgata teaching the Dhamma for the elimination of all standpoints, biases, obsessions, adherences and underlying tendencies, for the stilling of all formations, for the relinquishing of all attachments, for the destruction of craving, for dispassion, for cessation, for Nibbāna. They think thus: ‘So I shall be annihilated! So I shall perish! So I shall be no more!’ Then they sorrow, grieve and lament, they weep beating their breast and become distraught.”

~ M 22.20

And thereby hangs a tale...

Even though the Buddha said:

5.23) “That one should see Nibbāna as unsatisfactory, as dukkha, and for that conviction to be in accordance with Dhamma (anuloma-khanti), that I say is impossible ... But to see Nibbāna as free from dukkha and for that conviction to be in accordance with Dhamma, that I

say is possible.”

~ A 6.101

It seems that it was not uncommon for people, particularly those of a lustful or life-affirming bent, to have had a negative reaction to the Buddha’s teaching – even in his own lifetime and face-to-face. Since those days this misinterpretation of the teaching has been a recurrent theme.

In the preceding discourses (§§5.21 & 5.22) the Buddha outlines this presumption of nihilism as a mistaken view of his teaching and then, through the contemplations on impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, and not-self, he leads his listeners to the path of Awakening.

Nevertheless, despite this clear description of the genuine path to happiness, the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha (who had occasioned this teaching after the Buddha had refuted his assertion that the pursuit of sensual pleasure was not an obstacle to enlightenment)