The Island

144

not perceive water, in fire he does not perceive fire, in air he does not perceive air, in the sphere of infinite space he does not perceive it, in the sphere of infinite consciousness he does not perceive it, in the sphere of nothingness he does not perceive it, in the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception he does not perceive it; that in this world he does not perceive this world, in the world beyond he does not perceive the world beyond – and yet at the same time he does perceive?”

“It may be so, Ānanda. A bhikkhu’s winning of concentration may be of such sort ... and yet at the same time he does perceive.”

“But, venerable sir, in what way may a bhikkhu’s winning of concentration be of such a sort that still he does perceive?”

“Herein, Ānanda, a bhikkhu has this perception: This is the real, this is the best, namely, the stilling of all formations, the abandonment of the substratum of existence, the ending of craving, the fading of desire, cessation, Nibbāna. In such a way, Ānanda, a bhikkhu’s attainment of concentration may be of such a sort that in earth ... and yet at the same time he does perceive.”

~ A 10.6

The experience of meditating at night in the forests of Thailand, whilst the sounds of raucous activity from the nearby villages fill the air, is a very common one. Ajahn Chah often referred to another, similar insight which arose on one such occasion. As in the previous story he was endeavouring to practice meditation but, at this earlier time, he was becoming irritated by the noise:

8.13) “Why do they waste their time doing unskilful things and make disturbance for everybody else into the bargain? Don’t they know there’s a monk out here in the woods trying to meditate and practice the Buddha’s path? I go into the village every day for alms, they know I’m here, they should know better than to be so insensitive – they’re making a lot of bad karma...” etc. etc.

Suddenly, amidst the flow of righteous indignation, he realized: “The sound is just sound, it’s only doing its duty as sound, it has no intention to annoy me. Why should I go out and annoy it? If I leave it alone what harm can it do me?” Upon this realization his mind became very peaceful, even though the sounds of the village festival were still there.

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, (anecdotal)