Acknowledgements

AS EDITORS WE HAVE RELIED HEAVILY AND GRATEFULLY upon the ample and competent shoulders of several monastic friends in order to bring this volume of teachings into being.

First, thanks must be given to Ajahn Sucitto, of Cittaviveka Monastery in England, who gave an early draft of the manuscript a thorough reading and provided many thoughtful suggestions, both with respect to major elements of structure and content, as well as to minor aspects of phraseology. Furthermore, as we are by no means Pali scholars, we are grateful for the close attention of Gavesako Bhikkhu to the spelling and translation of many Pali terms. Ajahn Ṭhānissaro (Tan Geoff) of Metta Forest Monastery, California, kindly gave a similar comprehensive reading to a later draft and offered copious helpful suggestions, both with respect to overall structure and particularly with the translation of the Pali. He also allowed us, most generously, to include here numerous passages from his own published works, essays as well as quotations from the scriptures. Ajahn Jayasāro’s careful eye and extensive literary skills also benefitted us greatly, with respect to both style and content.

In addition to the help provided by those mentioned already, many other friends, monastic and lay, contributed useful feedback and other assistance along the way. Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi, although severely burdened by illness, wrote a detailed and illuminating four-page reply to a query we had about a text he had translated; and the Sangha at Abhayagiri Monastery, during the times that various drafts of the book have been read out to the community, frequently offered con- structive advice and pointed out areas that needed clarification. Karunadhammo Bhikkhu is particularly to be thanked for his helpful suggestions on the ordering of chapters in the first part of the collection.

Richard Smith bravely and generously devoted several years to the task of bringing the book into its finished form. Ruby Grad is to be thanked for the Index.