THIS AND THAT, AND OTHER THINGS

59

3.1) Idapaccayatā or ‘conditionality’ is the natural law, the natural truth that everything depends on causes and conditions. In all the things that are not self, in all naturally changing things, the change always changes according to causes and conditions. Idapaccayatā is the fact that with this as cause, this exists. With this as condition, this exists. The existence of anything, and the change of that existence, is always dependent on causes and conditions. Take away the conditions, and this

will no longer exist.

We use the word idapaccayatā to apply to everything – the entire uni-verse, both physical and mental – but when we speak solely about living things, especially the consciousness of living things, we speak in a more specific way. We talk of paṭiccasamuppāda, dependent co-origination: due to these and these and these and these and these conditions, dukkha arises. We also speak of paṭiccanirodha, dependent quenching. Through the quenching of this condition, which depends on the quenching of this condition dukkha is quenched, dukkha ends ...

The understanding of idapaccayatā, conditionality, and paṭicca-samuppāda, dependent co-origination, is crucial in understanding the mind, how suffering is concocted and how suffering is eliminated.

~ Ven. Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu, unpublished Dhamma talk, 1988, (Santikaro Bhikkhu trans.)

3.2) The Buddha expressed this/that conditionality [idapaccayatā] in a simple-looking formula:

“(1) When this is, that is.

(2) From the arising of this comes the arising of that.

(3) When this isn’t, that isn’t.

(4) From the stopping of this comes the stopping of that.”

~ A 10.92

There are many possible ways of interpreting this formula, but only one does justice both to the way the formula is worded and to the complex, fluid manner in which specific examples of causal relationships are described in the Canon. That way is to view the formula as the interplay of two causal principles, one linear and the other synchronic, that combine to form a non-linear pattern. The linear principle – taking (2) and (4) as a pair – connects events, rather than objects, over time; the synchronic principle – (1) and (3) – connects objects and events in the