The Island

174

... feeling ... perception ... mental formations ... consciousness by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him ... he is deep, immeasurable, hard to fathom, like the great ocean.”

~ S 44.1

The intangible, inscrutable yet powerfully present quality which is being referred to in these dialogues was a feature of early Buddhist iconography in the pre-Greek era in northern India. For example, at the great stūpa at Amāravati in Andhra Pradesh, and on many of the monuments of King Asoka, the Buddha was not represented in human form. There were a variety of ways in which his presence was depicted: as a pair of footprints, an empty chair, a stūpa, the Bodhi tree, a Dhamma wheel – all images designed to evoke something of the presence but explicitly avoiding encapsulating and confining the Buddha principle within the narrowness of the human form.

The ‘unapprehendability principle’ did not fade away completely with the introduction of the human form into religious sculpture and the emergence of the style of Buddha images which are so familiar today. In Borobudur – one of the largest Buddhist shrines in the world – the designers and architects conceived a way of displaying this subtle and esoteric teaching in the black volcanic stone of Java, where the great edifice is to be found. Each successive layer of the stūpa, from the ground up, is given to a depiction of some aspect of the Buddha’s life and lives. The lower layers carry bas-reliefs of the colourful rough and tumble of incidents from the Buddha’s previous lives; above these come the events of his last birth, as Siddhartha Gautama, the enlightenment and stories of his teaching career. Above these, the square form of the stūpa transmutes to the circular, with an impressive guard of images of the Dhyāni Buddha Amoghasiddhi – all in the abhaya or ‘fearlessness’ mudrā – rimming the parapet of the highest of the square levels.

At this same stage, small stūpas appear in concentric formation, with regular square holes in the ‘bell’ of each one, revealing a Buddha image within. One level higher and further rings of this same model of small stūpa have diamond-shaped perforations in them instead – somewhat smaller than the square holes and rendering the Buddha images within yet harder to discern. By the next level we have reached the summit and found a much larger and notably plain stūpa crowning the structure. There are no holes through which to see inside.

Needless to say, the thirteen centuries or so that have passed since Borobudur was first constructed have wrought major ravages to the shrine. In the 1970s,