The Island

36

Secondly (and this was the theory of Ven. Ānanda Maitreya, a knowledgeable and highly respected Sri Lankan elder), because the Buddha was speaking to highly variegated audiences – not only people from all four castes, from illiterate farmers to erudite pandits, but also people from many regions and speaking many dialects – he needed to put out a variety of terms, otherwise large sections of the audience might miss the meaning of what was being expounded.

As a teacher, the Buddha excelled in taking into account the faculties, dispositions and conditioning of his listeners, and on that basis alone Ven. Ānanda Maitreya’s theory makes a lot of sense. In fact the Buddha spells this principle out himself in ‘The Exposition on Non-Conflict’ (M 139.12), where he cites nine different words for the same object (e.g. ‘dish’, ‘bowl’, ‘saucer’ etc.) as used in different regions.

The effort to teach the Dhamma and to describe Nibbāna effectively has continued to be a challenging task, from the time of the Buddha up until the present. Nevertheless, over the years, various wise elders and commentators have formulated explanations and similes that have helped to convey the profundity and simplicity of these truths to their listeners and readers.

One such classical exposition is to be found in ‘The Questions of King Milinda’ – a text that derives from the time of Greek rule in northern India, following the invasion by Alexander. The ‘Milinda’ of the title is known to European history as ‘Menander,’ a Greek king who ruled in northwest India from 163 to 150 BCE. The collection is made up of dialogues between the spiritually interested king and the Buddhist monk Nāgasena. Here are some of the king’s questions and the responses he received.

1.12) “Reverend Nāgasena, you are continually talking about Nibbāna. Now is it possible to make clear the form or figure or age or dimensions of this Nibbāna, either by an illustration or by a reason or by a cause or by a method?”

“Nibbāna, great king, is unlike anything else; it is impossible.”

“This, Reverend Nāgasena, I cannot admit, – that if Nibbāna really exists, it should be impossible to make known its form or figure or age or dimensions, either by an illustration or by a reason or by a cause or by a method. Tell me why.”

“Let be, great king; I will tell you why.”