The Island

272

suggest at least one thing: Those who have been liberated know they have been liberated. This aspect of knowing for oneself is a characteristic of the Dhamma: paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhi – to be personally experienced by the wise.

15.7) Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the nature of his answer:

“Friends, regarding the seen I abide unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers. Regarding the heard ... Regarding the sensed ... Regarding the cognized I abide unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers. It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these four kinds of expression, that through not clinging my mind is liberated from the taints.” ...

Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed ... and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the nature

of his answer:

“Friends, having known material form to be feeble, fading away, and comfortless, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of attraction and clinging regarding material form, of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies regarding material form, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

“Friends, having known feeling ... Having known perception ... Having known formations ... Having known consciousness to be feeble, fading away, and comfortless, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of attraction and clinging regarding consciousness, of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies regarding consciousness, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

“It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these five aggregates affected by clinging, that through not clinging my mind is liberated from the taints.” ...

Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed ... and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the nature of

his answer: