The Island

290

16.17) If a monk practises for the sake of disenchantment, dispassion, & cessation with regard to aging & death ... birth ... becoming ... clinging/sustenance ... craving ... feeling ... contact ... the six sense media ... name & form ... consciousness ... fabrications ... ignorance, he deserves to be called a monk who practises the Dhamma in accordance

with the Dhamma.

~ S 12.67, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

One way that accords with Dhamma is the relinquishing of stinginess. A sotāpanna’s generosity is deeply ingrained in the heart; it does not need to be thought through. It has brought about the need for rules to be laid down in the Vinaya (the Monastic Code) to protect those lay sekha, (literally, ‘ones in training,’ but referring to at least stream-enterers, and also once-returners and non-returners) whose means were diminishing, but faith increasing. They would tend to be overly generous and the Buddha felt it necessary for the Sangha to be alert to their needs as well.

‘Macchariya’ is the Pali word used here which is defined in the dictionary as avarice, stinginess, selfishness, envy; one of the principal evil passions and the main cause of rebirth in the petaloka (the realm of the hungry ghosts).

16.18) Monks, unless one abandons these five things, one cannot realize the fruit of stream-winning. What five? Stinginess as to one’s lodging, family, gains, fame and Dhamma. Truly, monks, there are these five; now the meanest of these five, monks, is this: stinginess as to Dhamma.

~ A 5.260

Stinginess as to Dhamma means jealously guarding one’s knowledge and understanding to the point where one is unwilling to freely teach or pass it on.

The deep generosity of a stream-enterer’s heart makes it impossible to be possessive of one’s insights or experience – or to be worried that someone may be in competition with oneself. It is very inspiring to observe the selflessness of realized teachers who are always willing to share the teachings and their guidance with others. The following example shows how virtuous conduct and on-going training in accord with Dhamma are necessary factors for realizing sotāpatti (stream-entry).