“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

73

We now move back to the Pali Canon. The following passages clearly demonstrate both the power of reflective wisdom in the process of liberation and the need for turning away from fixation on the conditioned realm if the Truth is to be realized and the heart released.

4.4) “Here, householder, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. He considers that and understands it thus: ‘This first jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced (abhisaṅkhataṃ abhisañcetayitaṃ), but whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ Standing upon that, he attains the destruction of the āsavas (mental outflows). But if he does not attain the destruction of the āsavas, then because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the Dhamma, with the destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear spontaneously in the Pure Abodes, there to attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world.”

This passage is then repeated with reference to, firstly, the other three rūpa- jhānas, then the four brahma-vihāras (mettā, loving-kindness; karuṇā, compassion; muditā, sympathetic joy; and upekkhā, equanimity) and the first three of the arūpa- jhānas – the fourth of these (the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception) and the state of nirodha samāppati (the cessation of perception and feeling) are not mentioned because, it is said, they are states too subtle for their constituent factors to be used as objects of insight contemplation.

After each one of these paragraphs the Ven. Ānanda (who is expounding this discourse) says:

“This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One ... wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute ... he attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not attained before.”

~ M 52.4-14, A 11.17, (abridged)

In the following sutta the Buddha goes into a little more detail concerning the essentially unsatisfactory nature of all formations. He also, once again, points