SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT IV

333

“As the noble disciple possesses the same confirmed confidence in the Buddha that we possessed when we passed away there and were reborn here, he will come into the presence of the devas.”

Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken ... conducive to concentration. To those devatās who passed away here [in the human world] and were reborn there [in a heavenly world] possessing the virtues dear to the noble ones, the thought occurs: “As the noble disciple possesses the same kind of virtues dear to the noble ones that we possessed when we passed away there and were reborn here, he will come into the presence of the devas.” When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses these four things, the devas are elated and speak of his similarity [to themselves].

~ S 55.36, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The fruits arising from stream-entry apply both to this lifetime and to the life to come, benefiting oneself and others.

In this next short sutta, the Buddha points to six blessings of the sotāpanna. What he says is terse, but has a wide-ranging meaning or implication. As Bhikkhu Bodhi states in his footnote to this passage: “unable to fall back” – that is, one will not fall into the lower realms; “has a set limit to suffering” – the number of future existences is a maximum of seven; “uncommon knowledge” – is the supramundane knowledge of Nibbāna, which is not shared by the common worldling. The understanding of causes, and of things arisen by causes, are reckoned as two

distinct blessings.

19.11) There are, O monks, these six blessings in realizing the fruit of stream-entry: One is firm in the good Dhamma. One is unable to fall back. One has set a limit to suffering. One is endowed with uncommon knowledge. One has clearly understood causes and the phenomena arisen by causes.

~ A 6.97, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

19.12) At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, suppose that the Himālayas, the king of mountains, would be destroyed and eliminated except for seven grains of gravel the size of mustard seeds. What do you think, bhikkhus, which