PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

261

“That is mine.”

He should not conceive all, should not conceive in all, should not conceive from all, should not conceive, “All is mine.”

Since he does not conceive anything thus, he does not cling to anything in the world. Not clinging, he is not agitated. Being unagitated, he personally attains Nibbāna. He understands: “Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.”

~ S 35.90, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

14.23) So subtle, bhikkhus, was the bondage of Vepacitti, but even subtler than that is the bondage of Māra. In conceiving, one is bound by Māra; by not conceiving, one is freed from the Evil One.

Bhikkhus, “I am” is a conceiving; “I am this” is a conceiving; “I shall be” is a conceiving; “I shall not be” is a conceiving; “I shall consist of form” is a conceiving; “I shall be formless” is a conceiving; ‘I shall be percipient’ is a conceiving; “I shall be non-percipient” is a conceiving; “I shall be neither percipient nor nonpercipient” is a conceiving. Conceiving is a disease, conceiving is a tumour, conceiving is a dart. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: “We will dwell with a mind

devoid of conceiving.”

Bhikkhus, “I am” is a perturbation; “I am this” is a perturbation; “I shall be” is a perturbation ... “I shall be neither percipient nor nonpercipient” is a perturbation. Perturbation is a disease, perturbation is a tumour, perturbation is a dart. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: “We will dwell with an imperturbable mind.”

Bhikkhus, “I am” is a palpitation; “I am this” is a palpitation; “I shall be” is a palpitation ... “I shall be neither percipient nor nonpercipient” is a palpitation. Palpitation is a disease, palpitation is a tumour, palpitation is a dart. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: “We will dwell with a mind devoid of palpitation.”

Bhikkhus, “I am” is a proliferation; “I am this” is a proliferation; “I shall be” is a proliferation ... “I shall be neither percipient nor nonpercipient” is a proliferation. Proliferation is a disease, proliferation is a tumour, proliferation is a dart. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: “We will dwell with a mind devoid of proliferation.”