UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

147

astrologer, shaman and clairvoyant not uncommon in Thailand. He edged closer to the master’s seat, trying to catch a surreptitious glimpse at the lines on his palms as Ajahn Chah moved his hands, gesticulating as he often did in the illustration of some point of Dhamma, or acting out a metaphor he was using – perhaps the ears of an elephant, the dripping of a waterspout or (and this was ideal) how saṃsāra and Nibbāna are like the front and back of the hand: they happen in the same place and are known by the same awareness.

Catching the desired shot a couple of times, our friend’s inquisitiveness bore unexpected fruit. Knowing that Ajahn Chah was a major critic of superstition, protective amulets and other paraphernalia that coagulates around religious traditions, he had been chary of revealing his livelihood, let alone asking outright if he might read the Ajahn’s palms. But something had caught his eye that piqued his interest beyond his capacity for self-containment.

“Luang Por, forgive me for being so rude, and pardon me if it’s improper to ask, but I’m a palmist and it would make me very happy to be able to have a look at your hands. Would that be possible?”

Eyeing him with a friendly but penetrating glance, Ajahn Chah could see that the man was sincere and honest, with no ulterior motive. Giving him the gruff, all-purpose affirmative grunt which is the Lao way of saying “OK” and also tossing in a couple of amicably derogatory comments such as: “Don’t tell me, I’m going to win the lottery – right?” he held his hands out in front of him, palms upward, side by side.

The man shuffled forward, pulled a well-worn pair of spectacles out of his pocket, placed them on his nose and peered forwards. Saying: “Please excuse me,” once again, he took hold of the hands. He looked from one to the other, back and forth, tracing the lines with his fingertip. Shaking his his head in wonderment he looked up and said: “Luang Por, this is amazing – look at this line here...” And glancing up again, somewhat sheepishly – “You have a LOT of anger!”

“Yes,” replied Ajahn Chah, his face illumined by a foot-wide grin, “that’s true; but I don’t use it.”

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, (ancecdotal)