The Island

168

From these few brief exchanges (also bearing in mind Ajahn Chah’s ‘autobiography’ at §5.36) one can deduce that one cannot reckon the issue in terms of ‘meeting another person’ – all of our familiar handholds on identity and personality are called into question. The following passage is another very well-known and much-quoted instance of this principle.

The story so far is that the bhikkhu Vakkali has fallen gravely ill and the Buddha has come from his dwelling at the Squirrels’ Sanctuary in the Bamboo Grove, near Rājagaha, to pay him a visit. The Buddha asks him how he is doing and, after recounting to the Master that his sickness is worsening, he expresses the one regret remaining in his heart.

10.4) “For a long time, venerable sir, I have wanted to come and see the Blessed One, but I haven’t been fit enough to do so.”

“Enough, Vakkali; why do you want to see this filthy body? One who sees the Dhamma sees me; one who sees me sees the Dhamma. For it is when one sees the Dhamma that they see me; and it is when they see me that they see the Dhamma. How do you conceive this, Vakkali, is material form permanent or impermanent? ...”

~ S 22.87

The Buddha then went on to repeat the discourse on selflessness (Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta) which he had given to the group of five bhikkhus after the enlightenment. The key phrase in Pali reads: “Yo kho Vakkali Dhammaṃ passati, so maṃ passati. Yo maṃ passati, so Dhammaṃ passati.” The ancient commentary says on this:

10.5) Here the Blessed One shows (himself as) the Dhamma-body, as stated in the passage, “The Tathāgata, great king, is the Dhamma-body.” For the ninefold supramundane Dhamma is called the Tathāgata’s body.

~ Saṃyutta Nikāya, note 168, p 1081, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Even though this exact statement cannot be traced in the Pali Canon, Bhikkhu Bodhi suggests that it might be a misquotation of the Aggañña Sutta.

10.6) “This designates the Tathāgata: ‘The Body of Dhamma,’ [dhamma-kāya], that is ‘The Body of Brahmā,’ or ‘Become Dhamma,’ that is, ‘Become Brahmā.’”

~ D 27.9, (Maurice Walshe trans.)