WHAT IS IT?

35

These terms are all ways of referring to the same essential and ineffable quality. Such a variety of expression was needed since even the Buddha acknowledged that it was hard to convey the realization of Truth in words; he describes a time shortly after his enlightenment:

1.11) “I considered: ‘This Dhamma that I have realized is profound, hard to see and hard to understand, peaceful and sublime, unattainable by mere reasoning, subtle, to be experienced only by the wise.’ But this generation delights in worldliness (ālaya), takes delight in worldliness, rejoices in worldliness. It is hard for such a generation to see this truth, namely, specific conditionality (idapaccayatā), dependent origination (paṭicca-samuppāda). And it is hard to see this truth, namely, the stilling of all formations, the relinquishing of all attachments (upadhi), the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna. If I were to teach the Dhamma, others would not understand me, and that would be wearying and troublesome for me.”

~ MV 1.5, S 6.1, M 26.19

This insight of the Buddha was deeply prescient, for indeed worldly people frequently found his teachings unacceptable (for example in his encounter with Upaka, at §1.1, and in the passages §§5.21-26). Fortunately, shortly after this thought formed in the mind of the Buddha, he was persuaded to teach, and did so freely from then on. He travelled widely through northeast India (Jambudīpa) and spoke on invitation to whomsoever was interested to hear his teaching.

As he travelled and met people, the Buddha was concerned to get his message across as effectively as possible. In order to do this he employed a variety of ways of speaking. One of his styles of expression was the juxtaposition of perhaps half a dozen nouns or adjectives (such as various epithets for Nibbāna) with overlapping or mutually resonant meanings – examples of this style can be be seen both in the passage at §1.11 (in the second to last sentence) and in §1.13, para.2. There are several different reasons for such a manner of speaking.

Firstly, it offers a constellation of meanings so that, out of the related words, the listener would be more likely to receive at least one that reached their heart. The Buddha almost always used a variety of terms, rather than defining a quality with a single standard expression.