The Island

332

in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. He is not one of joyous wisdom, nor of swift wisdom, and he has not attained liberation. However, he has these five things: the faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of wisdom. And the teachings proclaimed by the Tathāgata are accepted by him after being pondered to a sufficient degree with wisdom. This person too, Mahānāma, is one who does not go to hell, the animal realm, or the domain of ghosts, to the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the nether world.

“Here, Mahānāma, some person does not possess confirmed confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. He is not one of joyous wisdom, nor of swift wisdom, and he has not attained liberation. However, he has these five things: the faculty of faith ... the faculty of wisdom. And he has sufficient faith in the Tathāgata, sufficient devotion to him. This person too, Mahānāma, is one who does not go to hell, the animal realm, or the domain of ghosts, to the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the nether world.

“Even if these great sal trees, Mahānāma, could understand what is well spoken and what is badly spoken, then I would declare these great sal trees to be stream-enterers, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as their destination. How much more, then, Sarakāni the Sakyan? Mahānāma, Sarakāni the Sakyan fulfilled the training at the time of his death.”

~ S 55.24, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Even when passing away, a sotāpanna brings blessings. Such people are assured of a pleasant rebirth and would be praised by those devas who were of similar faith and virtue:

19.10) Bhikkhus, when a noble disciple possesses four things, the devas are elated and speak of his similarity [to themselves]. What four?

Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: “The Blessed One is ... teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.” To those devatās who passed away here [in the human world] and were reborn there [in a heavenly world] possessing confirmed confidence in the Buddha, the thought occurs: