The Island

254

The Buddha says here that although there are just two views of existence and non-existence, they are the basis for all the multitudinous views that can be held in this human realm. When our vision is obscured, all we can see is a blur. With things unclear, all we can do is guess at the actuality of a situation. Given this internal confusion, it is no wonder that there is so much external confusion in the world. However, when there is right view and clear vision, there is no need for confusion or conflict. As Ajahn Chah says, if we see a cobra clearly then we won’t go near it. As a result, it won’t harm us. In the same way, when we are aware of the harm that can arise from our views, we can also step back from them.

14.12) Bhikkhus, there are these two views: the view of being and the view of non-being. Any recluses or brahmins who rely on the view of being, adopt the view of being, accept the view of being, are opposed to the view of non-being. Any recluses or brahmins who rely on the view of non-being, adopt the view of non-being, accept the view of non-being, are opposed to the view of being.

Any recluses or brahmins who do not understand as they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of these two views are affected by lust, affected by hate, affected by delusion, affected by craving, affected by clinging, without vision, given to favouring and opposing, and they delight in and enjoy proliferation. They are not freed from birth, ageing, and death; from sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; they are not freed from suffering, I say.

~ M 11.6-7, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Part of the suffering created by views is the conflict they foster. This conflict may not always come from the views themselves, but rather from the way they

are held tightly.

Whether they are religious, political, personal or social; whether they are reasonable or unreasonable; whether they are logical or illogical; the cherishing of views is what leads to conflict. Thus the path to peace and harmony lies in letting them go.

14.13) “Now, Aggivessana, a wise man among those recluses and brahmins who holds the doctrine and view ‘Everything is acceptable to me’ considers thus: ‘If I obstinately adhere to my view “Everything is acceptable to me” and declare: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” then I may clash