The Island

334

is more: the portion of the Himālayas, the king of mountains, that has been destroyed and eliminated or the seven grains of gravel the size of mustard seeds that remain?”

“Venerable sir, the portion of the Himālayas, the king of mountains, that has been destroyed and eliminated is more. The seven grains of gravel the size of mustard seeds that remain are trifling. They do not amount to a hundredth part, or a thousandth part, or a hundred thousandth part of the portion of the Himālayas, the king of mountains, that has been destroyed and eliminated.”

“So too, bhikkhus, for a noble disciple, a person accomplished in view who has made the breakthrough, the suffering that has been destroyed and eliminated is more, while that which remains is trifling. The latter does not amount to a hundredth part, or a thousandth part, or a hundred thousandth part of the former mass of suffering that has been destroyed and eliminated, as there is a maximum of seven more lives. Of such great benefit, bhikkhus, is the breakthrough to the Dhamma, of such great benefit is it to obtain the vision of the Dhamma.”

~ S 13.10, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

19.13) Bhikkhus, those for whom you have compassion and who think you should be heeded – whether friends or colleagues, relatives or kinsmen – these you should exhort, settle, and establish in the four factors of stream-entry.

~ S 55.17, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Beyond the happiness that stream-entry brings in this life and, through death, on into the next, is the happiness in knowing that one’s ultimate total

liberation is assured.

19.14) Bhikkhus, just as, when rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountain top, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these being filled fill up the pools; these being filled fill up the lakes; these being filled fill up the streams; these being filled fill up the rivers; and these being filled fill up the great ocean; so too, for a noble disciple, these things – confirmed confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, and the virtues dear to the