“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

85

• • •

All things are just as they are. They don’t cause suffering in themselves, just like a thorn, a really sharp thorn. Does it make you suffer? No, it’s just a thorn, it doesn’t bother anybody. But if you go and stand on it, then you’ll suffer. Why is there this suffering? Because you stepped on the thorn. The thorn is just minding its own business, it doesn’t harm anybody. Only if you step on the thorn will you suffer over it. It’s because of we ourselves that there’s pain. Form, feeling, perception, mental formations, consciousness... all the things in this world are simply there as they are. It’s we who pick fights with them. And if we hit them they’re going to hit us back. If they’re left on their own they won’t bother anybody, only the swaggering drunkard gives them trouble. All conditions fare according to their nature. That’s why the Buddha said, “Tesaṃ vūpasamo sukho”: If we subdue conditions, seeing determinations and conditions as they really are, as neither ‘me’ nor ‘mine,’ ‘us’ nor ‘them,’ when we see that these beliefs are simply sakkāyadiṭṭhi, the conditions are freed of the self-delusion.

If you think ‘I’m good,’ ‘I’m bad,’ ‘I’m great,’ ‘I’m the best,’ then you are thinking wrongly. If you see all these thoughts as merely determinations and conditions, then when others say, ‘good’ or ‘bad’ you can leave it be with them. As long as you still see it as ‘me’ and ‘you’ it’s like having three hornets’ nests – as soon as you say something the hornets come buzzing out to sting you. The three hornets’ nests are sakkāyadiṭṭhi, vicikicchā, and sīlabbataparāmāsa.2

Once you look into the true nature of determinations and conditions, pride cannot prevail. Other people’s fathers are just like our father, their mothers are just like ours, their children are just like ours. We see the happiness and suffering of other beings as just like ours.

2. These are the first three of the Ten Fetters, the obstructions to enlightenment: 1) identification with the body and the personality; 2) doubt about the nature of the Path; 3) clinging to rules, roles and conventions and believing that, for example, purification can come through the mere enactment of a procedure. Transcendence of these three is synonymous with Stream Entry – the first of the four levels of enlightenment.