THE UNCONDITIONED AND NON-LOCALITY

159

9.3) “There is the Unborn, Uncreated, Unconditioned and Unformed. If there were not, there would be no escape discerned from that which is born, created, conditioned and formed. But, since there is this Unborn, Uncreated, Unconditioned and Unformed, escape is therefore discerned from that which is born, created, conditioned and formed.”

~ Ud 8.3, Iti 43

It is significant that, when the Buddha makes such statements as these, he uses a different Pali verb ‘to be’ than the usual one. The vast majority of uses of the verb employ the Pali ‘hoti’; this is the ordinary type of being, implying existence in time and space: I am happy; she is a fine horse; the house is small; the days are long. In these passages just quoted, when the Buddha makes his rare but emphatic metaphysical statements, he uses the verb ‘atthi’ instead. It still means ‘to be’ but some Buddhist scholars (notably Peter Harvey) insist that there is a different order of being implied: that it points to a reality which transcends the customary bounds of time, space, duality and individuality.

9.4) “One who is dependent has wavering. One who is independent has no wavering. There being no wavering, there is calm. There being calm, there is no desire or inclination. There being no desire or inclination, there is no coming or going. There being no coming or going, there is no passing away or arising. There being no passing away or arising, there is neither a here nor a there nor a between-the-two. This, just this, is the end of dukkha.”

~ Ud 8.4

9.5) The concepts of coming-and-going are relative to the standpoint already taken in the process of identification. A relationship having been thus established between one’s present identity and a possible future state, there follows the corollary – ‘death-and-birth’ – with its note of finality. With it, relative distinctions of a ‘here,’ a ‘there’ and a ‘midway-between’ also set in. The entire process, whether it be understood in the context of the epicycle of Saṃsāra traceable to every moment of living experience, or in the context of the larger cycle of Saṃsāra rolling in time and space, is a perpetual alternation between a ‘this-ness’ and an ‘otherwise-ness’ (itthabhāvaññathābhāvaṃ).