The Island

160

Now, the Such-like One who sees the danger in resorting to ‘supports’ which only give way underneath, grasps at nothing and clings to nothing. He has given up all standpoints (see Kālakārāma Sutta at §6.8), and in so doing, has discovered a basis for firmness which never betrays. His is an unshakeable Deliverance of the Mind (akuppā cetovimutti) since he is free from attachment (anurodha) and repugnance (virodha) in the face of the worldly vicissitudes of “gain and loss, honour and dishonour, praise and blame, happiness and unhappiness” (see A 4.157) ...

The Buddha’s declaration in the Kālakārāma Sutta – “Thus, monks, the Tathāgata being Such-like in regard to all phenomena seen, heard, sensed and cognized, is ‘Such’” – is an allusion to this ‘uninfluenced’ mind of the emancipated one.

~ Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, ‘The Magic of the Mind,’ pp 53-55, (abridged)

To illustrate this domain, and its intractability to the mind that wants to fix reality on its own habitual, materialistic terms, here are some verses from the Mūlamadyamaka-kārikā (‘The Treatise on the Root of the Middle Way’) of Ācariya Nāgārjuna. It is a brilliant exposition on exactly how the skilful use of the principles of conditionality and dependent origination can be used to bring about the realization of Nibbāna.

9.6) Investigation of Nirvāṇa

1. If everything were empty, there would be no arising and perishing. From the letting go of and ceasing of what could one assert nirvāṇa(-ing)?

2. If everything were not empty, there would be no arising and perishing. From the letting go of and ceasing of what could one assert nirvāṇa(-ing)?

3. No letting go, no attainment, no annihilation, no permanence, no cessation, no birth: that is spoken of as nirvāṇa.

4. Nirvāṇa is not a thing. Then it would follow that it would have the characteristics of aging and death. There does not exist any thing that is without aging and death.

5. If nirvāṇa were a thing, nirvāṇa would be a conditioned phenomena. There does not exist any thing anywhere that is not a conditioned phenomenon.