The Island

262

Bhikkhus, “I am” is an involvement with conceit; “I am this” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall be” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall not be” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall consist of form” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall be formless” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall be percipient” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall be nonpercipient” is an involvement with conceit; “I shall be neither percipient nor nonpercipient” is an involvement with conceit. Involvement with conceit is a disease, involvement with conceit is a tumour, involvement with conceit is a dart. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: “We will dwell with a mind in which conceit has been struck down.” Thus should you train yourselves.

~ S 35.248, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

14.24) The wise person does not rate himself with the distinguished, the lowest, nor with ordinary people; calm and unselfish, he is free from possessiveness: he holds on to nothing and he rejects nothing.

~ SN 954, (Ven. H. Saddhatissa trans.)

There is no distinct division between the four different forms of clinging. Having clung to sensual pleasure (or to views, rites or self), doesn’t mean we are exempt from the other forms of clinging. One form of clinging can easily condition another. Similarly, unravelling one form of clinging can lead to the

unravelling of others.

14.25) Vaccha, “speculative view” is something that the Tathāgata has put away. For the Tathāgata, Vaccha, has seen this: “Such is material form, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is feeling, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is perception, such its origin, such its disappearance; such are formations, such their origin, such their disappearance; such is consciousness, such its origin, such its disappearance.” Therefore, I say, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of all conceivings, all excogitations, all I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit, the Tathāgata is liberated

through not clinging.

~ M 72.15, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

True letting go does not come about by only repeating the words of the Buddha’s teaching. There needs to be an unambiguous understanding of the difficulties that