The Island

326

Again, he possesses unwavering confidence in the Sangha thus: ‘The Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way ...’

Again, he possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones ...

These are the four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nourishments of happiness, which are heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven, and which lead to whatever is wished for, loved and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.

~ A 4.52, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

19.7) When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, it is not easy to take the measure of his merit thus: “Just so much is his stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, nutriment of happiness”; rather, it is reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.

Bhikkhus, just as it is not easy to take the measure of the water in the great ocean thus: “There are so many gallons of water,” or “There are so many hundreds of gallons of water,” or “There are so many thousands of gallons of water,” or “There are so many hundreds of thousands of gallons of water,” but rather it is reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water; so too, when a noble disciple possesses these four streams of merit ... it is reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.

~ S 55.41, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Part of this merit – or happiness – is a life with much decreased dukkha and an intrepidity when faced with difficult circumstances, even death.

Anāthapiṇḍika was one of the foremost lay supporters of the Buddha and was able to reap the fruits of his long association with the Buddha and the Sangha. He appears in this next discourse, which highlights the equation of the Noble Eightfold Path with the stream of Dhamma. As well as mentioning the Eightfold Path, it illustrates other characteristics of the sotāpanna and shows how Refuges and virtue are firmly established in the heart of a stream-enterer.

The discourse shows that a sotāpanna such as Anāthapiṇḍika is able to recollect the Refuges and not only be prepared for death but, because of his delight in Dhamma, his pain and discomfort disappeared completely at that time and he was able to get up and actively serve the Sangha.