The Island

316

who possesses right view: although he may commit some kind of offence for which a means of rehabilitation has been laid down, still he at once confesses, reveals, and discloses it to the Teacher or to wise companions in the holy life, and having done that, he enters upon restraint for the future. Just as a young, tender infant lying prone at once draws back when he puts his hand or his foot on a live coal, so too, that is the character of a person who possesses right view.

He understands thus: “I possess the character of a person who possesses right view.” This is the fourth knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people. Again, a noble disciple considers thus: “Do I possess the character of a person who possesses right view?” What is the character of a person who possesses right view? This is the character of a person who possesses right view: although he may be active in various matters for his companions in the holy life, yet he has a keen regard for training in the higher virtue, training in the higher mind, and training in the higher wisdom. Just as a cow with a new calf, while she grazes watches her calf, so too, that is the character of a person who possesses right view.

He understands thus: “I possess the character of a person who possesses right view.” This is the fifth knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people. Again, a noble disciple considers thus: “Do I possess the strength of a person who possesses right view?” What is the strength of a person who possesses right view? This is the strength of a person who possesses right view: when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, he heeds it, gives it attention, engages it with all his mind, hears the Dhamma as with eager ears.

He understands thus: “I possess the strength of a person who possesses right view.” This is the sixth knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people. Again, a noble disciple considers thus: “Do I possess the strength of a person who possesses right view?” What is the strength of a person who possesses right view? This is the strength of a person who possesses right view: when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.