The Island

46

and tending daily, so that they came to symbolise life in the world, life as a family man. This is made crystal clear in a sermon (A 7.44) in which the Buddha first juxtaposes the three sacrificial fires with the fires of passion, hatred and delusion, and then, with the aid of puns, metaphorically reinterprets the former: the eastern fire, āhavanīya in Sanskrit, he says stands for one’s parents; the western (gārhapatya) fire for one’s household and dependents; the southern (dakṣiṇāgni) for holy men (renunciates and brahmins) worthy to receive offerings. It is in this sense, he tells a fat brahmin, that a householder should tend the fires: by supporting people.

Later generations of Buddhists had no reason to be interested in Vedic brahmins or in the Buddha’s debate with them, so the origin of this metaphor was forgotten. So far as I know, it is not to be found in the commentaries. In the Mahāyāna, the metaphor was so thoroughly forgotten that passion, hatred and delusion came to be known as the three poisons ...

Since even the core of the fire metaphor was thus early forgotten by Buddhist tradition, it is not surprising that its extensions were forgotten too. The word ‘upādāna’ has both a concrete and an abstract meaning. In the abstract it means attachment, grasping; in this sense it is much used in Buddhist dogmatics. Concretely, it means that which fuels this process. The P.E.D. s.v.: ‘(lit. that [material] substratum by means of which an active process is kept alive and going), fuel, supply, provision.’ So when the context deals with fire it simply means fuel. The five khandhā, from form to consciousness, are often referred to in the texts as the upādāna-kkhandhā, and this is usually translated something like ‘the aggregates of grasping.’ While not wrong, this translation has lost the metaphor.

In my opinion it is clear that the term ‘khandhā’ too was a part of the fire metaphor. I would trace it back to a small sutta ... the sermon about the burden at Saṃyutta Nikāya Khandha-vagga, sutta 22 = S 22.22. Like most of these short sermons in the Saṃyutta Nikāya, this has no narrative context. The Buddha simply begins by saying: “Monks, I shall teach you the burden, the bearer of the burden, the taking up of the burden and the putting down of the burden.” He is expounding a metaphor. The burden, he says, is what we may call the five upādāna-kkhandhā; he then