THE UNAPPREHENDABILITY OF THE ENLIGHTENED

179

There are a few points in these two dialogues which are particularly worthy of note. Firstly, the five modes of relationship posited as possible for a Tathāgata in reference to the khandhas – identity with (or being); existing within; existing apart from; having; not having – describe a comprehensive schema for the habits of identification. As described in Chapter 5, all forms of positioning of

a self whatsoever, whether in terms of being or non-being, or as here in terms of a) identity, b) location or c) ownership, all of these have been abandoned by the enlightened ones. This formulation precisely maps the variety of ways in which we tend to define what we are – irrespective of whether such definitions are couched in positive or negative terms. Then, having neatly bundled them together, it points out to us that all definitions are necessarily wrong since they are based on invalid premises; like asking “Where exactly in the television does the newsreader live?” Or, as asked at §9.8 “Where is Nibbāna located?” or at §11.2, “When a fire goes out, does it go north, south, east or west?”

Further to this, one would have thought at first glance that Anurādha’s response to the wanderers (“Friends, a Tathāgata in describing an enlightened one describes them apart from these four instances”) was close enough to the mark. He at least seems to be holding the party line on not going along with the familiar quadrilemma – a formulation that appears to cover every conceivable angle of being, certainly one more thorough than any with which the average reader would be acquainted.

For the Buddha, however, as this expression fails to accord with the reality, he pulls Anurādha up on it and makes it the occasion for this fine teaching. For, in saying that an enlightened being is “described apart from these four instances,” he is unconsciously and tacitly implying that there is some other meta-dimension of being that the quadrilemma has missed and which is the actual abiding place of Tathāgatas after the death of the body. Not so.

In this light it is striking how, after the dismantling of all possible subtle position-taking, both suttas relocate the issue to the essence of the Teaching: dukkha and the ending of dukkha. These passages resonate with the Buddha’s emphatic declaration to Māluṅkyaputta on why he left certain things undeclared (M 63.7-10), while Ven. Yamaka’s words in particular are reminiscent of those uttered by the arahant bhikkhunī Vajirā (at §5.35) and by the Buddha to Ven. Mahā-Kaccāna (at §5.32) “What arises is only suffering arising, and what ceases is only suffering ceasing.” The following dialogue between the Ven. Mahā-Koṭṭhita and the Ven. Sāriputta echoes the same principle but uses a different angle of approach.