The Island

180

10.21) “When the six sense-spheres fade and cease without remainder, is it the case that there is anything else?”

“Do not say that, my friend.”

“Is it the case that there is not anything else?”

“Do not say that, my friend.”

“Is it the case that there both is and is not anything else?”

“Do not say that, my friend.”

“Is it the case that there neither is nor is not anything else?”

“Do not say that, my friend.”

“Being asked ... if there is anything else, you say, ‘Do not say that, my friend.’ Being asked ... if there is not anything else ... if there both is and is not anything else ... if there neither is nor is not anything else, you say, ‘Do not say that, my friend.’ Now, how is the meaning of this statement to be understood?”

“By saying, ‘... Is it the case that there is anything else? ... Is it the case that there is not anything else? ... Is it the case that there both is and is not anything else? ... Is it the case that there neither is nor is not anything else?’ – one is differentiating non-differentiation. However far the range of the six sense-spheres reaches, that is how far differentiation goes. However far differentiation goes, that is how far the range of the six sense-spheres reaches. When the six sense-spheres fade and cease without remainder, there is then the cessation, the allaying of differentiation.”

~ A 4.174

The Pali for “one is differentiating non-differentiation” is “appapañcaṃ papañceti,” literally, “complicates the uncomplicated.” Papañca is often taken to mean ‘illusion.’ It also has the meaning of ‘prolixity’ or ‘conceptual proliferation.’ The Buddha is described as ‘nippapañca’ – one who is free of this tendency. A key teaching on this subject is to be found in the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta (as at §6.9).

The encouragement that Ven. Sāriputta makes here – not to apply a means beyond its natural limitations – is also very apposite. There is an extremely strong tendency within most people to want to fill up the unknown, the ineffable, with a belief, with hope or fear, or, as with Anurādha and Yamaka, at least some kind of recognizable self-structure – in short to complicate the supremely uncomplicated.

As a final word, here is the Buddha, who has been addressing the Ven. Ānanda on insights into deluded views of self, culminating in liberation: