ATTENDING TO THE DEATHLESS

127

eyes in such a way as to see the computer generated, hidden 3-D images in a ‘magic eye’ picture, rather than a meaningless blur. Furthermore, inclining the mind, attending to the Deathless is usually expressed in the phrase, “This is peaceful, this is exquisite...” underscoring that this shift of perspective does not just mean seeing things from a different angle, it refers instead to realizing the presence of a dimension of peace and beauty hitherto unappreciated.

It also needs to be stressed that Ven. Anuruddha was an anāgāmi, a ‘non- returner,’ thus at the penultimate stage of enlightenment, when this exchange with Ven. Sāriputta took place. Many of his spiritual qualities were extremely ripe and without that ripeness, the immense preparation necessary for a full understanding of the nature of reality, the breakthrough to full enlightenment could not have come so swiftly. It takes more than the capacity to see the hidden dimensions of a ‘magic eye’ picture to fully liberate the heart!

The term ‘the Deathless element’ (amata-dhātu) was mentioned above, (at §7.1) with the suggestion that it is synonymous with ‘the Unconditioned’ (asaṅkhata- dhamma). It might be useful, however, to look briefly at the origin of the term – particularly since both ‘Deathless’ and ‘element,’ in English at least, can carry a tone of ‘thing-ness’ with them and thus convey an unintended concrete quality. On this point a contemporary Buddhist scholar, Stephen Collins, is worth quoting. His proposition is that amṛtam (Skt) – ‘amata’ in Pali – is a classic Vedic reference to:

7.2) An essential timelessness (or a timeless essence) both preceding and in some sense underlying the ordered human world of time; this is the immobile hub of the moving wheel of time, the still point (pada) beyond the ceaseless movement of saṃsāra.

~ Stephen Collins, ‘Selfless Persons,’ p 43

The following passage is similar to the first one of this chapter, both in its description of the practice of attending to the Deathless, and in the dialogue from which the discourse takes its provenance.

The Buddha has asked the assembly: “Bhikkhus, do you remember the five lower fetters as taught by me?” The Ven. Māluṅkyaputta responds by saying that he does but when he recites the list, apparently correctly, to his astonishment the Buddha responds: “Māluṅkyaputta, to whom do you remember my having taught the five lower fetters in this way? Would not the followers of other sects confute you with the simile of the infant?” The Buddha then outlines this simile