The Island

244

13.26) At Sāvatthī. Then the wanderer Timbaruka approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to him: “How is it, Master Gotama: are pleasure and pain created by oneself?”

“Not so, Timbaruka,” the Blessed One said.

“Then, Master Gotama, are pleasure and pain created by another?”

“Not so, Timbaruka,” the Blessed One said.

“How is it then, Master Gotama: are pleasure and pain created both by oneself and by another?”

“Not so, Timbaruka,” the Blessed One said.

“Then, Master Gotama, have pleasure and pain arisen fortuitously, being created neither by oneself nor by another?”

“Not so, Timbaruka,” the Blessed One said.

“How is it then, Master Gotama: is there no pleasure and pain?”

“It is not that there is no pleasure and pain, Timbaruka; there is pleasure and pain.”

“Then is it that Master Gotama does not know and see pleasure

and pain?”

“It is not that I do not know and see pleasure and pain, Timbaruka. I know pleasure and pain, I see pleasure and pain.”

“Whether you are asked: ‘How is it, Master Gotama: are pleasure and pain created by oneself?’ or ‘Are they created by another?’ or ‘Are they created by both?’ or ‘Are they created by neither?’ in each case you say: ‘Not so, Timbaruka.’ When you are asked: ‘How is it then, Master Gotama: is there no pleasure and pain?’ you say: ‘It is not that there is no pleasure and pain, Timbaruka; there is pleasure and pain.’ When asked: ‘Then is it that Master Gotama does not know and see pleasure and pain?’ you say: ‘It is not that I do not know and see pleasure and pain,Timbaruka. I know pleasure and pain, I see pleasure and pain.’ Venerable sir, let the Blessed One explain pleasure and pain to me. Let the Blessed One teach me about pleasure and pain.”

“Timbaruka, [if one thinks] ‘The feeling and the one who feels it are the same,’ [then one asserts] with reference to one existing from the be-ginning: ‘Pleasure and pain are created by oneself.’ I do not speak thus.