UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

151

8.23) “Bhikkhus, when the gods with Indra, with Brahmā and with Pajāpati seek a bhikkhu who is thus liberated in mind, they do not find [anything of which they could say]: ‘The consciousness of one thus gone is supported by this.’ Why is that? One thus gone is untraceable here and now.”

~ M 22.36

8.24) “There are these four nutriments for the establishing of beings who have taken birth, or for the support of those in search of a place to be born. Which four? Physical food, gross or refined; contact as the second, consciousness the third, and intention is the fourth. These are the four nutriments for the establishing of beings who have taken birth, or for the support of those in search of a place to be born.

“Where there is passion, delight and craving for the nutriment of physical food, consciousness lands there and grows. Where consciousness lands and grows, mentality-materiality alights. Where mentality-materiality alights, there is the growth of volitional formations. Where there is the growth of volitional formations, there is the production of renewed becoming in the future. Where there is the production of renewed becoming in the future, there is birth, aging, and death, together, I tell you, with sorrow, affliction and despair.

“Just as when there is dye, lac, yellow orpiment, indigo or crimson, a dyer or painter would paint the picture of a woman or a man, complete in all its parts, on a well-polished panel or wall, or on a piece of cloth; in the same way, where there is passion, delight and craving for the nutriment of physical food, consciousness lands there and grows ... together, I tell you, with sorrow, affliction, and despair.

Similarly with the other three kinds of nutriment.

“Where there is no passion for the nutriment of physical food, where there is no delight, no craving, then consciousness does not land there or grow ... Mentality-materiality does not alight ... There is no growth of volitional formations ... There is no production of renewed becoming in the future. Where there is no production of renewed becoming in the future, there is no birth, aging and death. That, I tell you, is quite free from sorrow, affliction or despair.