KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

221

It is an oft-remarked upon fact that the teachings of different masters sometimes seem to contradict each other – even those of the same teacher, on occasion. These passages from this famous discourse of Ajahn Mahā Boowa are included, not to be contradictory but rather to help the reader develop a more reflective and investigative appreciation of these teachings on radiance. What he points to here is the danger of subtle forms of identification and attachment, even to such seemingly pure qualities as radiance. It is only by such repeated contemplation and exploration, through meditation practice, that we can awaken to the fundamental truth of the matter.

To round things off for this chapter – concluding this section of the book and leading us to the final division (on Cultivation and Fruition) – here are some words of Ajahn Chah that encompass the themes we have been looking at.

12.29) “About this mind... in truth there is nothing really wrong with it. It is intrinsically pure. Within itself it’s already peaceful. That the mind is not peaceful these days is because it follows moods. The real mind doesn’t have anything to it, it is simply (an aspect of) Nature. It becomes peaceful or agitated because moods deceive it. The untrained mind is stupid. Sense impressions come and trick it into happiness, suffering, gladness and sorrow, but the mind’s true nature is none of those things. That gladness or sadness is not the mind, but only a mood coming to deceive us. The untrained mind gets lost and follows these things, it forgets itself. Then we think that it is we who are upset or at

ease or whatever.

“But really this mind of ours is already unmoving and peaceful... really peaceful! Just like a leaf which is still as long as no wind blows. If a wind comes up the leaf flutters. The fluttering is due to the wind – the ‘fluttering’ is due to those sense impressions; the mind follows them. If it doesn’t follow them, it doesn’t ‘flutter.’ If we know fully the true nature of sense impressions we will be unmoved.

“Our practice is simply to see the Original Mind. We must train the mind to know those sense impressions, and not get lost in them; to make it peaceful. Just this is the aim of all this difficult practice we put ourselves through.”

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, ‘Food for the Heart,’ p 41