Prefaces

11

faith in the transcendent, the practice of Buddhism became almost a dry, technical procedure – intellectually satisfying but strangely sterile as well.

“They had largely rejected the idea of an Ultimate Reality from their thoughts as being intrinsically theistic nonsense so I realized that people needed to be aware that there was also such a principle in the Buddha’s teachings, without there being any hint of a creator God in the picture. In Thailand, because there is already such a broad and strong basis of faith in these transcendent qualities, there is no need to talk about Ultimate Reality, the Unconditioned and so forth – for them it can be a distraction. Here, I saw that people needed something to look up to – that’s why I talk about it all the time. It goes a long way to cultivating faith and it gives a much more living and expansive quality to their spiritual life; there is a natural joy when the heart opens to its true nature.”

Fast forward now to late 1997:

Other seeds for this anthology began to come from several different directions. One of these was a conversation with Nancy van House in the parking lot of an Episcopalian church in Palo Alto, at the end of a weekend session on the subject of ‘The Graduated Teachings – Anupubbīkathā.’ The weekend had been organized by the Sati Center, a Buddhist studies group based in the San Francisco Bay Area, and people were keen for more such sessions in the future.

“Do you have any suggestions for topics?” I asked, as we walked towards our vehicles, arms laden with sundry mats, folders and shrine gear.

“How about Nibbāna?” replied Nancy, smiling gleefully. “Now that should be interesting...” thought I.

The subject had (predictably) come up a few times during the weekend, and it was clear that people had all sorts of conflicting or unformed feelings and impressions about what the word meant, how important it was or wasn’t, and how attainable or unattainable it might be. In people’s minds it seemed to be like some ancient or mythical country – like Wallachia or Avalon, Bactria or Uddiyana – written and spoken of by some as if familiar and commonplace, yet mysterious and distant, full of complexities to the neophyte. “Great idea,” I replied.

Not long after this, as I had begun to gather my wits, crack a few books of Pali suttas and pick Ajahn Pasanno’s brains on the subject, I was approached by James Baraz with the request that I help out with his new Community Dharma Leaders training program. This is an effort to give people who lead meditation groups,