SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

303

Although this description is clear, it is a bit terse and may not display its implications immediately. Therefore, in the following passage, the contemporary voice of Ajahn Chah may help the reader to understand the significance of the grasping at self in its many forms.

18.2) The Buddha intended for us to be free of attachment to the five aggregates, to lay them down and give up involvement with them. We cannot give them up, however, because we don’t really know them for what they are. We believe happiness to be ourselves; we see ourselves as happy. We believe suffering to be ourselves and see ourselves as unhappy. We can’t pull the mind out of this view, which means we are not seeing nature. There isn’t any self involved, but we are always thinking in terms of self. Thus it seems that happiness happens to us, suffering happens to us, elation happens to us, depression happens to us. The chain of self is constructed, and with this solid feeling that there is a self, everything seems to be happening to us.

So the Buddha said to destroy this conception, this block called self. When the concept of self is destroyed and finished, we are free of the belief that there is a self in the body, and then the condition of selflessness is naturally revealed. Believing that there is me and mine and living with selfishness, everything is understood as being a self or belonging to a self or somehow relating to a self. When the phenomena of nature are seen thus, there is no real understanding. If nature appears to be good, we laugh and rejoice over it; if phenomena appear to be bad, we cry and lament. Thinking of natural phenomena as constituting ourselves or something we own, we create a great burden of suffering to carry. If we realized the truth of things, we would not have all the drama of excitement, elation, grief, and tears. It is said, “Pacification is true happiness,” and this comes when attachment is rooted out through seeing reality.

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, ‘Being Dharma,’ pp 166-7

Ajahn Chah’s emphasis in teaching about the higher attainments would almost invariably lean toward speaking about that which is relinquished, let go of. This method tended to help his students deal with the obstacle that they were facing, rather than looking to an idealized goal in the future. As the true nature of things is