The Island

114

6.1) Atammayatā: THE REBIRTH OF A LOST WORD:

The term Atammayatā cannot be found in the Pali Text Society Dictionary. Readers will find it difficult to discover references to it in scholarly works, whether they come from West or East. The meditation masters of Tibet, Burma or Zen do not seem to be interested in it. Mention it to most Buddhists and they will not know what you are talking about. Yet there is clear evidence in the Pali Canon that the Buddha gave this word significant meaning. Currently, one of Thailand’s most influential monks is teaching that it is “the highest word in Buddhism, the final sword of Buddhism.”

Atammayatā appears in a number of Pali suttas and each context suggests that the term has important meaning. The traditional comme-ntators’ ... standard explanation, although vague, describes it as the awakened state of the Arahant, or fully-awakened, perfected being.

Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu, from Suan Mokkhabalarama in southern Siam, first took note of this word about thirty years ago. The contexts in which he found Atammayatā convinced him that its meaning is important. As with other terms and teachings found in the Tipiṭaka, he was careful to look further than the orthodox grammarians, pedants, and pundits. He searched for a spiritual meaning on the deepest level possible.

We can only speculate as to why Atammayatā was left out of the Pali Text Society Dictionary. Surely not because it is impossible to decipher. A literal analysis gives us: a (not), tā (that), maya (to make, create, or produce), and ta (the state of being). Thus, Atammayatā may be translated as “the state of not being made up by, or made up from, that (thing or condition).”

The meaning becomes clearer if we recognize that maya is a synonym for saṅkhāra (to concoct, compound, or condition). Atammayatā is ‘unconcoctability,’ a state of mind independent of the objects and conditions of experience. Fully conscious and aware, this mind is not affected by the defilements of greed, anger, and delusion. Thus, the concept is close in meaning to the adjective visaṅkhāra, which describes the unconditioned state of Nibbāna. Clearly, Atammayatā is something Buddhists should be aware of.

Why does Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu consider Atammayatā so important? In the Saḷāyatanavibhanga Sutta (M 137) the Buddha describes a spiritual progression carried out by “relying on this, to give up that.” Relying on