UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

135

the Conqueror, the Unconquered, the All Seeing, All Powerful, the Lord, the Maker and Creator, the Ruler, Appointer and Orderer, Father of All That Have Been and Shall Be.’

“A second time the monk said: ‘Friend, I did not ask if you are Brahmā, Great Brahmā ... I asked you where the four great elements cease without remainder.’ And a second time the Great Brahmā replied as before.

“And a third time the monk said: ‘Friend, I did not ask you that, I asked where the four great elements – earth, water, fire, air – cease without remainder.’ Then, Kevaddha, the Great Brahmā took that monk by the arm, led him aside and said: ‘Monk, these devas believe there is nothing Brahmā does not see, there is nothing he does not know, there is nothing he is unaware of. That is why I did not speak in front of them. But, monk, I don’t know where the four great elements cease without remainder. And therefore, monk, you have acted wrongly, you have acted incorrectly by going beyond the Blessed Lord and going in search of an answer to this question elsewhere. Now, monk, you just go to the Blessed Lord and put this question to him, and whatever answer he gives, accept it.’

“So that monk, as swiftly as a strong man might flex or unflex his arm, vanished from the brahmā world and appeared in my presence. He prostrated himself before me, then sat down to one side and said: ‘Lord, where do the four great elements – the earth element, the water element, the fire element and the air element – cease without remainder?”

“I replied: ‘... But, monk, you should not ask your question in this way: “Where do the four great elements – the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element – cease without remainder?” Instead, this is how the question should have been put:

“Where do earth, water, fire and air no footing find?

Where are long and short, small and great, fair and foul –

Where are ‘name and form’ wholly destroyed?”

And the answer is:

“Where consciousness is signless, boundless, all-luminous,

That’s where earth, water, fire and air find no footing,

There both long and short, small and great, fair and foul –