KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

197

All outward-going knowing

cast aside.

~ Upāsikā Kee Nanayon, ‘An Unentangled Knowing,’ p 33, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

In the employment of such terms as ‘the one who knows,’ it is important to understand that this is a colloquial usage and in no sense is some kind of ‘true self’ or ‘super-entity’ implied – it’s merely a convenient figure of speech. If we start looking for ‘who’ it is that is aware we rapidly end up in the kind of tangle described at §5.13.

When we speak or think about the quality of awareness there is also a subtle danger of the mind trying to cast it into the form of some kind of immaterial thing or process. The word ‘awareness’ is an abstract noun, and we get so used to relating to ordinary objects through conceptualizing about them that we allow the habit to overflow; thus we can end up conceiving awareness in the same way (cf §5.15). The heart can be aware but to try to make awareness an object, in the same way that we would a tree or a thought, is a frustrating process. Ajahn Chah’s most common phrase in warning against this was to say:

12.7) “You’re riding on a horse and asking, ‘Where’s the horse?’”

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, in ‘Venerable Father,’ by Paul Breiter, p 154

Or Ajahn Sumedho’s favorite:

12.8) “Just like the question ‘Can you see your own eyes?’ Nobody can see their own eyes. I can see your eyes but I can’t see my eyes. I’m sitting right here, I’ve got two eyes and I can’t see them. But you can see my eyes. But there’s no need for me to see my eyes because I can see! It’s ridiculous, isn’t it? If I started saying ‘Why can’t I see my own eyes?’ you’d think ‘Ajahn Sumedho’s really weird, isn’t he!’ Looking in a mirror you can see a reflection, but that’s not your eyes, it’s a reflection of your eyes. There’s no way that I’ve been able to look and see my own eyes, but then it’s not necessary to see your own eyes. It’s not necessary to know who it is that knows – because there’s knowing.”

~ Ajahn Sumedho, ‘What is the Citta?,’ ‘Forest Sangha Newsletter,’ Oct. ’88