The Island

62

to this and breaks through to it. Fully enlightened, fully understanding, he explains it, teaches it, proclaims it, establishes it, discloses it, analyzes it, elucidates it. And he says: ‘See! With birth as condition, bhikkhus, aging-and-death comes to be.’

“‘With becoming as condition, birth’ ... ‘With clinging as condition, becoming’ ... ‘With craving as condition, clinging’ ...

‘With feeling as condition, craving’ ... ‘With contact as condition, feeling’ ... ‘With the six sense-spheres as condition, contact’ ...

‘With materiality-mentality as condition, the six sense-spheres’ ...

‘With consciousness as condition, materiality-mentality’ ... ‘With volitional formations as condition, consciousness’ ... ‘With ignorance as condition, volitional formations’: whether there is an arising of Tathāgatas or no arising of Tathāgatas, this nature of things still stands, the stableness of the Dhamma, this causal orderliness, the relatedness of this to that. A Tathāgata awakens to this and breaks through to it. Fully enlightened, fully understanding, he explains it, teaches it, proclaims it, establishes it, discloses it, analyzes it, elucidates it. And he says: ‘See! With ignorance as condition, bhikkhus, volitional formations

come to be.’

“Thus, bhikkhus, that suchness (tathatā) therein – the invariability (avitathatā), the not-otherwiseness (anaññathatā), the relatedness of this to that – this is called dependent origination.

“And what, bhikkhus, are the dependently arisen phenomena?

“Aging-and-death is impermanent, compounded, dependently arisen, subject to withering, vanishing, fading away and cessation. So too are birth, becoming, grasping, craving, feeling, contact, the six sense-spheres, materiality-mentality, consciousness, volitional formations and ignorance. These also are impermanent, compounded, dependently arisen, subject to withering, vanishing, fading away and cessation. These, bhikkhus, are called the dependently

arisen phenomena.

~ S 12.20

3.4) “And what is the noble method that is well seen and well penetrated by insight?

There is the case where a noble disciple notices:

When this is, that is.