PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

257

with self” arises in him as true and established; or the view “I perceive not-self with self” arises in him as true and established; or the view “I perceive self with not-self” arises in him as true and established; or else he has some such view as this: “It is this self of mine that speaks and feels and experiences here and there the result of good and bad actions; but this self of mine is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and it will endure as long as eternity.” This speculative view, bhikkhus, is called the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the contortion of views, the vacillation of views, the fetter of views. Fettered by the fetter of views, the untaught ordinary person is not freed from birth, ageing, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; he is not freed from suffering, I say.

~ M 2.7-8, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Setting down the urge toward the creation of the self and all the ideas or views that are attendant on that, the heart is able to experience peace. This is difficult, as the permutations of clinging to the doctrine of self are so extensive. Although letting go may seem straightforward and logical, the habits we have accumulated that keep us repeating the pattern of attachment are deeply set.

There tends to be an assumption that the teachings around not-self are abstract. Rather, they are a very practical assessment of how best to relate to the basic conditions of our life: things that are often too close or too familiar for us to see clearly. When we can realize that we are clinging to ideas or conceptions that do not accord with reality and that actually intensify our suffering, we can step back, cool the ardour of our delusion and relax our grip in order to put down what really didn’t belong to us in the first place.

14.17) “Bhikkhus, what do you think? Is material form permanent or impermanent?” – “Impermanent, venerable sir.” – “Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?” – “Suffering, venerable sir.” – “Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?” – “No, venerable sir.”

“Bhikkhus, what do you think: Is feeling ... perception ... formations … consciousness permanent or impermanent?” – “Impermanent, venerable sir.” – “Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?” – “Suffering, venerable sir.” – “Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change