UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

137

Usefully, and especially in the context of the discussion on the teaching to Bāhiya (see §3.6), in Prof. Rhys Davids’ translation of the Dīgha Nikāya, he quotes Neumann’s rendering of nāma and rūpa as ‘subject and object.’ This is a helpful perspective since, for some, the ‘cessation of consciousness’ or ‘the destruction of mind and body’ might seem like depressing or nihilistic phrases, whereas ‘the dissolution of subject/object dualities’ and the freedom ensuing from that, sounds considerably more appealing. In this light it’s also worthy of note that the tangible qualities of the mind where no footing can be found for everyday dualisms include ‘radiance’ and ‘limitlessness’ – hardly uninviting qualities either.

The second point is the use of the word ‘nirodha.’ In the above-quoted sutta the verb variously translated as ‘destroyed,’ ‘cut off’ and ‘held in check’ is uparujjhati, which is virtually identical in meaning to nirujjhati, the verb derived from ‘nirodha.’ Customarily it is translated as ‘cessation’ as in dukkha-nirodha, ‘the cessation of suffering.’ In the above translations it, and its derivations, have been variously rendered ‘destroyed,’ ‘come to cease’ but also ‘held in check.’ The Pali root of the word is -rud, which not only implies to end, stop or quench, but also to hold in check, as an impulsive and restless horse is reined in. Thus there is a breadth of meaning in these key terms, of the last two lines of the verses which end both §§8.2 & 8.3, that is easy to miss in the English. Perhaps the best way of paraphrasing them is to say that when the dualistic, discriminative process is checked then the ‘thing-ness,’ the solid externality of the world and the ‘me-ness’ of the mind are seen as essentially insubstantial. There is no footing for the apparent independent existence of mental or material objects or an independent subject.

Here are some words from an eminent Buddhist scholar of Thailand to help further clarify the meaning of this term.

8.4) A PROBLEM WITH THE WORD ‘NIRODHA’

The word nirodha has been translated as ‘cessation’ for so long that it has become standard practice, and any deviation from it leads to queries. Even in this book I have opted for this standard translation for the sake of convenience and to avoid confusing it for other Pali terms (apart from lack of a better word). In fact, however, this rendering of the word nirodha as ‘ceased’ can in many instances be a mis-rendering of the text.

Generally speaking, the word ‘cease’ means to do away with something which has already arisen, or the stopping of something which has already begun. However, nirodha in the teaching of Dependent Origination (as