The Island

242

How, bhikkhus, do some overreach? Now some are troubled, ashamed and disgusted by this very same being and they rejoice in (the idea of) non-being, asserting: “In as much as this self, good sirs, when the body perishes at death, is annihilated and destroyed and does not exist after death – this is peaceful, this is excellent, this is reality!” Thus, bhikkhus, do some overreach. How, bhikkhus, do those with vision see? Herein a bhikkhu sees what has come to be as having come to be. Having seen it thus, he practises the course for turning away, for dispassion, for the cessation of what has come to be. Thus, bhikkhus, do those

with vision see.

~ Iti 49, (John D. Ireland trans.)

The act of clinging to views of being or non-being forms the basis for our misperception in life. When we hold to being, we foster a tendency to search for ways of furthering the gratification, comfort, pleasure of that being. When we hold to non-being, the swing goes in the direction of nihilism, fear, aversion to the quality of being. This is to state the case in a somewhat oversimplified way, but as we reflect and extrapolate from these two positions we can see how they can give rise to a multitude of difficulties.

The middleness of right view avoids other continuums as well, particularly the realm of philosophical or religious speculation.

13.25) At Sāvatthī. Then a brahman cosmologist went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One, “Now, then, Master Gotama, does everything exist?”

“‘Everything exists’ is the senior form of cosmology, brahman.”

“Then, Master Gotama, does everything not exist?”

“‘Everything does not exist’ is the second form of cosmology,

brahman.”

“Then is everything a Oneness?”

“‘Everything is a Oneness’ is the third form of cosmology, brahman.”

“Then is everything a Plurality?”

“‘Everything is a Plurality’ is the fourth form of cosmology, brahman. Avoiding these two extremes, the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma via