The Island

110

3.	If an essence does not exist, how can the thingness of the other exist. [For] the essence of the thingness of the other is said to be the thingness of the other.

4.	Apart from an essence and the thingness of the other, what things are there? If essences and thingnesses of others existed, things would be established.

5.	If things were not established, non-things would not be estab-lished. [When] a thing becomes something else, people say that it is

a non-thing.

6.	Those who view essence, thingness of the other, things and non-things do not see the suchness in the teaching of the awakened.

7.	Through knowing things and non-things, the Buddha negated both existence and non-existence in his ‘Advice to Kātyāyana.’

8. If [things] existed essentially, they would not come to nonexistence. It is never the case that an essence could become something else.

9.	If essences did not exist, what could become something else? Even if essences existed, what could become something else?

10.	‘Existence’ is the grasping at permanence; ‘non-existence’ is the view of annihilation. Therefore, the wise do not dwell in existence or

non-existence.

11.	‘Since that which exists by its essence is non-existent’ is [the view of] permanence. ‘That which arose before is now nonexistent,’ leads to [the view of] annihilation.

~ Ācariya Nāgārjuna, Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā, Ch 15, (Stephen

Batchelor trans.)

As with many of the instances where the Buddha invokes dependent origination as the resolution for dualities such as self and other, eternalism and annihilationism, etc. (a large proportion of these are found in the Nidāna Saṃyutta, ‘The Collection on Causation,’ S 12), Nāgārjuna employs the same method throughout his treatise. He illustrates again and again how the dependently originated quality of all things is the basis for their emptiness, (suññatā).

His exposition is a poetic exploration of the relationship between emptiness, dependent origination and the Middle Way. It is a work of great philosophical