UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

143

Here are a couple of passages from the scriptures that give a little more background to the mental qualities that Ajahn Chah is describing.

8.11) There is the case, Sandha, where for a superior person the perception of earth with regard to earth has ceased to exist; the perception of water with regard to water ... the perception of fire with regard to fire... the perception of air with regard to air ... the perception of the sphere of the infinitude of space with regard to the sphere of the infinitude of space ... the perception of the sphere of the infinitude of consciousness with regard to the sphere of the infinitude of consciousness ... the perception of the sphere of nothingness with regard to the sphere of nothingness ... the perception of the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception with regard to the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception ... the perception of this world with regard to this world ... the next world with regard to the next world ... and whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, pondered by the intellect: the perception with regard even to that has ceased to exist.

Meditating in this way, the superior person meditates dependent neither on earth, water, fire, wind, the sphere of the infinitude of space, the sphere of the infinitude of consciousness, the sphere of nothingness, the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, this world, the next world, nor on whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after or pondered by the intellect – and yet they do meditate. And to this superior person, meditating in this way, the gods, together with Indra, the brahmās and their chief queens, pay homage

even from afar:

“Homage to you, O superior one!

“Homage to you, O superlative one, of whom we have no direct knowledge even of what it is you meditate dependent upon!”

~ A 11.9

8.12) Now, the Ven. Ānanda went to see the Blessed One, and on coming to him saluted him and sat down at one side. So seated he said this to the Blessed One:

“Venerable sir, may it be that a bhikkhu’s attainment of concentration is of such a sort that in earth he does not perceive earth, in water he does