Atammayatā

119

~ Richard Gombrich, ‘Metaphor, Allegory, Satire,’ in ‘How Buddhism

Began: The Conditioned Genesis of the Early Teachings,’ pp 86-7

That is to say, with the opposite quality, A-tammayatā, the mind’s ‘energy’ does not go out to the object and occupy it. It neither makes an objective ‘thing’ or a subjective ‘observer’ knowing it; hence ‘non-identification’ refers to the subjective aspect and ‘non-fabrication’ mostly to the objective.

The reader should also carefully bear in mind the words “The origins of this idea...” and not take the Vedic concept and imagery as representing the Buddhist use of the word entirely accurately. In the state of Atammayatā, in its Buddhist usage, there is no actual ‘becoming con-substantial’ with the thing that is being known; it is more that the deluded identification of the mind with the object is being dispelled (see also §6.7).

One helpful way of understanding Atammayatā’s role and significance is to relate it to the other two items in the final triad of the nine insights as outlined by Ajahn Buddhadāsa. These three qualities describe the upper reaches of spiritual refinement: suññatā – voidness or emptiness; tathatā – thusness or suchness; Atammayatā – non-identification or ‘not-thatness.’ The three qualities speak to the nature of experience when many of the coarser defilements have fallen away. When the qualities of emptiness and suchness are considered, even though the conceit of identity might already have been seen through, there can still remain subtle traces of clinging; clinging to the idea of an objective world being known by a subjective knowing – even though no sense of ‘I’ is discernible at all.

There can be the feeling of a ‘this’ which is knowing a ‘that,’ and either saying “Yes” to it, in the case of suchness, or “No” in the case of emptiness.

Atammayatā is the closure of that whole domain, expressing the insight that “There is no ‘that.’” It is the genuine collapse of both the illusion of separateness of subject and object and also of the discrimination between phenomena as being somehow substantially different from each other. As it has been written:

6.5) Do not remain in the dualistic state;

avoid such pursuits carefully.

If there is even a trace

of this and that, of right and wrong,

the Mind-essence will be lost in confusion.

~ Hsin Hsin Ming, Verses of the Third Ch’an Patriarch,

(Richard B. Clarke trans.)