The Island

340

indulge them in their favorite pastimes. They probably see it as a place devoid of anything stimulating or exciting, and therefore, they don’t want to go there. They fear dropping into a still, silent hell without a soul in sight: There would be no family, no friends and no sounds, ever, of birds and cars, or laughter and crying. It appears to be a rather bleak, undesirable place in every way.

~ Ācariya Mahā Boowa Ñāṇasampanno, ‘Venerable Ācariya Mun Bhuridatta Thera: A Spiritual Biography,’ p 276

Similar attitudes toward Nibbāna were present in the Buddha’s time:

20.3) He thinks thus: “So I shall be annihilated! So I shall perish! So I shall be no more!” Then he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught.

~ M 22.20, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The Buddha points out that progress on the path is blocked if one cannot see the positive aspects of one’s goal:

20.4) Truly, O monks, that a monk who considers Nibbāna ... as suffering, can have a conviction that conforms with the Dhamma,

that cannot be; and that one who ... has not entered into the certainty of rightness should realize the fruits of stream-entry, once-returning non-returning or arahantship, that too cannot be.

~ A 6.101, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

To recognize and reflect on the blessings that accrue to those who have contact with one who has realized Nibbāna is one way to highlight the positive element of Nibbāna. The experience of Nibbāna is not something that leaves beings diminished; instead, it leaves them enriched and brings blessings to others.

In this next example, the Buddha points out that for those people who make offerings to the wanderer Saccaka, there would be a difference in the merits and blessings arising from their gifts, as opposed to offering to the Buddha, who was a purified being. The blessings that arise from offerings differ according to the recipients’ degree of virtuous development and freedom from defilement. On this