The Island

206

is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which

is present thus: ‘This is present.’ Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure entry into emptiness.

So too with the bases of infinite consciousness, nothingness and neither- perception-nor-non-perception.

“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu ... not attending to the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception – attends to the singleness dependent on the signless concentration of mind (animitta-cetosamādhi). His mind enters into that signless concentration of mind and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He understands thus: ‘Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of the base of nothingness, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of neither-perception-nor- non-perception, those are not present here. There is present here only this amount of disturbance, namely, that connected with the six sense bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’ He understands: ‘This field of perception is empty of the perception of the base of nothingness; this field of perception is empty of the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. There is present only this non-emptiness, namely, that connected with the six sense bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’ Thus he regards it as empty of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’ Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure entry into emptiness.

“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu ... attends to the singleness dependent on the signless concentration of mind. His mind enters into that signless concentration of mind and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He understands thus: ‘This signless concentration of mind is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.’ When he knows and sees thus, his heart is liberated from the outflow of sensual desire, from the outflow of becoming, and from the outflow of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’ He understands: ‘Birth is ended, the holy life has been lived