“‘REAPPEARS’ DOES NOT APPLY...”

183

in common usage, they lack technical accuracy for they can imply that Parinibbāna is some kind of special place – a sort of super-heaven that is somehow permanent and that one never dies in or falls away from. Instead the term means, rather, the event of passing away undergone by one who has attained Nibbāna during their life.

To borrow the language of modern physics, one could aptly refer to Parinibbāna as an ‘event horizon’ from beyond which nothing ever returns and from whence no messages can come. Around a black hole, it is the distance from its surface beyond which the laws of gravity ensure that there can be no turning back. It is a one-way border.

Nothing can escape the powerful gravitational grip of the black hole, not even light, for lightspeed is less than the escape velocity required to leave that hyperdense sphere. The event horizon is thus the limit of knowledge for the outside observer.

All analogies are flawed but this image well portrays the essence of the situation. Even though theories abound about what might be happening ‘inside’ a black hole, physicists of the calibre of Stephen Hawking have said that it’s still impossible to know. All information is lost forever once something has passed the event horizon: the laws of reality that function beyond that limit; whether they form gateways to other dimensions; if they are sources of big bangs generating other universes; whether qualities and occurrences, multiple dimensionalities, curling profusions of planes of time and space that utterly defy descriptive power are there; or an awesome nothingness – all of this is unknowable. Such wonderful unknowability is the principle in question.

To begin the exploration of this border area, here are a few examples of people encountering the principle, together with the Buddha’s reasoning as to why he relates to it in the way that he does.

11.1) Therefore, Māluṅkyaputta, remember what I have left undeclared as undeclared, and remember what I have declared as declared. And what have I left undeclared? ... [Whether] “after death a Tathāgata exists” ... or “after death a Tathāgata does not exist” ... or “after death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist’ ... or “after death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist.” Why have I not declared this? Because it is not beneficial, it does not belong to the fundamentals of the holy life, it does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna. That is why I have not declared it.

And what have I declared? “This is dukkha, this its origin, this its cessation and this the path leading to its cessation,” this I have declared.