“AH, WHAT BLISS!”

351

you utter, ‘Ah, what bliss! Ah, what bliss!’?”

“Yes, revered sir.”

“But, Bhaddiya, what do you see that prompts you to do so?”

“Formerly, revered sir, when I was a householder and enjoyed the bliss of royalty, inside and outside my inner apartments guards were appointed; inside and outside the city guards were appointed; inside and outside the district guards were appointed. But, revered sir, although I was thus guarded and protected, I lived fearful, agitated, distrustful, and afraid. But now, revered sir, on going alone into the forest, to the foot of a tree or to an empty place, I am fearless, unagitated, confident, and unafraid. I live unconcerned, unruffled, my needs satisfied, with a mind become like a deer’s. Seeing this, revered sir, prompts me, on going to the forest ... to utter constantly, ‘Ah, what bliss! Ah, what bliss!’”

Then, on realizing its significance, the Lord uttered on that occasion

this inspired utterance:

“In whom exist no inner stirrings,

Having passed beyond being this or that,

Free from fear, blissful and sorrowless,

The devas are not capable of seeing him.”

~ Ud 2.10, (John D. Ireland trans.)

As can now be seen, Nibbāna brings forth the fruit of bliss. In turn, the factors leading to Nibbāna need to be nurtured along with the other seeds, terrain and aspects of cultivation laid out in the Buddha’s teaching. This fruition is the Buddha’s sole goal in dedicating his efforts to teaching and training others throughout his long and illustrious life.

All the teachings compiled in this collection are for aiding us in our search for well-being and peace. Having recognized that Nibbāna is a possibility for ourselves, we are able to take the seeds, prepare the ground, and cultivate the fruit. The bliss of tasting and being nourished by this fruit is a principle of nature that we are all able to realize. A last example illustrating this principle of Nibbāna as a state of intrinsic well-being also comes in the Udāna. In the previous sutta passage Bhaddiya describes the bliss of Nibbāna as experienced in this life. In this passage – after the passing away of Dabba the Mallian – the Buddha affirms that that Nibbanic bliss is not affected or altered by the death of the body.