The Island

328

by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’ As you consider within yourself that confirmed confidence in the Dhamma, your pains may subside on the spot.

“You, householder, do not have that distrust towards the Sangha which the uninstructed worldling possesses because of which the

latter ... is reborn in the plane of misery ... in hell. And you have confirmed confidence in the Sangha thus: ‘The Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way, practising the straight way, practising the true way, practising the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals – this Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’ As you consider within yourself that confirmed confidence in the Sangha, your pains may subside on the spot.

“You, householder, do not have that immorality which the uninstructed worldling possesses because of which the latter ... is reborn in the plane of misery ... in hell. And you have those virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken, untorn, unblemished, unmottled, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration. As you consider within yourself those virtues dear to the noble ones, your pains may subside on the spot.

“You, householder, do not have that wrong view which the uninstructed worldling possesses because of which the latter ... is reborn in the plane of misery ... in hell. And you have right view. As you consider within yourself that right view, your pains may subside on the spot.

“You, householder, do not have that wrong intention ... wrong speech ... wrong action ... wrong livelihood ... wrong effort ... wrong mindful-ness ... wrong concentration ... wrong knowledge ... wrong liberation which the uninstructed worldling possesses because of which the latter ... is reborn in the plane of misery ... in hell. And you have right intention ... right speech ... right action ... right livelihood ... right

effort ... right mindfulness ... right concentration ... right knowledge ... right liberation. As you consider within yourself that right liberation, your pains may subside on the spot.”