The Island

146

In this way he abides contemplating mind as mind internally, or he abides contemplating mind as mind externally, or he abides contemplat-ing mind as mind both internally and externally. Or else he abides con-templating mind in its arising factors, or he abides contemplating mind in its vanishing factors, or he abides contemplating mind in both its arising and vanishing factors. Or else mindfulness that ‘there is mind’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness. And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind.

~ M 10.34-35, D 22.12

This principle is well-demonstrated by the following accounts from the teachings, again, of both Ajahn Chah and Luang Pu Dun.

8.16) Almost every day, and most of every day, Ajahn Chah would sit on a small wicker bench beneath the shade of his hut and receive a constant stream of visitors. He was entering his latter years and by now was widely known throughout Thailand, and much of the Western world, as a spiritual teacher who was straightforward and earthy, profound, practical and clear. His committed disciples, laypeople as well as monastics, numbered in their thousands and he was recognized as embodying the highest degrees of wisdom and purity of heart.

One day, amongst the several clusters of folk gathered around to listen to the teachings there sat a man – a middle-aged Thai from another province who had heard of Ajahn Chah’s reputation yet had never visited him before. He had been impressed by the serenity of Wat Nong Pah Pong (Ajahn Chah’s monastery) but more so by the good-humoured loving-kindness and mountain-like ease of the man to whom he was listening. As he sat there and took it all in, it seemed to him that indeed all that he had heard about Ajahn Chah was true: here was a man at peace. He had unlocked the secrets of the heart; and though he lived the austere life of a forest-dwelling monk he seemed to be the happiest man in the world.

After a while a certain curiosity was awakened in the visitor – by profession he was a palmist, and something of a mor doo, a blend of