UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

145

In a similar vein, here is a passage from the teachings of Luang Pu Dun.

8.14) Luang Pu lived at his monastery in Surin for fifty years without spending a Rains Retreat elsewhere. It is in the middle of the town and because of that it is quite noisy. Especially during occasions like the Elephant Festival or New Year, it can be a week or two of constant impingement. For any of the monks and novices who are not firm in their practice it can be quite disrupting.

Whenever anyone would complain, Luang Pu would instruct: “Why are you bothering to take interest in such things? It’s ordinary for light to be bright. It’s ordinary for sound to make noise. That’s its duty. If we don’t take an interest in it, it stops right there. Look after yourself so that you are not an enemy to the circumstances you are in, because the circumstances are just that way – that’s all. Just see things with true wisdom and that’s enough.”

~ Luang Pu Dun, ‘Atulo,’ collected teachings compiled by

Phra Bodhinandamuni

Such detachment, providing ‘no footing’ for the flow of experience, is not confined to sense perceptions alone, very significantly it also applies to thoughts, moods and emotions. The Buddha outlines this clearly in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta:

8.15) And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating mind as mind? Here a bhikkhu understands mind affected by lust as mind affected by lust, and mind unaffected by lust as mind unaffected by lust. He understands mind affected by hate as mind affected by hate, and mind unaffected by hate as mind unaffected by hate. He understands mind affected by delusion as mind affected by delusion, and mind unaffected by delusion as mind unaffected by delusion. He understands contracted mind as contracted mind, and distracted mind as distracted mind. He understands exalted mind as exalted mind, and unexalted mind as unexalted mind. He understands surpassed mind as surpassed mind, and unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed mind. He understands concentrated mind as concentrated mind, and unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated mind. He understands liberated mind as liberated mind, and unliberated mind as unliberated mind.