PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES I

233

fruits of the training do not magically appear; they reveal themselves in their own time, requiring a skillful, steady application of effort.

13.13) I say of such bhikkhus who are in higher training, whose minds have not yet reached the goal, and who are still aspiring to the supreme security from bondage, that they still have work to do with diligence. Why is that? Because when those venerable ones make use of suitable resting places and associate with good friends and balance their spiritual faculties, they may by realising for themselves with direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. Seeing this fruit of diligence for these bhikkhus, I say that they still have work to do with diligence ...

Bhikkhus, I do not say that final knowledge is achieved all at once. On the contrary, final knowledge is achieved by gradual training, by gradual practice, by gradual progress.

And how does there come to be gradual training, gradual practice, gradual progress? Here one who has faith (in a teacher) visits him; when he visits him, he pays respect to him; when he pays respect to him, he gives ear; one who gives ear hears the Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma, he memorises it; he examines the meaning of the teachings he has memorised; when he examines their meaning, he gains a reflective acceptance of those teachings; when he has gained a reflective acceptance of those teachings, zeal springs up in him; when zeal has sprung up, he applies his will; having applied his will, he scrutinises; having scrutinised, he strives; resolutely striving, he realises with the body the ultimate truth and sees it by penetrating it with wisdom.

~ M 70.13, .22 & .23, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A NATURAL PATH

There is a naturalness to this gradual training. The cultivation of the basic qualities leads naturally to more advanced qualities. For example, one of the common ways of teaching the training fundamentals is to emphasize the qualities of generosity, virtue, and meditation (dāna, sīla, bhāvanā). When one is generous and delights in giving, the heart tends to be satisfied and joyous. This supports the cultivation of virtue, as a heart that is satisfied and contented easily inclines to restraint and composure.