“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

89

As far as the explorations of this book are concerned, an interpretation which allows both ‘present moment’ and ‘three lifetimes’ models seems both valid and useful, particularly in reference to the investigation of self/not-self and

being/non-being.

It should be noted from the first that the terms ‘conceives’ (maññati) and

‘conceit’ (māna) have a broader meaning in Pali than their usual English counterparts; e.g. from the Buddhist point of view ‘conception’ can be used to express the view that ‘I don’t exist,’ and perversely (to common English usage) one can hold the ‘conceit’ that ‘I am the worst person in the world.’ In the Pali scriptures there are numerous places where such qualities are described. For example:

5.4) “The (equality-) conceit (māna), the inferiority-conceit (omāna), and the superiority-conceit (atimāna): this threefold conceit should be overcome. That one who has overcome this threefold conceit, through the full penetration of conceit, is said to have put an end to suffering.”

~ A 6.49

5.5) “Those samaṇas and brahmins who, relying on the impermanent, unsatisfying and transitory nature of material form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness, conceive that: ‘I am better,’ or ‘I am equal,’ or ‘I am worse’ – all these imagine thus through not understanding reality.”

~ S 22.49

A similar teaching is given by the Buddha to a female devatā “of stunning beauty” who encountered and propositioned the young bhikkhu Samiddhi, just after he emerged from the hot springs at Rājagaha and was drying himself on the bank. He declines her invitation and tries to explain why he is not interested in sensual pleasure.

When she fails to understand his reasoning, he encourages her to go and ask the Buddha. She, very poignantly, responds that as a humble and junior female devatā, it isn’t easy for those such as she to approach the Buddha as he is often surrounded by other more powerful and influential celestial beings. The Commentary adds that the deva-rājas usually have a retinue of one billion or ten billion so one could see how it might be possible to get lost in the crowd.