The Island

348

is an affliction for him. Now, the Blessed One has said that whatever is an affliction is stress. So by this line of reasoning it may be known how Nibbāna is pleasant.

“Then there is the case where a monk, with the stilling of directed thought & evaluation, enters & remains in the second jhāna: rapture & pleasure born of composure, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation – internal assurance. If, as he remains there, he is beset with attention to perceptions dealing with directed thought, that is an affliction for him ...

“Then there is the case where a monk, with the fading of rapture, remains in equanimity, mindful & alert, is physically sensitive to pleasure, and enters & remains in the third jhāna, of which the noble ones declare, ‘Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasurable abiding.’ If, as he remains there, he is beset with attention to perceptions dealing with rapture, that is an affliction for him ...

“Then there is the case where a monk, with the abandoning of pleasure & stress – as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress – enters & remains in the fourth jhāna: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain. If, as he remains there, he is beset with attention to perceptions dealing with equanimity, that is an affliction for him ...

“Then there is the case where a monk, with the complete transcending of perceptions of [physical] form, with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, and not heeding perceptions of diversity, thinking, ‘Infinite space,’ enters & remains in the dimension of the infinitude of space. If, as he remains there, he is beset with attention to perceptions dealing with form, that is an affliction for him ...

“Then there is the case where a monk, with the complete transcending of the dimension of the infinitude of space, thinking, ‘Infinite consciousness,’ enters & remains in the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness. If, as he remains there, he is beset with attention to perceptions dealing with the dimension of the infinitude of space, that is an affliction for him ...

“Then there is the case where a monk, with the complete transcending of the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness, thinking, ‘There is nothing,’ enters & remains in the dimension of nothingness. If, as