The Island

74

to the simple and direct recognition of that very unsatisfactoriness, via the fact of impermanence, as the key contemplative method for freeing the heart from bondage to the conditioned realm.

4.5) Then Ven. Ānanda, together with a group of bhikkhus, went to where the Blessed One was staying in Pārileyyaka, at the root of the Auspicious Sāla Tree, and on arrival, after bowing down to him, sat down to one side. As they were sitting there, the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused and encouraged them with talk on the Dhamma.

Then this thought arose in the mind of one of the monks, “Now I wonder – by knowing in what way, seeing in what way, can one immediately put an end to the mental outflows?”

The Blessed One, discerning the train of thought in the bhikkhu’s mind, said to the bhikkhus, “I have analyzed and taught you the Dhamma, bhikkhus. I have analyzed and taught you the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of success, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment and the noble eightfold path ... And yet still there appears this train of thought in the mind of one of the bhikkhus, ‘Now I wonder – knowing in what way, seeing in what way, can one immediately put an end to

the mental outflows?’

“So, by knowing in what way, seeing in what way, can one immediately put an end to the mental outflows? There is the case where an uninstructed, ordinary person ... assumes the body and form to be self. That assumption is a formation. Now what is the cause, what is the origination of that formation, from what is it born and produced? When an uninstructed, ordinary person is touched by a feeling born of contact accompanied by ignorance, craving arises. That formation is born of that. And that formation is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen. That craving ... That feeling ... That contact ... That ignorance is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen. It is by knowing and seeing in this way that one can one immediately put an end to the mental outflows.

“Or they do not assume the body and form to be the self, but they assume the self possesses form ... form as in the self ... self as in form ... or feeling to be the self ... the self as possessing feeling ... feeling as in