SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT IV

325

Then Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, with wet clothes and hair [a custom of mourning in India at that time] approached the Lord in the middle of the day. Having prostrated herself, she sat down to one side, and the Lord said to her: “Where have you come from, Visākhā, arriving here in the middle of the day with wet clothes and hair?”

“Revered sir, my dearly beloved grandchild has died. That is why I have arrived here in the middle of the day with wet clothes and hair.”

“Visākhā, would you like to have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Sāvatthī?”

“I would, Lord, like to have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Sāvatthī.”

“But how many people, Visākhā, die daily in Sāvatthī?”

“Perhaps ten people, revered sir, die daily in Sāvatthī. Or perhaps nine people die ... or eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two people die ... or perhaps one person dies daily in Sāvatthī. Revered sir, Sāvatthī is never without people dying.”

“What do you think, Visākhā, would you ever be without wet clothes or wet hair?”

“No, revered sir. Enough with my having so many children and

grandchildren!”

~ Ud 8.8, (John D. Ireland trans.)

In the next two short suttas, the Buddha points to the sotāpanna’s qualities as a foundation for happiness. In the human realm we always tend to be averse to suffering and to desire happiness. Thus whatever can create a firm foundation for happiness is of great value. It is important to notice that sotāpannas have gained a stable and inexhaustible source of happiness in their personal lives. For one person to have that stability and set it as an example for others would necessarily bring a great deal of well-being to many people.

19.6) Monks, there are these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nourishments of happiness, which are heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven, and which lead to whatever is wished for, loved and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness. What four?

Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant ...’

Again, he possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded ...’