The Island

198

This very type of error is the reason why it’s perhaps wiser to use a term such as ‘knowing’ instead of ‘transcendent wisdom’ or ‘awareness.’ As a gerund it is a ‘verb-noun,’ thus lending to it a more accurate quality of immanence, activity and non-thingness. The process of Awakening not only breaks down subject/ object relationships, as we have already discussed, it also breaks down the very formulation of ‘things,’ in order to speak more accurately of ‘events being known in consciousness.’ Some years ago Buckminster Fuller published a book entitled ‘I Seem to Be a Verb’; more recently, and more expansively, Rabbi David Cooper published ‘God is a Verb’ – both of these being attempts to counteract the floodtide of formulation of reality as ‘things’ that the untrained, conditioned

mind is prone to generating.

EMPTINESS

We come now to the quality of emptiness. Firstly, it is of some significance to note that, although the adjectival noun ‘suññatā,’ ‘emptiness,’ is used in the Theravāda scriptures, it is far outweighed in representation there by its humble cousin, the adjective ‘suñña,’ ‘empty.’ In later, Northern Buddhist traditions śunyatā took on not only a central position in the teachings on liberation (e.g. in the Prajñā Pāramitā Sūtras, the Heart Sūtra and the Vajra Sūtra) and the Middle Way (as in Nāgārjuna’s Madhyamaka philosophy, uniting emptiness and causality) but it also took on the attributes of some kind of quasi-mystical substance or realm – not intentionally or doctrinally even, but more through a subtle and unconscious reification. It became a something that is a nothing: that then was worshipped and

deified as a universal panacea.

This is not to say that all such teachings on emptiness are by any means false or useless, not at all; it is just to say that, like any verbal formulation of Dhamma, if grasped wrongly they can obstruct rather than aid progress on the path. If the concept of emptiness is understood and used as a skilful means (upāya) it is clearly seen that it could not be any kind of a thing-in-itself; any tendency to incline the attitude in that direction would thus be seen as falling wide of the mark.

12.9) If a person were to say that suññatā is a material element, his or her friends would die laughing. Some people would say that it is an immaterial or formless element, and here the Noble Ones (ariya) would die laughing. Voidness is neither a material nor an immaterial element, but is a third kind of element that lies beyond the ken of ordinary