“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

93

future ... they regard themselves thus: “I am at peace, I have attained Nibbāna, I am without clinging.” Certainly this venerable one asserts the way directed to Nibbāna. Yet this good samaṇa or brahmin still clings, clinging either to a view about the past or to a view about the future or to a fetter of sensual pleasure or to the rapture of seclusion or to unworldly pleasure or to neutral feeling. And when this venerable one regards themselves thus: “I am at peace, I have attained Nibbāna, I am without clinging,” that too is declared to be clinging on the part of this good samaṇa or brahmin. All that is conditioned and thus gross, but there is the cessation of formations.’ Having understood ‘There is this,’ seeing the escape from that, the Tathāgata has gone beyond that.”

~ M 102.23-4

5.11) Now the Ven. Sāriputta went to visit the Blessed One ... As he sat at one side the Blessed One said this to him: “Sāriputta, you must train yourself thus: In this body together with its consciousness, there shall be no notion of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ no tendency to conceit. Likewise in all external objects there shall be no such notion or tendency. ‘We will abide in the attainment of the heart’s release, the release through insight, so that we have no notion of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ no tendency to conceit.’ That is how you must train yourselves.

“Insofar as a bhikkhu has no such notions, no such tendency ... and abides in such attainment ... he is called ‘A bhikkhu who has cut off craving, broken the bond: one who, by perfect comprehension of conceit, has made an end of dukkha.’

“Moreover, in this connection, Sāriputta, I spoke thus in the chapter on The Goal in (the sutta called) The Questions of Udaya:

“The abandoning of lust and grief,

both these, and sloth’s destruction too,

restraint of mental restlessness

and pure tranquility of mind,

the equipoise of wholesome thought –

these I call

‘Release by knowledge’ and

‘The breaking up of ignorance.’”

~ A 3.33