“‘REAPPEARS’ DOES NOT APPLY...”

185

“I would, Master Gotama.”

“And suppose someone were to ask you, Vaccha, ‘This fire burning in front of you, what is it burning dependent on?’ Thus asked, how would you reply?”

“I would reply, ‘This fire burning in front of me is burning dependent on grass and sticks.’”

“If the fire burning in front of you were to go out, would you know that, ‘This fire that was burning in front of me has gone out’?”

“I would, Master Gotama.”

“And suppose someone were to ask you, ‘This fire that was in front of you and that has now gone out, in which direction has it gone? To the east? The west? The north? The south?’ Being asked thus, how would you answer?”

“That does not apply, Master Gotama. The fire burned dependent on its fuel of grass and sticks; when its fuel is used up – if no more fuel is added to it – it is simply reckoned as ‘gone out’ (nibbuto).”

“Even so, Vaccha, the Tathāgata has abandoned any material form by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm tree stump, deprived it of the conditions for existence and rendered it incapable of arising in the future. The Tathāgata is liberated from being reckoned in terms of material form, Vaccha, he is profound, boundless, unfathomable like the ocean. The term ‘reappears’ does not apply; the term ‘does not reappear’ does not apply; the term ‘both reappears and does not reappear’ does not apply; the term ‘neither reappears nor does not reappear’ does not apply.

“So too, any feeling ... any perception ... any mental formations ... any consciousness by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him: that the Tathāgata has abandoned ... The Tathāgata is liberated from being reckoned in terms of consciousness, Vaccha, he is profound, boundless, unfathomable like the ocean.”

~ M 72.16-20

11.3) This instruction was given by the Teacher while he was in residence at Jetavāna with reference to the Elder Vaṅgīsa.

It seems that there lived at Rājagaha a brahmin named Vaṅgīsa who could tell in which of the states of existence people were reborn after death. He would rap on their skulls and say, “This is the skull of a person who has