PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

253

“Well, Puṇṇa, since I certainly cannot persuade you when I say: ‘Enough, Puṇṇa, let that be. Do not ask me that,’ I shall therefore answer you.

“Here, Puṇṇa, someone develops the dog-duty fully and uninterruptedly; he develops the dog-habit fully and uninterruptedly; he develops the dog-mind fully and uninterruptedly; he develops dog-behaviour fully and uninterruptedly. Having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of dogs. But if he has such a view as this: ‘By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life I shall become a [great] god or some [lesser] god,’ that is wrong view in his case. Now there are two destinations for one with wrong view, I say: hell or the animal realm. So, Puṇṇa, if his dog-duty succeeds, it will lead him to the company of dogs; if it fails, it will lead him to hell.”

When this was said, Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic cried out and

burst into tears.

~ M 57.2-4, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli &Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The third aspect of clinging is to views. As human beings we have the tendency to want to fasten onto views, not for their efficacy in eliminating suffering, but for what we see as their truth in and of themselves.

These views can range from our idea of how the world is around us, to our opinions of others, to our speculation as to how things should be. Inevitably, as the Buddha points out, this leads to confusion, frustration and conflict.

14.11) There are, bhikkhus, these two views: the view of existence and the view of extermination. Therein, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple reflects thus: “Is there anything in the world that I could cling to without being blameworthy?” He understands thus: “There is nothing in the world that I could cling to without being blameworthy. For if I should cling, it is only form that I would be clinging to, only feeling ... only perception ... only volitional formations ... only consciousness that I would be clinging to. With that clinging of mine as condition, there would be existence; with existence as condition, birth; with birth as condition, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair would come to be. Such would be the origin of this whole mass of suffering.”

~ S 22.80, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)