SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT IV

323

the latter is not calculable, does not bear comparison, does not amount even to a fraction, as there is a maximum of seven more lives. He is one who understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ ... ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’

“Therefore, bhikkhus, an exertion should be made to understand: ‘This is suffering.’ ... An exertion should be made to understand: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’”

~ S 56.51, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The sotāpanna and one practising for sotāpatti (stream-entry) are considered great beings, along with people who have attained or are practising for even higher attainments. They are rightly regarded with respect. The daily chants of the Theravāda tradition in the recollection of the Sangha, include reference to the sotāpanna and one practising for sotāpatti (stream-entry) as dakkhiṇeyya-puggala – worthy of gifts, worthy of offerings. Such people are truly a wonderful and marvelous blessing for the world.

19.2) Just as the great ocean is the abode of vast creatures; even so is this Dhamma and Discipline the domain of great beings: the stream-enterer and the one practising for the realization of the fruit of stream-entry; ... once-returner ... non-returner ... arahant ... This is the eighth wonderful and marvellous quality in this Dhamma and Discipline, which the monks perceive again and again and by reason of which they take delight in it [i.e. Dhamma Vinaya].

~ A 8.19, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

19.3) By giving a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of stream-entry, the offering may be expected to repay incalculably, immeasurably. What, then, should be said about giving a gift to a stream-enterer?

~ M 142.6, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

In addition to the happiness they provide for others, sotāpannas find an immeasurable source of happiness in their attainment. Whether a sotāpanna is a layperson or a monastic, young or old, male or female, the nature of the liberation is exactly the same. In this next discourse, Mahānāma, who is the ruler of the Sakyans