PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES III

277

mind that is temporary and delectable or in [the deliverance of mind] that is perpetual and unshakeable. But it can be expected that when a bhikkhu lives alone, withdrawn from society, he will enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind that is temporary and delectable or in [the deliverance of mind] that is perpetual and unshakeable ... However, Ānanda, there is this abiding discovered by the Tathāgata: to enter and abide in voidness internally by giving no attention to all signs. If, while the Tathāgata is abiding thus, he is visited by bhikkhus or bhikkhunīs, by men or women lay followers, by kings or kings’ ministers, by other sectarians or their disciples, then with a mind leaning to seclusion, tending and inclining to seclusion, withdrawn, delighting in renunciation, and altogether done with things that are the basis for taints, he invariably talks to them in a way concerned with

dismissing them.

Therefore, Ānanda, if a bhikkhu should wish: “May I enter upon and abide in voidness internally,” he should steady his mind internally, quiet it, bring it to singleness, and concentrate it.

~ M 122.4, .6 & .7, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The dwelling in voidness, the perfect composure developed along the path (see also §§12.9-.21) are thus also fruits of the practice. Although these qualities may seem to resemble aloofness or coldness, the opposite is true. The Buddha drew countless beings to his presence because of his inspiring demeanour. Throughout the history of Buddhist countries, enlightened followers of the Buddha have always been a source of encouragement and the manyfolk have wanted to draw close to them because of the warmth of their example. Indeed, the Buddha praises those who live for the well-being of others:

15.15) These four kinds of persons, O monks, are found existing in the world. What four? There is one who lives for his own good but not for the good of others; one who lives for the good of others but not for his own good; one who lives neither for his own good nor for the good of others; and one who lives for both his own good and for the

good of others.

[1] (4.96) And how, monks, does a person live for his own good and not for the good of others? He practises for the removal of lust, hatred and