The Island

134

8.1) “MA [the ancient Commentary] offers three explanations of the phrase sabbato pabhaṃ: (1) completely possessed of splendour (pabhā); (2) possessing being (pabhūtaṃ) everywhere; and (3) a ford (pabhaṃ) accessible from all sides, i.e., through any of the thirty-eight meditation objects. Only the first of these seems to have any linguistic legitimacy.”

It is perhaps also significant that both of the instances where this phrase is used by the Buddha are in passages involving the demonstration of his superiority over the brahmā gods. It is thus conceivable that the phraseology derives from some spiritual or mythological principle dear to the brahmins, and which the Buddha is employing to expand the familiar meaning, or to turn it around. As we saw in Ch 2, this was a common source of the Buddha’s choice of words and

metaphorical images.

The longer of the two versions of this phrase comes at the end of a colourful and lengthy teaching tale recounted by the Buddha in the Kevaddha Sutta (D 11). He tells of a monk in the mind of whom the question arises: “I wonder where it is that the four great elements – Earth, Water, Fire and Wind – cease without remainder?” Being a skilled meditator, the bhikkhu in question enters a state of absorption and “the path to the gods becomes open to him.” He begins by putting his question to the first gods he meets, the retinue of the Four Heavenly Kings, the guardians of the world; they demur, saying that they do not know the answer, but that the Four Kings themselves probably do: he should ask them. He does, they do not and the search continues.

Onward and upward through successive heavens he travels, continually being met with the same reply: “We do not know but you should try asking...” and is referred to the next higher level of the celestial heirarchy. Patiently enduring the protracted process of following this cosmic chain of command, he finally arrives in the presence of the retinue of Mahā-Brahmā, he puts the question to them; once again they fail to produce an answer but they assure him that The Great Brahmā Himself, should He deign to manifest, is certain to provide him with the resolution he seeks. Sure enough, before too long, He appears and at this point we are treated to a taste of the wry wit of the Buddha:

8.2) “And that monk went up to him and said: ‘Friend, where do the four great elements – earth, water, fire, air – cease without remainder?’ to which the Great Brahmā replied: ‘Monk, I am Brahmā, Great Brahmā,