The Island

44

It’s also important, perhaps, to bear in mind that the Buddha taught in India, a land of blazing heat, and in such environments ‘coolness’ can easily gather to it an aura of intrinsic goodness and attractiveness (this notwithstanding the quest for tapas, ‘spiritual heat,’ by Vedic-inspired ascetics, especially through their practices of self-mortification).

In the northern regions where the English language originated, ‘warmth’ takes on a similar aura of desirability; the source of oppression and danger is not the merciless sun but the chill bitterness of winter – “Through the dark cold and the empty desolation...” as T.S. Eliot has it in East Coker. Accordingly, it is useful to take into account one’s own conditioning when exploring and considering the terms and images which appear in this book and in Theravāda scripture in general.

Since Nibbāna is the ultimate goal of Buddhist practice, it’s arguable that it should be regarded as the most significant of terms in the Pali Canon. The Buddha once referred to it as the “supreme noble truth” (M 140.26), it is therefore worthwhile to take a little time to explore this particular pariyāya; to investigate why the Buddha chose this specific term to refer to the culmination of the spiritual life, where the term came from, what connotations it had, and indeed (to follow Professor Gombrich’s question) to look at what it is that is ‘going out.’

What is immediately clear is that the term ‘Nibbāna’ refers to the realms of heat and coolness, to fire and its quenching. Here are some passages from Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu’s writings – including his excellent treatise on Nibbāna, ‘The Mind Like Fire Unbound’ – which address this same area. In ‘The Mind Like Fire Unbound,’ Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu particularly notes the two contexts in which the Buddha uses the fire analogy and the different points the Buddha draws from that analogy depending on the context – i.e. whether he is talking to non-Buddhist brahmins or to his own followers.

2.2) Nibbāna – which literally means the extinguishing of a fire – derives from the way the physics of fire was viewed at his [the Buddha’s] time. As fire burned, it was seen as clinging to its fuel in a state of entrapment and agitation. When it went out, it let go of its fuel, growing calm and free. Thus when the Indians of his time saw a fire going out, they did not feel that they were watching extinction. Rather, they were seeing a metaphorical lesson in how freedom could be attained by letting go.

~ Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu, ‘The Wings to Awakening,’ p 6