The Island

226

But just as it is important to have an adequate conception of the goal of our practice, it is also important to gain proper knowledge of the path leading to that goal. This section on practices and perspectives provides a framework for developing that conception.

In a discourse in the Udāna, the Buddha describes the path of practice by comparing it to the continental shelf off the coast of India.

13.4) Just as the ocean has a gradual shelf, a gradual slope, a gradual inclination, with a sharp drop-off only after a long stretch, in the same way this Dhamma & Vinaya has a gradual training, a gradual performance, a gradual progression, with a penetration to gnosis only after a long stretch. The fact that this Dhamma & Vinaya has a gradual training, a gradual performance, a gradual progression, with a penetration to gnosis only after a long stretch: This is the first amazing & astounding fact about this Dhamma & Vinaya that, as they see it again & again, has the monks greatly pleased with the Dhamma & Vinaya.

~ Ud 5.5, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

This image gives a sense of the training required to reach the goal of Nibbāna:

a gradually deepening practice culminating in a sudden penetration. The foundations of virtue, concentration and wisdom need to be gradually laid so that sudden penetration – which is a function of insight – can accomplish its work in truly freeing the mind.

This image of gradual training but sudden penetration will provide the framework for the discussion in this chapter and the chapters to follow. It is important to keep both sides of this perspective in mind so that, as seekers, we can avoid the problems that can come from focusing on one side to the exclusion of the other – for instance, believing that we can expect results only after long, long practice of many lifetimes, which can easily put us in the discouraging position of pursuing a goal that increasingly recedes into the distance.

Or we may believe that we are already perfectly enlightened, that effort entangles us needlessly, and that the thing to do is just be free – which leaves us doing nothing