The Island

104

was left “silent, dismayed with shoulders drooping and head down, glum and with nothing to say.”

It is because of the deep-rooted views of the sensory world as being solid, and the source of happiness, that the suggestion of non-attachment to it, or of its essential emptiness, is so threatening. And, if that which we have held to be real and of value is revealed as ephemeral and not ours, what can we depend on? Where is any reality? The heart can become disoriented and feel fundamentally bereft; hence the cry of anguish that the Buddha describes so accurately above.

Here a few wise voices of the current age reflect on this same theme:

5.24) Nibbāna is often held to be the ultimate goal in Buddhism, and yet it is rather ill-defined. It is considered to be remote, indicative of a superhuman vision that sees the illusory nature of the world, and hence, is free from grieving about its misfortunes. For many people, this gives Nibbāna about as much appeal as an anaesthetic – and a difficult-to-obtain one at that.

~ Ajahn Sucitto, ‘The Dawn of the Dhamma,’ p 97

5.25) “The worldly way is to do things for a reason, to get some return, but in Buddhism we do things without any gaining idea. The world has to understand things in terms of cause and effect, but the Buddha teaches us to go above and beyond cause and effect. His wisdom was to go above cause, beyond effect; to go above birth and beyond death; to go above happiness and beyond suffering. Think about it: there’s nowhere to stay. We people live in a home. To leave home and go where there is no home – we don’t know how to do that, because we’ve always lived with becoming, with clinging. If we can’t cling we don’t know

what to do.”

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, ‘No Abiding,’ in ‘Food for the Heart,’ p 316

So, in terms of experience in this life, non-attachment to the sense-world and the prospect of Nibbāna can seem a little off-putting. When lives after this one are also considered, from the same life-affirming position, the appeal can

wane even further.