The Island

92

5.9) “Friend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye-consciousness and things cognizable [by the mind] through eye consciousness thus: ‘This is mine, this is what I am, this is my self’? ... [So too with] the ear ...nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ...?’”

~ M 144.9

These three phrases quoted in §5.8 with their Pali originals, are known as the gāha – the obsessions (the word is derived from the image of being seized and carried off by a demon) – and they correspond to three principle defilements: taṇhā, māna and diṭṭhi – craving, conceit and views. The first is built around the delusion of ownership and possessiveness, the second around the subtle conceit of identity, and the third around the concretization of the body and personality.

The gāha are also closely allied with what are known as the ‘papañcadhammas’: taṇhā, diṭṭhi and māna – the qualities are the same, only the ordering is different. Although, having said that, it may be said that the diṭṭhi in papañca is of a more abstract nature, rather than directly about one’s ‘self’ – as in “my view is that the universe is eternal, etc.” Taking a stand on that view, one gets puffed up and ‘conceives,’ or self gets invested at that point. This is seen in ‘The Shorter Discourse on the Lion’s Roar’ (M 11) where grasping at views of annihilationism, eternalism, etc. precedes the full-blown ‘notion of self’ as an object of clinging.

Either way, these qualities are the root causes of conceptual proliferation, the random and unruly chattering of the thinking mind. For the Buddha’s advice on how to best deal with this particular condition, the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta (M 18) is the finest resource. There is also a very helpful and practical explication of this, and related teachings, in ‘Concept and Reality’ by Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda (BPS).

The conceits of identity can be extremly subtle, as described, for example, by the Buddha in the Pañcattaya Sutta.

5.10) “Here, bhikkhus, some samaṇa or brahmin, with the relinquishing of views about the past and the future, through complete lack of resolve upon the fetters of sensual pleasure, and with the surmounting of the rapture of seclusion, unworldly pleasure and neutral feeling, they regard themselves thus: ‘I am at peace, I have attained Nibbāna, I am without clinging.’

“The Tathāgata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: ‘This good samaṇa or brahmin, with the relinquishing of views about the past and the