The Island

282

In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of three fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, are once-returners: returning once to this world to make an

end of suffering ...

In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the three fetters, are stream-enterers, no longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment ...

~ M 118.9-12, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.

The number of stream-enterers in the Buddha’s time was relatively large.

16.6) “In the presence of the Blessed One, friends, I heard and learnt this: ‘Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus are few who, by the destruction of the taints, in this very life enter and dwell in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, realizing it for themselves with direct knowledge. Those bhikkhus are more numerous who, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, have become of spontaneous birth, due to attain Nibbāna there without returning from that world.’

“Further, friends, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learnt this: ‘Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus are few who ... have become of spontaneous birth ... Those bhikkhus are more numerous who, with the utter destruction of three fetters and with the diminishing of greed, hatred, and delusion, have become once-returners who, after coming back to this world only one more time, will make an end to suffering.’

“Further, friends, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learnt this: ‘Those bhikkhus are few who ... have become once-returners ... Those bhikkhus are more numerous who, with the utter destruction of three fetters, have become stream-enterers, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as their destination.’”

~ S 55.52, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A few inferences can be drawn from the brief introduction to this next sutta. One is that the attainments are not so formidable and daunting that lay-people living within society were not able to become anāgāmis, sakadāgāmis, and sotāpannas. It is also noteworthy to look at the numbers and see that there are almost twice as many once-returners as non-returners; and more than five times as many stream-winners as once-returners.