THE UNCONDITIONED AND NON-LOCALITY

165

This finding of the subtle Middle Way, which transcends the two extremes rather than being just halfway between them, is a theme that is repeated throughout the Pali Canon. It is addressed particularly in the teaching to Bāhiya (§3.6), in Iti 94 (§3.7), in Iti 49 (§§5.30,13.24), as well as numerous other places.

Perhaps a simple analogy for the finding of this mysterious Middle is to be found, once again, in the three-dimensional ‘magic eye’ pictures. At first glance such pictures seem to be a blur of print, perhaps with no distinct forms discernable in them at all. The extreme of ‘coming to a standstill’ or ‘holding back’ would be to turn away and ignore the picture.

The extreme of ‘struggling’ or ‘overreaching’ would be to stare at the page intently, rigorously following the instructions to hold it at the right distance and focus beyond the surface, but so eager to find the hidden image that the eyes cross and uncross, vision blurs until eventually one gets a headache and gives up.

It’s only when there is the interest, the correct methodology, and a relaxed attention to the process that we find the palm trees and dinosaurs, the swooping eagle emerging from the confused blur. And, moreover, formed in a distinct three-dimensional realm that no amount of force or trickery or blind obedience to a formula can reveal.

Another analogy that might be useful when investigating these areas where habitual approaches and language no longer apply is in the nature of the subatomic realm. Scientists have found that conventional notions of space and time cease to have much relevance below the Planck scale (i.e. distances less than 10-35 m). Such ultramicroscopic examinations of the world leave us, similarly, in a vastly different conceptual landscape, for they too describe an arena of the universe in which the conventional notions of left and right, back and forth, up and down, and even before and after, lose their meaning.

In sum, the mind cannot be said to be truly anywhere. Furthermore, material things, ultimately, cannot be said to be anywhere either. “There is no ‘there’ there,” as Gertrude Stein famously put it. The world of our perceptions is a realm of convenient fictions – there is nothing solid or separate to be found in either the domain of the subject or that of the object, whether it be an act of cognition, an emotion, the song of a bird or this book that you hold in your hands. However, even though all attributes of subject and object might be unlocated and thus ungraspable, with wisdom they can be truly known.