FIRE, HEAT AND COOLNESS

45

2.3) The image of an extinguished fire carried no connotations of annihilation for the early Buddhists. Rather, the aspects of fire that to them had significance for the mind-fire analogy are these: Fire, when burning, is in a state of agitation, dependence, attachment, & entrapment – both clinging & being stuck to its sustenance. Extinguished, it becomes calm, independent, indeterminate, & unattached: It lets go of its sustenance and is released. This same nexus of events, applied to the workings of the mind, occurs repeatedly in Canonical passages describing the attainment of the goal.

~ Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu, ‘The Mind Like Fire Unbound,’ p 41

It is in the spiritual and cultural context described by the above-quoted passages on fire that we should consider the Buddha’s choice of terminology when he coined the phrase ‘the three fires’ for passion, hatred and delusion (rāga, dosa and moha). Furthermore, he chose these terms very early on in his dispensation – traditionally said to be at the time of his third discourse, ‘The Fire Sermon.’

Even though, in this following passage, Richard Gombrich does not make reference to the Vedic notion that fire is latent everywhere, he nonetheless has some very insightful perspectives on the symbolic role of fire in India, particularly from the perspective of the brahmin priesthood.

2.4) Nirvāṇa is part of an extended metaphorical structure which embraces Enlightenment and its opposite. What has to go out is the set of three fires: passion (or greed), hatred and delusion. According to tradition, the Buddha introduced the concept of these three fires in his third sermon (MV 1.21 = S 35.28). This sermon is known in English as the Fire Sermon, but in Pali it is called the Āditta-pariyāya, ‘The way of putting things as being on fire.’ The sermon begins with the bald and startling statement, “Everything, O monks, is on fire.” The Buddha then explains what he means by ‘everything.’ It is all our faculties (the five senses plus the mind), their objects and operations and the feelings they give rise to. All these are on fire with the fires of passion,

hatred and delusion.

I have shown in an earlier article (Gombrich, 1990:17-20) that the fires number three because the Buddha was alluding to a set of three fires which the brahmin householder was committed to keeping alight