THIS AND THAT, AND OTHER THINGS

67

a sūtra of the Northern Buddhist tradition, given by a contemporary meditation master and scholar.

3.8) Using your inherent wisdom, observe inwardly the mind and body and outwardly the world. Completely understand both, as you would look through a pane of glass: from the outside seeing in and from the inside seeing out. Inwardly, there is no body and mind, and, outwardly, there is no world. But, although there is no body nor mind nor world, the body and mind and the world function in accord with one another. Although they function together, they are not attached to one another. This is called, “recognizing your own original mind.” The original self- nature, the true mind, clearly penetrates within and without.

The recognition of your original mind is liberation. When you are not attached to sense objects or false thought, you obtain liberation.

~ Master Hsüan Hua, ‘The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel

Platform Sūtra,’ p 149

A spectacularly thorough analysis of the perceptual process and the inability to find oneself anywhere within it (as demonstrated in the brief teaching to Bāhiya) is to be found in the Śūrangama Sūtra, a key text on meditation for the Ch’an school of China.

This passage revolves around the Buddha’s pressing of Ānanda, his closest disciple and ever-watchful attendant, to describe exactly where his mind is:

3.9) “It is the fault of your mind and eyes that you flow and turn. I am now asking you specifically about your mind and eyes: where are they now?”

~ The Śhūrangama Sūtra, 1.169, p 7, (BTTS 2003 edn.)

The investigation is scrupulous in the extreme, with the trusty Ānanda repeatedly being confounded by the Buddha’s wisdom – as he regularly was. Every nuance of object, sense organ and sense consciousness, every possible dimension of subject and object, are explored and demonstrated to be no abiding place for

an independent identity.

At its conclusion the analysis arrives at the same conclusion as the teaching to Bāhiya: any clinging whatsoever to this/that, here/there, subject/object, inside/outside or anything in between is synonymous with dukkha; abandon such clinging and dukkha necessarily ceases.