The Island

140

to the nature of the heart liberated from ignorance, it is illuminating that these two traditions, now so widely separated geographically, should hold such similar teachings as key distillations of their wisdom.

As a final comment on this passage, Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda explains it thus:

8.5) The last line of the verse stresses the fact that the four great elements do not find a footing – and that ‘Name-and-Form’ (comprehending them) can be cut off completely – in that ‘anidassana viññāṇa’ (the ‘non-manifestative consciousness’) of the Arahant, by the cessation of his normal consciousness which rests on the data of sense experience. This is a corrective to that monk’s notion that the four elements can cease altogether somewhere – a notion which has its roots in the popular conception of self-existing material elements. The Buddha’s reformulation of the original question and this concluding line are meant to combat this wrong notion.

~ Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, ‘Concept and Reality,’ p 66

The words of these teachings are echoed in another episode recounted in the Pali scriptures. In this passage the Buddha is approached by a deva called Rohitassa. It seems that in former times Rohitassa had been an accomplished yogi, a ‘sky-walker’ who could step from the eastern to the western sea of India. He said to the Buddha:

8.6) “In me, Lord, there arose the wish – ‘I will get to the end of the world by walking.’ I walked thus for a hundred years without sleeping, and pausing only to eat and drink and answer the calls of nature. Even though I exerted myself thus for a hundred years, I did not reach the end of the world and eventually I died on the journey.”

To this the Buddha replied: “It is true that one cannot reach the end of the world by walking but, unless one reaches the end of the world one will not reach the end of dukkha. It is in this fathom-long body, with its perceptions and ideas, that this world, its origin, its cessation and the way leading to its cessation are to be found:

“One who knows the world goes to the world’s end,

One who lives the holy life.

With heart serene, they understand the world’s end

And do not hanker for this world or another.”

~ S 2.26, A 4.45