SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT I

285

makes the leaf fragrant:

so it is

if you seek out

the enlightened.

~ Iti 76, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

This next example from the suttas concerns Mahānāma the Sakyan. There is no explicit mention here of Mahānāma being a sotāpanna, but other suttas praise him as having entered the stream of Dhamma. He maintained his association with both the Buddha and the Sangha, and was sincere in his practice. What is also worthy of note here is that, in addition to the above mentioned factors for stream-entry, a stream-enterer relies on the ariyavuddhi dhammas as the foundation of conduct – conditions conducive to noble growth (that is, faith, virtue, learning, generosity, wisdom). As one has contact with teachers and good examples, the path of training is entered into and lived fully.

16.11) Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him: “Venerable sir, this Kapilavatthu is rich and prosperous, populous, crowded, with congested thoroughfares. In the evening, when I am entering Kapilavatthu after visiting the Blessed One or the bhikkhus worthy of esteem, I come across a stray elephant, a stray horse, a stray chariot, a stray cart, a stray man. On that occasion, venerable sir, my mindfulness regarding the Blessed One becomes muddled, my mindfulness regarding the Dhamma becomes muddled, my mindfulness regarding the Sangha becomes muddled. The thought then occurs to me: ‘If at this moment I should die, what would be my destination, what would be my future bourn?’”

“Don’t be afraid, Mahānāma! Don’t be afraid, Mahānāma! Your death will not be a bad one, your demise will not be a bad one. When a person’s mind has been fortified over a long time by faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, right here crows, vultures, hawks, dogs, jackals, or various creatures eat his body, consisting of form, composed of the four great elements, originating from mother and father, built up out of rice and gruel, subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed