SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT I

281

The ultimate goal of the teachings is not a one-shot affair – either you get it or you miss it completely and are forever out of luck. There is a progressive maturing of insight into the nature of the goal that leads the practitioner to relinquish the obstructions blocking realization and to fulfill the qualities commensurate

with realization.

A good example of this is the account of the Buddha teaching his first five disciples. With this teaching, Kondañña was able to understand and realize stream- entry. Over the following days, the Buddha continued to instruct the five until they had all entered the stream. Then, on hearing the Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta – the Discourse on the Characteristics of Not-self – they all were fully freed (MV 1.6).

Although some people may be quicker than others in reaching the goal, the structure of the unfolding insight is common to all. The most familiar description of the stages of realization contains four levels: the stream-enterer (sotāpanna), once-returner (sakadāgāmi), non-returner (anāgāmi) and one fully enlightened (arahant). These levels are differentiated according to the ‘fetters’ (saṃyojanā) that a liberated person relinquishes at each stage:

16.3) Bhikkhus, there are these five lower fetters. What five? Identity view, doubt, the distorted grasp of rules and vows, sensual desire, ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

~ S 45.179, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

16.4) Bhikkhus, there are these five higher fetters. What five? Lust for form, lust for the formless, conceit, restlessness, ignorance. These are the five higher fetters.

~ S 45.180, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

16.5) In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final knowledge ...

In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, are due to reappear spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there attain final Nibbāna, without ever returning from that world ...