The Island

142

8.10) Luang Por Chah continued on his wanderings looking for peaceful places to practice until one day he reached Bahn Kohk Yaou where he came across a deserted monastery about half a kilometre from the edge of the hamlet. His mind felt light and tranquil. It was as if there was a kind of gathering of forces.

“One night there was a festival on in the village. Some time after eleven o’clock, while I was walking jongkrom, I began to feel rather strange. In fact this feeling – an unusual kind of calmness and ease – had first appeared during the day. When I became weary from walking I went into the small grass-roofed hut to sit and was taken by surprise. Suddenly my mind desired tranquillity so intensely that I could hardly cross my legs quickly enough. It just happened by itself. Almost immediately the mind did indeed become peaceful. It felt firm and stable. It wasn’t that I couldn’t hear the sounds of merrymaking in the village; I could still hear them, but if I wished to, I could not hear them. It was strange. When I paid no attention to the sounds there was silence. If I wanted to hear them I could and felt no irritation. Within my mind it was as if there were two objects standing there together but with no connection between them. I saw the mind and its sense object established in different areas like a kettle and a spittoon placed by a monk’s seat. I realized that if concentration is still weak you hear sounds but when the mind is empty then it’s silent. If a sound arises, and you look at the awareness of it, you see that the awareness is separate from the sound. I reflected: ‘Well how else could it be? That’s just the way it is. They’re unconnected.’ I kept considering this point until I realized, ‘Ah, this is important: when continuity (santati) between things is broken then there is peace (santi).’ Formerly there had been santati and now from it had emerged santi. I continued with my meditation. My mind was completely indifferent to all external phenomena.”

~ Ajahn Jayasāro, ‘Stillness Flowing – The Life and Teachings of Ajahn Chah,’ pp 90-91