FIRE, HEAT AND COOLNESS

49

“Bhikkhus, all is burning. And what, bhikkhus, is the all that is burning? The eye is burning, forms are burning, eye-consciousness is burning, eye-contact is burning, and whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition – whether pleasant or painful or neutral – that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of passion, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of delusion; burning with birth, aging, and death; with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair, I say.

“The ear is burning ... The nose ... The tongue ... The body ... The mind is burning ... and whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition – whether pleasant or painful or neutral that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of passion, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of delusion; burning with birth, aging, and death; with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair, I say.

“Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the wise, noble disciple experiences disenchantment towards the eye, towards forms, towards eye- consciousness, towards eye-contact, towards whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition – whether pleasant or painful or neutral; experiences disenchantment towards the ear ... the nose ... the tongue ... the body ... towards the mind ... towards whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition ... Experiencing disenchantment, they become dispassionate. Through dispassion the heart is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’ They understand: ‘Birth is finished, the holy life has been lived out, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming into any

state of being.’”

This is what the Blessed One said. Inspired, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s words. And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of those thousand bhikkhus were liberated from the outflows (āsavā) through not clinging.

~ S 35.28, MV 1.21

The whole teaching here hinges upon two simple words: “Seeing thus” – evaṃ passaṃ. Given sufficient clarity of vision – that is, insight into the true nature of things – the fires of passion, hatred and delusion can be completely cooled and extinguished. It’s also important to keep in mind the ‘Indian view’ of a fire going out – whereas for the occidentally conditioned mind an extinguished fire might