WHAT IS IT?

41

manifest, and mundane. Another is that the Buddha’s objective is the practical one of leading beings to release from suffering, and thus his principal approach to the characterisation of Nibbāna is to inspire the incentive to attain it and to show what must be done to accomplish this. To show Nibbāna as desirable, as the aim of striving, he describes it as the highest bliss, as the supreme state of sublime peace, as the ageless, deathless, and sorrowless, as the supreme security from bondage. To show what must be done to attain Nibbāna, to indicate that the goal implies a definite task, he describes it as the stilling of all formations, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion (M 26.19). Above all, Nibbāna is the cessation of suffering, and for those who seek an end to suffering such a designation is enough to beckon them towards the path.

~ Bhikkhu Bodhi, ‘Introduction to the Majjhima Nikāya,’ pp 31-2

Finally, as the term ‘Nibbāna’ has a somewhat broad definition, over the years there have often been misunderstandings and misuses of the word. Here is just one example from the time of the Buddha; it harks back both to the imagery (mentioned after §1.1 above) of dukkha as the fundamental spiritual disease and to its cessation, i.e. the establishment of perfect spiritual health, through the medicine of the Noble Eightfold Path.

1.14) “But, Māgandiya, when you heard that said [about Nibbāna as ‘the greatest health’] by earlier wanderers in the tradition of the teachers, what is that health, what is that Nibbāna?”

When this was said, the wanderer Māgandiya rubbed his own limbs with his hands and said: “This is that health, Master Gotama, this is that Nibbāna; for I am now healthy and happy and nothing afflicts me ...”

“So too, Māgandiya, the wanderers of other sects are blind and visionless. They do not know health, they do not see Nibbāna, yet they utter this stanza thus:

‘The greatest of all gains is health,

Nibbāna is the greatest bliss.’

“This stanza was uttered by the earlier Accomplished Ones, Fully

Enlightened Ones, thus:

‘The greatest of all gains is health,