SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT II

297

And how does a bhikkhu do so? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops right view, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release. He develops ... right concentration, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.

It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu with a rightly directed view, with a rightly directed development of the path, pierces ignorance, arouses true knowledge, and realizes Nibbāna.

~ S 45.9, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Right view is commonly explained in terms of the Four Noble Truths, and as the following passage makes clear, the stream-enterer has had a direct vision

of these truths.

17.6) Bhikkhus, for a noble disciple, a person accomplished in view (diṭṭhisampanna = sotāpanna) who has made the breakthrough ... is one who understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’ ‘This is the origination of suffering,’ ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’

~ S 56.51, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The Buddha also defines right view in terms of dependent origination. An understanding of conditionality is alluded to in the first quote in this chapter – “Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.” This forms a basis for insight into the true nature of phenomena that allows the heart to enter the stream. It is interesting how dependent origination and the structure of the Four Noble Truths are intertwined in the following sutta:

17.7) When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands the condition; thus understands the origin of the condition; thus understands the cessation of the condition; thus understands the way leading to the cessation of the condition, he is then called a noble disciple who is accomplished in view, accomplished in vision, who has arrived at this true Dhamma, who sees this true Dhamma, who possesses a trainee’s knowledge, a trainee’s true knowledge, who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, a noble one with penetrative wisdom, one who stands squarely before the door to the Deathless.

~ S 12.27, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)