The Island

12

or otherwise have responsible roles in their Dharma communities, all around the USA, a more complete foundation in the Teachings and more external support for their work and practice. They were due to have their inaugural week-long session at Santa Sabena retreat center in San Rafael and James wanted to know what I would like to offer when I came along.

“What would you like me to talk about?” I replied.

“Well, there’s so much interest in advaita vedanta and dzogchen amongst the vipassanā community these days, I thought it might be interesting if you were able to talk about similar ‘non-duality’ teachings in Theravāda – I know there are some but I’m not knowledgeable enough to track them all down. It would be really interesting if you could do that – people seem to have the idea that such teachings do not exist in the Theravāda world so they feel they have to look for them elsewhere. It would be great if you could present something on this.”

I told him that I had begun to research that very same thing and so the momentum gathered. As we settled into our winter retreat of January and February ’98, I got into more discussions on the subject with Ajahn Pasanno. It turned out that he had been gathering quotations on this same area of the teachings for years; he had jewels stashed away that I never dreamed existed. Slowly the piles of paper increased, the scanner hummed and the material sorted itself into a number of convenient if not definitive headings.

As time went by, and the collection got presented on different occasions more and more elements fell into place and the shape of the notes became more refined.

What is presented here is neither presumed to be definitive nor exhaustive. It is simply an attempt by Ajahn Pasanno and myself to put together a small compendium of these ‘essence teachings’ of the Buddha, as they appear in the Pali Canon and have been conveyed by the lineages that rely upon them (the Thai forest tradition in particular), in the hope that they will be of benefit to those who rejoice in the liberation of the heart. All the other references that are made herein, whether drawing on Thai forest meditation masters, modern science, classical literature, Northern Buddhism or whatever, are made solely to help illustrate the meaning of the Pali – it is the faith of the editors that the Buddha’s words can speak for themselves and this work has been compiled with that intention.