The Island

256

disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna. That is why I have left it undeclared.”

~ M 63.7-8, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The next discourse is from the Sutta Nipāta. It is one of many with a sense of the primacy the Buddha gave to non-attachment to views as the way to the goal.

14.15) The sage has abandoned the notion of self or ego and is free from clinging. He does not depend even on knowledge; he does not take sides in the midst of controversy; he has no dogmatic views. For him there is no desire to strive for this or that, in this world or the next. He has ceased to associate with dogmas for he no longer requires the solace that dogmas offer. To the sage there is not the slightest prejudiced view with regard to things seen, heard or felt. How can anyone in the world characterize by thought such a pure one who does not dogmatically grasp any views?

They neither form any particular dogma nor prefer anything. Dogmatic views are not esteemed by them. The brahmin is not led by rule and rite. Thus, the steadfast one has gone to the further shore, never more to return.

~ SN 800-3, (Ven. H. Saddhatissa trans.)

The fourth type of clinging is clinging to doctrines of self. It is usually translated as ‘doctrines,’ but it is more the habit or tendency of perceiving in terms of a self. This can be presented in the teachings as something very abstruse, but such habits all grow from some very common but unwise ways of framing issues in our minds.

14.16) This is how he attends unwisely: “Was I in the past? Was I not in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past? Having been what, what did I become in the past? Shall I be in the future? Shall I not be in the future? What shall I be in the future? How shall I be in the future? Having been what, what shall I become in the future?” Or else he is inwardly perplexed about the present thus: “Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? Where has this being come from? Where will it go?”

When he attends unwisely in this way, one of six views arises in him. The view “self exists for me” arises in him as true and established; or the view “no self exists for me” arises in him as true and established; or the view “I perceive self