The Island

314

confirmed confidence in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... He dwells at home with a mind devoid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, delighting in relinquishment, one devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing. A noble disciple who possesses these four things is a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination.

“Chamberlains, you possess confirmed confidence in the Buddha ... in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... Moreover, whatever there is in your family that is suitable for giving, all that you share unreservedly among those who are virtuous and of good character. What do you think, carpenters, how many people are there among the Kosalans who are your equals, that is, in regard to giving and sharing?”

“It is a gain for us, venerable sir, it is well gained by us, venerable sir, that the Blessed One understands us so well.”

~ S 55.6, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A discourse given by the Buddha to the quarreling monks of Kosambi, gives a comprehensive description of the results of being established in Dhamma. This is a particularly poignant context for this discussion, as problems of disharmony within the Sangha (or in society in general) would be solved if people took the Buddha’s advice and realized stream-entry.

The impact of one’s views is not confined to the world of ideas. It has implications in one’s actions and interactions with the world. Although stream-enterers are not freed from defilement, they have attenuated enough that they would never get into the kind of quarrels and strife that happened at Kosambi. This discourse gives one of the clearest pictures both of what a person aiming at stream-entry must wrestle with internally, but also of how one who has entered the stream would interact with the world. This is particularly clear in the sārāṇīya-

dhammas, or ‘memorable qualities,’ which will be discussed in more detail shortly.

18.12) Of these memorable qualities, the highest, the most comprehensive, the most conclusive is this view that is noble and emancipating, and leads the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering. Just as the highest, the most comprehensive, the most conclusive part of a pinnacled building is the pinnacle itself, so too, of these six memorable qualities, the highest ... is this view that is noble and emancipating ...