The Island

308

worth a sixteenth part of the obtaining of the four things.

~ S 55.1, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

18.7) Bhikkhus, a noble disciple who possesses these four things is a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination.

~ S 55.2, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

It cannot be overemphasized that ‘confirmed confidence’ in the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha plays a key role both in the suttas – which use this template over and over again in the reference to entering the stream – and within the mind itself. Throughout this chapter, this factor will keep reappearing in many different ways. The repetition of these qualities is so consistent in the Canon that attention will be drawn to its significance by including several references to it

throughout the text.

Internally, such confirmed confidence is not just a new belief or fleeting faith that arises in the heart of the practitioner. It is a radical change, a going-beyond-doubt that the external world and the internal universe are not a suitable refuge for one seeking an end to suffering. The faith in Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha is based on a clear understanding of the benefits of relinquishing desire and ignorance and truly relying on awakened knowing, truth and virtue. The full implications of this faith may not be totally understood at this entry point, but the heart has seen and knows that this is the way forward and that the stream of Dhamma being

entered is true.

The following sutta gathers in one place some of the different characteristics and qualities of a sotāpanna, that is, the commitment to virtue, faith, and to the wisdom that understands the true nature of things. The mention of observing dependent origination for oneself shows that the sotāpanna relies exclusively on seeing Dhamma rather than on an external method, ritual, ceremony or vows.

This sutta gives us a perspective on what a person who sees Dhamma actually sees, the results and workings of kamma and the mind that convince the person that virtue is an essential element of a life well-lived, that the virtues of the Refuges are incomparable. Thus, the stream-enterer is able to be free of the fetters and is established in the Refuges – not through blind belief, but through the penetration of truth.