The Island

64

It is said in the scriptures that during the weeks immediately following the Buddha’s enlightenment, he contemplated this pattern of insight knowledge; it was a pattern that was completely new to him. It describes the essence of both the central spiritual malaise and its solution.

This process of dependent origination, outlined so succinctly in this sutta, contains more than enough material within it for a book of its own. However, to remain focused on the topics at hand, we will simply present the text for your own investigation, rather than pursuing detailed explanations here.

The subject of causality, and the many ways that different things condition each other – as ennumerated in the 24 categories of the Paṭṭhāna (‘Conditional Relations’) in the Abhidhamma Piṭaka and as summarized above in §3.2 – refers to the different ways that aspects of the objective realm interact. By contemplating the dependent nature of all such phenomena we are better able to appreciate their essentially empty nature and to relate to them with less confusion and attachment.

We’ll now take a figurative step back from just viewing the interrelationships of various objects and take a look at the relationship between all these objects and that which is experiencing them, the apparent subject.

We often feel that there is a me in here that’s experiencing a world out there, and we can even experience thoughts and feelings as part of the world that ‘I’ am aware of. However, one of the most profound and liberating insights of the Buddha was that the feeling of I-ness (ahaṃkara) was just as much of a causally created construct as any other perceptual object. He saw that the solidity of the world of things, and of the ‘I’ that apparently experiences them, were both equally illusory, both void of substance. He saw that, instead, it was more accurate to speak in terms of an ‘eye,’ but of wisdom, that is the true agent of awareness.

3.5) “Friend, one understands a state that can be known with the eye of wisdom (paññācakkhu).”

~ M 43.11, (Bhikkhu Bodhi & Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli trans.)

This insight leads us into a contemplation of the relationship of the apparent subject and object – how the tension between the two generates the world of things and its experiencer, and more importantly how, when that duality is seen through, the heart’s liberation is the result.

Probably the clearest and most often quoted of the Buddha’s teachings on this is that given to a wanderer called Bāhiya Dārucīriya. According to the scriptures, Bāhiya was a well-respected religious teacher who lived in northern India,