The Island

188

~ ‘A Treasury of Buddhist Stories: From the Dhammapada

Commentary,’ (to verses 419-20), (E.W. Burlingame trans., adapted)

When speaking generally, or in responding to sincere questions rather than counteracting someone’s fixed views or claims, the Buddha’s words on this subject are still limiting yet take on a slightly more expansive tone.

11.4) “Monks, the body of the Tathāgata stands with the link that bound it to becoming (bhava-netti) cut. As long as the body subsists, devas and humans will see him. But at the breaking up of the body and the exhaustion of the life-span, devas and humans will see him no more. Monks, just as when the stalk of a bunch of mangoes has been cut, all the mangoes on it go with it, just so the Tathāgata’s link with becoming has been cut. As long as the body subsists, devas and humans will see him. But at the breaking up of the body and the exhaustion of the life-span, devas and humans will see him no more.”

~ D 1.3.73, (Maurice Walshe trans.)

Maurice Walshe’s note on “the link that bound it to becoming” explains the phrase as meaning “all that formerly bound him to the cycle of rebirth.”

11.5) Then the Ven. Phagguna appproached the Blessed One ... and said to him: “Venerable sir, is there any eye by means of which one describing the Buddhas of the past could describe them – those who have attained final Nibbāna, cut through proliferation, cut through the rut, exhausted the round, and transcended all suffering? Is there any ear ... Is there any mind by means of which one describing the Buddhas of the past could describe them – those who have attained final Nibbāna, cut through proliferation, cut through the rut, exhausted the round, and transcended all suffering?”

“There is no eye, Phagguna, by means of which one describing the Buddhas of the past could describe them – those who have attained final Nibbāna, cut through proliferation, cut through the rut, exhausted the round, and transcended all suffering. There is no ear ... no mind by means of which one describing the Buddhas of the past could describe them – those who have