PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES I

235

But in order to become established in those five things a bhikkhu should, in addition, maintain in being these four things. Loathsomeness (as the unattractive aspect of the body) should be maintained in being for the purpose of abandoning lust; loving-kindness for the purpose of abandoning ill will; mindfulness of breathing for the purpose of cutting off discursive thoughts; perception of impermanence for the purpose of eliminating the conceit ‘I am.’ For when a person perceives impermanence, perception of not-self becomes established in him; and when a person perceives not-self, he arrives at the elimination of the conceit ‘I am,’ and that is Nibbāna here and now.

~ A 9.3, Ud 4.1, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli trans.)

13.15) Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does right view come first? In one of right view, right intention comes into being; in one of right intention, right speech comes into being; in one of right speech, right action comes into being; in one of right action, right livelihood comes into being; in one of right livelihood, right effort comes into being; in one of right effort, right mindfulness comes into being; in one of right mindfulness, right concentration comes into being; in one of right concentration, right knowledge comes into being; in one of right knowledge, right deliverance comes into being. Thus, bhikkhus the path of the disciple in higher training possesses eight factors, the arahant possesses ten factors.

~ M 117.34, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

13.16) It is natural that in a virtuous person, one of consummate virtue, freedom from remorse will arise. .. It is natural that in a person free from remorse, gladness will arise ... It is natural that in a glad person, rapture will arise ... It is natural that for an enraptured person, the body will be calmed ... It is natural that a person of calmed body will feel pleasure ... It is natural that the mind of a person feeling pleasure will become concentrated ... It is natural that a person whose mind is concentrated will see things as they actually are ... It is natural that a person seeing things as they actually are will grow disenchanted and dispassionate ... It is natural that a disenchanted and dispassionate person will realize the knowledge and vision of release.

~ A 10.2