The Island

30

outlined the medicine (the Noble Eightfold Path – magga). It is not the purpose of this book to go into detail on this formulation. Suffice to say that all that he pronounces about ‘the state of health’ (to continue the analogy) is that this Middle Way that he has discovered: “brings vision, brings knowledge, leads to calm, to insight, to awakening and to Nibbāna.”

This via negativa method is most clearly displayed in the Buddha’s second discourse, the Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta (MV 1.6), also given in the Deer Park at Benares and the teaching which caused the five companions all to realize enlightenment, the liberation of the heart from all delusion and defilement. In this discourse the Buddha uses the search for the self (attā in Pali, ātman in Skt) as his theme, and by using an analytical method he demonstrates that a ‘self’ cannot be found in relation to any of the factors of body or mind; he then states: “the wise noble disciple becomes dispassionate towards the body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness.” In this way, he states, the heart is liberated.

This explanation implies that once we let go of what we’re not, the nature of what is Real becomes apparent – this was the realization that the Buddha had tried to communicate to Upaka when they met on the high road. And as that Reality is beyond description, it is most appropriate, and least misleading, to let it remain undescribed. This is the essence of the ‘way of negation’ and will be a repetitive theme throughout the coming pages.1

Secondly, throughout the Buddha’s teaching career of forty-five years, most of his attention was placed on offering descriptions of the path. If the goal was spoken of, it was usually in simple, general terms (e.g. at §1.5). However, one of the effects of having placed so much emphasis on the path, is that the Theravāda tradition has tended to speak very little about the nature of the goal – thus often causing that goal, Nibbāna, to disappear from view, or become impossibly vague in concept, or even to be denied as being realizable in this day and age.

One of the aims of this book is to collect many of the passages of the Pali Canon where the Buddha does indeed speak about the nature of the goal, elucidating this profound Truth and encouraging its realization.

1. Particularly useful passages on the philosophy behind this principle are to be found in Ch 10, on ‘The Unapprehendability of the Enlightened,’ and in Ch 11 – especially the passages from ‘The Questions of Upasīva’at §11.6-7.