The Island

306

“No, venerable sir.”

“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple has abandoned perplexity in these six cases, and when, further, he has abandoned perplexity about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the way leading to the cessation of suffering, he is then called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination.”

~ S 24.1, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The last fetter – sīlabbataparāmāsa – is translated here as the distorted grasp of rules and vows, the distortion being the underlying belief that there will be purification through keeping particular rules, vows or practices or that by being able to do things the correct way, somehow one will be liberated. Even though precepts and practices form a part of the training, they are a means to the goal of freedom, rather than freedom itself.

18.5) Now where do skillful habits cease without trace? Their cessation, too, has been stated: There is the case where a monk is virtuous, but is not defined by his virtue. He discerns, as it actually is, the release of awareness and release of discernment where his skillful habits cease without trace.

~ M 78.11, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

The relinquishing of this fetter does not mean that one no longer has to follow precepts. If anything, one would be even more assiduous as cause and effect are clearly seen and the wish to diminish suffering for oneself and others comes to the fore. The keeping of precepts is then seen as a protection and blessing for all.

The insight into the ways that identity view is an obstruction to freedom opens the way for the recognition of the limitations of the next two fetters. When the misperception of identity view is cleared, the heart is free from endless doubts as to what is a suitable refuge. It chooses instead the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha as its refuge.

What follows is probably the most common and consistent description of the stream-enterer in the Canon. The four qualities of faith in the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha and the establishing of a firm foundation in virtue are mentioned again and again as the stream-enterer’s hallmark characteristics, but – as we will see – there are other characteristics as well.