The Island

276

15.12) “Friend Anuruddha, your faculties are serene, your complexion is pure and bright. In what dwelling does the Venerable Anuruddha now usually dwell?”

“Now, friend, I usually dwell with a mind well established in the four establishments of mindfulness ...

“The bhikkhu, friend, who is an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, one completely liberated through final knowledge, usually dwells with a mind well established in these four establishments of mindfulness.”

~ S 52.9, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

In a discourse in the Majjhima Nikāya, Venerable Ānanda recounts all the many wonderful and marvellous qualities of the Buddha. He begins with the Buddha’s dwelling in Tusita heaven as a Bodhisatta, immediately prior to this lifetime, and the many aspects of his miraculous conception and birth. The Buddha approves of what Ānanda has said, but concludes by saying:

15.13) That being so, Ānanda, remember this too as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Tathāgata: Here, Ānanda, for the Tathāgata feelings are known as they arise, as they are present, as they disappear; perceptions are known as they arise, as they are present, as they disappear; thoughts are known as they arise, as they are present, as they disappear. Remember this too, Ānanda, as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Tathāgata.

~ M 123.22, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

One who is either inclined to Nibbāna or who has already attained some realization tends not to be drawn into the world and its complications. The protection provided by this composure is not strained or forced, but instead has become an innate characteristic within the heart.

15.14) Indeed, Ānanda, it is not possible that a bhikkhu who delights in company, takes delight in company, and devotes himself to delight in company, who delights in society, takes delight in society, and rejoices in society, will ever enter upon and abide in either the deliverance of