UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

155

8.28) Once a customer bought firewood and ordered it delivered to his shop. When the delivery had been made and Hui Neng had received the money, he went outside the gate, where he noticed a customer reciting a sūtra. Upon once hearing the words of this sūtra: “One should produce the thought that is nowhere supported,” Hui Neng’s mind immediately opened to enlightenment.

~Master Hsüan Hua, Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra

Ch. 1, ‘Action and Intention,’ (BTTS edn.)

The passage he describes as having heard actually comes from the Vajra (Diamond) Sūtra, one of the most influential wisdom teachings of the

Northern School.

8.29) “Therefore, Subhūti, the Bodhisattva, Mahāsattva, should produce a pure heart. They should realize and develop that heart which does not dwell in forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangible objects or dharmas. They should realize and develop the heart which dwells nowhere.”

~ Vajra Sūtra, Ch 10, ‘The Adornment of Pure Lands’

This insight into ‘the heart which dwells nowhere’ or ‘the mind which rests on nothing’ had a very powerful effect on the young man – he immediately resolved to leave the home life and study the Way with the Fifth Patriarch, Great Master Hung-jen at Tung Ch’an monastery. Fortunately his enthusiasm impressed other townspeople and a man made a large offering of silver to Hui Neng so that his mother would be provided for while the lad went in search of spiritual riches.

Once he had arrived at the monastery, because he was both young and illiterate as well as spiritually precocious, the Patriarch gave him the job of cutting wood and pounding rice in the kitchen. After some time the Fifth Patriarch announced that he would soon pass on the Patriarchy and, in order to select an appropriate successor, he invited everyone to write a ‘gatha without marks,’ a verse expressing their understanding of the essence of the Buddha’s wisdom.

The most obvious candidate for the inheritance was the senior instructor and preceptor, Shen Hsiu. The others of the thousand-strong asssembly hesitated to compose verses because they all thought that Shen Hsiu should be the one to receive the mantle. He, however, had major doubts about his own accomplishments and so wrote his verse covertly, in the middle of the night, on a wall of the corridor which