The Island

350

liberated, he still honours, reveres, and venerates the Tathāgata thus: “The Blessed One is enlightened and he teaches the Dhamma for the sake of enlightenment. The Blessed One is tamed and he teaches the Dhamma for taming oneself. The Blessed One is at peace and he teaches the Dhamma for the sake of peace. The Blessed One has crossed over and he teaches the Dhamma for crossing over. The Blessed one has attained Nibbāna and he teaches the Dhamma for attaining Nibbāna.”

~ M 35.26, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

During the Buddha’s time many of his fellow Sakyans left the home-life and trained under him. One of these was Bhaddiya, who had been the clan ruler and had left his position to take ordination in a group which numbered such well-known disciples as Ānanda, Anuruddha, Devadatta, Bhagu and Upāli. During his first rains retreat Bhaddiya realized liberation; his story is recounted in the Udāna:

20.17) Thus have I heard. At one time the Lord was staying at Anupiya in the Mango Orchard. At that time the Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāligodhā’s son, on going into the forest to the foot of a tree or to an empty place, constantly uttered, “Ah, what bliss! Ah, what bliss!”

A number of bhikkhus heard the Venerable Bhaddiya ... constantly uttering, “Ah, what bliss! Ah, what bliss!” and the thought came to them: “No doubt, friend, the Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāligodhā’s son, is dissatisfied with leading the holy life, since formerly when he was a householder he enjoyed the bliss of royalty. And when recollecting that, on going into the forest ... he utters, ‘Ah, what bliss! Ah,

what bliss!’”

Then a number of bhikkhus approached the Lord, prostrated themselves, sat down to one side, and reported this to the Lord. Then the Lord addressed a certain bhikkhu: “Come, bhikkhu, in my name tell the bhikkhu Bhaddiya, ‘The Teacher calls you, friend Bhaddiya.’”

“Very well, revered sir,” the bhikkhu replied and approaching the Venerable Bhaddiya, Kāligodhā’s son, he said, “The Teacher calls you, friend Bhaddiya.”

“Very well, friend,” the Venerable Bhaddiya replied, and approaching the Lord he prostrated himself and sat down to one side. The Lord then said to him: “Is it true, Bhaddiya, that on going into the forest ...