PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES I

225

are unable to do this, as a result of our not seeing clearly. If we were able to recognize that a particular way of perception would lead to a decline in skillful states or in well-being, then we would happily relinquish it as in our best interests.

Or, as we cultivate mindfulness and a steadiness of heart and observe that this particular mode of perception leads the mind to steady states of well-being, we would naturally want to protect and nurture that perception as it

increases our happiness.

If we could be more attentive to perceptions that penetrate the nature of our bodies and minds and of the world around us, our relationship to everything would be radically different. Our fascination with the world would easily be replaced with a sense of world-weariness, disenchantment, or disgust (nibbidā). In practice, this ‘disgust’ is an inner quality that loosens the hold of our habitual patterns of perception and conception.

It is not the emotional upheaval of finding something abhorrent, repugnant or offensive. Instead, it is closer to the roots of the word itself – “losing one’s taste for,” or “not delighting in its flavour,” leaving the heart cool, settled and clear. This sense of disenchantment can be fostered by focusing on the drawbacks of our normal involvement in the world of sensual passions, but it can also be fostered by focusing on the positive aspects of the peace offered by Nibbāna:

13.2) Here, Ānanda, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree or to an empty hut, a monk reflects thus: “This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all formations, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, cessation, Nibbāna.”

~ A 10.60, (Nyanaponika Thera & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

This perception is termed the perception of cessation, or the recollection of the peace of Nibbāna (upasamānussati), which the Buddha praised in glowing terms.

13.3) Monks, if even for the lasting of a finger-snap a monk should practise the recollection of the peace of Nibbāna, such a one may be called a monk. He is one whose meditation is not fruitless. He abides doing the Master’s bidding. He takes advice and he eats the country’s almsfood to some purpose. What could I not say of those who make much of recollection of the peace of Nibbāna?

~ A 1.20.102