The Island

118

others. This is the quality of a person who is truly good. [Similarly through all the jhānas.]”

~ M 113.21

The clause italicized above is a very famous and much discussed phrase in Theravāda literature; it appears in a number of places in the Canon. The Pali original is: Yena yena hi maññanti, tato taṃ hoti aññathā ti. Discussed extensively in ‘Concept and Reality,’ by Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, it is also quoted at §4.1.

6.3) “And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity? There is equanimity regarding the base of infinite space, the base of infinite consciousness, the base of no-thingness, and the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.

“Here, bhikkhus, by depending and relying on equanimity that is unified, based on unity, abandon and surmount equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity. It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted.

“Bhikkhus, by depending and relying on non-identification, abandon and surmount equanimity that is unified, based on unity. It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted.

“So it was in reference to this that it was said: ‘Therein, by depending on this, abandon that.’”

~ M 137.19-20

To help develop a clearer sense of what this term is pointing to, it might be helpful to explore its etymology a little more deeply:

6.4) [I]n the Vedanta ... to be wholly and exclusively aware of brahman was at the same time to be brahman ... The origins of this idea seem to lie in a theory of sense perception in which the grasping hand supplies a dominant analogy. It takes the shape of what it apprehends. Vision was similarly explained: the eye sends out some kind of ray which takes the shape of what we see and comes back with it. Similarly thought: a thought conforms to its object. This idea is encapsulated in the term tan-mayatā, ‘consisting of that’: that the thought of the gnostic or meditator becomes con-substantial with the thing realized.