The Island

252

“This is the cause and reason, Nakulapitā, why some beings here do not attain Nibbāna in this very life.

“There are, Nakulapitā, forms cognizable by the eye ... mental phenomena cognizable by the mind that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, sensually enticing, tantalizing. If a bhikkhu does not seek delight in them, does not welcome them, and does not remain holding to them, his consciousness does not become dependent upon them or cling to them. A bhikkhu without clinging attains Nibbāna.

“This is the cause and reason, Nakulapitā, why some beings here attain Nibbāna in this very life.”

~ S 35.131, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The next passage illustrates the danger of clinging to a belief in purification through rule or vow. In the time of the Buddha (as in ours!) many types of practices were assiduously followed with the assumption that they would bring about some spiritual purification or desirable result. These could range from grim ascetic practices to quite beautiful rituals, but the Buddha was adamant in asserting that without wisdom leading the way and permeating any practices undertaken, they would not bring about the hoped-for result. Practice and goal have to be commensurate.

14.10) Then Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, an ox-duty ascetic, and also Seniya, a naked dog-duty ascetic, went to the Blessed One. Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side, while Seniya, the naked dog-duty ascetic, exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he too sat down at one side curled up like a dog. Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked dog-duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food when it is thrown to the ground. He has long taken up and practised that dog-duty. What will be his destination? What will be his future course?”

“Enough, Puṇṇa, let that be. Do not ask me that.”

A second time ... And a third time Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked dog-duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food when it is thrown to the ground. He has long taken up and practised that dog-duty. What will be his destination? What will be his future course?”