SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT II

299

stream of the Dhamma, a noble one with penetrative wisdom, one who stands squarely before the door to the Deathless.

~ S 12.49, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Here is another perspective to the insight of a sotāpanna:

17.9) Bhikkhus, there are these five aggregates subject to clinging. What five? The form aggregate subject to clinging ... feeling ... perception ... mental formations ... the consciousness aggregate subject to clinging.

When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple understands as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of these five aggregates subject to clinging, then he is called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination.

~ S 22.109, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

This following sutta shows what leads to the insight and realization of a sotāpanna – what lays the foundation; that is, either faith in or the understanding of the true nature of our interface with the world. There are further suttas in this section that use the same format but they focus on the objects of the senses, the feelings that arise from contact, etc. as well as the five khandhas.

The power of turning the mind toward the impermanence of phenomena, and what the mind is therefore capable of accomplishing through that contemplation, is most worthy of attention. It is something that, although based on what is truly ordinary, has extraordinary possibilities. In this next passage, the categories of faith-follower and wisdom-follower are introduced. This is another way that the Buddha describes one who enters into the stream.

17.10) Bhikkhus, the eye is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. The ear ... The nose ... The tongue ... The body ... The mind is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. One who places faith in these teachings and resolves on them thus is called a faith-follower, one who has entered the fixed course of rightness, entered the plane of superior persons, transcended the plane of the worldlings. He is incapable of doing any deed by reason of which he might be reborn in hell, in the animal realm, or in the domain of ghosts; he is incapable of