The Island

178

Tathāgata is; or after death a Tathāgata is not; or after death a Tathāgata both is and is not, or after death a Tathāgata neither is nor is not?’”

“No, venerable sir.”

“Good, good Anurādha. What I describe, now as formerly, is dukkha (suffering) and the ending of dukkha.”

~ S 22.86, S 44.2

The other, closely related teaching is a dialogue between Ven. Sāriputta and a bhikkhu named Yamaka in whom the view had arisen that, after the death of the body, enlightened beings are “annihilated and they perish, they do not exist after death.” His companions in the holy life benevolently endeavour to shift him from this position but he stubbornly sticks to his opinion. This causes some of them to go off and find Ven. Sāriputta to let him know of Yamaka’s view.

After the day’s meditation is over, the wise elder comes to visit Yamaka for a chat. After Ven. Sāriputta has established that the word from the brothers on Ven. Yamaka’s views is correct, the dialogue proceeds exactly as that between the Buddha and Anurādha. Happily, in the light of Sāriputta’s insightful examination, Yamaka relinquishes his view; then, just to check that he’s now got it right, the elder asks him:

10.20) “If, friend Yamaka, they were to ask you: ‘Friend Yamaka, when a bhikkhu is an arahant, one whose heart is pure, what happens to him with the breakup of the body, after death?’ – being asked thus, what would you answer?”

“If they were to ask me this, friend, I would answer thus:

‘Friends, material form is impermanent; what is impermanent is unsatisfactory; what is unsatisfactory has ceased and passed away ... so too with feeling ... perception ... mental formations ... consciousness ...’ Being asked thus, friend, I would answer in such a way.”

“Good, good, friend Yamaka!”

~ S 22.85

The Ven. Sāriputta then goes on to draw a potent if chilling simile: he compares the five khandhas to an assassin who wins the confidence of a person and takes up the role of their servant, only in order to get close so that they may “ruin, harm, endanger, take that person’s life.” When the would-be murderer becomes aware that the person “has placed trust in them, finding them alone, they would take their life with a sharp knife.” Such is the treacherous result for the uninstructed worldling who places their trust and takes refuge in the five khandhas.