PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

251

What is to be let go of? The Buddha points to four basic types of clinging (upādāna) that lead to entanglement and suffering. When we are able to relinquish these forms of clinging and the ignorance on which they are based, the heart has the opportunity to experience freedom.

14.8) Bhikkhus, when ignorance is abandoned and true knowledge has arisen in a bhikkhu, then with the fading away of ignorance and the arising of true knowledge he no longer clings to sensual pleasures (kāmupādāna), no longer clings to views (diṭṭhupādāna), no longer clings to rules and observances (sīlabbatupādāna), no longer clings to a doctrine of self (attavādupādāna). When he does not cling, he is not agitated. When he is not agitated, he personally attains Nibbāna. He understands: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”

~ M 11.17, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The first type is clinging to sensual desires:

14.9) On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaggas at Suṃsumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, the Deer Park. Then the householder Nakulapitā approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, stood by one side, and said to him: “Venerable sir, what is the cause and reason why some beings here do not attain Nibbāna in this very life? And what is the cause and reason why some beings here attain Nibbāna in this very life?”

“There are, Nakulapitā, forms cognizable by the eye that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, sensually enticing, tantalizing. If a bhikkhu seeks delight in them, welcomes them, and remains holding to them, his consciousness becomes dependent upon them and clings to them. A bhikkhu with clinging does not attain Nibbāna.

“There are, Nakulapitā, sounds cognizable by the ear ... mental phenomena cognizable by the mind that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, sensually enticing, tantalizing. If a bhikkhu seeks delight in them, welcomes them and remains holding to them, his consciousness becomes dependent upon them and clings to them. A bhikkhu with clinging does not

attain Nibbāna.