“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

71

The property of being transient, ephemeral, arising and ceasing, is called aniccatā. The property of being subject to birth and dissolution, of inherently involving stress and conflict, and of being intrinsically imperfect, is called dukkhatā. The quality of voidness of any real self is called anattatā. The principle of Dependent Origination illustrates these three properties in all things and shows the inter-relatedness and inter-reaction of all things to produce the diverse events in nature.

~ Ven. P.A. Payutto, ‘Dependent Origination,’ pp 14-15

4.3) Finally, we come to the third type of suffering, the suffering of conditioning. This addresses the main question: why is this the nature of things? The answer is, because everything that happens in saṃsāra is due to ignorance. Under the influence or control of ignorance, there is no possibility of a permanent state of happiness. Some kind of trouble, some kind of problem, always arises. So long as we remain under the power of ignorance, that is, our fundamental misapprehension or confusion about the nature of things, then sufferings come one after another, like ripples on water.

The third level of suffering, therefore, refers to the bare fact of our unenlightened existence, which is under the influence of this fundamental confusion and of the negative karmas to which confusion gives rise. The reason it is called the suffering of conditioning is because this state of existence serves as the basis not only for painful experiences in this life, but also for the causes and conditions of suffering in the future. Dharmakirti’s ‘Commentary on the Compendium of Valid Cognition’ (Pramāṇavārttika) and Āryadeva’s ‘Four Hundred Verses on the Middle Way’ (Chatusataka shastrakarika) both offer a useful way of looking at this third level of suffering, and help deepen our understanding of it. Both works lay the emphasis on reflecting upon the subtle level of the transient, impermanent nature of reality.

It is important to bear in mind that there are two levels of meaning here. One can understand impermanence in terms of how something arises, stays for a while, and then disappears. This level of impermanence can be understood quite easily. We should add that on this level, the dissolution of something requires a secondary condition which acts as a catalyst to destroy its continuity. However, there is also a second, more