The Island

202

“This, venerable sir, is the method by which these things are different in meaning and also different in phrasing. And what, venerable sir, is the method by which these things are one in meaning and different

only in phrasing?

“Passion, venerable sir, is a maker of measurement, hatred is a maker of measurement, delusion is a maker of measurement. For a bhikkhu whose heart is completely pure, these have been abandoned, cut off at the root, made like palm stumps, obliterated so that they are no more subject to future arising. To whatever extent there are measureless liberations of mind, the unshakeable liberation of mind is declared the chief among them. Now that unshakeable liberation of mind is empty of greed, empty of hatred, empty of delusion.

“Passion, venerable sir, is a something, hatred is a something, delusion is a something. For a bhikkhu whose heart is completely pure, these have been abandoned, cut off at the root, made like palm stumps, obliterated so that they are no more subject to future arising. To whatever extent there are liberations of mind by nothingness, the unshakeable liberation of mind is declared the chief among them. Now that unshakeable

liberation of mind is empty of greed, empty of hatred, empty of delusion.

“Passion, venerable sir, is a maker of signs, hatred is a maker of signs, delusion is a maker of signs. For a bhikkhu whose heart is completely pure, these have been abandoned, cut off at the root, made like palm stumps, obliterated so that they are no more subject to future arising. To whatever extent there are signless liberations of mind, the unshakeable liberation of mind is declared the chief among them. Now that unshakeable liberation of mind is empty of greed, empty of hatred, empty of delusion.

“This, venerable sir, is the method by which these things are one in meaning and different only in phrasing.”

“It is a gain for you, householder, it is a great gain for you, that you have the eye of wisdom that ranges over the deep Word of the Buddha.”

~ S 41.7

In this interpretation, the measureless liberation of mind is via the four divine abidings; liberation of mind by nothingness refers to the third level of formless jhāna; the liberation of mind by emptiness is concentration based on insight