THE UNAPPREHENDABILITY OF THE ENLIGHTENED

169

Both of these passages are echoed somewhat in the following exultation of Ven. Mahā-Kaccāna.

10.7) “For knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he is vision, he is knowledge, he is the Dhamma; he is the holy one; he is the sayer, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the giver of the Deathless, the Lord of the Dhamma, the Tathāgata!”

~ M 18.12

This gives us a little more to go on but since the Dhamma itself is classically designated in the sparest of terms – “apparent here and now; timeless; encouraging investigation; leading inwards; to be experienced by each wise person for themselves” – there is still very little here to grasp by way of tangible characterization, and quite deliberately so. If we think that we’ll have more to play with in the phrase “the ninefold supramundane Dhamma is called the Tathāgata’s body,” we will again be disappointed, those ‘nine’ refer to the four Paths, their four Fruitions and Nibbāna – the states of mind established in wisdom and purity, not any kind of substance or personal characteristic.

Later Buddhist traditions have laid great emphasis on the Dharmakāya as the most universal and refined of the three kāyas of the Buddha: Nirmaṇakāya – physical body; Samboghakāya – the body of bliss/subtle, etheric body; Dharmakāya – universal and timeless body, the absolute aspect of the Buddha’s mind, unborn and omniscient. Extensive and grandiloquent descriptions exist of its nature and qualities but the texts of the Southern School are remarkably quiet on the matter.

Probably the most that can or needs to be said is that, from the Theravāda point of view, the Buddha is the perfect embodiment of the Dhamma. His effort in speaking in these minimalist ways seems designed to meet two purposes: firstly, to reflect the ultimately non-personal and indefinable nature of Ultimate Reality; secondly (and principally) to awaken in the minds of his listeners the insight which is holy and liberating. Another related and well-known example of the Buddha’s teachings on this area is found in the Itivuttaka.

10.8) This was said by the Lord ...

“Bhikkhus, even though a bhikkhu might hold on to the hem of my robe and follow close behind me step by step, if he is covetous for objects of desire, strongly passionate, malevolent, corrupt in thought,