The Island

128

and shows how “a young tender infant lying prone” could be said to be free of the five lower fetters: personality-view (sakkāyadiṭṭhi); sceptical doubt (vicikicchā); attachment to rules and conventions (sīlabbataparāmāsa); sensual desire (kāma-rāga); and ill will (vyāpāda). So, rather like Ven. Anuruddha, the wind is taken out of Māluṅkyaputta’s sails but, in due course, he also gets provided with a much more profound understanding of the Dhamma.

7.3) “Here ... a bhikkhu enters upon and remains in the first jhāna: experiencing refreshment and pleasure born of withdrawal, accompanied by applied and sustained thought. He regards whatever phenomena there that are connected with the body, feeling, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness as impermanent, unsatisfactory, a disease, a cancer, a barb, painful, an affliction, alien, as disintegrating, void, as not self.

“He turns his mind away from those states, and having done so, inclines his mind towards the property of Deathlessness, recognizing: ‘This is peaceful, this is exquisite – the stilling of all mental processes, the relinquishment of all the paraphernalia of becoming, the ending of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna.’ Standing there, he reaches the ending of the mental outflows. Or, if not, then – through that very Dhamma-passion, that Dhamma-delight (dhammarāgena dhammanandiyā), and from the total ending of the first five of the fetters – he is due to be reborn in the Pure Abodes, there to attain final Nibbāna, never again to return from that world.”

~ M 64.9-16, A 9.36

The same wording is repeated with reference to the other three rūpa-jhānas and similarly for the first three arūpa-jhānas; the two uppermost realms of concentration, the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and the ‘cessation of perception and feeling,’ are too refined a basis to allow any investigative reflection of this type.

Here is a passage from the Itivuttaka on a similar theme:

7.4) This was said by the Blessed One ...

“Bhikkhus, there are these three elements – what three?

The form element, the formless element and the

element of cessation. These are the three.