Atammayatā

115

the pleasure, pain, and equanimity associated with renunciation, one gives up the pleasure and pain associated with worldliness. Relying on singular or one-pointed equanimity (ekaggatā-upekkhā), one gives up many-sided or multifaceted equanimity (nānatta-upekkhā). Relying on Atammayatā, one gives up ekaggatā-upekkhā.

In this Sutta, nānatta-upekkhā is explained as “equanimity toward forms, sounds, odors, tastes, touches, and mind-objects,” which implies the four meditative states known as the ‘rūpa-jhāna.’ Ekaggatā-upekkhā is explained as “equanimity dependent upon the four immaterial absorptions (arūpa-jhāna).” To more easily understand what this means, we may compare it with the common Buddhist hierarchy of the sensual (kāma-), pure material (rūpa-), and non-material (arūpa-) realms. The ordinary worldling or ‘Thickster’ (puthujjana) clings to sensual experiences due to craving for sensual pleasures. One gets free of sensuality by relying on pure materiality, that is, steady concentration upon material objects (rūpa-jhāna). Pure materiality is abandoned by relying on the arūpa-jhāna. Finally, these exalted states of consciousness are abandoned through Atammayatā. In the Sappurisa Sutta (M 113), the Buddha describes qualities of the ‘good person’ (sappurisa) who avoids indulging in and goes beyond the eight jhāna through Atammayatā. There is liberation from the āsava (eruptions), which is full awakening. The Buddha is reiterating his message that final liberation cannot be found in the temporary peace and bliss of deep meditative states – in any conditioned state or thing, for that matter. Atammayatā is given precedence over the most sublime experiences that humanity can attain. Further, Atammayatā, rather than mystical states, is offered

as the means to liberation.

Upekkhā is the highest of the seven bojjhaṅga (factors of awakening). When the seven factors are developed successfully, they lead to the penetration of the object on which they are focused. Penetration, or direct spiritual experience, means awakening to and deeply realizing the true nature of things. Yet, the above sutta tells us that Atammayatā takes the spiritual cultivator beyond even upekkhā. The Buddha is saying that even upekkhā is a state that can be clung to, thus preventing liberation. Atammayatā frees upekkhā, as well as the other six factors and any wholesome dhamma that aids liberation from clinging and grasping. The mind with Atammayatā is not clinging and grasping. The