THIS AND THAT, AND OTHER THINGS

61

In this way, the combination of two causal principles – influences from the past interacting with those in the immediate present – accounts for the complexity of causal relationships as they function on the level of immediate experience. However, the combination of the two principles also opens the possibility for finding a systematic way to break the causal web. If causes and effects were entirely linear, the cosmos would be totally deterministic, and nothing could be done to escape the machinations of the causal process. If they were entirely synchronic, there would be no relationship from one moment to the next, and all events would be arbitrary. The web could break down totally or reform spontaneously for no reason at all. However, with the two modes working together, one can learn from causal patterns observed from the past and apply one’s insights to disentangling the same causal patterns acting in the present. If one’s insights are true, one can then gain freedom from those patterns. For this reason, the principle of this/that conditionality provides an ideal foundation, both theoretical and practical, for a doctrine of release. And, as a teacher, the Buddha took full advantage of its implications, using it in such a way that it accounts not only for the presentation and content of his teachings, but also for their organization, their function, and their utility. It even accounts for the need for the teachings and for the fact that the Buddha was able to teach them in the first place.

~ Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu, ‘The Wings to Awakening,’ pp 10-12

Examples of these two types of relationship would also be: a) for the linear principle that connects events, rather than objects, over time – if someone sends you a welcome gift, the next time you see them you immediately feel grateful and friendly toward them; b) for the synchronic principle that connects objects and events in the present moment – when sunlight falls on our body a shadow forms simultaneously. The following passages outline the Buddha’s definitions of dependent origination, specific conditionality and the relationship between them:

3.3) “And what, bhikkhus, is dependent origination? With birth as condition, aging-and-death comes to be: whether there be an arising of Tathāgatas or no arising of Tathāgatas, this nature of things still stands, the stableness of the Dhamma, this causal orderliness, the relatedness of this to that (idapaccayatā – specific conditionality). A Tathāgata awakens