SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT I

283

16.7) Thus have I heard. Once the Lord was staying at Nādika at the Brick House. And at that time the Lord was explaining the rebirths of various devotees up and down the country who had died and passed away: Kāsis and Kosalans, Vajjians and Mallas, Cetis and Vaṃsas, Kurus and Pañcālas, Macchas and Sūrasenas, saying: “This one was reborn there, and that one there. More than fifty Nādikan devotees, having abandoned the five lower fetters, were reborn spontaneously and would attain Nibbāna without returning to this world; over ninety of them, having abandoned three fetters and weakened greed, hatred and delusion, were Once-Returners, who would return to this world once more and then make an end of suffering; and more than five hundred, having abandoned three fetters, were Stream-Winners, incapable of falling into states of woe, certain of Nibbāna.”

~ D 18.1, (Maurice Walshe trans.)

SUPPORTS FOR ENTERING THE STREAM

In this section we will look at the various attributes leading to stream-entry. A picture will emerge that allows us to recognize stream-entry as accessible, practical and desirable. The mind will then be enabled to incorporate stream-entry into its view and to let it define the direction of aspiration, allowing the heart’s desire for freedom to be fulfilled.

The following sutta gives a sense both of what someone does to become a sotāpanna and of what it means to be a sotāpanna:

16.8) Then the Venerable Sāriputta approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side. The Blessed One then said to him:

“Sāriputta, this is said: ‘A factor for stream-entry, a factor for stream-entry.’ What now, Sāriputta, is a factor for stream-entry?”

“Association with superior persons, venerable sir, is a factor for stream-entry. Hearing the true Dhamma is a factor for stream-entry. Careful attention is a factor for stream-entry. Practice in accordance with the Dhamma is a factor for stream entry.”

“Good, good, Sāriputta! Association with superior persons, Sāriputta, is a factor for stream-entry. Hearing the true Dhamma is a factor for stream-entry. Careful attention is a factor for stream-entry. Practice in accordance with the Dhamma is a factor for stream-entry.”