“TO BE, OR NOT TO BE...”

109

“This world, Kaccāyana, is for the most part shackled by bias, clinging, and insistence. But one such as this [with Right View], instead of becoming engaged, instead of clinging – instead of taking a stand about ‘my self’ through such a bias, clinging, mental standpoint, adherance and underlying tendency – such a one has no perplexity or doubt that what arises is only dukkha arising, and what ceases is only dukkha ceasing. In this their knowledge is independent of others. It is in this way, Kaccāyana, that there is Right View.

“‘All exists,’ Kaccāyana, this is one extreme, ‘All does not exist,’ this is the other extreme. Without veering towards either of these extremes the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma by the Middle Way: With ignorance as condition, volitional formations come to be; with volitional formations as condition, consciousness comes to be ... Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.

“But with the remainderless fading away, cessation and non-arising of ignorance there comes the cessation of volitional formations; with the cessation of volitional formations, when there are no volitional formations, there is the cessation of consciousness, consciousness does not come to be ... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.”

~ S 12.15, S 22.90

It has been proposed (by Kalupahana, in ‘Nāgārjuna: The Philosophy of the Middle Way’) that this humble sutta was the principal seed for the great, early Indian Buddhist philosopher Ācariya Nāgārjuna’s masterpiece, the Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā – ‘Treatise on the Root of the Middle Way.’ It is certainly the only discourse of the ancient Canon that is mentioned by name therein; in point of fact it is the only discourse mentioned at all.

By way of expansion on this area, here are some of Ācariya Nāgārjuna’s own incisive insights on being, non-being and causality:

5.33) Investigation of Essences

1.	It is unreasonable for an essence to arise from causes and conditions. Whatever essence arose from causes and conditions would be something that has been made.

2.	How is it possible for there to be ‘an essence’ which has been made? Essences are not contrived and not dependent on anything else.