Atammayatā

123

he does not conceive of a ‘thing-worth-cognizing’; he does not conceive about one who cognizes.

“Thus, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata being Suchlike (tādi) in regard to all phenomena seen, heard, sensed and cognized, is Thus. Moreover, there is none other greater or more excellent than one who is Thus, I declare.

“Whatever’s seen, heard, sensed or clung to,

is known as truth by other folk;

Amidst those who’re entrenched in views,

one Thus holds none as true or false.

“The barb which hooks, impales the world,

has been discerned well in advance:

‘I know, I see, this is the truth,’

Tathāgatas do not cling thus.”

~ A 4.24

The terms ‘thing-worth-seeing, -hearing, -cognizing etc.’ are pointing to the habit we have of imputing inherent value or substance to perceptions, thoughts and emotions. Without such imputation they do not possess any such solidity or worth.

Tradition has it that five hundred of those listening attained arahantship and there were five earthquakes during the course of the exposition. This short teaching also became of great significance in the centuries after the Buddha’s time – it was used by the Elder Mahārakkhita under the auspices of King Asoka’s missionary endeavours, to instruct the Yonakas (Greeks) in their home country.

All the various passages quoted so far in this chapter describe the nature of Atammayatā and its related qualities but perhaps the questions remain: how is this best to be realized? And how can this depth of insight be developed? A text that points directly to this issue, and one of the most useful meditation teachings in the entire Pali Canon, is to be found in the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta; there, Ven. Mahā-Kaccāna says:

6.9) “Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is sense-contact. With sense-contact as condition there is feeling. What one feels, that one perceives. What one perceives, that one thinks about. What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates. With such conceptual proliferation (papañca) as the source,