SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT IV

337

“Here a bhikkhu hears thus: ‘The bhikkhu named so-and-so has died; the Blessed One has declared of him: “With the destruction of three fetters he has become a stream-enterer, no longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment.”’ And he has either seen that venerable one for himself or heard it said of him: ‘That venerable one’s virtue was thus, his state [of concentration] was thus, his wisdom was thus, his abiding [in attainments] was thus, his deliverance was thus.’ Recollecting his faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to such a state. In this way too a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.”

The Buddha then refers to bhikkhunīs, laymen, and laywomen in a

similar manner:

“So Anuruddha, it is not for the purpose of scheming to deceive people or for the purpose of flattering people or for the purpose of gain, honour, or renown, or with the thought, ‘Let people know me to be thus,’ that when a disciple has died, the Tathāgata declares his reappearance thus: ‘So-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place; so-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place.’ Rather, it is because there are faithful clansmen inspired and gladdened by what is lofty, who when they hear that, direct their minds to such a state, and that leads to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”

~ M 68.8-24, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

All these different aspects of the sotāpanna are worthy of much reflection. As human beings we have the opportunity to experience a breakthrough from the stream of the world to the stream of Truth. The discussion of this possibility is not just an idle philosophical pastime, but a practical guide as to how the heart can be set free.

By being attentive to this initial stage of Awakening, we can recognize more clearly what needs to be relinquished and what needs to be cultivated in the immediate present so that we can taste this freedom ourselves. Most significantly, all these teachings show us that, by entering the noble path and embodying the various qualities of the stream-enterer, we could attain ‘welfare and happiness for a long time’ – both for ourselves and for those around us.