The Island

170

unmindful, uncomprehending, unconcentrated, of wandering mind and uncontrolled faculties, he is far from me and I am far from him. What is the reason? That bhikkhu does not see Dhamma. Not seeing Dhamma, he does not see me.

“Bhikkhus, even though a bhikkhu might live a hundred leagues away, if he is not covetous for objects of desire, not strongly passionate, not malevolent, not corrupt in thought, with mindfulness established, clearly comprehending, concentrated, of unified mind and controlled faculties, he is close to me and I am close to him. What is the reason? That bhikkhu sees Dhamma. Seeing Dhamma, he sees me.”

~ Iti 92

10.9) “They call him Buddha, Enlightened, Awake, dissolving darkness, with total vision, and knowing the world to its ends, he has gone beyond all the states of being and of becoming. He has no inner poison-drives: he is the total elimination of suffering. This man, brahmin Bāvari, is the man I follow.

“It is like a bird that leaves the bushes of the scrubland and flies to the fruit trees of the forest. I too have left the bleary half-light of opinions; like a swan I have reached a great lake.

“Up till now, before I heard Gotama’s teaching, people had always told me this: ‘This is how it has always been, and this is how it will always be’; only the constant refrain of tradition, a breeding ground for speculation.

“This prince, this beam of light, Gotama, was the only one who dissolved the darkness. This man Gotama is a universe of wisdom and a world of understanding, a teacher whose Dhamma is the Way Things Are, instant, immediate and visible all around, eroding desire without harmful side-effects, with nothing else quite like it anywhere

in the world.”

“But Piṅgiya,” said Bāvari, “why then don’t you spend all your time, your every moment, with this man Gotama, this universe of wisdom ... with nothing else quite like it anywhere in the world?”

“Brahmin, Sir,” said Piṅgiya, “there is no moment for me, however small, that is spent away from Gotama, from this universe of wisdom ... with nothing else quite like it anywhere in the world ...

“I cannot now move away from the teaching of Gotama: the powers of