KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

199

people. The Buddha called it “quenching element” or “cessation element” (nirodha-dhātu).

The words “material element” (vatthu-dhātu) or “form element” (rūpa-dhātu) refer to materiality in visible forms, sounds, odors, tastes, or tactile objects. “Formless element” (arūpa-dhātu) refers to the mind and heart, to mental processes, and to the thoughts and experiences that arise in the mind. There is only one kind of element not included in these two categories, an element that is the complete antithesis and annihilation of them all. Consequently, the Buddha sometimes called it “coolness element” (Nibbāna-dhātu), sometimes “quenching element” (nirodha-dhātu), and sometimes “deathless element” (amata-dhātu).

Ven. Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu, ‘Heartwood of the Bodhi Tree,’ pp 51-2

In the Pali scriptures ‘suñña’ simply means ‘empty.’ It describes the quality of absence – an absence contained within a particular defining form, rather than some kind of absolute value. Every space has its poetics: this personality is empty of self, this glass is empty of water, this room is empty of people – there is a definite voidness in some respects but it is also ‘shaped’ by its context. The pair of silences during the opening bars of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony are just silence but the particular poetry of those silences is shaped by the notes before and after.

Without the glass there would not be any emptiness; without the other musical notes those moments would not be silent – that is to say, the emptiness only exists in relationship to its vessel, whatever that may be: a personality, a glass, a room, a musical phrase; it’s just a way of speaking about form and space using

relative language.

Thus from the Theravāda point of view, the concept of emptiness is quite prosaic. It lacks the intrinsic mystical quality imputed to it in some of the Northern Buddhist scriptures. However, it becomes more meaningful in terms of liberation as it is almost always used in the context of “empty of self and the property of a self.” If that absence is being apprehended then the heart is certainly

inclining to Awakening.

Phrases such as “enters into the signless concentration of mind (animittā-cetosamādhi),” “I often abide in emptiness (suññatā-vihāra)” are probably the kind of sources for the later drifting of the meaning of emptiness. Originally these pointed to the realization of Nibbāna through the contemplation of and concentration on qualities such as impermanence and selflessness, and were not