The Island

194

It is always up to the individual to take the teachings, apply them, bring them to life and then discover how they mesh via direct knowledge, rather than forcing them to align, in Procrustean conformity, with favoured presuppositions and habit patterns: “Is the mind empty or is it full of light? Is wisdom the light or the emptiness? Both? Neither? Ajahn Chah once said: ‘We call the mind empty but actually it’s full of wisdom,’ maybe that’s it!”

It’s never a matter of trying to figure it all out, rather we pick up these phrases and chew them over, taste them, digest them and let them energize us by virtue of their own nature.

12.2) “One who wishes to reach the Buddha-Dhamma must firstly be one who has faith or confidence as a foundation. We must understand the meaning of Buddha-Dhamma as follows:

“Buddha: the One-Who-Knows (poo roo), the one who has purity, radiance and peace in the heart.

“Dhamma: the characteristics of purity, radiance and peace which arise from morality, concentration and wisdom.

“Therefore, one who is to reach the Buddha-Dhamma is one who cultivates and develops morality, concentration and wisdom within themselves.”

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, ‘Fragments of a Teaching’ in ‘Food for the Heart,’

pp 43-44

Buddha-wisdom is the ultimate subject; Dhamma is the ultimate object; the field of their interplay is supremely bright; all these elements are empty of self. Enlightenment, liberation, depends on the recognition of the radical separateness of awareness – ‘the one who knows’ as Ajahn Chah would phrase it – and the world of the five khandhas. Having said that, it’s also crucial to note that the phrase ‘the one who knows’ (‘poo roo’ in Thai) is a colloquialism that has different meanings in different contexts. It can be used (at one end of the spectrum) for ‘that which cognizes an object,’ to (at the other end) ‘supramundane wisdom.’ Most often it is used in simple concentration instructions, where the meditator separates awareness from the object and then focuses on the awareness. The separate awareness of full awakening is of a different order altogether.

A comparable model that Ajahn Chah often used to illustrate this area is that of the relationship of mindfulness (sati), clear comprehension (sampajañña) and