The Island

346

Therefore the happiness synonymous with liberation is not tied to the world and not tainted by sensuality. And we can see that after the Buddha’s enlightenment, the happiness of the untainted mind was accessible to him:

20.12) “But, friends, I can abide without moving my body or uttering a word, experiencing the peak of pleasure for one day and night ... for two, three, four, five, and six days and nights ... for seven days and nights. What do you think, friends? That being so, who dwells in greater pleasure, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha or I?”

“That being so, the venerable Gotama abides in greater pleasure than King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha.”

~ M 14.22, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

In addition to this type of pleasure – accessible to those who have realized Nibbāna – there are more refined aspects which can be realized. In this next quotation, the Buddha details all the different attainments of absorption and refinement of mind, ending with nirodha-samāppati, ‘the attainment of cessation of perception and feeling.’ In each case he refers to a more sublime happiness.

At first glance, the cessation of perception and feeling would not appear to be happiness at all. But the Buddha is pointing out that wherever and whenever we are able to be free from suffering that is an aspect of well-being. The absence of any obstruction and stain is also what the Buddha perceives as happiness. Contemplating this passage allows us to stretch our notion of what the highest pleasure or happiness might be.

20.13) Though some may say, “This is the supreme pleasure and joy that beings experience,” I would not concede this to them. Why is that? Because there is another kind of happiness more excellent and sublime than that happiness. And what is that other kind of happiness? Here, Ānanda, by completely transcending the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is that other kind of happiness more excellent and sublime than the previous kind of happiness.

Now it is possible, Ānanda, that wanderers of other sects might speak thus: “The ascetic Gotama speaks of the cessation of perception and feeling, and he maintains that it is included in happiness. What is that?