“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

75

the self ... self as in feeling ... or perception to be the self ... the self as possessing perception ... perception as in the self ... self as in perception ... or formations to be the self ... the self as possessing formations... formations as in the self ... self as in formations ... or consciousness to be the self ... the self as possessing consciousness ... consciousness as in the self ... self as in consciousness.

“Now that assumption is a formation. What is the cause ... of that formation? When an uninstructed, ordinary person is touched by a feeling born of contact accompanied by ignorance, craving arises. That formation is born of that. And that formation is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen. That craving ... That feeling ... That contact ... That ignorance is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen. It is by knowing and seeing in this way that one can one immediately put an end to the mental outflows.

“Or ... they may have a view such as this: ‘This self is the same as the universe. Thus after death I will be constant, lasting, eternal not subject to change.’ This eternalist view is a formation ... Or ... they may have a view such as this: ‘I might not be, and neither might there be what is mine. I will not be, neither will there be what is mine.’ This annihilationist view is a formation ... Or ... they may be perplexed, doubtful and indecisive with regard to the true Dhamma. That perplexity, doubtfulness and indecisiveness is a formation.

“Now what is the cause, what is the origination of that formation, from what is it born and produced? When an uninstructed, ordinary person is touched by a feeling born of contact accompanied by ignorance, craving arises. That formation is born of that.

“So that formation, bhikkhus, is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen. That craving ... That feeling ... That contact ... That ignorance is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen. When one knows and sees thus the mental outflows are immediately brought to

an end.”

~ S 22.81

Another key passage from the Pali Canon which relates to this issue is found in the rich and colourful Dhātuvibhaṅga Sutta.