THIS AND THAT, AND OTHER THINGS

65

somewhere on the sea-coast. He was an ascetic of some spiritual accomplishment and he assumed that he was a fully enlightened being. One night a devatā, who had been a relative of his in a former life, came to him and informed him that: “No, you are not an arahant and you are not on the way to becoming one either.” Bāhiya was disturbed by this announcement and asked then if there were any genuine arahants in the world. He was told: “Yes indeed,” and his celestial visitor described both the Buddha and where he was residing. Bāhiya is said to have started the walk of several hundred miles then and there.

Some days later, having reached the district capital of Sāvatthī, he encountered the Buddha and a group of his monks as they walked on their morning almsround through the narrow, dusty streets of the town. He strode right up and bowed before the Buddha, stopping him in his tracks – and asked to receive teachings on the Dhamma. The Buddha pointed out that this was not a convenient time to teach him, as they were in the middle of collecting their almsfood and around them was all the surge and bustle of an Indian market town at the start of the day; however Bāhiya was undeterred and responded by saying: “Life is a very uncertain thing, venerable sir, it is unknown when either you or I might die, please therefore teach me the Dhamma here and now.”

As often occurs in Buddhist scriptures, this exchange was repeated three times. Finally, both because the Buddha could see the truth of Bāhiya’s assertion (he him-self regularly used the fact of such uncertainty in encouraging a sense of urgency in his students) and because when pressed up to the third time on any question a Bud-dha has to respond, he then relented and gave Bāhiya this brief but pithy teaching:

3.6) In the seen there is only the seen,

in the heard, there is only the heard,

in the sensed there is only the sensed,

in the cognized there is only the cognized:

This, Bāhiya, is how you should train yourself.

When, Bāhiya, there is for you

in the seen only the seen,

in the heard, only the heard,

in the sensed only the sensed,

in the cognized only the cognized,

then, Bāhiya, there is no ‘you’

in connection with that.