SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

317

He understands thus: “I possess the strength of a person who possesses right view.” This is the seventh knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people. When a noble disciple is thus possessed of seven factors, he has well sought the character for realisation of the fruit of stream-entry. When a noble disciple is thus possessed of seven factors, he possesses the fruit of stream-entry.

~ M 48.7-15, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

As was mentioned above, right view does not just confine itself to having correct ideas and intentions. Conduct is necessarily affected, and the lives of sotāpannas are exemplary. The sārāṇīya-dhammas are standards of conduct by which sotāpannas would tend to live. The term is variously translated as ‘principles of cordiality,’ ‘states of conciliation,’ or ‘virtues for fraternal living.’ These are considered intrinsic to a sotāpanna as the last quality states that a person endowed with these qualities would “possess the view that is noble and emancipating ...”

These memorable qualities, if followed, would allow the Sangha (or any society) to live in concord. In the following passage the Buddha is encouraging the monks to consider the difference between their conduct and that of one who has entered the stream of Dhamma.

18.13) There are, O monks, these six principles of cordiality that create love and respect and conduce to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to concord and to unity. What six?

Here, a monk maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his fellow monks. This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect ...

Again, a monk maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his fellow monks. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect ...

Again, a monk maintains mental acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his fellow monks. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect ...

Again, a monk uses things in common with his virtuous fellow monks; without making reservations, he shares with them any righteous gain that has been righteously obtained, including even the contents of his bowl. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect ...