The Island

304

seen clearly and we are able to discard that which fetters or obstructs us, we are more able to be established in a true refuge.

The clear seeing of stream-entry is the force behind the cutting off of this fetter. Identity views take the five khandhas as their focus. When these five khandhas are seen arising and ceasing in the context of causal conditions and dependently arisen, a fixed view of self is cut off and dropped. Particularly the allowing of the khandhas to cease in the awareness of dependent origination in its cessation mode opens the way for the experience of the Deathless; the tendency to view the khandhas as self is then eradicated. The sotāpanna has seen clearly the nature of body and mind. Although experiencing illness would normally create suffering, the mind of a sotāpanna is not overwhelmed. Nakulapitā, the protagonist in this next sutta, was a stream-enterer and was declared by the Buddha foremost among his male lay disciples

who were trustworthy.

18.3) “And how, householder, is one afflicted in body but not afflicted in mind? Here, householder, the instructed noble disciple, who is a seer of the noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who is a seer of superior persons and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, does not regard form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form. He does not live obsessed by the notions: ‘I am form, form is mine.’ As he lives unobsessed by these notions, that form of his changes and alters. With the change and alteration of form, there do not arise in him sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.”

And similarly for feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness.

“It is in such a way, householder, that one is afflicted in body but not afflicted in mind ...”

This is what the Venerable Sāriputta said. Elated, the householder Nakulapitā delighted in the Venerable Sāriputta’s statement.

~ S 22.1, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Doubt, the second fetter, is the basis from which we formulate most of our views and opinions of ourselves and the world around us. Perplexity and uncertainty hold beings attached to the world quite firmly. When we see truth only partially, the human tendency is to fill in the blanks and then to cling to what we have constructed. This tendency was especially strong in the Buddha’s time, given India’s