PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES I

231

of this holy life, its heartwood, and its end.

~ M 29.7, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

13.11) “Friend, when asked: ‘But, friend, is it for the sake of purification of virtue that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One?’ you replied: ‘No, friend.’ When asked: ‘Then is it for the sake of purification of mind ... purification of view ... purification by overcoming doubt ... purification by knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the

path ... purification by knowledge and vision of the way ... purification by knowledge and vision that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One?’ you replied: ‘No, friend.’ For the sake of what then, friend, is the holy life lived under the Blessed One?”

“Friend, it is for the sake of final Nibbāna without clinging that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.”

~ M 24.10, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The Buddha gives a lovely description of the gradual process of training by comparing it to the refining of gold. Given the right conditions, gold is pure, but it still can have impurities that require a process of refining. Similarly, although the mind is inherently pure and Nibbāna is ‘apparent here and now,’ it requires a process by which the obstructions can be cleared away.

13.12) There are, O monks, gross impurities in gold, such as earth and sand, gravel and grit. Now the goldsmith or his apprentice first pours the gold into a trough and washes, rinses and cleans it thoroughly. When he has done this, there still remain moderate impurities in the gold, such as fine grit and coarse sand. Then the goldsmith or his apprentice washes, rinses and cleans it again. When he has done this, there still remain minute impurities in the gold, such as fine sand and black dust. Now the goldsmith or his apprentice repeats the washing, and thereafter only the gold dust remains.

He now pours the gold into a melting pot, smelts it and melts it together. But he does not yet take it out from the vessel, as the dross has not yet been entirely removed and the gold is not yet quite pliant, workable and bright; it is still brittle and does not yet lend itself easily to moulding. But a time comes when the goldsmith or his apprentice repeats the smelting thoroughly, so that the flaws are entirely removed.