SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

321

confidence in the Buddha, he makes further effort for solitude by day and for seclusion at night. When he thus dwells diligently, gladness is born. When he is gladdened, rapture is born. When the mind is uplifted by rapture, the body becomes tranquil. One tranquil in body experiences happiness. The mind of one who is happy becomes concentrated. When the mind is concentrated, phenomena become manifest. Because phenomena become manifest, he is reckoned as ‘one who dwells diligently.’

“Again, Nandiya, a noble disciple possesses confirmed confidence in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... He possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken ... leading to concentration. Not content with those virtues dear to the noble ones, he makes further effort for solitude by day and for seclusion at night. When he thus dwells diligently, gladness is born ... Because phenomena become manifest, he is reckoned as ‘one who dwells diligently.’

“It is in this way, Nandiya, that a noble disciple is one who

dwells diligently.”

~ S 55.40, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

To complete this section on the relinquishing of the fetters, some leeway will be taken to introduce other aspects of what is let go of, but which do not fall specifically under that category. A passage in the Vinaya states that a sotāpanna relinquishes the four agati – wrong courses of behaviour; or prejudices. These are: 1) chandāgati – prejudice caused by love or desire, partiality; 2) dosāgati – prejudice caused by hatred or enmity; 3) mohāgati – prejudice caused by delusion or stupidity; 4) bhayāgati – prejudice caused by fear.

Bhikkhu Bodhi writes in one of his footnotes to the Majjhima Nikāya that the ancient Majjhima Commentary says that the stream-enterer has abandoned (samucchedapahāna – abandonment by eradication) contempt, a domineering attitude, envy, avarice, deceit and fraud. These are truly important traits of those who have realized Dhamma. The lives of such people are not drawn into the prejudices and biases that would create disharmony and discord in the world and the society in which they live. A world with more sotāpannas would obviously be a different world from the one we live in today.