The Island

80

originated, that is transient and uncertain, and whatever is transient and uncertain is unsatisfactory’ is subject to the same logic! Thus you too adhere to that which is intrinsically unsatisfactory, you too commit

yourself to dissatisfaction.”

“Venerable sirs, whatever has been brought into being, is fabricated, volitionally produced and is dependently originated, that is transient and uncertain, and whatever is transient and uncertain is unsatisfactory. That which is unsatisfactory does not belong to me, is not what I am, it is not my self. Having understood this with true wisdom, as it actually is, I have also discerned the genuine means for transcendence of it.”

When this had been said, the wanderers became silent, dismayed, with their shoulders drooping and their heads sunk down on their chests, glum and with nothing to say. The householder Anāthapiṇḍika, perceiving that the wanderers were silent ... glum and with nothing to say, stood up and left that place.

~ A 10.93

Finally, in this chapter, here are some of the words of Ven. Ajahn Chah on the issue of the conditioned realm and its relationship to the Unconditioned.

4.9) The Buddha talked about saṅkhata dhammas and asaṅkhata dhammas – conditioned and unconditioned things. Conditioned things are innumerable – material or immaterial, big or small – if our mind is under the influence of delusion, it will proliferate about these things, dividing them up into good and bad, short and long, coarse and refined. Why does the mind proliferate like this? Because it doesn’t know conventional determinate reality, it doesn’t know about conditions. Not knowing these things, the mind doesn’t see the Dhamma. Not seeing the Dhamma, the mind is full of clinging. As long as the mind is held down by clinging there can be no escape from the conditioned world. As long as there is no escape, there is confusion, birth, old age, sickness, and death, even in the thinking processes. This kind of mind is called the saṅkhata dhamma (conditioned mind). Asaṅkhata dhamma, the unconditioned, refers to the mind that has seen the Dhamma, the truth of the five khandhas as they are – as transient, imperfect and ownerless. All ideas of ‘me’ and ‘mine,’ ‘them’ and ‘theirs,’ belong to the determined reality.