“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

83

high, low, black and white are all determinations. We are all lost in determinations. This is why at the funeral ceremonies the monks chant, Aniccā vata saṅkhārā... “Conditions are impermanent, they arise and pass away...” That’s the truth. What is there that, having arisen, doesn’t cease? Everything arises and then ceases. People are born and then they die. Bad moods arise and then cease. Good moods arise and then cease. Have you ever seen anybody cry for three or four years? At the most, you may see people crying a whole night, and then the tears dry up. “Having arisen, they cease...”

“Tesaṃ vūpasamo sukho,” (“And in their passing is peace.”) If we understand saṅkhāras, proliferations, and thereby subdue them, this is the greatest happiness. This is true merit, to be calmed of proliferations, calmed of ‘being,’ calmed of individuality, of the burden of self. Transcending these things one sees the unconditioned. This means that no matter what happens, the mind doesn’t proliferate around it. There’s nothing that can throw the mind off its natural balance. What else could you want? This is the end, the finish.

• • •

Let the knowing spread from within you and you will be practising rightly. If you want to see a train, just go to the central station, you don’t have to go travelling all the way up the Northern Line, the Southern Line, the Eastern Line and the Western Line to see all the trains. If you want to see trains, every single one of them, you’d be better off waiting at Grand Central Station, that’s where they all terminate.

Now some people tell me, “I want to practise but I don’t know how. I’m not up to studying the scriptures, I’m getting old now, my memory’s not so good...” Just look right here [pointing at his heart], at ‘Central Station.’ Greed arises here, anger arises here, delusion arises here. Just sit here and you can watch as all these things arise. Practise right here, because right here is where you’re stuck. Right here is where the determined arises, where conventions arise, and right here is where the Dhamma will arise.