THE UNAPPREHENDABILITY OF THE ENLIGHTENED

173

being reckoned in terms of material form, feeling, perception, mental formations and consciousness, Vaccha, he is profound, immeasurable, unfathomable like the ocean.”

~ M 72.20

The preceding statement is also found in the Saṃyutta Nikāya, in the opening entry of the Connected Discourses on the Undeclared – a rich and fascinating collection of teachings. The sutta recounts a meeting between the arahant bhikkhunī Khemā, and King Pasenadi of Kosala. The King had been travelling between Sāketa and Sāvatthī and, having to stop overnight in Toraṇavatthu, he had asked if there were any local samaṇas or brahmins whom he might visit and with whom he might have some spiritual discussion. The man sent out to search returns, and says:

10.15) “Sire, there are no samaṇas or brahmins in Toraṇavatthu whom your Majesty could visit. But, sire, there is the bhikkhunī Khemā, a disciple of the Blessed One ... Now a good report concerning this revered lady has been spread abroad thus: ‘She is wise, competent, intelligent, learned, a splendid speaker, ingenious.’ Let your Majesty visit her.”

The King opens the dialogue by asking her whether a Tathāgata exists after death or not, in the familiar quadrilemmal form of the question. To each of the four lemmas (exists, doesn’t exist, both does and does not, neither does nor does not) she replies: “The Tathāgata has not declared this.” His perplexed Majesty then asks:

“What now, revered lady, is the cause and reason that this has not been declared by the Blessed One?”

“Well then, great king, I will question you about this same matter. Answer as you see fit. What do you think, great king? Do you have an accountant or calculator or mathematician who can count the grains of sand in the river Ganges thus: ‘There are so many grains of sand ...’?”

“No, revered lady.”

“Then, great king, do you have an accountant or calculator or mathematician who can measure the water in the great ocean thus: ‘There are so many gallons of water ...’?”

“No, revered lady. For what reason? Because the great ocean is deep, immeasurable, hard to fathom.”

“So too, great king, the Tathāgata has abandoned that material form