KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

193

in this list, ‘aññā’ – usually meaning the understanding gained by those who have realized enlightenment.

There are a number of other words and phrases which point to the same area of mind but which carry various other colourations of meaning; these are such words as sati (mindfulness), sampajañña (clear comprehension), appamada (heedfulness), paññācakkhu (the eye of wisdom, as at §3.5), yoniso-manasikāra (wise consideration), dhamma-vicaya (investigation of states of experience) and vīmaṃsā (intelligent reviewing).

In the forest tradition of Theravāda Buddhism, particularly as it has been practised in Thailand in the last hundred years or so, a great primacy has been given to the quality of awareness itself – it is seen as the sine qua non of both the path and the goal of the spiritual life.

Certainly, in the monastic life, considerable emphasis is given to purity and precision in ethical discipline, and the austere dhutanga practices are encouraged. For the lay community, a similar stress is placed on the need for moral integrity, as well as the practices of devotion and generosity. In Buddhist training, however, the development and practice of awareness is firmly at the centre of things for those who are intent on liberation. Numerous masters have emphasized repeatedly that it is this very quality, in its role at the core of insight meditation (vipassanā), that frees the heart.

The reason why we have grouped these three qualities – knowing, emptiness and the radiant mind – together for this chapter was first touched on in Chapter 8. The environment of pure awareness is cultivated through a realization of emptiness and then embodies that characteristic as a result of its perfection. Radiance is another of the principal qualities that manifests as that knowing is purified.

These three attributes weave through each other and are mutually reflective and supportive. In a way, they are like the fluidity, wetness and coolness of a glass of water: three qualities that are distinct yet inseparable. It is because of the inseparability of these three, and the continual overlapping of teachings referring to each of them, that they are being investigated together here.

As the reader will discover through this chapter, and as is the general intent of this book, each of the passages lends itself to individual contemplation – contemplation that will slowly reveal many layers of meaning and interrelationship. Sometimes one teaching will seem to confirm another, at other times they might seem to contradict – this is the flavour of Buddha-Dhamma.