“AH, WHAT BLISS!”

347

How is that?” When wanderers of other sects speak thus, Ānanda, they should be told: “The Blessed One, friends, does not describe a state as included in happiness only with reference to pleasant feeling. But rather, friends, wherever happiness is found and in whatever way, the Tathāgata describes that as included in happiness.”

~ S 36.19, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Because the happiness of Nibbāna is so far out of the range of our ordinary perceptions and assumptions, there is an inherent difficulty in discerning what it could possibly be. Our tendency is to rely on familiarity with gratification or stimulation, but even in normal circumstances it is easy to see that when desirable things have impinged on consciousness for too long, they become tedious or irritating. In this next sutta, Sāriputta equates happiness with relief from a less exalted sensation or stimulus so that there ceases to be an ‘affliction.’

20.14) I have heard that on one occasion Ven. Sāriputta was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Feeding Sanctuary. There he said to the monks, “This Nibbāna is pleasant, friends. This Nibbāna is pleasant.”

When this was said, Ven. Udāyin said to Ven. Sāriputta, “But what is the pleasure here, my friend, where there is nothing felt?”

“Just that is the pleasure here, my friend: where there is nothing felt. There are these five strings of sensuality. Which five? Forms cognizable via the eye – agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, fostering desire, enticing; sounds cognizable via the ear ... smells cognizable via the nose ... tastes cognizable via the tongue ... tactile sensations cognizable via the body – agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, fostering desire, enticing. Whatever pleasure or joy arises in dependence on these five strings of sensuality, that is sensual pleasure.

“Now there is the case where a monk – quite withdrawn from sensuality, withdrawn from unskillful qualities – enters & remains in the first jhāna: rapture & pleasure born from withdrawal, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation. If, as he remains there, he is beset with attention to perceptions dealing with sensuality, that is an affliction for him. Just as pain arises as an affliction in a healthy person for his affliction, even so the attention to perceptions dealing with sensuality that beset the monk