The Island

228

Although Nibbāna is immediate, the number of people who have actually seen it is infinitesimal. This is because Nibbāna is extremely subtle – so subtle that the Buddha, after first awakening, grew discouraged at the prospect of teaching it.

13.6) I considered: “This Dhamma that I have attained is profound, hard to see and hard to understand, peaceful and sublime, unattainable by mere reasoning, subtle, to be experienced by the wise. But this generation delights in adhesion, takes delight in adhesion, rejoices in adhesion. It is hard for such a generation to see this truth, namely, specific conditionality, dependent origination. And it is hard to see this truth, namely, the stilling of all formations, the relinquishing of all attachments, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna. If I were to teach the Dhamma, others would not understand me, and that would be wearying and troublesome for me.”

~ M 26.19, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Fortunately for us, the Buddha abandoned his hesitation and devoted himself to forty-five years of tireless service for the benefit of those who wished to practise and realize the fruits of his teachings. Nevertheless, the subtlety of the goal is what requires a gradual path of practice in which one’s powers of concentration, mindfulness, and discernment become steadily heightened to the point where they lead to a direct realization of the goal. This means that an important part of the path will include practices that enable us to increase the subtlety of our powers of perception and will direct our search for the peace of Nibbāna to the point where searching is no longer necessary.

13.7) Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of search. What three? The search for sensual gratification, the search for being, the search for a holy life. These are the three.

A disciple of the Buddha,

concentrated, clearly comprehending

and mindful, knows searches

and the origin of searches,

where they cease and the path

that leads to their full destruction.