KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

213

it would be more fruitful than all the actions described there: “to sustain the insight into impermanence for merely as long as a finger-snap,” thus, as in the Vajra Sūtra quotation, clearly delineating wisdom as the most precious commodity of all.

Of all the teachings on emptiness to be found in the Northern tradition, probably the most ubiquitous is the Heart Sūtra. It is recited daily in Buddhist communities from Ladakh to Hokkaido, from Taiwan to Lake Baikhal, not to mention at Buddhist monasteries and centres throughout the Western world. It is considered to embody the essence of the wisdom teachings of the Buddha. It, too, is structured around the insight into the true nature of the five khandhas.

12.21) When Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara was practising the profound prajñā pāramitā, he illuminated the five skandhas and saw that they were all empty, and he crossed beyond all suffering and difficulty.

“Śāriputra, form does not differ from emptiness; emptiness does not differ from form. Form itself is emptiness; emptiness itself is form. So too are feeling, cognition, formations and consciousness.

“Śāriputra, all dharmas are empty of characteristics. They are not produced, not destroyed, not defiled, not pure, and they neither

increase nor diminish.

“Therefore, in emptiness there is no form, feeling, cognition, formations or consciousness; no eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body or mind; no sights, sounds, smells, tastes, objects of touch or dharmas; no field of the eyes, up to and including no field of mind-consciousness; and no ignorance or ending of ignorance, up to and including no old age and death, or ending of old age and death. There is no suffering, no origination, no extinction and no Way, and no understanding and no attaining.

“Because nothing is attained, the Bodhisattva, through reliance on prajñā pāramitā is unimpeded in his mind. Because there is no impediment, he is not afraid and he leaves distorted dream-thinking far behind. Ultimately Nirvāṇa!

“All Buddhas of the three periods of time attain Anuttara-samyaksambodhi through reliance on prajñā pāramitā.

“Therefore know that prajñā pāramitā is a great spiritual mantra, a great bright mantra, a supreme mantra, an unequalled mantra. It can remove all suffering; it is genuine and not false. That is why the mantra of prajñā pāramitā was spoken. Recite it like this: