KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

217

here is the point where meditators clearly know this, and it’s the point that lets them argue – because the truth has to be found true in the individual heart. Once a person knows, he or she can’t help but speak with full assurance.

~ Ajahn Mahā Boowa, ‘Straight From the Heart,’ pp 139-40, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

12.28) Now, when the mind has investigated time and again, ceaselessly, relentlessly, it will develop expertise in affairs of the khandhas. The physical khandhā will be the first to be relinquished through discernment [paññā]. In the beginning stage of the investigation, disc-ernment will see through physical khandhā before seeing through the others, and be able to let it go. From there, the mind will gradually be able to let go of vedanā, saññā, saṅkhāra and viññāṇa at the same time.

To put the matter simply, once discernment sees through them, it lets go. If it has yet to see through them, it holds on. Once we see through them with discernment, we let them go – let them go completely – because we see they are simply ripplings in the mind – blip, blip, blip – without any substance at all. A good thought appears and vanishes. A bad thought appears and vanishes. Whatever kind of thought appears, it’s simply a formation and as such it vanishes. If a hundred formations appear, all hundred of them vanish. There is no permanence to them substantial enough for us to trust.

So then. What is it that keeps supplying us with these things or keeps forcing them out on us? What is it that keeps forcing this thing and that out to fool us? This is where we come to what the Buddha calls the pabhāssara-citta: the original, radiant mind. “But monks, because of the admixture of defilement,” or “because of the defilements that come passing through” – from sights, sound, smells, tastes, tactile sensations; from rūpa, vedanā, saññā, saṅkhāra and viññāṇa, that our labels and assumptions haul in to burn us – “the mind becomes defiled.” It’s defiled with just these very things.

Thus investigation is for the sake of removing these things so as to reveal the mind through clear discernment. We can then see that as long as the mind is at the stage where it hasn’t ventured out to become engaged in any object – in as much as its instruments, the senses, are still weak and