The Island

250

sense bases] ... whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition ... that too he sees differently.

“When, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu knows and sees thus, ignorance is abandoned by him and true knowledge arises.”

~ S 35.80, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The non-clinging leading to release is not a blanket or indiscriminate letting go of everything. There needs to be discernment as to what is appropriate and what will facilitate the realization of the end of suffering. Ajahn Chah used the simile of purchasing a coconut to illustrate this point:

14.7) The Buddha says we must practise by letting go. It’s hard to understand this practice of letting go, isn’t it? If we let go, then we don’t practise, right? Because we’ve let go.

Suppose you went to buy some coconuts in the market, and while you were carrying them back someone asked why you bought them.

“I bought them to eat,” you say.

“Are you going to eat the shells as well? No? I don’t believe you! If you’re not going to eat the shells, then why did you buy them too?” Well, how are you going to answer? We practise with desire. If we didn’t have desire, we wouldn’t practise. Practising with desire is taṇhā. Contemplating in this way can give rise to wisdom, you know. As for those coconuts, of course you are not going to eat the shells. Then why do you take them? Because the time hasn’t yet come for you to throw them away. They’re useful for wrapping up the coconut. If, after eating the coconut, you throw the shells away, there is no problem.

Our practice is like this. When the Buddha instructs us not to act on desire, speak from desire, or walk or sit or eat with desire, he means we should do these things with detachment. It’s just like bringing coconuts from the market. We’re not going to eat the shells, but it’s not yet time to throw them away. The coconut milk, the husk, and the shell all come together; when we buy a coconut we buy the whole package. If somebody wants to accuse us of eating coconut shells that’s their business; we know what we’re doing. This is how the practice is.

~ Ven. Ajahn Chah, ‘Food for the Heart,’ pp 241-2