SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

319

‘It is possible that an ordinary person might treat something as self – there is such a possibility.’

“He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could deprive his mother of life – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: ‘It is possible that an ordinary person might deprive his mother of life – there is such a possibility.’ He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could deprive his father of life ... could deprive an arahant of life – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: ‘It is possible that an ordinary person might deprive his father of life ... might deprive an arahant of life – there is such a possibility.’ He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could, with a mind of hate, shed a Tathāgata’s blood – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: ‘It is possible that an ordinary person might, with a mind of hate, shed a Tathāgata’s blood – there is such a possibility.’ He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could cause a schism in the Sangha ... could acknowledge another teacher – there is no such possibility.’ And he understands: ‘It is possible that an ordinary person might cause a schism in the Sangha ... might acknowledge another teacher – there is

such a possibility.’”

~ M 115.12-13, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

The last section of the Eightfold Path (i.e. right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration) pertains to the practice of meditation. We will now briefly consider one aspect of this part of the training and its relationship to stream-entry.

In this following sutta, the Buddha points out that there is a possibility that sotāpannas might not be diligent or might be lax in their training at times. This is obviously not the standard that the Buddha encouraged, but it is helpful to recognize what the mind still harbouring defilements is capable of, so that it is not a source of discouragement and for the arousing of appropriate antidotes:

18.15) On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park. Then Nandiya the Sakyan approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him: