The Island

216

within and without, merit and harm. Wherever the centre of a thing lies, there lies its heart, for the word ‘heart’ means centrality.”

~ Ajahn Thate, ‘Only the World Ends,’ pp 47-49, (Jayasāro Bhikkhu trans.)

Following these two passages it seems very fitting to include another set of reflections on the same sutta. This teaching is from Ajahn Mahā Boowa – bearing in mind also that he is the devoted disciple of Ven. Ajahn Mun and would not dream of contradicting his teacher.

12.27) ‘The Radiant Mind Is Unawareness’

We’ll see – when the mind is cleansed so that it is fully pure and nothing can become involved with it – that no fear appears in the mind at all. Fear doesn’t appear. Courage doesn’t appear. All that appears is its own nature by itself, just its own timeless nature. That’s all. This is the genuine mind. ‘Genuine mind’ here refers only to the purity or the ‘sa upādisesa-nibbāna’ of the arahants. Nothing else can be called the ‘genuine mind’ without reservations or hesitations. I, for one, would feel embarrassed to use the term for anything else at all.

The ‘original mind’ means the original mind of the round in which the mind finds itself spinning around and about, as in the Buddha’s saying, “Monks, the original mind is radiant” – notice that – “but because of the admixture of defilements” or “because of the defilements which come passing through, it becomes darkened.”

The original mind here refers to the origin of conventional realities, not to the origin of purity. The Buddha uses the term ‘pabhāssaraṃ’ – ‘pabhāssaramidaṃ cittaṃ bhikkhave’ – which means radiant. It doesn’t mean pure. The way he puts it is absolutely right. There is no way you can fault it. Had he said that the original mind is pure, you could immediately take issue: “If the mind is pure, why is it born? Those who have purified their minds are never reborn. If the mind is already pure, why purify it?” Right here is where you could take issue. What reason would there be to purify it? If the mind is radiant, you can purify it because its radiance is unawareness [avijjā] incarnate, and nothing else. Meditators will see clearly for themselves the moment the mind passes from radiance to mental release: Radiance will no longer appear. Right