KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

203

into the selfless nature of phenomena. The signless liberation of mind is harder to pinpoint in terms of a familiar doctrinal category; however, its characteristics seem to align it with nippapañca (freedom from conceptual proliferation) and the quality of Atammayatā – the non-fabricating faculty of the mind. It is that which is restraining the tendency to conceive the world in terms of fixed and separate names, forms and things, and which leads from there to liberation. The ancient commentary describes it as being supramundane with Nibbāna as its object. It is thus identified with arahantship; the first three, although all exalted states, all pertain to the mundane level.

Probably the most familiar statement in the scriptures concerning signless concentration, as well as its most poignant instance, was spoken by the Buddha a few months before the Parinibbāna.

12.12) “Ānanda, I am now old, worn out, venerable, one who has traversed life’s path, I have reached the term of life, which is eighty. Just as an old cart is made to go by being held together with straps, so the Tathāgata’s body is kept going by being strapped up. It is only when the Tathāgata withdraws his attention from outward signs, and by the cessation of certain feelings, enters into the signless concentration of mind, that his body knows comfort.”

~ D 16.2.25

A similar, if not identical, grouping of types of liberation (vimokkhā) is to be found in the Visuddhimagga, relating the manner in which each of the familiar Three Characteristics should be handled and the type of release resulting from

that effort.

12.13) With great resolution there is the contemplation of impermanence; this leads to liberation through signlessness (animittā-vimokkhā).

With great tranquility there is the contemplation of unsatisfactoriness; this leads to liberation through desirelessness (appaṇihita-vimokkhā).

With great wisdom there is the contemplation of selflessness; this leads to liberation through emptiness (suññatā-vimokkhā).

~ Vsm 21.70

In contrast to the previous two discourses, in this next one (which arguably