The Island

126

which people rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing and realizing it for himself in the here and now. He knew: Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is no more coming into any state of being. And thus Ven. Anuruddha became another one of the arahants.

~ A 3.128

There are many such delightful and pithy vignettes in the Pali Canon – the simplicity and directness of the exchange between two companions in the holy life; the apparently affectionate and ironic demolition of the pride and anxiety in relation to achievements that the average spiritual aspirant might be pleased even to approach; the direct and practical pointing out of the path – all these elements are present in this brief account.

Probably most significant to the theme of this investigation is the process of turning away from even the most exalted domains of the conditioned realm. Ven. Sāriputta’s unerring acuity of vision has discerned that, even though his friend’s meditation has been bringing some spectacular results (Ven. Anuruddha was later to be named by the Buddha as the one most accomplished in seeing into other realms of existence), he has been missing the crucial and liberating element: the presence of the Unconditioned. To enable his friend’s attention to make this radical shift of view, Ven. Sāriputta employs the tactic of naming the ways in which his mind is misapprehending, and identifying with these experiences. He also, it seems, is defining the three problems that Ven. Anuruddha is beset with in terms of the final three of the Ten Fetters (saṃyojanā): the fetters of conceit (asmi-māna), restlessness (uddhacca) and ignorance (avijjā).

This last of the three might be debatable as a parallel for ‘anxiety’ (the Pali word in the text here is kukkuccasmiṃ), however, as Ven. Anuruddha is clearly close to the final realization of arahantship, these three particular elements would necessarily need to be seen and overcome for his heart’s liberation to occur. His brother in the holy life is merely pointing out to him that the ‘I’ that keeps appearing in his thoughts about those two achievements, and the lack of the third achievement, has been obscuring the Deathless element and has actually been the stumbling block obstructing the path.

It is also worthy of note that the wording of the Ven. Sāriputta’s advice implies that it is just a change of perspective, a different locus of attention that is needed, not a scrapping of all that has gone before. A simple analogy is the refocusing of the