The Island

138

also in dukkhanirodha, the third of the Noble Truths) means the non-arising, or non-existence, of something because the cause of its arising is done away with. For example, the phrase “when avijjā is nirodha, saṅkhārā are also nirodha,” which is usually taken to mean, “with the cessation of ignorance, volitional impulses cease,” in fact means that “when there is no ignorance, or no arising of ignorance, or when there is no longer any problem with ignorance, there are no volitional impulses, volitional impulses do not arise, or there is no longer any problem from volitional impulses.” It does not mean that ignorance already arisen must be done away with before the volitional impulses which have already arisen will also be done away with.

Where nirodha should be rendered as cessation is when it is used in reference to the natural way of things, or the nature of compounded things. In this sense it is a synonym for the words ‘bhaṅga,’ breaking up, anicca (transient), khaya (cessation) or vaya (decay). For example, in the Pali it is given: imaṃ kho bhikkhave tisso vedanā aniccā saṅkhatā paṭiccasamuppannā khayadhammā vayadhammā virāgadhammā nirodhadhammā – “Monks, these three kinds of feeling are naturally impermanent, compounded, dependently arisen, transient, subject to decay, dissolution, fading and cessation.” (All of the factors occurring in the Dependent Origination cycle have the same nature.) In this instance, the meaning is “all conditioned things (saṅkhārā), having arisen, must inevitably decay and fade according to supporting factors.” There is no need to try to stop them, they cease of themselves. Here the intention is to describe a natural condition which, in terms of practice, simply means “that which arises can be done away with.”

As for nirodha in the third Noble Truth (or the Dependent Origination cycle in cessation mode), although it also describes a natural process, its emphasis is on practical considerations. It is translated in two ways in the Visuddhimagga. One way traces the etymology to ‘ni’ (without) + ‘rodha’ (prison, confine, obstacle, wall, impediment), thus rendering the meaning as ‘without impediment,’ ‘free of confinement.’ This is explained as ‘free of impediments, that is, the confinement of saṃsāra.’ Another definition traces the origin to ‘anuppāda,’ meaning ‘not arising,’ and goes on to say ‘nirodha here does not mean bhaṅga, breaking up and dissolution.’