The Island

66

When, Bāhiya, there is no ‘you’

in connection with that,

there is no ‘you’ there.

When, Bāhiya, there is no ‘you’ there,

then, Bāhiya, you are neither here

nor there

nor in between the two.

This, just this, is the end of suffering.

~ Ud 1.10

Bāhiya realized full enlightenment even as he heard the few words of this teaching, kneeling in the dust and clamour of Sāvatthī that morning; and furthermore, true to his own sense of the fragile nature of existence, moments later he was impaled by a runaway cow and breathed his last.

It was customary of the Buddha to honour those of his disciples who excelled in particular ways, for example: Sāriputta was declared by him to be the keenest in wisdom, Dhammadinna as the nun most skilled in expounding on the Dhamma – and to Bāhiya he (posthumously) accorded the honour of being the one to gain the swiftest full understanding of his teaching.

This instruction to Bāhiya bears a close relation to the Kālakārāma Sutta, A 4.24, (at §6.8) and is well worth contemplating in connection with that teaching. In addition this discourse to Bāhiya, particularly in its references to non-locality, is comparable to Ud 8.1 (at §9.2), while it also has resonances with the brief comment made by Ajahn Mahā Boowa, included at §9.1. This abandonment of subject/object dualities is largely contingent upon the correct apprehension of the perceptual process, and thus the breaking down of the apparent inside/outside dichotomy of the observer and the observed.

3.7) A bhikkhu should so investigate that, as he investigates, his consciousness is not distracted and diffused externally, and internally is not fixed, and by not grasping anything he should remain undisturbed. If his consciousness is ... undisturbed, then there is no coming into existence of birth, ageing, death and suffering.

~ Iti 94

This passage is comparable to one spoken in reference to the nun Jaṭilā Bhāgikā, A 9.37, (included at §7.7). It is also reminiscent of the following commentary on