The Island

186

been reborn in hell; this person has been reborn as an animal; this person has been reborn as a ghost; this is the skull of a person who has been reborn in the human world.”

The brahmins thought to themselves, “We can use this man to prey upon the world.” So clothing him in two red robes, they took him about the country with them, saying to everyone they met, “This brahmin Vaṅgīsa can tell by rapping on the skulls of dead people in which of the states of existence they have been reborn; ask him to tell you in which of the states of existence your own kinsmen have been reborn.” People would give him ten pieces of money or twenty or a hundred according to their several means, and would ask him in which of the states of existence their kinsmen had been reborn.

After travelling from place to place, they finally reached Sāvatthī and took up their abode near the Jetavāna. After breakfast they saw throngs of people going with perfumes, garlands, and the like in their hands to hear the Dhamma. “Where are you going?” they asked. “To the monastery to hear the Dhamma,” was the reply. “What will you gain by going there?” asked the brahmins,

“There is nobody like our fellow-brahmin Vaṅgīsa. He can tell by rapping on the skulls of dead people in which of the states of existence they have been reborn. Just ask him in which of the states of existence your own kinsmen have been reborn.”

“What does Vaṅgīsa know!” replied the disciples, “There is no one like our teacher.” But the brahmins retorted, “There is no one like Vaṅgīsa,” and the dispute waxed hot. Finally the disciples said, “Come now, let us go find out which of the two knows the more, your Vaṅgīsa or our teacher.” So taking the brahmins with them, they went to the monastery.

The Teacher, knowing that they were on their way, procured and placed in a row five skulls, one each of people who had been reborn in the four states of existence: hell, the animal world, the human world, and the worlds of the gods; and one skull belonging to a person who had attained arahantship. When they arrived, he asked Vaṅgīsa, “Are you the man of whom it is said that by rapping on the skulls of dead people you can tell in which of the states of existence they have been reborn?” – “Yes,” said Vaṅgīsa. “Then whose is this skull?” Vaṅgīsa rapped on the skull and said, “This is the skull of a person who has been reborn in hell.” – “Good, good!” exclaimed the