SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

311

Having established oneself in the Noble Eightfold Path as described by Sāriputta in §16.8 and entered the stream, the knot of clinging to the fetters unravels. The sotāpanna is steeped in this Path, lives according to it, and is unwavering in commitment to it.

The Path begins with the elements of wisdom – that is, right view and right intention, and here would be a good opportunity to bring forward some examples of this commitment in order to illustrate how the wisdom aspects are a result of entering the stream.

18.9) Bhikkhus, suppose there were a seafaring ship bound with rigging that had been worn out in the water for six months. It would be hauled up on dry land during the cold season and its rigging would be further attacked by wind and sun. Inundated by rain from a rain cloud, the rigging would easily collapse and rot away. So too, when a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path, his fetters easily collapse and rot away.

And how is this so? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops right view ... right concentration, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release. It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path so that his fetters easily collapse and rot away.

~ S 45.158, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

18.10) Bhikkhus, suppose there is a guest house. People come from the east, west, north, and south and lodge there; khattiyas, brahmins, vessas, and suddas come and lodge there. So too, when a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path, he fully understands by direct knowledge those things that are to be fully understood by direct knowledge; he abandons by direct knowledge those things that are to be abandoned by direct knowledge; he realizes by direct knowledge those things that are to be realized by direct knowledge; he develops by direct knowledge those things that are to be developed by direct knowledge.

And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be fully understood by direct knowledge? It should be said: the five aggregates subject to clinging. What five? The form aggregate subject to clinging ... the consciousness aggregate subject to clinging. These are the things to be fully understood by direct knowledge.