ATTENDING TO THE DEATHLESS

131

the shining Sea,’ etc. and such language plainly endeavours to represent a gravitation of the heart towards Truth, an aspiration that is intuitive to the human condition. Thus it would be easy to read the statements on ‘merging’ as a similar kind of spiritual ‘return’ or ‘union.’ However, the Buddha expended considerable effort to counteract this model and very carefully pointed out, in numerous teachings, that all these types of expression are subtly rooted in wrong view, for example:

7.10) “Having directly known that which is not commensurate with the allness of All, I did not claim to be All, I did not claim to be in All, I did not claim to be apart from All, I did not claim All to be ‘mine,’ I did not affirm All.”

~ M 49.23

7.11) “They perceive All as All. Having perceived All as All, they conceive [themselves as] All, they conceive [themselves] in All, they conceive [themselves] apart (or coming) from All, they conceive All to be ‘theirs,’ they delight in All. Why is that? Because they have not fully understood it, I say.”

~ M 1.25

This latter passage expresses some of the kinds of view that he criticized as ‘eternalist’ and thus one of the extremes to be avoided. The Buddha insistently spoke of the Middle Way as the path to freedom and peace, therefore it is most helpful to keep returning to that principle as the primal guide – just as in a tightrope walk, there is both the constant danger of tilting too far to the left or the right, and the need for a relaxed yet alert attention to minor fluctuations of balance.

It is a pronounced human tendency to lean toward either eternalism or nihilism, pushing ahead or holding back; the Buddha’s teaching is unsurpassed in both analysing and providing genuine means for counteracting such tendencies.

Perhaps the clearest expression of this problem, and its antidote, that has come down to us in the Suttas is found at Iti 49 (§5.30); it is also touched on at Ud 3.10 (§§1.7, 4.1, 5.19) and most significantly at S 12.15 (§5.32).

When one reflects on the language the Buddha uses to express this principle of merging with the Deathless and meshes it with his statements about the All, one can see that the image of the relationship of habitual sense perceptions (the All) to the