“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

79

“The universe is eternal – only this is true, everything else is wrong. This is the view I hold.”

Another wanderer stated to Anāthapiṇḍika: “The universe is not eternal – only this is true, everything else is wrong. This is the

view I hold.”

Another wanderer stated: “The universe is finite ... The universe is infinite ... The self and the body are the same ... The self is one thing and the body another ... After death a Tathāgata exists ... After death a Tathāgata does not exist ... After death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist ... After death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist – only this is true, everything else is wrong. This is the view I hold.”

When this had all been said, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika said to the wanderers, “As for the venerable one who says: ‘The universe is eternal – only this is true, everything else is wrong. This is the view I hold’ – this view has arisen from his own unwise consideration or in dependence on the words of another. Now, this view has been brought into being, is fabricated, volitionally produced and has originated dependent on causes. Whatever has been brought into being, is fabricated, volitionally produced and is dependently originated, that is transient and uncertain, and whatever is transient and uncertain is unsatisfactory. Thus this venerable one adheres to that which is intrinsically unsatisfactory, he commits himself to dissatisfaction.”

Anāthapiṇḍika then proceeds to treat the rest of these ten classical philosophical positions in the same way.

When this had been said, the wanderers said to the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, “We have all expounded our views, each according to our own perspective. Now tell us what views you hold.”

“‘Whatever has been brought into being, is fabricated, volitionally produced and is dependently originated, that is transient and uncertain, and whatever is transient and uncertain is unsatisfactory. That which is unsatisfactory does not belong to me, is not what I am, it is not my self.’ This is the view I hold.”

“Householder, your belief that: ‘whatever has been brought into being, is fabricated, volitionally produced and is dependently