“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

77

One of the messages that repeatedly comes through these teachings concerns the emotional results of fully comprehending conditioned reality. Again and again it is the true seeing of instability, unsatisfactoriness and the emptiness of all things that leads to disenchantment with and dispassion toward the realm of the senses, the thinking mind and even to refined states of consciousness.

With the enchantment broken, the attitude radically shifts and the heart changes, there is a natural turning away from the conditioned, the born and the dying. For many, it is this more emotive response to clearly seeing conditioned reality that provides the impetus to set it all down, thus leading to the possibility of realizing the Unconditioned.

Reflection on these limitations of conditionality is a recurrent theme in another of the highly significant suttas of the Majjhima Nikāya, the Pañcattaya Sutta. This discourse describes how the nature of experience is wisely analysed in meditation, in order to see clearly and abandon all subtle and gross forms of clinging. The Buddha’s description of tracking “the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger and the escape in the case of the six bases of sense-contact,” is a very pithy synopsis of the process of insight meditation.

4.7) “Whether [based on] perceptions of form or of the formless, of the limited or of the immeasurable – some assert the base of nothingness, immeasurable and impeturbable, [to be the self]. However, all that is conditioned and thus gross, but there is cessation of formations. Having known ‘There is this,’ and seeing the escape from it all, the Tathāgata has gone beyond it.”

This formula is then repeated with respect to a wide variety of speculative views: three more on the nature of the self after death, sixteen on the relationship of the self and the world, and a final four on the misapprehension of Nibbāna here and now. All of these paragraphs conclude with the same refrain:

“All that is conditioned and thus gross, but there is cessation of formations. Having known ‘There is this,’ and seeing the escape from it all, the Tathāgata has gone beyond it.”