SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT I

291

16.19) Bhikkhus, dwell possessed of virtue, possessed of the Pāṭimokkha, restrained with the restraint of the Pāṭimokkha, perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, train by undertaking the training precepts.

If a bhikkhu should wish: “May I be dear and agreeable to my companions in the holy life, respected and esteemed by them,” let him fulfill the precepts, be devoted to internal serenity of mind, not neglect meditation, be possessed of insight, and dwell in empty huts.

The Buddha then continues to describe various ways in which the precepts bring benefit, such as being a source of merit for those who give support, relinquishing unwholesome mental qualities, entering the jhānas, and many other higher attainments including:

If a bhikkhu should wish: “May I, with the destruction of three fetters, become a stream-enterer, no longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment,” let him fulfil the precepts, be devoted to internal serenity of mind, not neglect meditaton, be possessed of insight, and dwell in empty huts.

~ M 6.2-3 & .11, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

This next passage is an example of the results of not practising in accordance with the Dhamma. King Ajātasattu was obstructed in his ability to realize stream-entry even when listening to Dhamma directly from the Buddha, due to his being a parricide. “His fate is sealed” means that due to his actions he is irreconcilably destined to a very long stay in the lowest hell realm.

16.20) Then King Ajātasattu, rejoicing and delighting at these words, rose from his seat, saluted the Lord, and departed with his right side towards him.

As soon as the King had gone, the Lord said: “The King is done for, his fate is sealed, monks! But if the King had not deprived his father, that good man and just king, of his life, then as he sat here the pure and spotless Dhamma-eye would have arisen in him.”

~ D 2.101-2, (Maurice Walshe trans.)