“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

69

Self-Awakened One: all that preparation and then... was it going to be impossible to point out the Way to anyone else?

Fortunately, intervention and imploring by the brahmā god Sahampati caused the Buddha to try teaching “those with but a little dust in their eyes,” and the world inherited these profound and liberating teachings as a result.

However, the Buddha’s hesitancy is a salutary reflection on the task at hand for those who aspire to the unshakeable freedom of the heart. The conditioned realm is multilayered, multifaceted, subtle, awesome, colourful, compelling, inspiring, frightening, irritating and generally very convincing with regards to its substantiality, meaning and value.

The teachings we will look at here are confined to the area which is both most fundamental and most subtle, the unsatisfactoriness inherent in the compounded, conditioned, dependent nature of the mental and physical world. This is not because it is the only aspect worth investigating but more that it is the root of the issue. If we can understand this essential quality of the conditioned realm and how it functions, and then learn how to break the enchantment, we have fulfilled the first half of the task of liberation.

The following passages come from two eminent, contemporary commentators: Ven. Bhikkhu Payutto, a Thai monk and author of the encyclopedic commentary ‘Buddhadhamma,’ from which this quotation is taken; and His Holiness the Dalai Lama – his words here are taken from a session of teachings on the Four Noble Truths, given at the Barbican, London, in 1996.

In both instances the authors have already referred to the first two types of dukkha: dukkha-dukkha – the suffering of painful feelings; and vipariṇāmadukkha – the unsatisfactoriness inherent in the experience of change. The third type, discussed below, is the most refined of the three.

4.2) Saṅkhāra-dukkhatā: the suffering which is inherent within all saṅkhāra, all things which arise from determinants; specifically, the five khandhas. This refers to the subjection of all conditioned things to the contrary forces of birth and dissolution, how they are not perfect within themselves but exist only as part of the cause and effect continuum. As such, they are likely to cause suffering (that is, the feeling of suffering, or dukkhadukkhatā) whenever there is inflexible craving and clinging to them through ignorance (avijjā-taṇhā-upādāna).

The most important kind of suffering is the third kind, which describes