KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

209

“Therefore, Dhammadinna, you should train yourselves thus: ‘From time to time we will enter and dwell upon those discourses spoken by the Tathāgata that are deep, deep in meaning, supramundane, dealing with emptiness.’ It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.”

“Venerable sir, it is not easy for us – dwelling in a home crowded with children, enjoying Kāsian sandalwood, wearing garlands, scents, and cosmetics, receiving gold and silver – from time to time to enter and dwell upon those discourses spoken by the Tathāgata that are deep, deep in meaning, supramundane, dealing with emptiness. As we are established in the five training rules, let the Blessed One teach us the Dhamma further.”

“Therefore, Dhammadinna, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will possess confirmed confidence in the Buddha ... in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... We will possess the virtues dear to the noble ones,

unbroken ... leading to concentration.’ It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.”

“Venerable sir, as to these four factors of stream-entry taught by the Blessed One, these things exist in us, and we live in conformity with those things. For, venerable sir, we possess confirmed confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. We possess the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken ... leading to concentration.”

“It is a gain for you, Dhammadinna! It is well gained by you, Dhammadinna! You have declared the fruit of stream-entry.”

~ S 55.53, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

One of the most common ways in which the Buddha employed the concept of emptiness in his expositions was in reference to wise consideration of the

five khandhas.

12.17) On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Ayojjhā on the bank of the river Ganges. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

“Bhikkhus, suppose that this river Ganges was carrying along a great lump of foam. A person with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to them to be empty, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a lump of foam?