THE UNAPPREHENDABILITY OF THE ENLIGHTENED

175

UNESCO launched a restoration campaign and the vast complex has since been repaired and returned to something of its original glory.

During the course of excavations the great stūpa at the crown was opened and entered. Its interior revealed that it too had a Buddha image inside but when it was examined closely it was found to have a strange, altogether unique feature: one of the hands was unformed and seemed to meld into the leg upon which it rested; in several places raw rock seemed to interplay with the living being who was represented there. The initial supposition was that the image was unfinished and maybe was installed “in a hurry,” for some undefined reason. One would have thought that a thousand years or so would have given plenty of time to replace it or finish it, if that was what was intended. Instead the hidden, half-defined image seems to fit perfectly the theme of ascent of the holy mountain being unified with increasing unapprehendability: the higher you go the more impressive yet the more out-of-reach the Buddha principle becomes. The walled-in nature of the ultimate image and its half-emergence from the virgin stone: Is he here? Is he gone? What is he? – expresses well the ‘deep, immeasurable, hard to fathom, untraceable, unapprehendable’ nature of the Tathāgata.

It is also worthy of note that such a principle has not solely been the province of Buddhist thought and expression. There are also strong traditions of ‘non-representation’ in both Judaism and Islam. Both of these theistic religious forms, particularly in their more orthodox expressions, absolutely forbid the depiction of God in physical form.

The name of God is considered to be unutterable – to be pronounced but once a year by the high priest alone in the holy of holies, in the case of Judaism. In some Jewish writing the form ‘G – d’ is used, or ‘Y – – h’ to resonate that same respectful prohibition. The unique and dazzling artistic forms of calligraphy and geometric patterns employed in Islamic tradition arose because, for some lineages, not only is God not to be represented in physical form but also via any living creation – thus only abstract forms can be used in their religious artwork.

The principle is also found within the Christian tradition, particularly among the mystics and contemplatives; for example:

10.16) When we give a thing a name we imagine we have got hold of it. We imagine that we have got hold of being. Perhaps we should do better not to flatter ourselves too soon that we can name God.

~ Gregory of Nyssa