SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT III

305

rich tradition of exploring religious ideas and practices. But even there, any person who had developed the clear seeing that culminates in entering the stream was able to put aside the whole realm of philosophical speculation and superstitious belief that often dominates the religious landscape. This next sutta is an example of the many types of views, from the Buddha’s time, that the sotāpanna would abandon. Although some of the beliefs recounted here might sound quaint to our ears, we in the twenty-first century West have our own array of misguided beliefs which are just as entangling.

18.4) At Sāvatthī. “Bhikkhus, when what exists, by clinging to what, by adhering to what, does such a view as this arise: ‘The winds do not blow, the rivers do not flow, pregnant women do not give birth, the moon and sun do not rise and set but stand as steady as a pillar’?”

“Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their resort. It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it.”

“When there is form, bhikkhus, by clinging to form, by adhering to form, such a view as this arises: ‘The winds do not blow ... but stand as steady as a pillar.’ When there is feeling ... perception ... volitional formations ... consciousness, by clinging to consciousness, by adhering to consciousness, such a view as this arises: ‘The winds do not blow ... but stand as steady as a pillar.’

“What do you think, bhikkhus, is form permanent or impermanent? ... Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, venerable sir.”

“But without clinging to what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, could such a view as that arise?”

“No, venerable sir.”

“That which is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, and ranged over by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, venerable sir.”

“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”

“Suffering, venerable sir.”

“But without clinging to what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, could such a view as that arise?”