“AH, WHAT BLISS!”

339

When a plant brings forth good and sweet fruit, it can bring satisfaction and sustenance for us and for others as well. Similarly, Nibbāna is the sweetest and most nourishing of spiritual fruits: something that brings true happiness to the person who realizes it – as well as to the world.

Although, on a certain level, Nibbāna is beyond all categorization, either positive or negative, the mind still needs something positive to inspire or motivate it. The Buddha recognized this in his teachings on the four iddhipāda – the four paths to accomplishment (sometimes translated as ‘the four bases for success’). This is one of the groups of dhammas in the thirty-seven Bodhipakkhiyadhammas, the qualities conducive to enlightenment.

The first factor is chanda, which is aspiration, desire, or motivation. Nibbāna is as it is and the practitioner’s task is to arouse the motivation to make the effort to realize Nibbāna for him or herself. In this last short chapter, we will consider some of the ‘positive’ aspects of Nibbāna that can inspire faith as a condition for motivation and effort, thus laying the basis for realizing Nibbāna and bringing blessings into the world.

Having faith and confidence in something naturally draws us toward it; when we have no faith or confidence, there is little or no sense of attraction. Sometimes, people shrink back from Nibbāna, viewing it as a source of loss or a blankness, and so feel little faith or confidence in it. This point is mentioned in the biography of Ajahn Mun:

20.2) The trouble is, most people react to talk about Nibbāna by feeling oddly dejected and dismayed. It doesn’t put them in a good mood as does talk about worldly matters. Having no personal experience of Nibbāna, they probably think that it’s not as enjoyable as the humdrum things they are accustomed to. Not only has the present generation lost interest in Nibbāna – even our parents and grandparents were not much interested, nor did they encourage others to take an interest. At most, they may have encouraged their family ... to do meditation practice to calm them down a bit and keep their behaviour within acceptable limits. Of course, one way or another they did manage to advise their family and friends to do just about everything else, until fed up with hearing their advice, most people no longer bothered to take it.

Undoubtedly, most people have already decided that Nibbāna must be a very silent place, there being no music or entertainment and no one to