KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

207

out, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming into any state of being.’

“He understands thus: ‘Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the outflow of sensual desire, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the outflow of becoming, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the outflow of ignorance, those are not present here. There is present here only this amount of disturbance, namely, that connected with the six sense bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’ He understands: ‘This field of perception is empty of the outflow of sensual desire; this field of perception is empty of the outflow of becoming; this field of perception is empty of the outflow of ignorance. There is present only this non-emptiness, namely, that connected with the six sense bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’ Thus he regards it as empty of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’ Thus, Ānanda, this is his genuine, undistorted pure entry into emptiness, supreme and unsurpassed.

“Ānanda, whatever samaṇas and brahmins in the past ... future ... [or] present enter upon and abide in pure, supreme, unsurpassed emptiness, all enter upon and abide in this same, pure, supreme, unsurpassed emptiness. Therefore, Ānanda, you should train thus: ‘We will enter upon and abide in pure, supreme, unsurpassed emptiness.’”

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.

~ M 121

This is an extensive teaching, with many aspects of meditation practice subsumed within it. As the aim of this section of the book is principally to explore some of the terrain and to map out the main characteristics of Nibbāna, we will leave it to the final section on Cultivation and Fruition to describe the practical side of developing methods of meditation akin to that described here.

Even though emptiness was not the most frequent subject of the Buddha’s teachings, it was plainly one that he saw to be of great importance. The following passages indicate the profound and essential quality that the Buddha saw in the