“ALL THAT IS CONDITIONED...”

81

Really they are all conditions. When we know the truth of conditions we know the truth of the conventions. When we know conditions as neither ourselves nor belonging to us, we let go of conditions and conventions. When we let go of conditions we attain the Dhamma, we enter into and

realize the Dhamma.

When we attain the Dhamma we know clearly. What do we know? We know that there are only conditions and conventions, no self, no ‘us’ no ‘them.’ This is knowledge of the way things are. Seeing in this way the mind transcends things. The body may grow old, get sick and die, but the mind transcends this state.

When the mind transcends conditions, it knows the unconditioned. The mind becomes the unconditioned, the state which no longer contains conditioning factors. The mind is no longer conditioned by the concerns of the world, conditions no longer contaminate the mind. Pleasure and pain no longer affect it. Nothing can affect the mind or change it, the mind is assured, it has escaped all constructions. Seeing the true nature of conditions and the determined, the mind

becomes free.

This freed mind is called the unconditioned, that which is beyond the power of constructing influences. If the mind doesn’t really know conditions and determinations, it is moved by them. Encountering good, bad, pleasure or pain, it proliferates about them. Why does it proliferate? Because there is still a cause. What is the cause? The cause is the understanding that the body is one’s self or belongs to the self; that feelings are self or belonging to self; that perception is self or belonging to self; that conceptual thought is self or belonging to self; that consciousness is self or belonging to self. The tendency to conceive things in terms of self is the source of happiness, suffering, birth, old age, sickness and death. This is the worldly mind, spinning around and changing at the directives of worldly conditions. This is the

conditioned mind.

The reason you can’t see these things in line with the truth is because you keep believing the untrue. It’s like being guided by a blind person. How can you travel in safety? A blind person will only lead you into forests and thickets. How could they lead you to safety when