The Island

184

Why have I declared this? Because it is beneficial, it belongs to the fundamentals of the holy life, it leads to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna. That is why I have declared it.

~ M 63.7-9

One of the greatest of all the Buddha’s instructional dialogues opens with the wanderer Vacchagotta asking the Buddha the standard list of ten philosophical questions (previously, at §4.8). The Buddha responds to each of the ten questions by saying, “I do not hold that view.” Vacchagotta is frustrated by this and asks:

11.2) “Then does Master Gotama hold any speculative view at all?”

“Vaccha, ‘speculative view’ is something with which the Tathāgata has nothing whatsoever to do ... with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up and relinquishing of all conceivings, all excogitations, all I-making, mine-making and the underlying tendency to conceit, the Tathāgata is liberated through not clinging.”

“But, Master Gotama, a bhikkhu whose mind is thus liberated: Where does he reappear [after death]?”

“‘Reappear,’ Vaccha, does not apply.”

“In that case, Master Gotama, he does not reappear.”

“‘Does not reappear,’ Vaccha, does not apply.”

“... both does and does not reappear.”

“... does not apply.’

“... neither does nor does not reappear.”

“... does not apply.”

“Here I am bewildered, Master Gotama, here I am confused. The small degree of understanding which had come from our earlier conversations has now disappeared.”

“Certainly you are bewildered, Vaccha. Certainly you are confused. This Dhamma is deep, Vaccha; it is hard to see and hard to understand, peaceful, sublime and beyond the scope of mere reasoning, subtle, only to be experienced by the wise. It is difficult for those with other views, who follow other teachings, other aims and other teachers to understand.

“As this is so, I will ask you some questions. Please answer them as you like. What do you think, Vaccha, suppose a fire were burning in front of you, would you know that, ‘There is a fire burning in front of me’?”