The Island

330

This next sutta is a striking case of the extraordinary gain that comes through relinquishing doubt as to what is a true refuge. People who only knew Sarakāni socially thought he was a wastrel and a drunkard, but through the criterion of faith or conviction, and being established in the inclination to right view, he is saved from the fate normally assumed for such a person. Even if it is right at the end, as in this case – he accomplished it at the moment of death – this change of heart is a tremendous gain because it protects one from descending into the lower realms.

This passage also underlines the importance of the death moment and the potency of seizing the opportunity it still offers for establishing oneself in Dhamma rather than being distracted by the defilements of grief, worry, or fear. There is also a very human element in this sutta, in that the various Sakyans are dubious about the Buddha’s statement and are willing to criticize him. This discourse also shows us that the faculties for realizing sotāpanna are not so unattainable that they exclude all but those who are exceptionally wise.

19.9) At Kapilavatthu. Now on that occasion Sarakāni the Sakyan had died, and the Blessed One had declared him to be a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the nether world, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as his destination. Thereupon a number of Sakyans, having met and assembled, deplored this, grumbled, and complained about it, saying: “It is wonderful indeed, sir! It is amazing indeed, sir! Now who here won’t be a stream-enterer when the Blessed One has declared Sarakāni the Sakyan after he died to be a stream-enterer ... with enlightenment as his destination? Sarakāni the Sakyan was too weak for the training; he drank intoxicating drink!”

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and reported this matter to him. [The Blessed One said:]

“Mahānāma, when a lay follower has gone for refuge over a long time to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, how could he go to the nether world? For if one speaking rightly were to say of anyone: ‘He was a lay follower who had gone for refuge over a long time to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha,’ it is of Sarakāni the Sakyan that one could rightly say this. Mahānāma, Sarakāni the Sakyan had gone for refuge over a long time to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, so how could he go to the nether world?