The Island

106

5.28) “Master Gotama, my doctrine and view is this: ‘Nothing is acceptable to me.’”

“This view of yours, Aggivessana, ‘Nothing is acceptable to me’ –

is not at least that view acceptable to you?”

“If this view of mine were acceptable to me, Master Gotama, it would all be the same, it would all be the same.”

One can almost see the dusty, long-nailed and dreadlocked fellow wagging his head and looking at the floor, there in the Boar’s Cave on Vulture Peak. After a few explanatory sentences the Buddha then says:

“Aggivessana, there are some samaṇas and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this: ‘Everything is acceptable to me.’ There are some samaṇas and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this: ‘Nothing is acceptable to me.’ ... Among these, the view of those samaṇas and brahmins whose doctrine and view is ‘Everything is acceptable to me,’ is close to lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to holding, close to clinging. The view of those samaṇas and brahmins whose doctrine and view is ‘Nothing is acceptable to me,’ is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging.”

When this was said, the wanderer Dīghanakha remarked: “Master Gotama commends my view! Master Gotama commends my view!”

~ M 74.2-5

The Buddha, however, then disabuses Dīghanakha of the idea that he’s totally in the right; he goes on to point out how clinging to views inevitably causes conflict. He then describes a process of meditation on feeling that will lead to liberation. While listening to this discourse Dīghanakha realized stream-entry.

Meanwhile, the Ven. Sāriputta, who had been ordained as a disciple of the Buddha for a fortnight at this point and was standing behind his seat fanning him, realized complete enlightenment then and there.

In another discourse the Buddha employs a memorable image to describe the limiting nature of nihilistic attitudes and how aversion can be just as strong a bond as attraction: