The Island

296

This would also result in a direct understanding of dependent arising: that is of a reality not of things existing in a void, but a dynamic of forces, currents and tendencies. There is no void. The ‘unconditioned dhamma’ some texts allude to is the experience of an awareness that doesn’t support or give rise to conditions.

Seeing the true nature of phenomena in this way with penetrative insight opens the heart to seeing beyond the phenomena to knowledge of liberation.

17.4) First, Susīma, comes knowledge of the stability of the Dhamma, afterwards knowledge of Nibbāna.

~ S 12.70, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Human life is often characterized by the uncertainty of what is ‘truly’ good or ‘truly’ right. There are many pundits and experts willing to expound their views, and many people are willing to try to believe them, but, still ... doubts linger. Stream-enterers have gained confidence in the Buddha’s doctrine not because they are trying to believe, or are forced to believe, but because they have seen for themselves. The independence and freedom of not having to rely on others is precious. It is not arrived at through a stubborn and rigid upholding of a view or position, but through a clear penetration of direct experience through the light of discernment.

In order for the mind to penetrate truth, seeing will accord with right view. The view in accordance with Dhamma is the dominant factor in facilitating a clear penetration. The Buddha praises and encourages right view in many places in the Canon. Here is just one example.

17.5) Bhikkhus, suppose a spike of rice or a spike of barley were rightly directed and were pressed upon by the hand or the foot. That it could pierce the hand or the foot and draw blood: this is possible. For what reason? Because the spike is rightly directed. So too, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu with a rightly directed view, with a rightly directed development of the path, could pierce ignorance, arouse true knowledge, and realize Nibbāna: this is possible. For what reason? Because his view

is rightly directed.