The Island

248

Those knowing this, mindful,

fully unbound

in the here & now,

are forever calmed,

have crossed over beyond

entanglement in the world.

~ SN 1086-7, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

A central part of the direct path of the Buddha is ‘letting go’ or ‘not clinging.’ This is something we must do in the present and recognize the result in the here and now. The degree to which we are able to let go, together with the correctness or appropriateness of that letting go, is what will determine its effect. When we ‘let go’ of goodness and virtue, as in just dropping or neglecting them, that would tend to create more suffering and problems. When we let go of our destructive habits in a skillful way, it has a very different effect. Letting go of subtle obstructions has a more refined result.

To continue with the image of the continental shelf of India – its gradual slope, then its sharp dropping off – there is a need to be laying the gradual foundation of practice firmly and to sharpen our discernment continually by monitoring our progress, but there is also a need to be looking for the point of letting go that leads to penetration.

The Buddha continually pointed to wisdom as the central factor of the path. This underlies the training, as well as modulating the training so that it bears fruit in release. The Noble Eightfold Path begins with the wisdom factors – right view and right resolve. The five spiritual faculties of faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom, culminate with wisdom. Any ‘letting go’ has to rely on wisdom.

14.3) Bhikkhus, just as the footprints of all living beings that walk fit into the footprint of the elephant, and the elephant’s footprint is declared to be their chief by reason of its size, so too, among the steps that lead to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared to be their chief, that is, for the attainment of enlightenment.

~ S 48.54, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

14.4) It is, bhikkhus, because he has developed and cultivated one faculty that a bhikkhu who has destroyed the taints declares final knowledge thus. What is that one faculty? The faculty of wisdom. For a noble disciple