UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

139

Therefore, translating nirodha as ‘cessation,’ although not entirely wrong, is nevertheless not entirely accurate. On the other hand, there is no other word which comes so close to the essential meaning as ‘cessation.’ However, we should understand what is meant by the term. In this context, the Dependent Origination cycle in its cessation mode might be better rendered as “being free of ignorance, there is freedom from volitional impulses...” or “when ignorance is gone, volitional impulses are gone...” or “when ignorance ceases to give fruit, volitional impulses cease to give fruit...” or “when ignorance is no longer a problem, volitional impulses are no longer a problem.”

Even in the forward mode there are some problems with definitions. The meanings of many of the Pali terms are too broad to be translated into any single English word. For instance, ‘avijjā paccayā saṅkhārā...’ also means “When ignorance is like this, volitional impulses are like this; volitional impulses being this way, consciousness is like this; consciousness being this way, body and mind are like this...”

~ Ven. P.A. Payutto, ‘Dependent Origination,’ pp 106-8

Although spiritual parallels can sometimes be deceptive, it is tempting, at this point, to make a comparison between two different spiritual traditions. This is due both to the significance and usefulness of the phrase “viññāṇaṃ anidassanaṃ anantaṃ sabbato pabhāṃ,” as a tool for Dhamma practice, as well as the potency and popularity of the Tibetan Buddhist practice of dzogchen (‘natural great perfection’) in the West these days.

In listening to dzogchen teachings it is clear that the aim of the practice is to establish the mind in ‘innate, self-arising rigpa’; this latter word – for which the Skt. is vidyā and the Pali vijjā (transcendent knowing) – is variously translated as ‘non-dual awareness,’ ‘innate wisdom,’ ‘pure presence,’ ‘primordial being.’ Again and again its principal qualities are ennumerated: empty of essence, cognizant in nature, unconfined in capacity. Or, using a different translation of these terms: emptiness, knowing, and lucidity or clarity. Again, the translations into English vary but, on consideration, the resemblance to the adjectives describing the mind “where long and short etc. can find no footing” is striking. To spell it out: viññāṇaṃ = cognizant in nature; anidassanaṃ = empty; anantaṃ = unconfined in capacity; sabbato pabhaṃ = lucid in quality. Whether or not this is a valid alignment of principles is for the individual to discover. However, as both of these teachings ostensibly point