SOTĀPANNA: THE SPIRITUAL TURNING POINT II

295

the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma; he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained intrepidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation.

~ M 56.18, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

17.3) To Upāli the householder, as he was sitting right there, there arose the dustless, stainless Dhamma eye: Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation. Then – having seen the Dhamma, having reached the Dhamma, known the Dhamma, reached a footing in the Dhamma, having crossed over & beyond doubt, having had no more questioning – Upāli the householder gained fearlessness and was independent of others with regard to the Teacher’s message.

~ M 56.18, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

Here, the key factor in turning away from the stream of the world and entering the stream of Dhamma is the insight into impermanence, along with the seeing of a causal connection between all phenomena. We can recognize that seeing the truth of “All that is subject to arising is subject to cessation,” is not beyond our own or anybody else’s capabilities. Having made this point, the discourse goes on to describe the results, the first being the transcending of doubt and uncertainty.

Due to the different nature of the English and Pali languages, there are difficulties in translation that may obscure crucial aspects of the Dhamma. If we translate the stream-entry vision literally from Pali, we have something like ‘whatever arising-dhamma cessation-dhamma.’ This is terrible English but beautiful insight. English grammar requires subject and verb. Thus ‘something’ arises and ceases. Hence ‘dhamma’ comes across as a thing, or an attribute of things. A thing has existence in time, so whatever thing arises, or is subject to arising, subsequently ceases. This is not really news to the reflective mind. However if we consider stream-entry as something profound, it would be useful to consider the experience to be one in which the very process that brings ‘things’ to awareness is seen into. That is, the mind is experiencing an ‘event-stream’ dynamic of arising and ceasing

that rules out substantiality.

It is like writing in water – the experience is of arising and ceasing occupying the same time frame. In this light, perhaps a better rendering would be

‘Whatever is experienced as arising, is experienced as ceasing’; or ‘Any experience of arising is an experience of ceasing,’ the enigmatic ring of which may alert the reader to the profundity of the experience.