The Island

258

fit to be regarded thus: “This is mine, this I am, this is myself’?” – “No, venerable sir.”

“Therefore, bhikkhus, any kind of material form whatever, whether past, future, or present ... all material form should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ Any kind of feeling whatever ... Any kind of perception whatever ... Any kind of formations whatever ... Any kind of consciousness whatever ... all consciousness should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ “Seeing thus, a well-taught noble disciple becomes disenchanted with material form, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with perception, disenchanted with formations, disenchanted with consciousness.

“Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion [his mind] is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’ He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’”

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words. Now while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging the minds of sixty bhikkhus were liberated from the taints.

~ M 109.15-18, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Inextricably bound up with our sense of ourselves is our perception of the world outside of ourselves. Again, this is a perception that needs careful attention. As the Buddha pointed out, our experience of the world outside us is composed simply of sense impressions making contact with sense organs; not something separate

from ourselves.

14.18) Then a certain monk went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One: “‘The world, the world (loka),’ it is said. In what respect does the word ‘world’ apply?”

“Insofar as it disintegrates (lujjati), monk, it is called the ‘world.’ Now what disintegrates? The eye disintegrates. Forms disintegrate. Consciousness at the eye disintegrates. Contact at the eye disintegrates. And whatever there