The Island

108

It is important to note that the last paragraph more describes a method of meditation practice than merely another philosophical position. These various teachings point to the fact that the answer to the conundrum of being and non-being is to be found in reshaping the issue, mostly by the way in which it is seen. The advice given in the last passage closely matches the practice of vipassanā (insight) meditation: this is comprised of, firstly, the calm and attentive observation of the arising of all patterns of experience.

Secondly, it involves the seeing of all such patterns through the reflective lens of anicca-dukkha-anattā (impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, and not-self). Lastly, in the culmination of the process, there is the remainderless relinquishment of all experience. There is a complete acceptance of all that arises and no confusion about the fact that all patterns of experience are of the same dependent,

insubstantial nature.

5.31) “Whatever form ... feeling ... perception ... mental formations ... consciousness there are: past, future or present; internal or external; gross or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near – all should be seen as they really are through true wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’”

~ MV 1.6, S 22.59, Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta

The evidence for ‘being’ (the arising of things) is seen and seen through, the evidence for ‘non-being’ (the cessation of things) is seen and seen through; both are thus let go of through perfect understanding, and the heart experiences release.

Another of the highly significant expressions of this same balancing point of the Middle Way comes in the Collection on Causation in the Saṃyutta Nikāya:

5.32) At Sāvatthī. Then the Venerable Kaccānagotta approached the Blessed One, paid respects to him, sat down to one side, and said to him, “Venerable sir, it is said, ‘Right View, Right View.’ In what way, venerable sir, is there Right View?”

“This world, Kaccāyana, for the most part depends upon the dualism of the notions of existence and non-existence. But for one who sees the origin of the world as it really is with right understanding, there is no notion of non-existence with regard to the world. And for one who sees the cessation of the world as it really is with right understanding, there is no notion of existence with regard to the world.