The Island

280

16.2) When he saw that Yasa’s mind was ready, receptive, free from hindrance, eager and trustful, he expounded to him the teaching peculiar to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path to its cessation. Just as a clean cloth with all marks removed would take dye evenly, so too while Yasa sat there the spotless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in him: All that is subject to arising is

subject to cessation.

~ MV 1.7, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli trans.)

Although Nibbāna is the highest and most worthy goal for one practising the Buddha’s teachings, the thought of ever attaining the sublime nature of that goal can appear daunting. So, to show the point of access to that goal, it is often a useful exercise to contemplate the first level of realization: stream-entry. This helps to provide a clearer sense of what needs to be done in the first stage of the practice, and to provide a reminder of the practice’s positive and attainable fruits.

Therefore exploring the various facets and aspects of stream-entry should be a fruitful endeavour as there tends to be little talk about or discussion of this ‘lowly’ attainment, which often lives in the shadow of complete realization:

Nibbāna – arahantship.

Particularly in a modern Western culture, inundated by advertising and the overstimulation of the consumption ethic, the mind can be constantly searching for anything with a superlative prefacing it – the ultimate, the perfect, the refined, the exquisite. If this is the case in our spiritual aspirations, we will tend to overlook the foundations when trying to reach the ultimate too quickly. This impatience can easily lead to frustration and a feeling that the goal is impossible to attain. So reflecting on stream-entry can play a very important role, especially in that it allows us to see what can be incorporated into our daily lives and practice.

A sotāpanna is one who has reached the first stage of liberation (stream-entry

– sotāpatti). The early commentators emphasized that the stream-enterer had a first taste of Nibbāna and the motivation arising from that initial realization

would, without a doubt, provide the impetus that would carry the aspirant on to the final goal. After one has realized stream-entry, one’s full awakening is assured

in not more than seven lifetimes. This is nothing to be looked down upon. Stream-enterers will not be reborn in any of the lower realms; they will at least be born in the human realm or higher. This is a great blessing.