The Island

234

With this composure, together with the lack of remorse that virtue affords, the heart is easily settled and focused. Meditation thus progresses more smoothly and the mind naturally brightens, making it suitable for seeing things as they truly are.

It is helpful to recognize this tendency for good qualities to foster further good qualities, so that we can nurture the appropriate causes for the results we are seeking. Otherwise we can be prone to wanting to experience the fruits of the training before the ripening has fully taken place. An image Ven. Ajahn Chah frequently used was that of a person tending an orchard. His or her duty would be to prepare the soil, fertilize the earth, water it and keep the bugs away from the tree – not to pull on the tree to make it grow faster or expectantly stand waiting for the fruit to miraculously appear. When the duties have been fulfilled properly, fruit will appear in accordance with its nature.

13.14) Meghiya, while the heart’s deliverance is still unripe, five things lead to its ripening. What five? Firstly, a bhikkhu has good friends and companions. Secondly, a bhikkhu is perfect in virtue, restrained with the Pāṭimokkha restraint, perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, he trains by giving effect to the precepts of training. Thirdly, he is one who finds at will with no trouble or reserve such talk as is concerned with effacement, as favours the heart’s release, as leads to complete dispassion, fading, ceasing, pacification, direct knowledge, enlightenment, Nibbāna, that is to say, talk on wanting little, on contentment, seclusion, dissociation from society, energeticness, virtue, concentration, understanding, deliverance, knowledge and vision of deliverance. Fourthly, a bhikkhu is energetic in abandoning unwholesome things and in giving effect to wholesome things; he is steadfast, persistent and untiring with respect to wholesome things. Fifthly, a bhikkhu has understanding; he has the noble ones’ penetrative understanding of rise and disappearance that leads to the complete ending of suffering.

Now when a bhikkhu has good friends and good companions, it can be expected of him that he will be virtuous ... that he will be one who finds at will ... such talk as is concerned with effacement ... that he is energetic in abandoning unwholesome things and in giving effect to wholesome things ... that he has the noble ones’ penetrative understanding of rise and disappearance that leads to the complete ending of suffering.