The Island

324

and a cousin to the Buddha, is asking the Buddha how to counsel a wise lay follower who is ill. His question arose because the Buddha was about to leave on walking tour and would not be in Kapilavatthu for some time:

19.4) A wise lay follower, Mahānāma, who is sick, afflicted, and gravely ill should be consoled by another wise lay follower with four consolations: “Let the venerable one be consoled. You have confirmed confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is ... teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’ You have confirmed confidence in the Dhamma ... in the Sangha ... You have the virtues dear to the noble ones, unbroken ... leading to concentration.”

After a wise lay follower, who is sick, afflicted, and gravely ill has been consoled by a wise lay follower with these four consolations, he should be asked: “Are you anxious about your mother and father?” If he says: “I am,” he should be told: “But, good sir, you are subject to death. Whether you are anxious about your mother and father or not, you will die anyway. So please abandon your anxiety over your mother and father.”

And also to abandon anxiety over wife and family. Then withdrawing attention from sensuality, then the different ascending heavenly realms.

If he says: “My mind has been withdrawn from the brahmā world; I have directed my mind to the cessation of identity,” then, Mahānāma, I say there is no difference between a lay follower who is thus liberated in mind and a bhikkhu who has been liberated in mind for a hundred years, that is, between one liberation and the other.

~ S 55.54, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

A sotāpanna may feel grief or experience defilement but – with just a bit of admonishment – be able quickly to let go of these mind states and be re-established in the Dhamma. This is illustrated by the following story concerning Visākhā, the great female lay-disciple, who was a stream-enterer:

19.5) Thus have I heard. At one time the Lord was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park at Migāra’s mother’s mansion. On that occasion the dearly beloved grandchild of Visākhā, Migāra’s mother, had died.