KNOWING, EMPTINESS AND THE RADIANT MIND

219

it, jar it, obscure its radiance. Even the most refined adulteration is still an affair of defilement, about which we as meditators should not be complacent. We must investigate it with unflagging discernment. In order to cut through the burdens of your concerns once and for all, you should ask yourself, “What is this radiance?” Fix your attention on it until you know. There’s no need to fear that once this radiance is destroyed, the ‘real you’ will be destroyed with it. Focus your investigation right at that center to see clearly that this radiance has the characteristics of inconstancy, stress, and not-self just like all the other phenomena you have already examined. It’s not different in any way, aside from the difference in its subtlety. Thus nothing should be taken for granted. If anything has the nature of conventional reality, let discernment slash away at it. Focus right down on the mind itself. All the really counterfeit things lie in the mind. This radiance is the ultimate counterfeit and at that moment it’s the most conspicuous point. You hardly want to touch it at all, because you love it and cherish it more than anything else. In the entire body there is nothing more outstanding than this radiance, which is why you are amazed at it, love it, cherish it, dawdle over it, want nothing to touch it. But it’s the enemy king: unawareness.

Have you ever seen it? If you haven’t, then when you reach this stage in your practice, you’ll fall for it of your own accord. And then you’ll know it of your own accord – no one will have to tell you – when mindfulness and discernment are ready. It’s called avijjā – unawareness. Right here is the true unawareness.

Nothing else is true unawareness. Don’t go imagining avijjā as a tiger, a leopard, a demon or a beast. Actually, it’s the most beautiful, most alluring Miss Universe the world has ever seen. Genuine unawareness is very different from what we expect it to be.

When we reach genuine unawareness, we don’t know what unawareness is, and so we get stuck right there. If there is no one to advise us, no one to suggest an approach, we are sure to be stuck there a long time before we can understand and work ourselves free. But if there is someone to suggest an approach, we can begin to understand it and strike right at that center, without trusting it, by investigating it in the same way we have dealt with all other phenomena.

Once we’ve investigated it with sharp discernment until we know it