Atammayatā

117

concocted by them through foolishly relying upon them? From this realization liberation naturally follows.

Atammayatā IN PRACTICE

... Atammayatā ... is a way of understanding the reality of conditioned things. When insight progressively deepens through the nine ‘eyes,’ then one realizes that there is nothing deserving of being concocted, affected, manipulated, or cooked and seasoned by us. By cultivating this understanding, human beings may liberate themselves from ignorance, from their attachments, from conflict and misery.

The third and highest use of Atammayatā is to signify the state of mind that is totally free, independent, liberated. Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu prefers to describe this state as being “above and beyond positive or negative.” Human beings instinctually feel and perceive all experience as either positive or negative. This leads to evaluating and judging those experiences, which turns into liking and disliking those experiences, which in turn fosters craving, attachment, and selfishness. Thus arises dukkha (misery, pain, dissatisfaction). The mind that has gone beyond positive and negative cannot be pulled into the conditioned arising (paṭicca-samuppāda) of dukkha. Thus, Atammayatā in this, its most proper sense, describes the reality of the Arahant, the worthy undefiled one.

~ Santikaro Bhikkhu, adapted from ‘Evolution/Liberation,’ 1989

The references to Atammayatā in the Pali Canon are few, here are the two above quoted passages from the Majjhima Nikāya as examples.

6.2) “A person who is not truly good ... enters and remains in the first jhāna. They notice, ‘I have gained the attainment of first jhāna.’ They exalt themselves for that attainment of first jhāna and they disparage others. This is a quality of a person who is not truly good.

“The truly good person notices – ‘The Blessed One has spoken of non-identification (non-fabrication) even with regard to the attainment of the first jhāna; for however they conceive it, the fact is ever other than that.’ So, making non-identification their focal point, they neither exalt themselves for that attainment of the first jhāna nor do they disparage