PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES III

273

“Friends, I have treated the earth element as not self, with no self based on the earth element. And with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of attraction and clinging based on the earth element, of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies based on the earth element, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

“Friends, I have treated the water element ... the fire element ... the air element ... the space element ... the consciousness element as not self, with no self based on the consciousness element. And with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of attraction and clinging based on the consciousness element, of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies based on the consciousness element, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

“It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these six elements, that through not clinging my mind is liberated from the taints.” ...

Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed ... and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the nature

of his answer:

“Friends, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of desire, lust, delight, craving, attraction, and clinging, and of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies regarding the eye, forms, eye-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

“With the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of desire, lust, delight, craving, attraction, and clinging, and of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies regarding the ear, sounds, ear-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind] through ear-consciousness ... regarding the nose, odours, nose-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind] through nose-consciousness ... regarding the tongue, flavours, tongue-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind] through tongue-consciousness ... regarding the body, tangibles, body-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind] through body-consciousness ... regarding the mind, mind-objects, mind-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the