11

“‘REAPPEARS’ DOES NOT APPLY...”

IN HIS FRIENDLY REBUKE TO ANURĀDHA THE BUDDHA pointed out that,

given that the Tathāgata was unapprehendable even while the body was both alive and present, it was even more unfitting to conceive any idea whatsoever as to what the nature of a Tathāgata might be once the body has died. It is because of this principle of unapprehendability that, in the conventions of the Buddhist tradition, one never speaks of the Buddha as having ‘died.’ To assert so would imply an identification with the body and personality that the Master had, since the enlightenment,

ceased to possess.

It might be argued that the avoidance of such usages is simply the attempt of the faithful to legitimize their clinging to their beloved mentor. Maybe so – but a little serious investigation and contemplation of the teachings contained both in this and the previous chapter, will make it obvious that this practice is simply an exercising of the Buddha’s injunctions on how to relate to the quality in question in accordance with reality.

Instead of ‘death’ such terms as ‘attained final Nibbāna’ are used, the latter words being a translation of ‘Parinibbāna.’ In most Buddhist literature the word Nibbāna is taken to signify Nibbāna as experienced in life and Parinibbāna as what occurs at the death of the body of an enlightened being. This is an over-simplification (e.g. in the Sutta Nipāta ‘Parinibbāna’ is often used to apply to a living arahant; furthermore the word can also mean the act of quenching whilst ‘Nibbāna,’ in that context, means the state of quenchedness) but it is fair enough to say that the above sense is what the words usually mean and that is how we will use them here.

The Buddha was extraordinarily resolute in saying nothing about what happens after the death of the body of an enlightened one; therefore, one small point to clarify at the beginning is that when the noun Parinibbāna is used to denote this, it does not mean ‘Nibbāna after death.’ Even though such phrases as ‘gone to Parinibbāna’ are