PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES II

259

is that arises in dependence on contact at the eye – experienced as pleasure, pain or neither-pleasure-nor-pain – that too disintegrates.

“The ear disintegrates. Sounds disintegrate ...

“The nose disintegrates. Aromas disintegrate ...

“The tongue disintegrates. Tastes disintegrate ...

“The body disintegrates. Tactile sensations disintegrate ...

“The intellect disintegrates. Ideas disintegrate. Consciousness at the intellect disintegrates. Contact at the intellect disintegrates. And whatever there is that arises in dependence on contact at the intellect – experienced as pleasure, pain or neither-pleasure-nor-pain – that too disintegrates.

“Insofar as it disintegrates, it is called the ‘world.’”

~ S 35.82, (Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu trans.)

14.19) Friends, when the Blessed One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling after reciting a synopsis in brief without expounding the meaning in detail, that is: “Bhikkhus, I say that the end of the world cannot be known, seen, or reached by travelling. Yet, bhikkhus, I also say that without reaching the end of the world there is no making an end to suffering,” I understand the detailed meaning of this synopsis as follows: That in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world (lokasaññī), a conceiver of the world (lokamānī) – this is called the world in the Noble One’s Discipline. And what, friends, is that in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world, a conceiver of the world? The eye is that in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world, a conceiver of the world. The ear ... The nose ... The tongue ... The body ... The mind is that in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world, a conceiver of the world. That in the world by which one is a perceiver of the world, a conceiver of the world – this is called the world in the Noble One’s Discipline.

~ S 35.116, (Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Because our sense impressions are so dependent on our sense organs, the sense of the world ‘out there’ as opposed to our self ‘in here’ does not accord with direct experience. When we see how this false dichotomy causes suffering, we will drop it and be released from our attachment both to ‘self’ and to ‘world.’