Atammayatā

121

The result that comes from the mind going out in order to satisfy

its moods is Suffering (I);

The mind seeing the mind clearly is the Path Leading to the

Cessation of Suffering (IV);

The result of the mind seeing the mind clearly is the Cessation of

Suffering (III).

~ Luang Pu Dun, ‘Atulo,’ collected teachings compiled by

Phra Bodhinandamuni

Next we have some words from Bhikkhu Ñāṇananda, picking up a variety of terms related to Atammayatā. Each of the words he outlines is worthy of a pause to consider, and to contemplate its sense and implications.

6.7) The process of becoming is thus shown to be perpetually going on within the mind of the saṃsāric individual who identifies himself with sense-data under the proliferating tendencies towards craving, conceits and views (the three main āsavā) [these are more usually referred to as the papañca-dhammas]. This identification is implied by the term tammayatā (lit. ‘of-that-ness’) and one who resorts to it, is called tammayo – one who is ‘made-of-that’ or is ‘of-that-(stuff).’ Since the perpetual process of becoming in the psychological realm is necessarily followed by birth, decay-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, grief and despair in every specific instance of short-lived identification, an insight into the law of Dependent Arising provides one with the key to the entire gamut of saṃsāric experience ...

This penetrative insight into the arising and cessation of phenomena dispels all doubts as to the speculative problems of absolute existence and non-existence, of unity and plurality etc., and the mind is brought to rest in the ‘middle’ – though, paradoxically, it now rests on nothing. ‘Thingness’ has completely faded away, so much so that craving finds ‘no-thing’ to grasp at. Instead of an attempt at identification (tammayatā) impelled by craving, a detached contemplation of the Norm of Suchness (tathatā) sets in.

With this emancipation of the mind, one’s attitude towards the world with all its vicissitudes, becomes one of ‘Such-like-ness’ (tāditā) – of aloofness (atammayatā) and he deserves to be called the ‘Such-One’ or the ‘Such-like One’ (tādi, tādiso).