The Island

176

10.17) God, who has no name – who is beyond names – is inexpressible.

~ Meister Eckhart

Both of these passages, along with the observation that in the Jewish tradition an empty throne was also used as a symbol for the presence of God, are quoted in a chapter entitled ‘Prayer Without Language in the Mystical Tradition,’ in the book ‘The Solace of Fierce Landscapes’ by Belden C. Lane. In a similar vein, as Wittgenstein put it in the dénouement of his Tractatus:

10.18) What we cannot speak about, we must pass over in silence. (Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darüber muß man schweigen.)

~ L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Proposition 7)

The clearest analyses of the principle of unapprehendability to be found in the Pali Canon occur side-by-side in the Connected Discourses on the Khandhas.

10.19) Once some wanderers of other sects went to the venerable Anurādha and asked him: “Friend Anurādha, one who is a Tathāgata, highest of beings, the supreme among beings, one attained to the supreme attainment, when a Tathāgata is describing them, in which of the four following instances do they describe them: After death a Tathāgata is; or after death a Tathāgata is not; or after death a Tathāgata both is and is not; or after death a Tathāgata neither is nor is not?”

“Friends, a Tathāgata in describing them describes them apart from these four instances.”

When this was said they remarked: “This must be a new bhikkhu, not long gone forth; or, if he is an elder, he must be foolish and incompetent.” Then, having no confidence in the venerable Anurādha and thinking him newly gone forth or foolish, they got up from their seats and went away. Then, soon after they had gone he wondered: “If they had questioned me further, how should I have answered them so that I might say what the Blessed One says without misrepresenting him with what is not fact and might express ideas in accordance with the Dhamma with nothing legitimately deducible from my assertions that would provide grounds for condemning me?” So he went to the Blessed One and told him about this.