UNSUPPORTED AND UNSUPPORTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS

149

As the reader might have noticed, we have returned once more to the words of our opening passage. The Buddha has given this teaching to the brahmā god in order to demonstrate the conditioned and limited nature of the latter’s vision. In an interesting reworking of the translation, Bhikkhu Bodhi renders the passage thus:

8.20) “The consciousness that makes no showing,

Nor has to do with finiteness,

Not claiming being with respect to all:

that is not commensurate with the earthness of earth ... the

Allness of All.”

~ ibid

The following passages from the Pali are the key places where the Buddha speaks of unsupported consciousness per se; they bring together and synthesize much of the material that has already been explored in this chapter. If they are taken as guides for meditation, rather than just as philosophical viewpoints, they largely speak for themselves and are rich sources for reflection.

Their principal strength, the capacity to catalyse insight and liberation, lies in the emphasis they give to the subtle conditioning power of volition and other mental undercurrents, the clarification that it’s not necessary to give those tendencies life and solidity – a landing place – and the crucial role that right attitude

has in meditation.

8.21) “What is intended (ceteti), what is acted upon (pakappeti) and what lies latent (anuseti): this is a support for the establishment of consciousness. There being a support, there is a landing of consciousness. When that consciousness lands and grows, there is the production of renewed becoming in the future. When there is production of renewed becoming in the future, there is future birth, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. Such is the origin of this entire mass of dukkha.

“If nothing is intended, if nothing is acted upon but something lies latent: this is a support for the establishment of consciousness ... Such is the origin of this entire mass of dukkha.

“But when nothing is intended, acted upon or lies latent, there is no support for the establishment of consciousness. There being no