The Island

342

shall bring them great fruit and benefit, and so that our going forth shall not be in vain but fruitful and fertile.”

~ M 39.2, (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi trans.)

Another aspect of the blessings generated for others is the delight beings find when coming into contact with one who has realized Nibbāna. Whether the contact is direct or indirect, whether those who make that contact are in the human realm or a celestial realm, the effect of one who has completely liberated the heart is tangible.

20.7) After they had accompanied the Blessed One a little way and turned back again, the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila asked the venerable Anuruddha: “Have we ever reported to the venerable Anuruddha that we have obtained those abidings and attainments that the venerable Anuruddha, in the Blessed One’s presence, ascribed to us up to the destruction of the taints?”

“The venerable ones have never reported to me that they have obtained those abidings and attainments. Yet by encompassing the venerable ones’ minds with my own mind, I know that they have obtained those abidings and attainments. And deities have also reported to me: ‘These venerable ones have obtained those abidings and attainments.’ Then I declared it when directly questioned by the Blessed One.”

Then the spirit Dīgha Parajana went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to the Blessed One, he stood at one side and said: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, venerable sir, a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!” On hearing the exclamation of the spirit Dīgha Parajana, the earth gods exclaimed: “It is a gain for the Vajjians, a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!” On hearing the exclamation of the earth gods, the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings ... the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three ... the Yāma gods ... the gods of the Tusita heaven ... the gods who delight in creating ... the gods who wield power over others’ creations