Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 1 (V494A6GhmvA)
Video ID: V494A6GhmvA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V494A6GhmvA

Good afternoon, Lumpur. >> Good afternoon, John. >> So, today is August the 11th and we're now in the Reigns Retreat and this is your 60th Reigns Retreat. >> Yes, that's true. >> So, we've had a little break from the Q&A. you've been quite busy uh celebrating your birthday and having many of your friends come to visit. So,

we took a little break from the Q&A, but uh we're back. We're back today. So, I thought, Lumpur, maybe you could um talk a little bit about the uh the feathers that um that we come up against as practitioners. You're often referring to them in your dharma talks, specifically the three the first three fedters blocking stream entry. Yes. Well,

I like to reflect on the feathers a lot because these teachings of the Buddha are very helpful in dealing with trying to understand what's happening, where you're at in developing meditation and insight into the dharma. And of course the first feather is the called sakadi which translate as a self you or the ego.

So we often do often most of the time refer to it as the ego. The sense of I am the body. I am a separate person. It's all about me and mine. As we grow up and see that our identity is a very physical one with the gender of the body, with the color of the skin, with the uh size, the the form, whether it's

goodlooking or not, we identify with that. And so we form a a sense of self view. >> [gasps] >> that at an early age when you're an innocent child, like when you were born, the first few years of your life, you're you're just receiving information from your mother and father

[snorts] and uh you don't know whether it's true or false, but you you just accept it, you know, because they They protect you and nurture you and you depend on them. So we form a very strong ego and a sense of I'm this limited form this this body that is growing will get grow up get old and pass away. So sakiti is

is very uh powerful thing to break through to see that all that you believed in before that you are just this very mortal form limited form is not not to see it in a very personal way. what you look like and all kinds of cultural identities, biases, prejudices form around just that. And uh that can carry one through a whole

lifetime to 92 in fact. So second dity is is to be understood as as a sense of me and mine. So this is the basis for all the other feathers. Once you realize you're not what you think or you're not just this limited form, a human body, male or female, then you

[clears throat] Also uh what goes along with the ego is the silabarasa or the sense of uh identity with nationality with with morality with with religion with culture all that that is given to you through your cultural experience. So you form a strong s you know have a

strong sense of guilt and being born into a religion that emphasizes sin. We one of the great problems psych psych psychologically is that sense of guilt feeling this sense that you might have done something wrong or you did something wrong.

So cultural conditioning is to is very strong and uh even though in the formal books on the 10 fitness it says attachment to rights and rituals. I I personally never felt very attached to rights and rituals, but I had strong identities with with cultural culture

American cultural identities. And so I began to see that that that's con to translate silaras attachment to convention. [clears throat] Well, nationalism is a convention. Patriotism is a convention. Uh that everything is that we learn about you know

that we're informed with in the early years is conventional. It's not ultimate reality. So we have strong identities such as I'm uh such as what's happened the war in Ukraine and Russia that's based on sataramasa being strongly identified with being Ukraine or Russia and because that's a

convention and so uh that happens in what's happening in and throughout the world there biases that form through wars and that such as the the wars in Africa and tribal identities you know if you're not not just uh national identities then there's tribal identities

religious identities ities and you know such as I'm terra you're is a conventional identity because terra is a convention marana is a convention. So we begin to put convention in its proper place and not just go along with the biases and prejudices that we experience when we're identified with the conventions we've acquired through

our youth through our conditioning. And the third is witchi kicha which is doubt. So this doubt is through thinking you know like attachment to thoughts and um we we often times try to fight doubt.

One of the ways of talking about is to conquer doubt. And so I as a person, you know, you can suppress doubt, but you don't really you can't conquer it until you realize the limitation of thinking. And thinking itself is a creation, is a convention. It's not ultimately real. And so these conventions

are to be understood as or attachment to the conditioning we acquire we have acquired in our lives and our language that we speak and these prevent us from seeing the part. these first three conventions. So it's important to understand these conventions and not just ignore them to

like do doubt. For one example, I'm a person that likes to think a lot. And the more I think, the more I doubt. And when I try to conquer doubt through suppressing it, I think even more. You know, I can suppress it for a while, but I can't conquer doubt till I

understand doubt. And so in understanding doubt is to doubt and be the observer of doubt. Doubt is put your mind into an empty state. You're not sure is it red or or purple or whatever. You know then is is the is a doubt and you want to answer the

answer the doubt get rid of the doubt through some definition you find on AI artificial intelligence on Google on the internet because you want certainty [snorts] as a ego as a person we want to find things and have certainty through our definitions. But what is an important feed to appreciate

the first three feathers are I call artifices because they're made made up conditions. [sighs] You know, they're not You weren't born with a with a name with with identifying with your body or your gender or your nationality or your race. You know, your baby is born. It it has a physical form and it's conscious.

The form itself is is impermanent you know so like a baby is has to be nurtured in order to survive. It can't survive on its own. So the form is very uh you know is a condition in nature and the consciousness is what is completely natural you know the the form is in consciousness

rather than consciousness is in the form. So this is an important distinction to recognize that [clears throat] we tend to in the west western world tend to think of consciousness is in the form and so this means my consciousness is separate from yours

and so that creates a sense of total separation but in terms of identity we see ourselves as totally separate forms with separate consciousnesses. But what is truly natural or tamach is consciousness itself. It has no form and it's here and now. So actually our forms are in consciousness and then how we experience through consciousness we have to experience

through the senses through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and the brain. So we we have very unique brain as human beings. So we think we've developed language to a high level and then think of modern technology with all the controversies around AI and internet and developing. You know, we have this because we have

this this brain that can think, create language and create the scientific conditions that are quite impressive in themselves. But the despite all that, no matter how intelligent and well educated a human being might be, they still

have to deal with sexual desire and fear and anger. So the next two feathers are about are just natural feathers. They're not there. When you're born, you're born in a sexual form that you didn't choose. And so, you know, it's not culturally conditioned. It's it's a natural form that arises through sexual intercourse.

So it it is uh we identify with with the gender very much so in in modern life. Gender discrimination and identity with gender orientation or sexual orientation is very strong, very divisive with we identify with with various uh concepts of gender and our identity with them and and uh they don't always conform to just the natural male female qu identities.

So there's a lot of controversy around gender and and gender identity. This is because sexual desire is is part of the experience of a human form, male and female. Because you know in the mamalian world it's about procreation and survival.

So we were discussing before this event you were telling about the grace of dharma. What do you call >> the edible door mouse? animal door mouse [laughter] that you was annoying you in your cooting. [laughter] And that animal door mouse, you know, is has fear and anger in its makeup just as we do

>> and sexual desire. They procreate and they learn how to survive in a hostile world. And this is this is just natural to to these animal forms, whether it's insects or [gasps] butterflies or bumblebees or mice, rabbits, whatever. We all share the same sexual impulses and survival mechanisms.

So like when you contemplate survival, you know, you you realize uh you know, you have to survive in a in a universe that is quite frightening when you contemplate it. If you're not if you're living in a jungle or in a in a difficult place, a lot of wars going on around the world. People don't know whether they're going to survive the night or not. This is natural feeling of

survival, fear. And this is not cultural. This is part of our mamalian makeup. or animal makeup, whether it's mammals or not, we have this sense for procreation and survival. And that's the ne the following factors of uh sexual desire and anger and fear. So how does how does practice shift or

change when one say has had insights into the first three fedters? Uh how does one continuing on say to develop more understanding of the later fedters? >> Well with the first three fedters you're confident in the path. You're beyond doubt. You you you you recognize the path for yourself, but then you still got to deal with a

lifetime of conditioning and society you're living in and the experiences that you have through the form that you're no longer identified with. But you they still have to deal with sexual desire and anger and fear. They're they're part of the experience that you but you recognize them for what they are rather than as

personal identities or faults that you might assume otherwise. Like one of the common questions have on a retreat as I remember was how do I get rid of anger and because people according to the ideal you shouldn't get angry but anger is is is a kind it's not you know culturally assumed it's part of the species.

These forms just get angry because they have to survive and there a lot of fear, a lot of things that can create anger which we see very personally rather than I've got to get rid of anger and which is very idealistic. But can you get rid of anger if you're still caught with the first threes? You know, you might you can suppress it. And that's the best you can do. You

can't understand it. >> And uh sexual desire, you you know, you can suppress it, but you don't understand it. You know, you you think you've got to get rid of sexual desire and fear. It's still the ego operating. who who wants to get rid of sexual desire and fear is is still operating from me as a separate identity

as a man >> as a monk that wants to get rid of something I don't like and that is uh still the ego operating the ego can't get rid of it can suppress is the most it can do. >> Mhm. >> So, we suppress our anger, our sexual drives,

but they still thrive and then we feel embarrassed or guilty when these conditions arise. We see it very personally. I'm not a good monk. If I have sexual desire or if I get angry, I'm shouldn't be on. I'm a monk of 60 pun says I shouldn't get angry. That's the ego. >> That's what my ego wants

>> to get rid of anger rather than to understand it. So even in this kind of world of Buddhism and practice say specifically monastic life there is always a danger of getting caught into say sila bataparamasa say of being a good Buddhist so to speak rather than understanding the dharma itself not as a not as Buddhism but as truth and

reality. >> Yeah. Well, like being identified with Thai forest tradition and vinay and and all that can be a a a convention we use but if we're attached to it then it becomes so like after you know at my age you don't and my experience with practice is

I I can still feel anger arising but I don't prosper at 92 sexuality doesn't arrive not too much of a problem it's very Of course. >> Well, on that note, Lumpur, uh we'll say thank you for uh doing a session with us. It's been a while and we look forward to doing uh another one with you in uh in the future. Thank you very

much, Lumpur.