Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 39 (wpLwVWpYfEE)
Video ID: wpLwVWpYfEE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wpLwVWpYfEE

The more [Music] for Satan. So this the opportunity to open yourselves be the witness to the way it is. Reflect on the impermanence of conditions of phenomena. And as I've said many times before in

these occasions, the reflective ability of a human being is to be able to observe how they feel. Not to grasp but to be the witness. And this relationship of Buddha to Dharma, Buddha is a witness to Dharma. So we take the Buddha position of the

witness, the observer, not the critic, not the separate person, not the personality. So in that simple relationship of Buddha to Dharma, we can see it as a kind of ceremonial attachment to different forms of Buddhism. But in practicality, that's the the pattern. It's the Buddha that knows Dharma the

way it is. It's not prince or the aesthetic kota or me or you or anyone else. It's the ability to reflect is like this. This it's not judgmental. So we're not, you know, the thinking mind is a judgmental mind. We make judgments about ourselves and the world,

families, societies we live in. So judgments are creations. They're not dhamma. They're just phenomena that arise and cease. And we live in a society that forms judgments. Self-criticism, criticism of the leaders, criticism of mothers, fathers, children, politicians. It's all part of the social

reality that we are conditioned to to recognize as phenomena rather than as something to grasp and hold on to. So the simple fact of life is that birth is the cause of death. If you're never born, you never die. So that this is so matter of fact and nobody can deny that if it has a beginning, it has an ending.

Death is the ending of what began. And yet we celebrate birth. But death is something we we uh we often times don't want to think about or observe in our own mind. We all have to experience the aging process of our parents, teachers, friends. And then I can my birthday people wish me to live for 120 years

which I know they mean well but uh as a reality I don't think I can do that as a person. I can't guarantee that a tomato is going to last that much longer because for someone my age death is very close. Now the future is still death or the body.

So when I reflect on life, you know, I'm still in a living, breathing, fairly well functioned form. But in terms of reflection, it's old age is like this. It's it's you know a lot of disabilities and problems. Senses fade, balance falters, mind blanks suddenly arise in your thinking

process. short memory loss and we can take this personally like it's me that you know I I don't walk very well and and I can see it as some kind of personal disability and flaw. But when you reflect on it, it's just the way it is. A 91y old body is like this. It's not fine to be like a long-distance runner or an

athlete or like I used to be when I was younger. We all have to experience the loss of loved ones. And we don't like to think of our loved ones dying. We want them to live for us. So the future as imagined can be rather depressing, you know, to think of someone you love, you're close to, you spend your life

with is going to die. And how does that feel when you think like that? You know, your reflective mind, the Buddha awareness mind is aware. If it feels, you know, it's not a happy thought, not a happy image in the about the future. What if I said I'm going to live for 120 years? You know what? I wonder how you'd feel.

You imagine 120 years from now, what I'd look like, what I'd be like. because I'm not the body. This is where meditation is so important is to trust in awareness and reflect on impermanence and you you you know your kind of youthful fantasies and imagine and your wishes about the future. You begin to see in terms not of as

personal problems or just youthful fantasies or delusions but they are impermanent. The future is unknown and that's a fact. Right now tomorrow is we don't know tomorrow is maybe we have plans we have things duties to perform plans to go somewhere meet people or maybe we don't have anything to do

but in terms of here and now the reality of awareness is always about here and Now, not about tomorrow, not about the past, but the way it is here and now cuz that's where we experience life always in the present. Experience is about here and now through it's a sensory experience. We experience happiness and

suffering and through the mind through the senses. So the senses are what we cling to and hold to and identify with the central world that we're experiencing. So apparent here and now is consciousness. As I've said over and over again, consciousness is about now rather than about

a sensory experience. Consciousness is not a sensory experience. It's not about the senses. It's about the reality of being here and now. Being Pluto, being aware, reflecting on the changingness of life of of what we're thinking, feeling through the

through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, through the body, through the brain, through the emotions. years ago, I used to set up like one of these Zen coons about is there something permanent? Because the Buddha said all conditions are impermanent. Everything is impermanent. And then I noticed that my mind said,

well, if Buddha said that, so that must be true. You shouldn't question it. you should just believe because the Buddha said that in the scriptures that you shouldn't question it. But a cohan or a conundrum is an opportunity to investigate. Is it really true? Is there everything

impermanent? And so through meditation you investigate everything that you're experiencing through seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking, feeling. And I couldn't find any permanency in any of it. You know, it changes very quickly. They call it the monkey mind because

it's just hopping from one banana to another. So life is about impermanence and these forms they're impermanent and there's nothing sad about it because it's dharma. It's the dama by the way all the these things that have happened the past the memories of the past

the plans for the future the problems about the future what is the future now in terms of experience it's imagination what's going to happen to Amirati when ajan tomato dies and uh or when Ajan Amro dies or you know then you you start imagining scenarios or possibilities

of what might happen but that's always about imagining forming images in your mind in the here and now. It's not you know you can imagine anything any imagine or believe or hope wish or dread. I remember when Pocha passed away and he a very kind of powerful

charismatic figure, great teacher that you get very attached to. You just want him to stay alive even though he was quite incapacitated as a physical form. And then we think what's going to happen to his monastery what pop home when l passed away and on and on like that then we imagine there it'll just dissolve

into you couldn't imagine what my poem without ach SH But in terms of the reality of the way it is that the form what we called lung was was old and sick and worn out and time to Oh, so you can rationalize, you think, well, you you shouldn't be sad because

uh you know, he was very disabled and and I'm, you know, it's about time. You can be very reasonable about it, about death, but the intellect can always say, well, you know, you can't live forever. things change. You can say say the words all conditions are impermanent things change.

But then in my experience of meditation as I developed the reflective capacity more and not just follow belief systems and ideas of my own where I actually became the p the witness to the way it is. I had the insight into letting go, letting go of sankars, of phenomena, of conditions. And at first letting go to my cultural

mind was to get rid of it. To let go means to just get rid of things you don't like and don't want. or to form a view. But I'm too attached. I'm too attached to life. I'm too attached to this person. I'm too attached to this house or this place.

And so we form a sense of ourself as being attached. And then we think have been Buddhist we should not be attached to anything. Another brilliant thought that comes to the mind. I shouldn't be attached to anything. After all these years being a Buddhist monk meditating

I shouldn't be attached to anything. So the mind will produce the sense of you know there's something wrong with attachment. And if you've been a proper meditator and a good monk, then you wouldn't be attached to anything. Those are maybe inspiring ideas, but they are that they're they're not about the way it is. It's not about as a

person to get rid of everything or to you shouldn't be attached but to recognize attachment to other people to conditions to places like this is your witness to it. Not a person trying to become unattached to phenomena. In monastic puja we often times reflect

all that is mine, beloved and pleasing will become otherwise will become separated from me. And I remember when I first heard that I thought that's very sad. That's really sad you know that is mine beloved and pleasing will be separated from me because it is sad in terms of attachment to

the things that are mine or beloved and pleasing. What is mine and what is beloved and pleasing as a person you want to keep hold on to and live forever more because that is the way we we we think and cling to things. We want our money, our

place, our country, our friends, our parents, our teachers, our friends, our husband, wife, children. We want them to be not to be separated from us but to be with us forever and ever. So reflecting on that that that's an impossibility. That's just romantic nonsense.

But there I made a judgment again saying it's romantic nonsense. It is what it is. But it's not sad where all that is mine beloved and pleasing will become otherwise will become separated from me is you know in terms of meaning it's quite sad

to those who are young and who are very attached to what they regard as theirs. But I'm encouraging you to really reflect on attachment is like this. It's not wrong or bad or good. It's just the way it is. It's not about that you shouldn't be attached because that's the ego again. The ego can grab these teachings and just say,

you know, a good monk wouldn't be attached to life, be free from attachment. That's you know what you read in the scriptures or a heography but the Buddha's reflective ability to say that condition phenomena is you know it's it has qualities of beauty and ugliness good or bad right or wrong,

virtue, wise, heaven, hell. These are these are words. These are concepts that we form through thinking. And thinking about unattachment, of letting go of everything is still thinking even though it's intelligent thinking. But if you just hold on to the thoughts then it leads to grief, sorrow, despair and anguish

because all that is mine, beloved and pleasing does become otherwise is separated from me. And during one's life, one has to experience that's part of human experience that every human being must experience whether we like it or not. There's no kind of heavenly state we can go to

where we can live permanently happy forever after. Many Buddhists want to be reborn into heavenly realm. So in Thailand, the many Thai Buddhists who just tried to lead a good life and make a lot of do a lot of good things were very generous, meritorious, which is good. But good is another word, another

concept about phenomena. Heavenly realms, da realms are beautiful and that's their nature. They're very, you know, they don't have coarse bodies like we have. We have to live within an animal body where the views and and concepts about the dava realms

ethereal bodies. But ethereal is another word that is made up. Ethereal bodies are still impermanent. Because in the scriptures there are stories about David as reaching the highest da realm and then dying. So any form whether it's ethereal or material

young or old male or female is a form. It's a sankara. Is consciousness a sankara? You know when we talk about not being reborn, what happens when to an arahant when aunt passes away? They're not supposed to be reborn again. So what happens to them?

And so we can form im images. Imagine images of a hunts and top of Mount Kylash in Tibet or Aura hunts in the Himalayas or Aurans in Scotland or Ara. You can form any kind of images that you so inclined to do because you you believe you're not in a hood and you think our hearts are not reborn. So then you think there's

they're floating in space or they contact some kind of formless spirit or we don't know. We don't know that. And just to know we don't know is like this that all the imaginations of happiness, perfection, beauty, heavenly realms, da realms.

Or we might go the other way there. No. Once you're dead, you're dead. That's it. There's nothing left. the no soul just uh when our heart dies that's it that's the end of that being completely disappears but what you know the Buddha talks about the deathless reality

and this monastery I intentionally named Amarvati the deathless realm beyond death. What is beyond death? And you can't imagine it. You can imagine heavenly realms, neighbor realms, Brahma realms. You can imagine oblivion nothing. But all these words whether it's

oblivion nothing or Brahma realm or my soul will be re born again they're all words nothing wrong with the words but they're sankaras all words no matter how divine spiritual beautiful meaningful areas this. So that's why I encourage you to investigate just words,

whether they're intelligent, nonsense, doesn't make any difference. Words themselves, wise teachings on the scriptures are just utter rubbish from gossip columnists. They're words that are created that we tend to create ourselves with words. Our ego is about me

and me is a word created in by somebody centuries ago English language. Ajan tomato is a word two words they're very nice words I like them bad they are words they are sankaras and just through investigating the impermanence of thoughts of words themselves no matter how sacred or profound or vulgar or stupid

it's not the point of being profound or stupid but of just being the witness to saras are like this good good sankaras come and go bad saras come and go and when I use this word sankara it is the poly word for phenomena or condition a created thing. But what I have found in my life as a Buddhist monk is the deathless reality.

It's not a thing. It's not a condition. It's not a phenomenon. But it's apparent here and now. Timeless that you begin to rather than just ch the words and believe in the concepts. It's still empty phenomena until you realize that the words are merely directional signs.

like the words. You want to go to London and you go out on the M1 and you see a sign saying London. You know, only a very ignorant person would think that that sign is London, but it's pointed in a direction. So Buddha Dhamma are like that. They're pointers in a direction. of here and now. And that doesn't matter where you are

physically because it's always you're always here and now timeless. Can you imagine timelessness? You know it all words are created through time and space. Space and forms are the illusions that we cling to and live with and believe in and get deluded

by. But enlightenment means to see beyond the forms. Not to get rid of them, not to believe in them, but to you know re realize that the Buddhist teaching are directional signs and the amirati the deathless reality that we are realize this is The great realization is not something that

you imagine anymore. You're getting beyond imagination or just blind faith in Buddha Dhama Sana ultimate reality or dharma You know what is ultimate reality? You know, you can I love to question myself years ago about I take refuge in dharma, ultimate reality, but I don't, you know, I kind of understand the meaning.

But ultimate reality is what? You know, it's a hear it, smell it, taste it, touch it, or God. The word God for those of you who are brought up in theistic religions. It's a created word and that's not diminishing its power. You can say I'm an atheist. I don't believe in God

or I believe in God. But that's not about pau knowing dhamma that all conditions whether it's belief and grasping or disbelief and denying is like this. Denying the existence of God is words again, grasping ideas, believing in something called God or

even ultimate reality. Absolute reality is like this. But what is absolute reality? As is it an experience that you get through meditation? Is enlightenment an experience that you're looking forward to? You're looking forward to becoming enlightened if you really sit and

meditate for hours. Devote your life as a sauna. do a lot of good works, get rewarded with something you imagine is the ultimate human experience called enlightenment. But it's here and now it's not about personal is a enlightened you know you can ask yourself that's

that's just words again was lumpa enlightened was a mua enlightened and these These are questions in the Thai forest tradition that many people ponder. You know when Cha became disabled he could no longer talk and then many people started I don't think he's

enlightened because if he was in our heart this would never happen our hearts can speak and when they die they sit in samadi in full lotus this posture and just pass away. That's the ideal where Locha was disabled for 10 years. Seriously. So, so then the question was Locha

enlightened and then we imagine he a devoted attachment to Ajan Sha makes us say yes he was he definitely enlightened or others can think I doubted you know our heart could be disabled like that But reflecting on that way it is is that these thoughts whether we absolutely believe he was a fully enlightened dar or

not. They're images that we form in our mind. That's the way it is. That's a wisdom reflection. All conditions are impermanent and they are is consciousness then not just sensory consciousness which is obviously very impermanent like the senses themselves are very delicate

experiences that we have and sensory conscious consciousness through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body to the brain. You know these things. The brain you can go brain dead. You can lose your memory. You can change your gender. You can do all kinds of things with the body.

But is the body when the body the senses in the body when they you know when they go blind or deaf there's a sense of smell that the there's still consciousness. So consciousness beyond the senses is the win consciousness without feature without end. And what is that in terms of dharma?

That is dharma. That is absolute reality. And that's what you begin to realize through meditation as you reflect on the simple truth that all conditions are impermanent. So consciousness, the pure consciousness is not a condition, not a thing, not a phenomenon that doesn't die. That's the deathless

reality. The amarati. So is Aja and tomato enlightened? You know in terms of aja and are words that can never be enlightened. The body isn't going to get enlightened. So was Ajan enlightened? Well, as a person, nobody's personality ever gets enlightened because it's very conditioned,

very impermanent, very fleeting, very changeable. Personality is definitely like the monkey mind swinging from one tree to the next. Very restless, discontented with what you have, looking for something better. But consciousness is its very nature is pure not sensory consciousness

but pure consciousness without feature without end. The amatama deathless reality is apparent here and now timeless. Come and see for yourself. It's a wakeup call. It's like a pasico is in the poly words when we chant the qualities of dharma. It's a posical

come and see. It's like like a invitation very polite invitation to find out for yourself and that's what meditation is about. It's a aico invitation to you must realize this for yourself. No matter how wise a teacher, a guru, a monk might be clinging to the teacher is still not a prico. It's not

the parent who now is still the personality. the person worshiping as physical form and his own views and opinions about the nature of the teacher being enlightened or not. So this is something I find very important to keep reminding you so that you do begin to realize this for yourself. That's the whole point of this life. His monastic form is not about

escaping the world or becoming something. getting a status as a senior monk, senior nun, becoming famous and all these are very worldly ambitions. Oh, it reminded the the word biku means beggar. One who depends on the kindness of

others. So you don't have to become a biku to be a beggar to depend on the kindness of others. What's important is to follow the signs to dhamma ultimate reality for yourself not just try to get some status or to become nobody. Sometimes we want to just be a recluse and hide away.

Just leave me alone. Don't bother me. I'm meditating. That's still that's not a come and see. It's it's me as a personality wanting to not be bothered with others, not be annoyed, not have duties or responsibilities that live, you know, in living community. you are inevitably caught up in duties and responsibilities.

So you know as an ideal we can think I just want to be live a quiet life in the forest meditating on dharma and uh become a beggar or arms mannequin. Alms sounds a little nicer than a beggar. But when I became a British citizen

years ago, I changed my name from Robert Jackman to Biku Sumato. So my first name is Biku or Beggar. It's not Ajan or Jun or anything high up. just a simple arms mandic but I can still be attached to that as a sense of my humility and my humbleness and I'm not after status and I'm still

I'm still bragging about wanting to be left alone being a recluse being nobody is still being somebody. But being a senior monk is like this. It's, you know, it's it's I experience a lot of respect and gratitude from people. People are incredibly generous. So I'm very grateful for that. But it's

not demanded or expected because basically I'm just a beggar of no importance and even that could be a form of pride. But as I rest in the silence of consciousness, consciousness is pure unmitigated silence. It's peaceful. It's not a creation through developing concentration. It's not like I've got

really good samadi and I, you know, I just live in a realm of of a very special state of consciousness. This is the ordinary consciousness we're all sharing. That is our true nature that we can rest and abide in, relax into realize there's nothing to fear, nothing

to regret. So I offer this as a reflection. Hallelujah. [Music]