Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 14 (X8DeyhVIpWs)
Video ID: X8DeyhVIpWs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X8DeyhVIpWs

Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa Aparuta detha anukampimam pajam tavara E sotthim bhavantu

sabbada So I welcome everybody on this sunny day with this reflection on the way it is. And uh time moves on so it's only a few days left of the what we've labeled the winter's retreat January, February, March.

So it's reaching the end of the retreat and end of the month of March. So the retreat is labeled by us for most people the end of March is not about end of a retreat just to point out how we label everything. We put things like retreat or

March onto the realities that we're experiencing here and now. So bringing your attention to what the ending is like this feeling only a few days left of the retreat is like this. And the March is like this. Just these labels we project onto

situations, to people are they're artifices. They're not natural because the season now doesn't say I'm March. We call We project the word March onto it. Just to point out how the thinking mind works. It makes things up. Gives titles. The end of the retreat

3 months of retreat time, winter winter retreated on the property. Now it's a memory. So the retreat winter retreat of 2026 is nearly end. It's the ending of something that we've believed in quite literally.

So pointing to how time is an artifice itself. Because for many of us 3 months winter's retreat is a long time. For me it was I wasn't really on retreat but the 3 months starting with January to this

today and towards the end of March has gone by very fast. As we say time flies. But also to point that time and space are what we create in our minds. It's timeless in the present. And the present has no name. It's empty. So apparent here and now timeless

is the ultimate reality of every moment we experience. We measure things. So we have 12 months in the year and and uh there's different calendars made up by different cultures. For many people lay people go into ski resorts during January, February,

March is what they perceive as their winter experience. So to to be timeless to realize timelessness is to realize the present moment is like this. Sounds very simple. Just wake up the present moment, let go of

everything. >> [clears throat] >> But the human beings are we're intelligent creatures that grasp the creations we we make in life. That we've been we've been acquired what we've identified with. So this grasping in Pali we call it Upadana grasping

is you know even though we think just let go, don't grasp it's easy to say. But my advice is to really grasp something and pay attention to the tension you create in your life, in your body in your mind when you're really holding to prejudices, biases

grasping perceptions. Grasping your gender grasping Buddhism grasping anything when you really just grasp it, you you can no longer understand it. Because that power of grasping blinds you to the reality of what you're doing what's happening. Some people have asked me questions

about samatha and according to many teachers samatha is something you've got to grasp. Get it. You've got to get it. It's something to acquire. It's something that a good monk or nun should practice samatha

and develop concentration. So as personalities we do that in the beginning years of our meditative experience we grasp things trying to get what we have been told is right or is desirable to get rid of all the things that the defilements

we've got defilements that we've got to get rid of. And this fits into the whole illusion [gasps] of time and It is the first factor in the eightfold path. What is sammaditthi? And so as a person

as a separate person identified with your body and operating from habits that never that is very ephemeral. It's time bound. So we out of ignorance, out of avijja we bind ourselves to the unsatisfactory always using the unsatisfactory to find the satisfactory.

Well, the unsatisfactory can't ever find satisfaction. Because it's nature to change. And it's not a real person. It's an illusion we create. So in in our lives as samanas or as lay people whatever our position in the social structure we see ourselves as individual

personalities who become Buddhists and become meditators and become something. So that's the thought. That's wrong. I'm not criticizing, but just pointing out operating from that self view the atta view of I am this separate

human form in a society looking for God or looking for the deathless. Or looking for unconditional love. You know, it's impossible. So the Buddha's teaching is pointing to the unsatisfactoriness

of forms. And what is the most obvious form is your own body. It's a separate form in the way we see and have been conditioned by our cultures, by our parents, by our societies by our education. So sammaditthi is when we realize

our true nature is formless. It's not this what we've been told. So sammaditthi right understanding is the realization that you are not a real person. This is a convention. The forms we have are

very delicate sensitive forms in space. So space and form go together. Without space there there could be no forms. No, just logic, reason. The space is and one can perceive by looking around. There's the space

in this temple is is quiet. We think of the space spacious room. But if this temple built out of solid bricks we couldn't very well use it. The forms could not enter a form. And so forbidding as cement or bricks.

But space is is what we live in. It's apparent here and now. It's endless. It's not like winter's retreat or month of March, which is ending. It's endless. Turning into our own ways of perceiving it. And we try to perceive space.

You go outside and stand on a mountain top and perceive space. It's where where does it begin? Where does it end? So these are the questions to ask yourself. Are you just a very limited being bound to a very sensitive form for a lifetime of that your age is

or becomes? Is that all you are? And just another time bound condition? And so we want to be reborn again. Or we want to annihilate ourselves. So being reborn again is like we thought we'd been good and I should be rewarded for being virtuous and good. And if I've been bad

bad should be punished not rewarded. So there's always this logic. The good is rewarded and the bad is punished. This is all the creation of language. Is language divides everything. Space has no form. But we can

it, so we we call it space. And then it's opposite opposite is spacelessness. But you can't perceive spacelessness with vision. You can't see it or define spacelessness. We can say how does space That's very far away, but space in the temple is like this.

Space in your home is like this. Space in your car is like this. So, what I'm trying to do is kind of tearing down the blindfolds that bind us to these illusions. Like the Buddha. Somebody that he is really realizing anatta, no self.

How can you imagine yourself to be no self? If you're no self, you have no form. You're nobody. No self has to no eyes, no ears, no tongue, no body, no brain. So, we resort to grasping the upadana, the grasping of forms endlessly, and wonder why

we suffer. So, the Buddha's first noble truth there is suffering is to be understood. And that's very significant, that word understood. It's not to be annihilated or criticized, but to be understood is like this. Feeling lonely.

Just feeling the cold. Just feeling bored on the winter's retreat. [clears throat] Because we as us if we were just a the forms that we identify with then life gets very lonely. You kind of seeing yourself as as an isolated form in space

is not a very uh pleasant feeling or perception. So, we seek company. We go to the pub. We play sports. We do everything to feel part of a group, part of a family. Is when we're part of a family then we're we're not so lonely. So, but just consider how lonely it is to be

a separate form in space. Not understanding your true nature with an identity that's bound to something that's very delicate, easily harmed, very sensitive in a vast universe that is endless. So, sammasamadhi, getting back to that.

As long as our samadhi is dependent on form, on an object, whether it's the breath of the body, candle flame, [clears throat] a color, kasina, you know, then we're we're always focusing on an object that is a form of some sort.

But sammasamadhi is realizing formless. There's no form. So, it's not like concentrating on emptiness as some believe, but being emptiness. Being a formless pure conscious awareness

that we're our true experience whatever time, whatever place. So, sammasamadhi, samma samadhi is is not about putting forth an effort, but in relaxing. As long as you're using effort to find

to develop samadhi, you're caught the basic illusion may become more subtle, less coarse, but even the subtlest illusion is still an illusion. Where non-grasping is freedom, liberation. So, anatta no self is not annihilating your personality,

but no longer grasping It's being free from seeing your personality as your what you really are. Believing in all your prejudices, biases, positions you take on right and wrong, good and bad. So, sammaditthi is letting go of everything, not

destroying. It's not about rejecting forms, but non-grasping. And that's relaxation. So, this is an encouragement to investigate life. This is a the blessing of the Buddha. Not telling us what to believe.

Or forming an some identity with Buddhism, but in freeing us of having no identity. So, dhamma the dhamma apparent here now and timeless is ultimate reality. Sangha The Buddha established the sangha. So, we

we form a uh monastic forms, rules, regulations, vinaya, >> [clears throat] >> to make a sangha work. If it's just a of each person can do what make up their own rules do what they want. Then that doesn't form a Sangha, that just creates endless conflicts.

Where the Vinaya, at least for the monks and the nuns, it's it gives form. Not to grasp and identify with, but to live with, to know the limits of action and speech. To subscribe to the limits of behavior, bodily behavior, and

our ability to speak and think. But it's not about judgment or forming a sense of superiority. Because that's psychic identity again. So it's you know, one can be very proud of one's moral commitment. And that uh is not to be despised, but >> [clears throat]

>> the grasping of morality leads to arrogance. So our relationship to morality is to respect the limits, to live in harmony with the >> [clears throat] >> Sangha that we've chosen to live with. So you can see the

the in form is is anicca dukkha anatta. It's impermanent. It's not perfect, it's full of flaws and mistakes, right and wrong, good and bad, beautiful, ugly. Sankhara anicca,

sabba dhamma anatta, all dhamma. As we say, are our forms, are they dhamma? Are they some kind of freaky outcome or freaky birth out of nothing or we can imagine anything we want. But the forms are conventions, that's all they are. All they are. And we try to

use these forms to be compassionate, to be of metta, to bring harmony in a in a society we're in. So to reiterate the Theravada Buddhism is a mere convention, it's not ultimately real, it's the conventions, the

signposts that point the way. What we do when we read the signposts, we look inward, rather than looking for dhamma as some outward thing. When we look outward, we look for an enlightened person, a form, a man or woman who

who we believe is enlightened, and cling to that person. But the ultimate reality is not a person. So I offer this as a reflection for this afternoon.