Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 37 (iH_DagyaKp0)
Video ID: iH_DagyaKp0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iH_DagyaKp0

[Music] So the one time I won't turn to Satan. So this afternoon you're assemble here to reflect on the way it is the dharma. I'm not a teacher. I don't want to teach you anything but point the way. And that's the basic value of Buddha Dama is like a for noble truth. His first sermon after

enlightenment was was not a doctrine, not a teaching but pointing the direction to enlightenment. So even though I'm called Ajan, Ajan means teacher. It's just a convention. I don't like to think of myself as a teacher because then I feel I have to teach people.

So in meditation what we call power it's it's investigating the way it is. So right now, just observe what you're feeling right now as you're sitting here in this damole. Just be the watcher, not the judge. It's not judging how I'm not suggesting you

should be feeling anything but just be the witness each person here in the Damo about the feeling that you have the mood the state of mind you happen to be experiencing. So this is a reflective a reflection on the way it is. You can't help the way you feel at this moment. You don't choose feelings. They just

come according to conditions. Well, we out of ignorance of dharma, we tend to identify with our feelings. I feel like this. I feel interest. I'm not interested or I'm bored or I'm you know we we want to make judgments about how we're feeling at this moment or maybe thing you think I don't feel anything but whatever not feeling anything is

still a word about not being able to identify the the experience of here and now Because the way it is is always about here and now. Enlightenment is here and now. Nibana is here and now. Liberation from suffering is here and now. It's not something in the future or

is difficult or something highly attained through hours of meditation is through recognizing your true reference. Your two abiding places which is apparent here and now is the way it is. Whatever mood, whatever state of mind you're in at this time, it changes according to

conditions. So when you identify with your mood, then you become someone who's angry or frightened or jealous or hungry. You become a personality that's identified with the way it is now through ignorance. So that we call a retita or ignorance of the way it is. So the Buddha wasn't really a teacher.

He was pointing very directly to the way it is. So when he after his enlightenment when he went to meet his five colleagues as not you know and he the first sermon was there is suffering there's a cause there's the end there's a way of nonsuffering so that's not a doctrine suffering is not a doctrinal position we

It's to understand it. Now suffering is very much this realm that we're experiencing through the body. The body is a realm of feelings and suffering and fear and desire that we all experience individually. So looking at my body now that I'm 91 years old

or am I is this a body that's 91 years old? You know it's it's not what I want personally. Everybody wants me to live to 120, but I've had enough really. 91. I'm very fortunate. I I don't suffer very much. My vision is is very poor. So if you've come to greet me and I can only see you when

you're up close. I can see you know the separation. I can't see any features on faces. So people out of respect for the sa when they come to see me they sit very far away and speak in a soft voice and and I can't hear them or see who it is. I used to have 2020 vision and perfect hearing but this is the aging process of a of a human body. It's like this. It's

not something to identify with but to learn from. Old age is like this. It's not, you know, your personality, your ego is formed when you're young. So when you're young, you know, you think old age is far away, but when you're old, you think I'm surprised there still be alive. So

ages is about the body. It's not personal. It's not a personal thing. It's the nature of forms. They begin, they they are born, they get old and die, they end. And that's the wisdom teaching of the Buddha. All conditions are impermanent. In my own experience, I

I I really registered that that old conditions are impermanent. So in my bow practice over the years, you know, I began to see really not just see this in terms of what the Buddha taught or a Buddhist doctrine, but a reality. It's the reality. It's real. All conditions are impermanent.

So when the body dies, what happens to the soul or the spirit? You know, when we're identified with the body, we can imagine experienced outside of the form that we identify with. So we I think you know we make up images of heaven, hell, nibbana. Debonic can be seen as eternal bliss or

we can think just annihilation oblivion everything we think whether it's oblivion heaven hell or reborn as a da or an angel in the highest realms or becoming a Buddha these are words like the word Buddha is a nice word very to me the nicest word we have but it is a word it's a sankara the word dharma is a sankara the word sana is a sankara

they they arise and they cease their forms in consciousness they you can't sustain them. Like in the Thai tradition, we we we use the uh mantra Buh, the Buddhist name. But no matter how much you repeat the word B, it has a beginning and ending. So I began to really investigate words, how strong I identify with words, with me as a Buddhist, as a Viku, as a man,

with my age, with my appearance. I began to investigate. All that I believed in was taught to my parents through my social conditioning by my education are just words. They taught me I must believe in God as a Christian. So as God then you must believe and then

it's always him. God is has a form has a gender and then you know it's a sin to disbelieve in God. So the word sin comes into consciousness. And so this has been very much a strong influence in my life. The sense of sin and being wrong

because the judgment is about right and wrong, sin and virtue. The thinking mind, the thinking mind is a is a judging function. You know, if you got heaven, you got hell. If you got God, you've got Satan. You got male, female, right and wrong, true and false, virtue and vice. Every every single word has its opposite of positive and a

negative. All these positive and negative are judgments are conditions we make on ourselves and on others on the society we live in. So we we began to I began to realize how living in a sa of monks who some I liked some I didn't like as a person

and then the ideal of a biku is I should like everybody equally and I should appreciate our virtues, our interest in dharma and and that's being very rational and reasonable about everything. But just noticing emotions aren't about being reasonable. Emotions are not reasonable. They're

feeling right and wrong, good or bad, angry or happy. So then the Buddhist said all conditions are impermanent. So suddenly you realize there's no reality between right and wrong, good and bad, male and female, God and Satan. It's not real. It's contrived. It's artificial. It's made up by human beings. But what we call dharma

the word itself is a sankara but it pointing to the way it is. When we become the witness to the way it is then we're in the state of awakened attention to the way it is. All conditions really are impermanent. And a doubt about is there something permanent? Is is consciousness permanent? Is is there a permanent soul or spirit essence

or karmic essence that gets reborn? And so we hear various explanations, justifications and rationalizations about this. But it's really very simple that that all that arises ceases and is not self. All dhamma is not personal. So what is impersonal is consciousness because we don't create it. Sense consciousness is very

personal and temporary. So what we see here smell touch think what we feel is always changing. Sur are always changing. So that mean what is the witness of change? What is it that witnesses change? Is it Ajan Seleno watching practicing meditation watching things come and go in his mind? You know on one conventional level that how we talk and

think and interpret experience or is it Buddha or you know what what is pure consciousness that doesn't begin or end. And of course, we can't find it. You'll never be able to see it, hear it, smell it, taste it, touch it, or think it because that's what you ultimately are. That's what awareness is. Conscious

awareness is where you're abiding in the pure consciousness of dharma, ultimate reality. So it's rather than trying to get enlightened as a person, I guarantee nobody's personality ever gets enlightened. You don't become an enlightened person because the personality is very artificial.

No matter how virtuous and pure you try to live, you as a person don't get enlightened. What enlightenment is is realizing your true nature which is impersonal or what we call an non no person. Now that pure consciousness is complete is pure. So your true nature, everyone here in this hall, everyone in England, in the world

is the same ultimate consciousness except they identify with what they're not. Their conditioning, their egos, their prejudices, their biases, their views and opinions about right and wrong, good and bad. So that's why you know to have person in the attempts to have solve wars in the world to bring peace to the

world. I remember I grew up during the Second World War and so much of my experience, early experience and childhood was was with the American propaganda. And so, you know, I thought at the end of the war, then they had the United Nations meeting, forming the United N United

Nations in San Francisco. And I remember with great hope that this where all the United Nations would become united and make agreements, fair and just agreements, and really there'd be no more war. I was 11 years old at the time and that was a hope because war was second world war was terrible.

So, you know, the United Nations is a really good idea, but it is an idea. And so, we have wars all over now in Ukraine, Russia, and Palestine and Israel, and and Sudan and other in African countries. And there was even a conflict between the ties and the Cambodians recently. And it goes on, how can we handle these

conflicts and have permanent peace? Well, permanent peace is impossible as long as we are identified with conditions of change. There is no such thing as permanent peace in the world. because it it's just not the way it is. The things change. You know, you you fall in love with somebody and you think you're going to be in love with them

forever and then after a few years you want to separate because the idea of living happily ever after is a beautiful idea. It's ideal but it's not the way things are. Things Relationships change, feelings change, conditions change. So the bas

all conditions are impermanent. And that's you need to realize this for yourself, not just take believe what I'm saying. But what I'm saying is to encourage your own ability to develop your wisdom faculty to see through the illusions you cling to and identify with. Now this is a very important teaching at this time

because we've got everything you know these wise wisdom teachings are now quite available to everyone through the internet. through technology where when I first became a Buddhist in 1955 there was hardly anything in English about Buddhism

there's a plethora of books on meditation ter Buddhism Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism about the and on and on. It's wonderful to see in it way. Often times you don't know which book to buy because there's so many choices, so many options. One thing when you're as a seminar, as a monk or a nun,

you know, Often we come to this life with our ideals how things should be. And I remember when I met Lar in 1967, I was looking for the ideal teacher and uh the ideal monastery. And so I thought when I first met the monks what they were only about 20 monks at the time,

you know, I thought they were all perfect. I just assumed that anybody living this life would have realized enlightenment by now. And I wanted I want y'all to be perfect for me. You know, this is all about me. What I wanted and expected as an idea. I wanted to be the perfect example of an arant.

I wanted his disciples to be perfect examples of sas. And the life was very simple and basic which I quite liked. I personally approved of it. I wanted to understand how to use vinaya the discipline. So I was quite eager to I was quite open to the whole thing.

But within a year I was totally frustrated because I was having to learn another language. I didn't understand Thai culture or Thai society. I would misinterpret experience. I'd get paranoid thinking, you know, people laughing at me because would sometimes point at me and

everybody start laughing and I take that personally as you know why are they laughing at me? you know in America that was rude and so and then everybody with a strict eye. They were always on my back making so telling me what to do, how to walk, how to carry my my bag, how to eat my meal, how to sit. You have to sit with your

legs to one side, which was very painful at first. And every time I shift into crossing the legs, then some monk would tap me on the shoulder and tell me to sit in this in this polite posture, type polite posture, which we never do in the United States. Never thought about it before. And so

I began to just feel oppressed, smothered by the discipline, all the rules and and I began to see that all the monks were not enlightened. So then I was disillusioned because uh my the ideals that I came with brought up my critical mind. I started

criticizing and just feeling like I'm suffocated under a blanket of precept rules and monks that are always on my back telling me what to do. So this was a feeling I had a feeling of being overwhelmed with with vinaya and rules about right and wrong and true and false and good and bad. And

I got this idea that we were superior monks to the village monks because we wear these dark robes and they always have this feeling that we're keeping the rules and we're better than they are. So I've developed this sense of of a kind of cultish acceptance of we're superior and you can't trust those village monks. And I grew up in a Christian community,

high Anglican community. And high church Anglicans are very cultish. They think they're much better than low church Anglicans. So So brought up, you know, the very cultish uh experiences about we're superior and we look down on like in in America it's called the Episcopal Church, the the middle and the low but

very high high church. And I noticed how cruel being superior to to others is because high church Anglicans could be very judgmental, uncruel, and unkind in the way they looked at others. that didn't quite fit into their high standards of how a Anglican should be. So I became very much afraid of being belonging to something like that when I

entered the monastic life. And here I was, you know, that brought up this karmic remembrance remembering of superiority to others. like superior to the village monasteries or the Bangkok monasteries and I didn't like that feeling. I didn't want to I could see just feeling superior to other people is is

not peaceful because your critical mind just goes very active and you've got to protect your purity at all costs. you've got to to uh you know make everybody conform to your rules and your to keep you pure and superior to the rest. And by verbalizing this in my mind, you know, and observing the impermanence

of words and feelings, I began to see how see how these I'm superior or inferior are just conditions, words that we come from that are created. They have no reality in themselves. There is no one superior or inferior. So I and I try to take the middle way. I'm just an ordinary. I'm not superior. I'm not inferior.

I respect all people who try to live the holy life and that's being very reasonable and fair and proper but it's still artificial. It's not enlightened awareness. So whether you want to be just one of the boys or just a commoner or equal or equal are all equal to each other. These are words that we often time cling

to. Maybe ideas like want equality among all people is a very nice ideal. Gender equality, racial equality, religious equality, everything's fair and just is is ideal. So it's the best you can think, but it's not the way it is. Ssara is not about equality, equity or fairness. Sara is changing and we can't make it

stop changing and bend condition phenomena to fit our ideals and ideals change. So you begin to wake up to reality itself to what is your true nature. And my realization was this conscious awareness which is not personal. It's not a where

male and female, good and bad, right and wrong cease. In pure consciousness, there's nothing. The conditions arise and cease. good ones, bad ones, fair ones, unjust ones, because that's the way this this exper this experience of life in a form is. It's just like this. Getting old is like

this. And by reflecting this way, you stop trying to want it to be otherwise or thinking it's unfair or unjust. You stop thinking as your identity because thinking is about right and wrong, good and bad and that's all thinking is an artifice. Poly, poly grammar, Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese,

all languages are created. They're sankaras. No matter whether they're holy languages or vulgar languages or primitive languages, they they arise and cease like all So one day I became so depressed at what I became so just feeling smothered and it made me credibly critical of everything

and it was evening puja time in the enchanting And I didn't go. I went out into the forest and I started swearing all the words that a good Piku should never use. I was in the Navy for a few four years, so I'm really good at swearing. And just by you know it's nothing wrong with what or lumpa or the monks really

you know they were it was a you know I didn't want to leave but uh they were changing conditions that didn't always suit my my interpretation of what's right and so I began to just release this sense of oppression of just trying to fit in on my personal level to the way I thought everybody wanted me to be

because that takes a lot of effort when you're a a West Coast American. I came from Berkeley, California. This was 1967 and Berkeley, California was the hippies and the pot smokers and follow your heart, do whatever you want, experience everything. But that's the kind of society I left behind

to live in what form a very strict venile monastery. So we're going from one extreme where there complete freedom follow your heart whatever it wants to do to you can't do this you can't do that but I still didn't want to leave but I think the release mechanism I'm not recommending that you do this but this is how I dealt with this the

way I was holding it the way I you know, out of my personal habit patterns, holding the strict rules and and you know, being very idealistic about how things should be, I began to just release the tension. So, I went back to the salah where they were chanting me and I felt this sudden real love for the

whole life. And I listened I stood outside just listening to the monks chanting and I just felt so peaceful and felt so full of love for everything because I was no longer holding ideals or demands or views or opinions. Somehow I've released myself from from these kind of tension holding experiences to just being

and the poly chanting was very beautiful the way the tries to do it. And uh and I then I went back and I could really begin to enjoy the life of the ter forest monk. So what one of the forms of desire that is most deluding

is called whipplewood. The desire to get rid of things. to get rid of fear, to get rid of greed and lust and get rid of jealousy, you know. So, this was this was the idea of wanting to get rid of wanting to get rid of my defilements. I saw myself as a defiled person and I wanted to get rid of them. I wanted to I suffered from jealousy

and I wanted I didn't like to be jealous. I didn't want to be a jealous person. So I was trying to get rid of it. Trying to get rid of fear because my generation of Americans were brought up with the idea of, you know, the really tough male who never frightened of anything. Superman kind of images from childhood.

And so you had this idea that you're a weak male if you're experiencing fear. So you wanted to get rid of it. His early conditioning. It affects us our whole life if we're not aware of it. how the views and opinions, the perceptions we formed when we were innocent, openminded children. Like when a new baby is born, it's

totally innocent, you know, it's not it's conscious, but it doesn't have memory, doesn't have a name. Then the mother father name it and you're a boy or a girl and you're English or Thai or American you form a sense of your identities through knowledge acquired from others from your parents from your brothers and sisters

your society. So now the conventions, the idea of being American or male or viku that I realize are mere conventions. They're not what I am, not ultimately real. They're just acquired perceptions that I didn't ask for. They were just given to me. When when you're

a child, your innocence, you just soak up whatever comes at you at the time. Soana desire to get rid of sin or defilements or jealousy or fear. That's ego. That's my ego. Wanting to get rid of fear, not wanting to be jealous, wanting to be pure, not have any sexual feelings,

wanting to no longer have defilements, wanting to just get rid of them all, hoping that I could do that. And then through mindfulness and through wisdom you find out you can't really because nature of the human body. It's a it's a condition itself. The eyes where most tongue body the brain is condition is phenomenal

and it's not ideal. It's not, you know, so many disabled people and people babies born that are disfigured or whatever. It's not fair. Being brought up as a Christian, I used to wonder, why does God allow people to be born deformed? It's not fair. And it's not fair. But that's the way it is.

Sara the changing conditions of phenomena are like that. They're not always fair or just or good or right. So with the wood desire to get rid of things I had insight early on in monastic life that that was my middle name with I wanted control of my life and get rid of what I didn't like

and become what I ide ide idealized. And I can see you know through investigating the ego I want to become a pure viku are words it's not bad but it is a creation that my personality my ego wants to become pure wants to get enlightened and just by

observing that being the pl the witness to the way it I want to become enlightened. You know, you can say, well, I shouldn't think like that. Or that's my goal in life is to become enlightened. I'm dedicating my life as a Buddhist monk to become enlightened. The world needs more enlightened people. Well, it does.

But you know can those words really you know they come from artififices from saras. So then I had a very powerful experience of realizing the silence behind the words which goes unnoticed is not created. I call this the sound of silence. Silence is here and now. It's not a creation by humanity,

but it's reality. It's not a sankara. So enlightenment means abiding in pure conscious awareness which is here and now. It's timeless. It doesn't about time. Saras are all about time. And then I realized in the sequence of consciousness, space, earth, fire, water and air, the elements,

you know, just reflecting if there was no consciousness, how could there be space? If there is personal confidence, we live in space. So space is something that comes into consciousness. Otherwise there could be no forms. If there are no space then there's no forms can arise in in a spaceless reality.

But because there is consciousness here and now, then space, earth, fire, water and hell or air or forms manifest in space. And we identify, cling to these illusions that are created, that are impermanent, that are unsatisfactory. And that's why the suffering of the world is like this. There has to be wars as

long identify with with nationality, you know, creating lines where where this is my nation and your nation's over there. That's artificial. So there's going to be a war. You like impinging on my my borders. We're going to fight you. This is a because of the identity with my country, my nationality, my space. It's all illusion. It's not reality at all.

Where the Buddha was pointing to ultimate reality. And so the third noble truth is the end of suffering. which is here and now timeless. It's peace. It's perfect peace. So that is your true nature whether you realize it or not. If you stop, if you just let go of perceptions and things that you're

attached to is more like not getting rid of them, but no longer identifying with them on a conventional sense in this tradition tradition. I'm a Buddhist monk of au that's convention which is impermanent in itself. When we attach to the conventions then we were bound into that

world of suffering, despair, anguish, regret, guilt, remorse. all that makes life miserable. So I offer this as a reflection for this afternoon.