Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 34 (Ix7yPCKAviY)
Video ID: Ix7yPCKAviY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ix7yPCKAviY

Buas [Music] One time John 2. So this, as I say every time, this is the opportunity to reflect, not to think or try to pass judgments, but just to observe, be the witness, the PH, rather than somebody listening to a dharma talk. So being a pau is the witness position.

It's not the judgmental. Buddha is not a judge. Doesn't pronounce judgments on anyone. Buddha Buddha is the witness to ultimate reality. So there's been a question about is absolute reality and consciousness the same thing. And of course I can

I can only reflect on what I've realized myself. It's called budget way up to be realized individually. So everything I say is not a doctrine or if you believe what I say just blindly you say a said that must be true then you're still operating from not the witness but the very personal

reaction to what you hear or your faith in me or your wanting to know definitely what somebody else thinks about ultimate reality or consciousness. So the Buddha emphasized bunch which is to to be realized individually through wisdom. So even in the sutras, the scriptures, the historical Buddha wasn't preaching about doctrines that

you had to believe, but ways to realize for yourself. So these reflections are hopefully ways to encourage you to reflect rather than to just grasp ideas. scriptural proclamations, imperatives that you hear from others, but to see th how they affect you. So consciousness Dharma, absolute reality, ultimate truth

as far as my realization goes are the same thing. That's what I've realized. So that is just A statement not to be grasped or to spread around or to believe that you know is is Ajan Samo really realized the Dharma pure consciousness or Nibana?

You can speculate all you want and form views and opinions about it. But all that is still proliferation like is is Ajan Samato truly realized person and you know that that's a a doubt a question is he realized or not and what you can know from that kind of doubt is you can believe that I am or I'm not.

So any words you you you think up end in doubt. Doubt is the result of grasping ideas. Somebody wrote me a email about Jas do do you really have to get Jas or you don't need them or what do you think John about Jas

and then I just answered it's another word that we can speculate about and that is the fact you when you're the witness you know the word Janna is is a word it's a fact it's it's comes and goes according to conditions or samati you've got to get samati before you can do a is like uh

imperative in some circles, some teachers, you got to get samadi and ask who has to get samadei and what is what is samadi and then you realize English translation is concentration and you've got to get concentrated and then you ask yourself who has to get concentrated. Is there a separate

entity called that needs to get samati? And uh you know then the question is can you can I find a separate person called tomato you know I can see it's a word I've been given the name but is to is is another word it comes and goes. I wasn't knows what my Christian name is.

It's my Buddhist name. So this is investigating phenomena as we experience it. even very personal identities and we live in an age in a culture that makes everything very personal. what I think and feel is so ultimately important and my views and my opinions

should be taken seriously and uh I want to be understood and appreciated as a person and all these we can all relate to you know as a person we want all kinds of things or don't want things to be a certain way. So the witness is aware of this desire wanting and not wanting. So the personality sakiadi

or the ego when we call it the ego or in poly term psychiad the first matter you know as a person I want to be listened to and respected as a person but when I try to find the person that has any permanence or any sustainability. I can't find it. I can't

find myself as a person. And as you keep investigating and and questioning and as you you begin to realize that when you let go of the personality, you you don't destroy it. It doesn't mean you don't have any personality anymore, but it's no longer what you believe and trust in

as a person. Trust you know my personality is very changeable. The ego changes according to conditions. So I can't trust it because it is very unstable. But in ultimate reality, in pure consciousness, I trust that that's my abiding place, not in what I think or feel or believe. And as far as I've been able to do, I I

cannot get beyond consciousness, pure consciousness. I can believe I can imagine images beyond consciousness like there's a Brahma realm or a special realm where Ara live or those are those are images we create in consciousness. But when you realize pure consciousness, it's the silence behind all the

thoughts, all the emotions that you realize. It's apparent here and now. It's timeless. It never changes. So that must be ultimate reality because you can't you you can't get beyond it. Any images you might form are within consciousness. So

even the idea of getting beyond consciousness is still words imagination. So I found like in the terravada approach the poly cannon and that I I like the the form of it and it's it's just the first sermon to me is absolutely brilliant because it it uh it's it's all there you know the the suffering is a common human

experience which we none of us want to suffer as persons as people and yet so much of life in this form this human body male or female is suffering. That's just the way it is. is not a form that was meant just for pleasure and happiness. It's a form that's born in pain,

grows up, gets old, and dies. And that's what all forms do. Whether they're images or material forms, human forms, animal forms, all conditions are impermanent. So that that is telling you the truth. But then you have to realize that for yourself. It's not about believing all

phenomena is impermanent. It's not about grasping the words but finding out. Can you find phenomena that is permanent? Maybe the sun is best you can get. But sometime in the future the sun will burn out cuz it's fire. It's a condition. It's a phenomenon. Then what will happen to earth?

If the sun burns out, you know, so we're dependent on the sun for sustenance, to grow food, to survive, to breathe. But even that worshiping the sun as a god has a certain reasonleness to it. But it's still not realizing ultimate reality. isn't the sun in the sky or the stars in

the firmament, but it's what you are ultimately is pure conscious awareness. And this is very important for each one to trust in not believed but to find out for yourself. The trust that you're not just a mortal form limited to karmic conditions that you've acquired

and may want or don't want. Because just contemplate the like the entertainment world is about murder and violence and wars, adultery, abuse. And that's what we go pay money to go see is the horror shows or things that are scary. Because

silence ultimate reality isn't exciting or interesting. And as a personality, we're conditioned to seek interesting things, things that entertain us, take us out of our mundane world, the boring life that we might feel we have. So we go to the movies and we watch

we can watch dragons fly through the air. We can see all kinds of fantasies and true stories about people whose lives have been disrupted in so many ways, different ways, listening to the news in the morning, the world the BBC World Service was, you know, sometimes I don't want to even

listen to it because it's always so distressing bringing about what's happening and the starvation, the wars that go on, the brutality and in my practice of meditation and I I Find the silence of here and now my strength. It's peaceful. It's not suffering.

So what do you want to identify with with the desire mind that always looking for a hit a sensual experience? uh a reward, a prize, win a race. Listening to the BBC World Service, I hear these people winning races and how excited and happy they are at being winners, being recognized as winners, and it's all very enthusiastic. But how long can you sustain that kind of how long can

you sustain the belief that you're a winner? Or you might be the depressed kind that think I'm a habitual loser. I'm nobody. How long can you sustain that illusion? you know, so we handled it with alcohol, drugs, smoking, all kinds of ways of of uh making life more interesting or blotting

it out. But apparent here and now is dharma. And that when you ask yourself what is apparent here and now this conscious awareness wherever you whatever state of mind you're in whether you're elated because you're a winner or you're a loser apparent here and now is the mood changes but the conscious silence is

fully conscious. It's not a created consciousness through any organ of the body. So this is another question to ask yourself. Is consciousness just limited to my body? Is it bound into this mortal form or is conscious? Is the body in consciousness? Is the world in is the planet in consciousness?

Is are the sun, moon, and stars in consciousness? Consciousness embraces everything. And when we so that we're all in the same consciousness, it's not personal, it's not Buddhist, it's not anything but ultimate reality. It can only be that. Now this is to be realized for yourself and this kind of reflection that I'm

giving this afternoon is to encourage you to do it. This is the pansa, the vasa, the monasteries dedicated towards realizing this for yourself, not to become a just followers of of terabad and Thai forest tradition or to be caught in the momentum of custom and habit, but to be the witness to Whatever

habits you individually might have, whether they're wholesome or not, you can witness they are what they are. Say, is smoking a good or bad habit? Smoking cigarettes. And then you can say, when I was a youth, it was what everybody did. And you were nobody if you didn't light

up a cigarette and smoke. And it was kind of I liked smoking. And then it be now it's considered a bad habit because it causes cancer. So we we pass judgment. What is it? It's not about saying whether smoking is good or bad, but it is a condition that arises and ceases. So you're saying it no longer from the judgment position of right or

wrong, good or bad, but from wisdom. It is a condition. It's not ultimate reality. Whether you personally think it's good or bad is individual. But good and bad are just words. They're judgments. And the thinking mind is all about judging things. You know, the thinking mind is all

words. So all words vocabulary is dualistic you know. So we divide everything that we experience through what we see here, soul, taste, touch and think into right and wrong, good and evil, true or false, male or female, virtue and sin. All these are words that

that make judgments about phenomena. It's not judging ultimate reality. But we can think ultimate reality must be very good. But it's not about being good anymore. It's about the way it is. Ultimate reality is to be realized. It's a bunch of tongue. It's a it's to be realized individually. So everybody in this

temple hall listening to this realize it's it you can do this. This is not asking you to that only special people can do this. is a very practical way to reflect on one's own personal take on life and existence. Do you really like yourself as a person or do you pass judgments on yourself? I have these bad habits. I

think too much. I I'm too lazy. I'm not I'm too greedy. I'm have too much anger and hatred. These are judgments about your personality you know. So as we see our personality is what we are then we the judging faculties come into existence because the personality is you know it

changes. It can be good it can be bad. It can feel love and respect. You can feel anger and hatred. That's a personality. But it's a very impermanent condition. It's a phenomenon. So when we live our lives just from a personal identity, then then it life does you know when you get

old especially As long as you're young, you can kind of enjoy life. If you're not disabled or you believe you can, you think if you got a lot of money and a lot of power, you be on top of the world. But the world is not a realm of happiness. It's a realm of suffering when you

contemplate nature just around us here at this the way is all about self-preservation survival procreation like sexual desire is a natural condition to the this form of the human male male and female.

And yet we see it, we can take it in very personal ways. It's right, it's wrong, it's a sin, it's we should suppress it, we should get rid of it. But it's programmed into the form. The form is a sexual form. So in monasticism you become celibate. Well, what is that? As a person, you

abstain from sexual activities that we often takes personally. to take personally because we still have sexual desire. The body produces that and we think we've got to control it, get rid of it, deny it. But celibacy, we just don't act on it. We recognize it as just a function like swallowing food or defecating. It's just natural phenomena arising and

ceasing. or pure consciousness is silent. It's blissful once you realize it. It's not interesting. It's not romantic. It's not adventurous. to the personality. It's boring and we judge silence. You know it our personalities get bored and restless

because the personality doesn't isn't silent. You can't become a silent person by trying to create silence. But you can realize silence because it's here and now timeless. And so the path, the eight-fold path is like some right understanding or perfect understanding. Recognize that the path

is silent path. It's not personal. It doesn't belong to anybody. Are there arants on the path or sapanas streamers? There's all kind of speculation about the attainments of people's who meditate whether they're streamers or once returners or non- returnturners or a hunts and these are words

they're empty phenomena. So one time years ago with Locha I asked him I I asked John Cha I said am I a stream enterer am I a sodapana and he looks at me and he smiles and says how should I know so suddenly I realized that's something you know individually through wisdom not that you have to have it affirmed by by someone who you trust is enlightened.

How should I know? This is some his budget tongue to be realized individually not to be kind of kned with a with a sword by a enlightened master. You are a supreme emperor. I wouldn't trust that. The ego would like that. The ego would like to have all the wise sages affirm I'm highly spiritually

evolved and that the ego likes that kind of thing. But when you're not an ego anymore, what are you if you're not a person? And through investigation, the silence behind all the rubbish, all the noise of the world of your mind. Your mind is a thinking function. So it's noisy. Thinking is is a very noisy, you know,

we're stuck with because we're thinking creatures. So we think think and and then we try to stop thinking by using willpower personal willpower to stop thinking thinking I've got to stop thinking you can't do it. I've tried it. Tried to just willfully willfully stop thinking.

And then I like this technique that I recommend to deliberately think because you know I had this insight to stop thinking. So I'd use personal willpower, effort, personal effort to stop it. Now I could do it, hold it for a few seconds and then it would can can sustain it. And that's one reason why drugs or alcohol sometime relief from thinking

because we it just rattles on and on endlessly. Some of it intelligent, a lot of it nonsense. So the space between like take a when you deliberately think something very simple not emotionally charged I use the words like I am a human being now that doesn't arouse any great emot emotion in me. I, you know, it's not something I controversial or

arising arousing any strong feelings. It's kind of a matterof fact statement. But I wasn't interested in the words, but in the silence between the words because that's here and now. Silence is here and now. The words come and go. I am come and go. Even the word a is comes and goes. Try to sustain the the simple

word a. I am a. It's gone. Human is a bigger word. So, but when you try to sustain the word human, you can't. It comes and goes very quickly. And there's space, there's silence between the words that's apparent here

and now. So rather than trying to stop thinking through thinking about stopping thinking and through efforts created out of ignorance just think and be the witness. Can any word can even the word Buddha a holy word in this tradition? So we use the mantra buh but even that you know after a while you

you have to keep thinking bh because you can't sustain the word. You got to keep thinking of it. After a while, just by reciting bh you can sustain. You can go b. But I was such a ravid thinker, such a obsessed with thoughts and ideas that I first when

advised me to use the mantra like you know the inhalation poo and the exhalation toe with using the anapana the breath rising falling of the breath I couldn't And you know, I could I I began to realize inhalations were easy to observe. And I began to notice that my mind would wander on

exhalations. Like inspiration is what we like and expiration we don't want to know. getting old. It's like your life is expiring. Your body's getting old. That's the nature of phenomena. But actually the word Buddha is just a word. It's a sankara. Whether you think it's sacred or not,

it's not a matter what you think. But the fact is it is a creation. It has a origin and a sensation. But what it arises and ceases in is silence. The silence surrounding the word Buddha. How many of you really notice that? Being human is like this. We're thinking creatures and therefore

we can create teachings like the four noble truths dependent origination. They're all thoughts. They're all empty phenomena. But we don't worship thoughts and phenomena unless we're ignorant. We, you know, the four noble truths are signs pointing here and now. And I'm pointing to my

self. There is suffering. And I look here rather than you know listening to the BBC World Service about all the suffering and wars that are going on here and now in the world. So suffering is is to be realized to be understood. So we we're not trying to get rid of it.

We're not trying to not suffer. But suffering is teaching us that it is a condition has causes. It's not personal. It's just the way life is in these very mortal forms. The word mortal mean they're meant to die. And when our identity is with unsatisfactory conditions that are changing that we can't control

then we suffer because you know we we blame God. We we when we're caught in our thinking mind we tend to blame I was noticing with this this uh assassination of this American political activist Charlie Kirk. All the news is who's to blame? Immediately they go to who's to blame

for this on all the media whether it's right or left it's about who's to blame and so I I realized that I could I tended to do this too just to have it and because I am aware I began to question why do I always do that who's to blame somebody broke I remember on the shrine in the old salah, the glass plate on the on the

shrine, somebody broke that glass and I immediately, who's to blame? And I began to think, why do I always do that? Why do I always feel there's somebody to blame? My first reaction, who's to blame for breaking this class? And by questioning, it's not that we we don't do that, but we begin to see we're always looking outward, somebody to

blame for our suffering. I'm suffering from PTSD, post-traumatic stress syndrome. Who's to blame for it? I've got cancer. Who's to blame? And on and on like that. This is who's to blame is a question that comes automatically with the thinking mind. There's got to be blame. Then we tend to think as my mother

or my father. You know, you're looking for somebody to blame for the suffering where a wise wisdom directs you inward. It's not about blaming, but understanding suffering is like this. It's attachment to desire. The causes of suffering. Am I to blame? Do I blame myself? Well, that's more words, isn't it? Who

is myself? That just to investigate desire. How do you investigate desire? And you know you think of desire different cultural attitudes about desire but dana the poly word means there's three kinds and this realm that we're experiencing this body is a dana a form it's about desire

sexual desire. desire or desire for survival. So this it's not that we get rid of desire but we begin to no longer blindly grasp desires in our experience as an individual being in a society. The insight into the second noble truth is letting go of desire. Desire is a phenomena. So it's it arises and seas. It's not

ultimate reality. But just as you witness in your life here as a turns to autumn, you know, you see the changing conditions from summer to autumn. That's just natural phenomena doing what it's supposed to do. Change according to the season. Getting old is just the natural condition of a human experience of life.

getting cancer or things happen that you don't approve of or like is it you know this shouldn't be the people shouldn't act like that or people should you know get along just solve all their problems diplomatically with loving kindness is a good idea idea.

But when you really been insulted or hurt in some ways, you can think, well, I must forgive that person. But emotionally, you're angry or hurt. It's like this. Being angry is like this. Being hurt, being feeling misunderstood or taken advantage of. is like this. It's just that the world will never take advantage of me

is a hopeful wish. An impossible demand on phenomena that changes according to karma, not to my will or desires. So this investigation is into suffering and desire. Are you really a desire? And a desire is very impermanent. And we live in a desire form in a desire world. a planetary system that's all based on

survival. So that's a way to to realize for yourself what you truly truly are ultimate reality not as a personal quality because you see the futility of seeing yourself always personally but to just stop doing them and learn to trust in awareness in silence. The space between words,

the silence behind the noise is the conscious pure conscious ultimate reality to be realized individually by oneself. So I offer this as a reflection.