Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 27 (U03YoHWfJi8)
Video ID: U03YoHWfJi8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U03YoHWfJi8

Good afternoon lap. >> Good afternoon so >> thank you for this opportunity once again. So today is Thursday 11th of December 2025. So today I'd like to start our session with a reference to what is I believe a Zen story. There's this saying in Zen Buddhism, if you see the Buddha on the

road, kill him. What is that about? Well, it we tend to imagine a Buddha. The Buddha isn't on the road and and if we meet one on the road, it's a fake. It's a skeleton. But uh killing it is not exactly good

advice, but it means to not grasp it. Your image of Buddha Because your true nature is Buddha. [clears throat] So when you see a Buddha on the road, it's in the imagination, not not the real, not the real Buddha. So it's not necessarily killing is a bit of a heavy word, but

it gets the point across. So is this something that is basically advice given in the context of how thinking gets in the way of the practice? Thinking, imagining, remembering. >> Well, we're very conditioned. So we we we believe in what we've been conditioned by.

And uh the whole point of the ego is to understand the ego is just empty phenomena. It's not a real person. And yet our personality is definitely built on being somebody being a man or a woman or British or American or whatever. So [clears throat] we identify with the age of the body, we

identify with the skin color, with the gender, with the emotional habits we have. So uh you know the body is born. It's either male or female. But then emotionally we can feel that we're the opposite gender. So emotions are not necessary alignment

with the realities of a physical body. So we have transgender and and various attitudes about sex that we identify with. And [clears throat] this ident identity with conditioned phenomena is what deludes us because ultimately we're not a we're not that. And even though on a conventional level I say I'm a Buddhist, I'm a Buddhist

monk. That's convention is not wrong. But it's but as an identity then what does it do? If I if I as a person as a physical person identify as being an aan being 91 years old, being a man,

being celibate, then I create my sense of my selfidentity which is the ego. So even though conventionally these are in alignment, they're not wrong, but they are conventions. There are conventions are all in Buddhist terms empty phenomena. They arise and they cease. And so the suffering that we experience

in life is we're identifying with with things that change. And now it's changing of the season, changing of the year, changing is inex inexorable. You can't stop it. It's the nature of phenomena. There's no such thing as a pimp permanent phenomena where the ego like how do you know the

different ego from consciousness? Well, you can be you know really investigate. I am Ajan tomato and then I uh investigate that and it's English words aan is a Thai version of a char of teacher and uh the body is male so identify with the male and and that but it's changing

you know 91y old male body is like this. It's not like it was when I was young. Being celibate is part of our lifestyle. Being a male community or a female community, you you have these sexual desires, but you you're aware of them rather than following them or repressing them. So there's a difference between

what you really are to what you believe and think you are. And with sati mindfulness conscious awareness then you can realize that whatever you think you are is not that it's right or wrong. It could be right. It could be wrong according to the world. But the world is is an illusion.

The world that we see, hear from taste, touch, and experience through the senses is is an illusion that we've been conditioned to regard as our the the real world, our reality. And then we suffer. You can just listen to the BBC World Service in the morning and it's pretty grim. You know how much human suffering exists just in the news

and [snorts] yet we want to be happy and successful. So you know I would think to I want to be a good monk and then I think the word I comes and goes want comes and goes to be comes and goes a good beu a role model impeccable and you know so that In worldly terms

that's noble but in terms of reality it's ego. If I grasp that then I have to act like I'm a good vu all the time. So you feel obliged to play a role in life that you can fool yourself with or fool others with but it's not through wisdom or understanding of dharma.

And that kind of brings us back to the first three fetterss which you've often spoken about, doesn't it? Well, that's why I always emphasize those first three feathers because they are real artifices, artificial creations that that we make like the ego and the social conditioning convention and

which the third one is doubt which is attachment to conventions. to thinking. [clears throat] So when you think about yourself, am I uh on the path and then you convin you can convince yourself you are or you you you still might be want verification from a senior monk

or a yogi or something confirmation from somebody else that that I am on the right path. But it's through trusting and awareness that is the path. And so it's not right or wrong. It's where right and wrong cease. And right and wrong and doubt are, you know, constantly are issues of the world that we live in.

Personal issues. Doubt. You know the Zen tradition uses doubt as a meditation technique which is about kill Buddha because it makes you know from a traditional Buddhist viewpoint that's something you don't do. You get bow down and bow to the Buddha. But like what does that mean? Like you asked me to try to reflect upon it. And

what does that mean really? If you're been brought up to bow to the Buddha, Buddha is your refuge is worthy of respect. Then that's conventional conditioning. That's which seeamasa and then kill the Buddha if you see him on the road is is throws you into the state of

doubt because as a person you don't want to do that you know as a person my personality is conditioned to want to if I meet the wood on the road I want to get down in my hands and knees and bow where the killing the Buddha is is merely a way of throwing someone into a state of

doubt which is quite empty don't know explain what knowing the Buddha means and the real you know a conventional I think it's it's a [clears throat] what do you call it? A heretical statement. I could be an apostate. I could be just giving terrible advice,

you know, on the conventional level where the second fence uh better is all about convention. What is convention? you know and then you ask yourself I want to be a role model for the sa is is a nice statement it's right but as I grasp that on the conventional

level then I've got to always act like and believe like I think I'm a role model always impeccable always perfect. [clears throat] But if I realize that that you know if at first I hear that it throws me in the state of doubt. Doubt is where you stop thinking. And then when you stop thinking you're there you're right on the Buddha

path. The Buddha nature doesn't isn't the thinking nature. It's pure conscious awareness is the first which is translated into English as the ego. And so I'm I've explored my ego endlessly over the years and I found it quite fun to do just to see how how I think as a physical human male

in the position I'm in. And uh I listen to it and I see that the words are there English words usually sometimes in Thai but generally English is my first language. So I see myself using English words and our words. What are they? They come and go.

You can't keep hold of words unless you keep repeating them because they they're very very conditioned very you have French or Thai or Singal or whatever poly Sanskrit these sacred languages Tibetan language is sacred. What does sacred mean? What's sacred

about a poly except that we've made it given that label but it is just empty phenomena. All the wisdom scriptures in the just empty phenomena that's hard to take for a poly scholar. But the Buddha wasn't pointing at the words but at the reality of being aware of letting go of contemplating desire

you know we can think I have a lot of desires as a person but I don't even as a person I don't always have desires but The body, this body is a desire form. It's all about desire, sexual desire, desire to get something to become powerful, to become enlightened

or desire to get rid of dirty thoughts or bad emotions. and the inner tire of trying to get rid of the inner tire, right? The critical mind. Now, when you contemplate how language functions, it's all dualistic. It's just based on male, female, right and wrong, good or bad, [clears throat]

heaven and hell. And that's because it's very limited language. You can't describe dharma with words. You have to shut up and just be dharma rather than try to find words for it because you can't. You say it's peaceful, it's blissful, you know these words or it's absolute

reality. But these are just nice words we apply to the ultimate reality of our true nature. So as human beings and as the Buddha pointed out so wisely and so well is not we're not this these uh mortal forms that we identify with because that grasping

grasping of the form the body leads to all kinds of problems. You wanting it to be young when it's getting old. [clears throat] Wanting to get rid of pain or physical discomfort. Wanting to to be happy and loving and fair and just and all these kind of noble thoughts. When the

phenomena that we experience through the senses through the body is always changing according to its nature. You know that we have like right now we were just noticing that the leaves that of the trees have all gone. So what used to be a wall of green is now just bare branches because it's changing and the springtime starts putting forth

leaves and that's just the inevitable change of of phenomena which is based on on what begins ends what arises ceases. >> [clears throat] >> But does Dhamma arise and cease? You know that's a question that's can when you take refuge in d is it dharma arise and cease as a word it does. It's just a convenient designation.

But dharma is conscious awareness. It's here and now. You know where where am I? I'm here. Where? And if I ask myself, that's a stupid question because then wherever I am physically, I'm always here. [snorts] But it's a also part of a way of reflecting here and now rather than

where will I be? What happens when I die? When this body dies, where will I be? And if I'm pure consciousness, I'll be here and now. Where if I'm a spirit. I don't have no idea where he is a soul or a spirit cuz I don't attach to those words anymore.

This is very important to you know I emphasize the first three feathers or the 10 fetterss because they they're made up by human beings where after the first three fedters they're just part of the package of being born as a mammal as a physical being. Like sexual desire is part of the

nature of a male or female body. It's procre for procreation [clears throat] and uh anger or you know fear are part of survival because then the you know this is a dangerous planet to live on. all the what we call climate change and talking about terrible typhoons in the Philippines and and earthquakes and

tsunamis and meteors falling and and the climate changing and what's going to happen to the world that we hold to as our reality. then we we get caught up in all kinds of mental fears and anxieties. But if we see that we'll never die, consciousness doesn't is never born and never dies.

And so when you realize your true nature, then the fear of death or climate change or fires, earthquakes, tsunamis, typhoons, cyclones, hurricanes are just part of the changing nature of planet Earth, which we want to control. We want to control nature as as human beings. If we could control the planets

and the sun, moon and stars according to do with AI or some modern scientific techniques. You know, we spend our lives developing technology to kind of increase our self-importance and the sense of survival. But yet as we do it, we we aren't looking in the right place. We're always

looking outward at the stars, at the sun, at the moon, always looking outward at at the leaves falling or the trees with no leaves or somebody else looking for some kind of because that's what we're used to doing. We're conditioned to to look outward [clears throat] where contemplating the ego, you're looking inward. You're not criticizing

your ego, no matter how humble or narcissistic or arrogant or stupid it might be. You know, those are words we apply, you know, definitions, qualities that we might think we we have bad thoughts, but but we're conditioned to see if the thoughts are not good and appropriate, [clears throat] then they're bad. Good and bad are

words we've created. Their creations of human beings are not made by God or Krishna or or Brahma. So when you know my insight into that was how the emptiness of thoughts because I as a person wanted to become enlightened. reason why I became a monk wanted to escape suffering. So that brought me into contact with

Buddhism and that brought me into contact with the SA in Thailand. And uh so as a person I feel very blessed as a matter of grace because I wasn't brought up as a Buddhist and yet the teachings of the Buddha struck me in a way that I've never felt about any other religion. [clears throat] So I trusted that.

And then uh in my life as a monk I've had the opportunity to investigate the three fetas living with lumpa for many years and establishing amorvati and onward like that then this brought all kinds of experiences that I could take personally.

of being praised or being admired or being blamed or criticized. But I've always used the praise and blame as objects [snorts] because my ego likes praise and doesn't like blame. You know that's the ego. That's not me. That's just the way I'm conditioned. Because praise is present and blame is

unpleasant. So we want the pleasant. We don't want the unpleasant. Youth is present and old age is not. So we want stay young. But when you're old, if you really realize your true nature is a deathless reality of dharma,

then old age is part of the changing of the seasons. Like wintertime in England, you know, it's not as pretty as springtime in England. But it is the way it is and it has its own perks. Like being 91 means I just

sexual desire is not there. Physically it doesn't it's gone. And uh I have the wisdom to deal with the praise and blame, slings and arrows of fortune, you know, in a way with wisdom rather than to feel sorry for myself or when I'm being criticized or blamed or demanding

praise and admiration from everybody. So you know at the end of life when you realize you're nobody and in that it's that English word nobody and then the word nobody like the ego doesn't want to be nobody wants to be somebody. Recognize there's somebody at least.

But uh when you realize you're nobody, then it means you're nobody. You're not a body. You're not a male or female. You're not a American or British or a Thai. You are this here and now perfect the reality of perfection of dharma the

changeless reality that we're all experiencing but we never notice. So it's these talks, these Q&As and these questions are provided for to encourage you to to investigate who you are, not to believe what you think you are. Thank you very much, Lo.