Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 31 (M-oUr3MV390)
Video ID: M-oUr3MV390
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-oUr3MV390

[Music] [Music] Fore [Music] [Music] one time. So I we have this opportunity to reflect on dharma the way it is dharma is

apparent here and now and the way it is is like this. So these simple phrases simplify the Buddhist teaching which can sound very complicated when you look at the scriptures but actually Buddha Dhama is extremely simple what's more

realistic than apparent here and now because experience is always about now. Here experience of the past is a memory and experiences that you expect to have in the future are imagination. So it's learning to relax and be present here and now. Just the quiet listening silent presence which is a dharma

which is consciousness. But what is apparent for many of you is your thoughts. you know what your expectations or your attitudes your memories that arise during this time and I've been asked to reflect on the desires which are the cause of suffering. So

when we have the first noble truth, there is suffering. It should be understood. You're not looking outward anymore. It's always going inward at one's own fears. Imagine fears about the future. guilt and remorse or regret about the past. Feelings of conceit about your status

and all the conditioning we get we acquire. So that is the world that we create. Each person creates their own world to live in. So it's uh based on ignorance on avicha ignorance of dharma or the way it is. So when inviting you to be present here and now

it doesn't mean that you have to do anything. It doesn't mean you have to become a person who's present. It's just learning to listen to open to the present moment is like this. And whatever way your experience is experiencing this motion emotionally, physically, it's like this rather than my feelings,

my body, which are all illusions that we create and are the very cause of suffering. When you identify with the body, if that's all your identity is is in the human body, then you are bound to suffer in life because the body is not what we call a happy condition. It's a created form. But this is a desire realm. And a desire

realm is like this. A desire realm is what we see, hear, smell, taste, touch, what we think, our emotions. So we we live in a world. Each one creates our own separate world to experience and translate it in into terms of me and mine. My world, my thoughts, my feelings,

my memories. But of the three kinds of desire, desire to become something, you feel you've got to get enlightened or sensory desire. Gamadana is is a sensor sensual desire. desire for what? Pleasure through the senses through the body or the desire to become. You feel you've got to get something. Now, how many of

you come to these talks feeling you hope to get something, wanting to become enlightened, wanting to get understanding, wanting to you feel you're missing something. There's something in your life that's missing or not good enough and you want to make it better and meaningful and purposeful.

That's baana. And whipoadana is a desire to get rid of the negative side of life, to control, to uh micromanage life, to get rid of anger, fear, jealousy, the defilements, theis to just deny, get rid of, and spend a lot of time resisting. life

or the here and now through all your efforts go into whippoa desire to control and get rid of what you don't like what you don't like. So I've told you many times when I really discovered Whippoadha I thought I said that's my middle name. I'm I'm a Robert Whippu Danha because I saw how I'm conditioned my personality condition to try to

control and get rid of fear. Get rid of jealousy. Get rid of a vicha. Want to conquer ignorance. And how much of my life is based on ideals of wanting to make the world perfect, to create a perfect monastery. So it's it's not

criticizing oneself when one recognizes these desires. Once you see them as desire and rather than as personal flaws trying to to control, to get rid of, trying to become a perfect person that we suffer even in monastic life and lay life, we we create the conditions because we we want life to be

fair and just and meaningful and purpose. We want to resolve conflicts. We want to become brave and courageous and fight for what's right. All the kind of noble desires to become by the desire to get rid of like weakness or fear, anxiety,

get rid of worry. Wouldn't it be nice if we didn't ever worry about anything? But the future is the unknown. So there's a lot to worry about. But these three desires are very important to to study, to observe in yourself, not to apply them to others, but to just witness

your sensual desires like this. It's not that being celibate and a monk or a nun that you shouldn't have sensual desires. That's an ideal you might hold in your life in some monastic. But the celibate life of a monk or none of the sa is is a mirror for reflection is to see sensual desire is part of the is the

body itself. It's a sense form. It's a sense realm we're experiencing. Sensuality is like this is not judging it in terms of good or bad, right or wrong, but in understanding that this experience within the form of a monk or nun or man or woman is a very limited identity. No enlightenment of being awake. Even for one who is completely awake

knowing Dharma, resting and abiding in Dharma, still lives within the rest of his or her life in the sensual world. But through understanding the limitations of sensuality of desire in its three forms, we're no longer slaves to our habits. We're not victims of fate. We learn from experience because through the senses we experience

beauty and ugliness. Through emotions we experience anger and fear, happiness, pleasure. So pleasure, happiness, sensual pleasure and happiness and fear and misery and suffering are of equal value in our lives. It's not like we're seeking to experience get beyond the sensual world

and turn our backs on it, but to understand it. This is the occasion that we all share in understanding through observing being the bu the witness to the emotions whatever they may be pleasant unpleasant fair unfair good or evil they are like this they arise they feed But when a bad thought ceases, you're still conscious.

But your enlightened mind is aware of the end of that thought. That unpleasant unwanted thought is teaching us the nature of dharma. All conditions are impermanent. What arises ceases. So each one of us is learning from the way we are. No matter if we're have really good karma, where we're loyal, happy

or miserable and depressed, both extremes are not self. They're not a person. There are conditions that arise through ignorance, through identity, with the sense realm, with the body. So the insight into the third no the second noble truth is let go.

And let go is not getting rid of. It's not like you're resisting anymore. You're not fighting. You're not a warrior, monk, or nun fighting against evil forces. You're letting go. So letting go, how do you let go? The question is asked by many and it's just natural. Relax.

Rather than making your hands into fists to fight the world, you would just relax the hands. Simple as just relaxation. But we're very much conditioned for many of us anyway to fight like we have this ideal of a warrior monk that fights for fairness and justice. And so

this is an image that is quite attractive to especially to men. But it's not becoming a warrior that we realize dhamma the way it is because the way it is is as it is in the present moment. Silent and with silence there's nothing to fight. Silence has no ugly images to

destroy, no enemies. It has no angelic images of what you should become and hold on to. Silence is silence. It's empty. It's here and now. Whatever state of mind you're in, physically or emotionally or mentally, silence is still your refuge rather than trying to get rid of things, trying to control things,

Wanting to control life, make it fight for ideals in in worldly terms is very noble. Democracy. Fight for democracy. Human rights. Fight for human rights. Fight for DEI, diversity, equity, inclusion. Fight for what's noble, fair, and just

is ideal. You know, it's a not to be despised, but what it is in reality is an ideal because life is like this. And we even with all of the best conditions where there is diversity, equity, and inclusion, there's still unfairness, inequity, prejudice, biases

that are not ideals, but are conditions that many People believe in in racism in gender identities in in nationality. They they hold these identities as a kind of rigidly bound to to these ideals. But with mindfulness and wisdom, then we can see

that this this clinging to even the the most wonderful ideals is still suffering because this sensual world is not an ideal and and we cannot make it ideal. An ideal is a creation of the mind is imagination. Then you might ask, well, if we don't fight for fairness and justice and equity and inclusion,

then the world will the evil forces will take over. And so we we create an an illusion about evil forces, the possibility of authoritarian systems of fascism. And who's creating these images? It's it's oneself. We create fear through imagining, through imaging, through

remembering the past, through imagining the future. But apparent here and now, dharma is peace. It's bliss and it's here and now. It's not something you'll find is something that you are basically your true nature is perfect, peaceful, blissful.

So the discovery that you're not just bound by prejudice, biases, idealism, by gender, by nationality, by race. These things lose their hold on you, your mind, and you relax and just be with life as you experience it, learning from the way it is in its pleasant aspects or its unpleasant ones.

So sati is mindfulness and wi clear comprehension or wisdom which are natural. It's not that you have to become a wise person. But learning to let go of the three kinds of desire doesn't mean you don't experience them but you know them for what they are. You know that all three

whip are sankaras are conditions that arise according to other conditions. They're impermanent and they're not a real person no matter how much they insist that they are really a person. So when I say nobody gets enlightened, that can be a rather depressing statement. But if you know who you really are,

you're enlightened naturally. Not as a person but as dhamma as ultimate reality. Now this is encouragement to have faith in the gate to the deathless are open. This statement that I like to chant before I start talking really impressed me years ago

at the beginning of my monastic life. It seemed like a statement of confidence. The gate to the deathless are open. So you don't have to find a way of opening the gates. They're already open. And that open gate is here and now dhamma. Then the second verse. Those who hear this,

put your confidence and faith in your true nature rather than in teachers or traditions or ideals. Because all teachers, physical teachers, all traditions, scriptural imperatives, all these are

created forms. They're not ultimate reality. as teachers, as imperatives, as commandments. So it's like really awakening to so that the Buddha is not not just a memory of a sage of India 2,500 and so many years ago. It's not about

worshiping memories of a sage or a Buddha image, but it's about realizing your true nature. You don't have to look at anything other than let go. It's like listening. Listening to nature. Listening to the sounds of the world.

And behind all the sounds of nature and your own thoughts and your own ideas is the silence. The resonating silence of the deathless the gate that the gates are open for. You don't have to open the gates. They're already open. So I offer this as a reflection for this afternoon.

Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah.