Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 26 (y2793IaOnxQ)
Video ID: y2793IaOnxQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y2793IaOnxQ

More Fore. So I wish to welcome everybody on this beautiful day to come and listen to the dharma. This is a very praiseworthy thing to be able to do to hear Dharma or reflections on the way it is because we've been so conditioned

by our parents, by our cultural identities, by our generation. to see the world through as our reality. And we talk about the real world is the mortal world that's in the state of continuous irrepressible change. So as we approach old age or we are old then we we begin to

experience a lot of fear because youth goes by very quickly [clears throat and cough] and fear of death is a common human experience. And the question, what happens after you die? Because we imagine a future as a reality.

We have all kinds of stories, legends about death and rebirth and reincarnation. So then we identify with the mortality that's going to die and we don't understand our true nature. So coming to reflect on the way it is the way the dharma ultimate reality supreme reality is to

begin to realize we're not what we've been told or what we think or what we believe. So then we're left with the puzzle, who am I? If I'm not the body, if I'm not the name I have because we this this identity with mortality is to be questioned and that's the way of power meditation to start questioning

am I really this this body? And of course the ego says, "Well, of course that's an obvious fact." [sighs] But you can't believe the ego. The ego is a very conditioned state in which is constantly deluding us. And reflecting on my past, my parents, my childhood, I realize

how I, you know, how many shocks and disappointments and experiences of fear and anxiety about growing up, about how I look, about if people like me [sighs] will I succeed in life? All these faces when we're children, teenagers. So the future

in terms of ultimate reality is an imagination. Like you can imagine your future. You can imagine being reborn as some in some form or another. You can imagine hell or heaven or annihilation. So this ability to imagine should be questioned. Imagination is a gift and also a curse. When an infant's born into

a mortal has a mortal form, but it is totally helpless. An in newborn baby needs the support of the mother and father otherwise it can't survive. And so [clears throat] born into the world as a helpless form that's conscious. The newborn baby is conscious which is not personal.

It doesn't think of itself as a girl or a boy or in any words or conditions. We acquire those identities after a certain age where it is subject to the forces of nature. It needs to be cared for, fed, protected because it's helpless. And then we are told who we are or what we should be by our parents, by our society.

So we become acquire information of the ego through through sources for uh outside ourselves. We have the innocence not to be able to distinguish whether it's right or wrong, true or false. We just take what mother says or father says as they are kind of gods protectors.

So then when we contemplate dharma, we contemplate this conditioning that we've acquired whether it's wholesome, skillful, good, right or wrong. But this ability to investigate, to reflect on the way it is is is what the Buddha is pointing to. It's the path of liberation. And this is important for all of us

because as changes of the world of the universe that go on inexably, we're trying to control it. We want to stop climate change. We want to live to 200,000 years. We want to never die or never experience sickness.

or illness. [clears throat] So we you know modern science has been very skillful in dealing with >> [sighs] >> uh diseases and with the aging of the body. So that's to be respected modern science. But modern science is still conditioned

phenomena. You can't put your faith in modern science as your refuge. It has its limits. But dma with awakening to the way it is which is all conditions are impermanent. So we're not told that when we're children

when we're being culturally socially conditioned. Our parents never tell us everything's impermanent. And so you You grow up thinking that I remember when I was a boy thinking by the time I'm this age they would have completely eradicated cancer. There is so much information about cancer and cures and scientific efforts to deal

with cure of cancer. So that is uh I thought by you know from 19 45 to 2025 they would have solved the problem completely eradicated cancer. That's the faith I had in modern science. They they stopped the uh polio

uh epidemics, the measles, all kinds of flu vaccin vaccines and so forth. So it it you know so many of the childhood diseases that were very threatening when I was a child are no longer threatening. Well, that's to be praised and admired to be able to use things to to prevent disease and to

try to deal with the problem of disease in the human body. But no matter h how many skillful medical treatments we might go through, we still have to deal with the future which always ends in death. So what is born newborn infant is a birth which we've all been through and at the end of life it's called

death. And our cultural conditioning, our education has always promoted the sense of youth and vigor and good health and [clears throat] and all the very positive ideals that we can imagine. So we have, you know, when you get old, you you you look back on your life

and you wonder how fast how speedy my life is. You know, it's doesn't seem to only yesterday it seems like I was young. Now I'm old and death is very close in the sense of an aging body. This this old is going to die soon. And the Buddha always emphasize a

reflection on death because it's a word that is often times scary. Nobody knows what happens after somebody dies. >> [clears throat] >> There's all kinds of views, as I pointed out before, of heaven and hell and being reborn in in heavenly realms

or in hell. Now, when we think of hell, it's it's a very frightening perception. All perceptions, all ideas of hell are always very miserable and and unwanted about being tortured, being humiliated. And we can say it for eternity or for a period of time till we're purified. We think of purity as as that. We think

of ourselves as basically impure. So when I tell people that they're absolutely pure, they look at me with disbelief because what I'm referring to when I say you're absolutely pure, I'm referring to your true nature. which we call the dharma. Pure consciousness that doesn't change, doesn't get old,

doesn't get sick or die, is not male or female, is not young or old. Well, we can imagine that to try to imagine that like timelessness. Kalikadama try to imagine timelessness just intellectually you know it's because we're using

imagination which is time bound condition to imagine something that is not conditioned [clears throat] and you can't do it I've tried to imagine timelessness what we call a kalikadama And every time I put forth an effort to try to describe timelessness, my thinking stops

and I just notice suddenly I have no thought because timelessness is unimaginable. It's not an imagination. And yet the dharma is timeless. In the morning and evening pujas we chant that aolo timelessness. This is like investigating how limited one's intellectually

is where we give so much importance to knowledge and acquire and being intellectual being able to figure everything out quickly. I mean a quick mind a high IQ and on and on like that has given so much importance in many of our families and societies. >> [clears throat] >> But then to know the limitation

of the intellect the intellect can't get there. We have the poly word timeless. [snorts] Then what? Because all perceptions, all thoughts, no matter how scientific, refined or intelligent they might be, they're time bound conditions. So this is like investigating. This is

what I've spent so many years doing is investigating the experiences that I have. And in the morning and evening pujas, I remember how much I really enjoyed reflecting on the the nature of Buddha Dhama. At first I remember as a new monk being with Lua Cha and Ubu in Thailand they

they would chant this in Pali. Well I didn't understand Pali. So I learned how to chant it in Pali. I didn't know what it meant. But as the years went by, I began to understand, you know, what Buddha Dharma really is, Buddha Dhama, not as just a Buddhist terrain Buddhist ritual chant or belief system,

but actually began to reflect on the way it is that in ter Buddhism, it's very is very uh kind of direct. So when I question about when I take the the refuge in Buddha Dhamama, what am I doing? [clears throat] What am I personally doing when I take refuge in Buddha? Who is Buddha? what is Buddha?

And then of course the intellect says well he was the founder of Buddhism in India so that's the intellectual side the knowledge side knowing that Buddhism and poly are ancient religions originated in India and that's conventional knowledge but The idea of actually taking refuge in Buddha in some ancient teacher,

you know, in my modern mind didn't make sense. How can you take refuge in in someone who's passed away? So then reflecting on Buddha, I began to reflect on the that of the Buddha is here and now taking refuge in the witnessing position that knows Dhamma the way it is. [sighs] So Buddha then becomes a skillful means

to use rather than just uh tai terra ceremonial chanting. This is investigating dharma apparent here and now timeless and what is appearing here and now then I start thinking well I'm sitting here in this chair talking to you that's apparent here and now on the

conventional level on the sensual reflective sensual experiences like this as a being in this particular position, this moment. But what is apparent here and now, wherever you are, wherever your body is, whether it's sitting, standing, walking, or lying down. And then consciousness is apparent here and now.

Your true nature is apparent here and now. It's pure. It's not doesn't have wasn't born never dies. So then when a baby is born, it's conscious. But is consciousness limited to an infant form? You know it where consciousness has no beginning or end. But we think the baby is born and has

consciousness in its body rather than the baby with mom and dad and everyone else is in consciousness. So at this moment what's apparent here and now to me is we're all in consciousness which is impersonal. It's not my consciousness or anyone's consciousness. It's not the

consciousness of the senses because seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking, we're all different. But pure consciousness that it has no beginning or ending. The whole universe is in consciousness rather than consciousness in the universe. Uh that just intellectually reflecting on that statement.

I remember years ago reading the heart sutra amayana text and I thought it doesn't make any sense to me until I had the insight that the whole universe the sun moon stars all All the planets you and I are in consciousness rather than consciousness is in us. So you can't claim [clears throat] it

with your personal conditioning or if you do you kind of miss the point. The kind of wisdom that comes from consciousness is dharma. It's timeless. So all these clues are given in the very basic scriptures of poly the polycanon. So what happens when you die

and then I was brought up as a Christian where you believe you have a personal soul [gasps] a soul that's each one of us has a separate soul so that [clears throat] in question trying to find what my soul is, what my personal separate soul is.

And I've never been able to find one. [sighs] But as consciousness, it's apparent here and now. And I and it's the ability to reflect Witness the way it is here and now timeless as in my old age I live quite a reclusive life so it's quite pleasant living here at Amarati and I'm very

grateful to the SA and all the lay people that support it and give me this opportunity at the end of my life to live in such a good way quite comfortable. But what happens when you die? And so this is a good question to investigate. Your the body is going to die

definitely. In fact, you know, you want it to die. When you get this old, you don't really, you know, you're not going to get any better. As much as I'm grateful and appreciate life here with the SA and the lay community of Amarati, you know, it's still having an old body is not a kind of pleasant experience.

like putting on a robe. If you notice, I'm wearing my Giwan over my, you know, I don't put it on properly. I'm afraid of falling over because I'm very unstable on my feet. So, the monks allow me to wear it in a way that is less dangerous. And I can't see very well. I have vision problems, hearing problems. So this is just a a body. Is it really me? Am I

really a old man, an old monk with all kinds of physical problems due to old age? And can modern science take old age away from me? But if I identify, if I wanted to be otherwise, then I I suffer. If I want to have perfect vision again and and accurate hearing and and stable

balance then then then I create suffering as a person. That's my ego. Wanting not wanting to be an old body, wanting to be young is suffering. So when I reflect the old body is like this. It's it's pretty good actually. You know I don't have chronic pain or anything that unbearable. So I'm grateful. I thank my agent body

every morning for being as good as it is. But am I an old monk and an old man and conventional? Yes, that's convention. But through investigating dhamma, you realize you're not this. I've realized many years ago that I'm not the body. And that's an insight through

investigating. The first foundation of mindfulness is about investigating the body. You know, questioning are you really a man or a woman? And then you you notice the gender of the body is either male or female. So you you identify with that. But really basically can you

if you identify with the body then you become a man or a woman. You become your age. You're always becoming what you believe. What you've been conditioned to believe in is the real world. But the Buddha pointed out the world is not reality and gave us the tools for investigating. And so like the

for noble truths is a brilliant teaching an enlightened teaching put into this quartet of truths starting with suffering ending with not suffering. And that's by not beginning to question everything you believe and been told is right or wrong, true or

false. you're investigating is a is right and wrong, true and false. Is is you know these are words that langu every language has words for the for right and wrong, true and false, good or bad, heaven or hell, male or female, these are part of every language. But languages are limited.

They can't describe a kalikadama timeless reality. Not Sanskrit, not poly, not Tibetan, but they point to it. So where are they pointing you know where the for noble truth where are they pointing about suffering in the world about what's happening in [sighs] Sudan or Caribbean Venezuela or whatever you know

that's suffering obviously reported on the news but they're looking inward pointing here. You look you go inward rather than seek reality as something you can see, hear, smell, taste, touch or think or define. So in the

reflective life, the way it is here and now is like this. And through meditation and insight then my natural abidance is in the silence [snorts] behind the words behind the forms. Now at my age after all these years and as a Buddhist monk then I just have to say the way it is and

it's silence because even in the midst of a noisy crowd there's silence behind all the noise. The silence of bliss, a sense of joyfulness comes with silence. Now the ego doesn't like silence. Remember we're conditioned to

identify with romance, adventure, excitement, interesting subjects. and be interested, to be fascinated, to to look at look at the stars at night and wonder about them and to uh you know experience a go sightseeing and see wonderful views of mountains and rivers and water. So we depend so much on sight

to experience adventure, excitement, interest. I used to be a avid book wearer. I loved reading. Now I can't read very well. Like when I open a book, I look at the the uh words in the book and I I have to get a magnifying glass to make sense of them. Trying to read a book

with a magnifying glass is very cumbersome. [clears throat] So I have learned to not you know to give up reading. Well the ego the ego wants to solve the visionary problems so I can read again. But now after so many years not being able to read properly, I don't care.

I don't care if I go blind. I know my real refuge is in dharma, apparent here and now and timeless. And you can't lose that no matter what happens to the body. dementia, blindness, deafness, cancer. So suffering is about ignorance, identifying with uns unsatisfactoriness, a changing conditions that we've been

conditioned to identify with. So when you see that and you contemplate it and really investigate like the four noble truths are in investigative truths not doctrines to believe in and you're looking inward rather than wanting happiness as some kind of experience through the through the body

and mind. So the peace behind the noise once you get used to it then it's it's [snorts] what they call bliss. And bliss is like this. So simple, so direct, always here and now, timeless.

So rather than seeing death as annihilation or oblivion, we can look at it as oblivion. Once you're dead, that's it. or that you're reborn and again as something else somebody else but Locha used to say in Thai the word die is death and he would say die before you die. So in terms of die before you die

is meditation right meditation bana you're letting go of all the deathbound conditions you're not trying to get rid of them. They're just their nature is to come and go. And what's left when you let go of everything is peace

which is deathless and it's not personal it's universal. So that kind of solves the mystery. what's going to happen when I die that you know I should be rewarded for living a wholesome sounded life by who? By what? as [clears throat] a person. You know, that's intellectual thinking. I should be rewarded for being so good.

But when I hear my mind saying that or thinking that, then I realize that's that's just rubbish. It's not reality because there is no sumato an ultimate reality here and now. Sumato is a convention. The body here is a convention. It's a form that was born and grows up, gets old and dies.

So you feel a sense of eternal peace, the bliss of eternal peace rather than [sighs and gasps] than saying in the Christian view that I was raised in where you if you've been a good person then you go to heaven and and live eternally with Jesus. You know, does that sound very peaceful, [clears throat] very boring as a person?

So where eternal peace as a non-person is dharma and that's what we're here for today to reflect on the way it is. So offering this reflection, I encourage you to really trust in what you're doing and really have the courage and the willingness to investigate your own life rather than blaming your

suffering on others to realize suffering is a noble truth to be understood through wisdom. So I offer this as a reflection.