Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 30 (Qv8QgVbZoj8)
Video ID: Qv8QgVbZoj8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qv8QgVbZoj8

Oh, samba. So the one time So this afternoon we have this opportunity to reflect on Dhamma the way it is and I'd like to reflect on Queen Synette the Queen Mother of Thailand who passed away [sighs] on the

24th last Friday at the age of 93. three. And she was very extraordinary woman who uh did many generous offerings to the SA. Love the Dharma and who I met personally. I forget how long ago. And I was with Ajan Patano

and uh we were invited to the palace in Chiang Mai to meet her and I was very uh nervous because basically I'm quite shy person and then to meet the queen of Thailand who's a very important figure a royalty and in Thailand they have a royal form of Thai which I couldn't speak [sighs and gasps] and so I was quite nervous what was I

going to say to Queen of Thailand and so with all my fears and doubts and speculations uh she came in the room and she was extremely beautiful person. And she got down on the floor and bowed in the proper way that ties do. And [clears throat] uh she spoke perfect English

and I carried on a one of the most pleasant conversations with her for about half an hour and I was thoroughly enjoyed it. who was a she's a very charming, skilled kind of person who could put you at ease instantly. So all my fears dissipated and and I just enjoyed the opportunity to meet her as a another human being.

[clears throat] So the passing away of a queen is like this when we think of her. She's just a legend for many of you. She was the wife of Rama the ninth. She did many uh philanthropic works in Thailand supporting the arts and crafts and helping to educate the hill tribes of

Thailand as a generous loving woman and now she's passed away. So that is she leaves a good memory in my mind at least. I think being an American you're kind of against kings which is a strong slogan these days. [sighs and gasps] But living in Thailand many years, I

changed my attitude because I found uh [snorts] the king of Thailand and his wife, you know, very skillful leaders of a nation giving support for a nation of ties. So many ties are grieving. This is a shrine to her. And through life we all have to grieve because life is about change and loss.

We would like life to be a happy experience and kind of you know all that is mine beloved and pleasing will be mine forever in a happy state is the kind of wish of a child and as you grow older you see the loss I remember the loss of pets when I was a boy the grief I experienced the loss of my

cat and so forth. So you experience grief even as a child. So when the Buddha pointed to suffering as the first noble truth because this realm that we want to enjoy through the senses is about loss. It's about death, sickness, old age.

And pointing this out while you're still young, while you're still healthy, is important to reflect on it, to to realize grief as a part of our human experience [clears throat] in these very mortal forms. When you contemplate your own body, you see how mortal it is. [clears throat] And

when you're young, you you don't think you're ever years that will take many years before you die. You've got a whole lifetime ahead of you. But when you're 91, that illusion completely is shattered and death is [clears throat] very much the future in the near future. So living this life for almost 60 years

as a beu [clears throat] you contemplate that and contemplation isn't just thinking it's it's an investigation of the way it is. When people ask about what is meditation, they want a kind of succinct answer and it is that to define it uh and with

techniques of practice. But when you really look at the and examine the fornable truths, the teaching the Buddha gave to his five friends, five disciples after enlightenment. It's about investigation. It's it's encouragement to investigate life, not to define it or just go along with what you're told. Tell me how to meditate. Tell me what's

the purpose of life because you want the answers from somebody else. What is the purpose of life? Ask yourself what is the purpose of my life? And that's a good question to ask yourself and eventually not to try to come up with some clever answer. If you believe in God, then you're told

that purpose of your life is to die and live with Jesus forever more. But that's a an answer that is just it's an illusion that that you're getting. You're not getting to understand what the purpose of your life is as a man or woman as a human being with eyes, ears, nose,

tongue, body, with a brain. And any [clears throat] answers, no matter how clever or wise they may sound, are just words. And words are conditions, they're phenomena. So can you trust words? So in investigation isn't about trying to figure out the purpose of life but keeping the question

what is the purpose of one's life and keep it open. It opens up the mind. That questioning life isn't to get clever answers, but to open your conscious experience of life to the way it is, to the silence between the words, to the dharma.

And then we how do you define dharma? And so we use words like absolute reality, ultimate truth. But these are no matter how ultimate and beautiful they may sound, they're just words and all words are sankaras. So I lose my faith in just definitions with words. The purpose of life and somebody gives you some clever answer to that

question. [snorts] But it is just words. It's not investigation. It's not looking inward. is not realizing right now is the purpose of life. Consciousness right now is our true nature, not the body. So I used to wonder as a child H [clears throat]

if uh why did God create disabled people? And as a child, you hear about, you know, other children being born with blind or with no arms or legs or things like this. And and you've got this idea that your mother father told you that God loves everybody equally. Why didn't why didn't

he create? Why did he allow disableness to be born? Why didn't he give everybody perfect form, a beautiful form? You know, if I as a child thinking, if I could create everybody, I'd create everybody beautiful cuz I was very idealistic child and uh

went as my mother and she she said, "Well, it's she didn't know what to say really. it's God's purpose or and so you you know you what what the me what that really means and that's thinking and logic you're trying to logically figure out the purpose meaning of existence.

How did the universe get here in the first place? Sun, moon, and stars. What about dinosaurs and all these different animals that were created long before human beings? Why did Why did God create dinosaurs? They got ugly forms. And so you can go on asking why, why,

why, wanting to get answers with words, what some prophet says about it, what the Bible says, what the a say. When you ask the Buddha why, he doesn't ever tell you. But the the question word why why is a very good

word to stop the thinking mind. Why am I here? Why do I feel this way? Why do I have anger? Why do I feel uh jealous or upset by life? Why? What's wrong with me as as an ideal? I'm I'm not an ideal. I'm got all kinds of weaknesses. Why? A lot of fear. I have a You know, you're not

I have a lot of fear about life. I get angry over things. And then as an ideal you say you should give up anger and fear and just believe in God which is still not answering the question why. What does that mean? You must believe in God. And ultimately that means trust in awareness

in Buddhist terms. trusting in awareness. One time trust in awareness. That's what And how do you do that? What what is awareness? I try to be aware, but my mind goes all over the place just making up problems and worries and anxiety.

[clears throat] I don't know what to trust. But you're aware that your mind is angry or you're frightened or anxious or worried about something or wanting to stop the thinking mind. Who wants to stop the thinking mind? So these words, question words, why and who, where,

are words to use to stop the thinking mind. For those of you who have been on retreat for the past week, how do I practice when I go home, when I go to the office? And so you ask the other John the question, what how what do I practice when I'm with my family when I'm at my

workplace? And so then you want the Ajan to give you a a answer that's really going to benefit you. But the the answer is in the question, how do I practice when I go home to meet my family? How And that's another word to investigate reality here and now. How how do I practice mindfulness

awareness when I'm at the office where there's a lot of confusion and jealousy and fear? How do I practice? And you don't need an answer. Just be the witness to the lack of an of to the silence after you ask the question. That's investigating, witnessing the way it is rather than trying to get answers,

verbal answers from or literary answers from scriptures from philosophers, from psychologists. So I use this a lot in my years of practice just asking myself who is doing this who wants to get enlightened and then I [snorts] that stops the thinking mind at least it does with me who wants to get enlightened and then I say oh I know that ready.

[sighs and gasps] So it's not the it's not the the kind of mundane answer to the question, but to the the reality of a question stops the thinking mind because you you you start searching for an answer. But don't search for an answer. Just stop with who wants to get enlightened. And there's silence. So you say well I want to get

enlightened that everybody knows that you know it before you ask the question. So it's but so the question is merely a way of investigating, watching, observing what comes and goes, what changes. like the ego the sense of a separate self. I am this body.

I am ajan tomato. I am a Buddhist monk. And these things are [clears throat] titles were given, names were given. We don't, you know, you're given your name, your original name that your mother and father gave you or your poly name. They're they're a given thing. You didn't choose them. You weren't born with the name.

So don't trust anything that you are given. Culture, religion, education, beliefs of all sorts. All sankara, all conditions are impermanent. The wisdom teaching that's for investigation. It's not a belief. It's not

the Buddha expected us to believe that all conditions are impermanent. So it's not Buddhist doctrine but it is a statement that encourages investigation. Are they is there a permanent sankara is a question and then the loyal Buddhist mind says well Buddha said they're all impermanent

so they must be because we believe in Buddha so I just believe all saras are but that's not the point not to just be a Buddhist but to it's it's a wisdom statement not to be grasps but to encourage maybe maybe there are permanent saras because I read allaras are impermanent so I read that from a

holy book and so you believe that but that's not the point of investigation it's not believing that that's true. It's it's a statement to encourage you to investigate thoughts, memories, emotions, physical conditions, the body as senses and pay

So tas all dhamas are not a person like there is the dhama which is ultimate reality but ultimate reality is another word two words. So [clears throat] that's the best you can do with English superlatives. But uh other than that, is that true?

Separate selves. We see ourselves as separate. So we're dumas. And they like to compare the dhamas. It's like waves on on the on a pond or in the ocean. They're the same thing as water, but they come and go. So when we think of ourselves as just

waves on a pond or a sea or an ocean suddenly, you know, because waves are definitely impermanent, but there's still as much of the water as the whole ocean is. they don't change. So consciousness, [clears throat]

these conscious forms that are sitting here in this in this uh temple are like waves on the sea. They're like, but we take I'm a I'm not just an ordinary wave. I'm a special wave. I'm a separate wave. I'm a different wave from you. But for us who look at the look upon the

the pond and its waves, it's all just water. Just like dhamma is ultimate reality. The waves are just the the dhamas that arise. So they're called dhamasma. There's good waves and bad waves and tsunami waves and ripples and things like that. So they have different

they don't have exactly the same qualities all the time. But what is definitely reality is that they're part of the sea, part of the pond. They come from that. So see, consciousness is universal, not personal. So that changes one's attitude towards life. When we see everything personally,

it's you know we feel separate. We like this person, we don't like that person. [sighs] We agree with some, we disagree with others. We form prejudices, opinions and views. And the thinking mind goes on and on and on discriminating, judging, comparing about waves on a pond, ripples on the pond

is what the emptiness of life is is really when you examine it. It's just nothing more than different different dharmas arising and ceasing. So when you identify with these separateness these separate waves then you you know you there's no purpose to life because they're not going to last.

Waves don't last very long. But when your refuge is in dharma and this is like consciousness then the ripples and tsunamis and hurricanes and all the different forms of water that can change and arise cease according to conditions are no longer our identity. We realize our true nature which is a deathless

reality of dharma apparent here and now and timeless. Timelessness is a really good thing to question. Try to figure out timeless with your thinking mind. Because the thinking mind is about time. So you're trying to imagine [snorts] something that doesn't is not in time and all you get up is a word like timeless. You

can't really imagine timelessness with your intellect. Just try this is investigation. Try to imagine timeless while we have the word eternity, immortal. [sighs] But there are just more words. You don't really can't you can't imagine timelessness a callama

because words are time bound. So it's like trying to realize God or dharma or consciousness with something that is time bound and impermanent. It doesn't work. You can't do it. This is investigation. So then I say you're perfect. Everyone here is already enlightened. Perfect.

hunts and then how does that affect you? But I say everyone here is pure consciousness. Your true nature is pure deathless dharma consciousness. And then you're thinking, well, I have all kinds of faults and fears and and because we we unless you're really narcissistic,

you you don't think of yourself as perfect. you think of yourself as as something wrong or not quite right or you you've you come to meditation retreats to to solve your problems and to find out what's wrong with you or discover your real self [sighs] that is motivating people to meditate. That's all it can do. But until you

investigate and find out for yourself, you can spend the rest of your life trying to figure out the purpose of life or meditating without investigating. Just trying to seek perfection as some ideal that you've got to get. So when I ask myself are you perfect

John are you perfect but then in terms of [clears throat] I think no no ajent tomato is not perfect is you know I knew that already before I asked the question but if there's no ajan tomato Am I really a tomato as my ultimate reality and purpose in life? So it's convention.

Nothing wrong with it. It's a nice name. So it it's uh it's conventional reality. So the conventional reality is like language, religious customs, traditions, education, intellectual conditions. Reason, logic are are conventions, not ultimate reality. But when you investigate am I not

am I enlightened or am I not enlightened or say am I not enlightened then the mind goes empty am I enlightened the mind that gets a reaction it'll tell my my personality stress comes forth and says, "No, you got a lot of things wrong with you, but then my personality says one thing, but am I

not enlightened?" And then, you know, then I intellectual says, "No, you you would be arrogant to assume you are. That's what my personality does." It's like that. So it's am I enlightened? Is it says one thing? Am I not enlightened? I I don't I don't know. As a person, as a convention, I don't know.

But as awareness, conscious awareness is enlightenment. When you realize that you're you're the ocean, not the wave, you're the universal conscious reality of dharma rather than the mortal forms that that move and change and get grow and get old, get sick and die. So I want to emphasize

it's like looking for yourself where is consciousness then there's eye consciousness ear consciousness nose consciousness. But these are all subject to change. You can go blind. You can become deaf. Lose your sense of smell. You lose your sense of taste. You get old, you get

dementia, you get Alzheimer's, lose your memory, your intellect. So anything you gain you lose. But what you can't lose is conscious awareness. Consciousness itself is dharma ultimate reality. So that doesn't change. That's not something that is impermanent and personal. Pure consciousness,

a sense of separateness, a separate self falls away and what's left is conscious awareness. You can see it as love, unconditioned love, as bliss. as happiness. Whatever words you want to use, they're all positive because dhamma is perfect.

Nothing wrong with it. You can't it doesn't change. It's apparent here and now and timeless [snorts] go come and see. Come and realize this for yourself. So the Buddha dummies is like an invitation to investigate life rather than trying to convert you to Buddhism or tell you what you should do or believe.

So it's like a liberating teaching to to to give you the encouragement to experiment to find out for yourselves. So it's like a real freedom to know this there's nothing wrong, nothing to fear. So it's liberation or freedom from the limitations of being just a ripple or a tsunami on the great ocean

that's going to rise and cease and change [sighs] and be harmless or very destructive. Right now in Jamaica and Cuba, the terrible hurricane Melissa, beautiful name for a terrible event. So these Caribbean islands, which are often times seen in very romantic images of palm trees and and sandy shores and

warm weather can become nightmares because they're emulsional. They're mortal, and changeable. So, it's not just ripples that's affecting Jamaica right now. It's it's one of the worst hurricanes they've ever witnessed. So, hurricanes are imperfect. They're dumbas. They arise and cease according to conditions

there. But they are just water whether they take the form of a ripple on the pond or a hurricane in the Caribbean. So I offer this as a reflection for this afternoon. I don't