Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 42 (VldD8pC74XQ)
Video ID: VldD8pC74XQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VldD8pC74XQ

more sas Fore [Music] speech. So on this uh summer's day we can reflect on the way it is the dharma. And today I like to reflect on space because that's one of the elements.

There's a consciousness space. They're formless. And the form elements are the earth, fire, water, and air. So space you can perceive and this I've said many times space is totally uh necessary otherwise there be nothing to manifest to manifest in space.

That's where the forms we these bodies that we identify with we we just take space for granted. We say it's a big space or little space according to our views about sizes of rooms, temples, assembly halls and so forth. Stadiums are big spaces and there's small spaces, closets,

cupboards, but cupboards, spaces, assemblies, athletic statements, stadiums, cathedrals, men, women couldn't manifest if there was no space at all. So space is easy to reflect on because we can actually see it. We can perceive it through the eyes.

We can feel it in the body when we can stretch and move in space. But space has no form of its own. And where does it end? Where does space begin or end? You know, we can ask ourselves where forms all have beginnings and endings. What will be the end of space when the the world collapses? When the planet dies,

when the sun goes out, when the moon falls in to the ocean, what happens to space? And of course, space doesn't have a quality other than spaciousness. I did a lot of reflections on color kenas in my early years because they have forms and they have qualities. All the forms have qualities. They're

beautiful or not beautiful or boring or good or bad, big or small. But space you know it is not like it's beautiful or ugly. Beauty and ugliness can appear in space but in itself it's just spacious. But as I've said before we take space for granted. We just operate in it. We're born into it. We we've been educated, brought up in space

and our attitudes towards space are according to the sizes of forms. So sometimes when you go to a mountain or climb a mountain and or national park or some place where you get this incredibly wide view of space as it seems to go be endless. So it's experience of awe. You feel a sense of awe or your thinking mind stops because

the space can has no limits. It's so vast where our daily lives are contained in rooms and in automobiles in in uh objects that are limited in form. And I've often recommended the space between words. It's important to to recognize, not to perceive that you can't see the space between

words, but you can observe it because words themselves are forms. They're made up. They're created. They're sankaras all words. So words themselves are impermanent and very unstable. So we can give different meanings to the same word or different interpretations. We argue in

religious circles about what is uh the real English definition of dooka or suffering. You know, I've heard many arguments about what is the perfect word in English for duka or the poly word for suffering. And then you say suffering isn't good enough, stress or various other English

words we can think of. So, we can argue about words because they're forms. They have beginning and end. They're made up. They come and go very quickly. And so, the space between words, we don't notice because languages have grammar and we learn grammatical forms rather than just words. So when we're learning a language, we

have to learn through the way it's placed in in a grammatical position. So we're conditioned to think in grammatical phrases where thinking itself like just think one word and we want to connect it to you know one word we can say beautiful then we what what are you talking about

we can say the word good and and they'll say well what do you what's good? What what's that you see as good or bad or wicked? You know my generation wicked meant bad but modern generation it means very good. So it change say that sandwich was really wicked

and it means it's a compliment. So uh words can change their meanings like the word god is actually from German and it's uh applies to the Germanic deities but we've incorporated into English language and and we believe it's Christian

it's not Odin and so we confine ourselves God means the Christian God the almighty only God the perfect God so we had superlatives to the word God's perfect all powerful wonderful good compassionate And then if you got good and God, then you've got to have the opposites, bad and

evil, because that's how language functions through discrimination. Space doesn't discriminate. It has no ability to discriminate the forms that enter it. They can be beautiful or ugly or male or female or tall or short, black or white. And space doesn't it doesn't discriminate. It just

operates so that things manifest whether their quality is good or bad. So space is you know reflecting on that Just how you know how we our daily lives in a monastery can be based on the forms you know who do we like who do we don't like who is good who is bad who is a nun who is a monk and on and on like that who's senior who's junior

so our life is caught up in discriminating because he's a senior junior are discriminations in words. But space doesn't care whether you're the king or the peasant, whether you're senior or junior. Space will openly receive whatever. So space is a is a reflection to cultivate because it

then you you know it gives you perspective on the limitation of the forms that we identify with and cling to. It gives us perspective in a way that we don't have when we're just caught up in our discriminatory habits, our cultural attitudes and biases, our religious prejudices and on and on like that. Then we're bound into the the conditioning

that arises and ceases in space. And that's very limited when we live in a world of discrimination. And we can see that the wars that take place endlessly are about discriminating one nation from another. What about Ukrainians and Russians? That's a madeup discrimination.

you know that that they're willing to fight over whose land is whose land, who has the right to this piece of property. All these arguments take place in space. Space doesn't care whether who's right or wrong or whose land you call Ukraine or Russia. It doesn't doesn't have the slightest interest. Has no interest in anything. It's just something that allows

things to appear and disappear. So you see the wars, the prejudices, the biases that exist culturally and religiously, nationally are just inventions made up by the thinking process. So they're not like divine doctrines or God likes some people better than others or

this is a madeup legend. It's not reality or which race is superior is the white race or the black race or whatever is superior. These are just cultural conditions that that we acquire. They're not ultimately true or valuable. They breed kind of our discriminatory tendencies to to form judgments, value

judgments over person's appearance, over what they say, what they believe. But consciousness perceives space. Space is in consciousness. But you can't perceive consciousness. Just reflect on that. None of us can perceive consciousness. And so, you know, every there's so much interest in consciousness because it's a

mystery to most people. It's just, you know, where is it? Then is it in the brain when we die and the brain dies there's no consciousness because we imagine consciousness to be very personal inside the body as like the sensory consciousness. So we perceive our eyes, our conscious,

our ears, nose, our taste buds, bodily feeling of pleasure, pain. So we see the forms have these experiences of pleasure and pain. The eyes have the experience of seeing beauty and ugliness. The ears can hear cacophinous noise or beautiful harmonies, musical gifts.

But can when you see that that limitation of sensory consciousness because the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, the brain mana are manifestations where consciousness operates through them to see objects to perceive objects that are in consciousness too. So what the eye sees, what we see through the eyes is you know a manifestation through consciousness.

Even though the object like this microphone we say it's it's just a mechanical mechanism. It's not conscious. where Ajan Samato's conscious cuz he's speaking and and he's looking and he's hearing and he's smelling tasting touching. So this is like investigation of life looking into what what is reality itself

or just what is the conditions that we tend to hold to blindly out of ignorance. So consciousness is a perceiving mechanism. That's why you can't see your own eyes or you can't see consciousness as an object. You can't perceive it because it is the what is gives the ability to

perceive forms space to form languages to make value judgments discriminations. So I always refer to consciousness because that is my real home. And when you in the spiritual path of life that we're all engaged in, it's, you know, it's not through believing the doctrines or the teachings or

just trying to be good and and committed to good actions and compassionate feelings. But it's actually even though that's good like good karma to do good you receive good to do bad you receive bad on the worldly level but ultimately good and bad are conditions made through discrimination that that we

have that we cling to. So we can know what's what is you know to do good to be honest to be moral to be responsible to to be compassionate to be kind and so forth there's good action. So we know you know when we teach about karma we there's good karma and bad karma. So karma has those qualities of

being skillful or or unskillful. But consciousness, pure consciousness like space doesn't make judgments about karma. And consciousness is apparent here and now. It's dharma. apparent here and now. And that's what we're that's our experience when we're

reflecting. If there was no consciousness, you couldn't reflect on anything. You couldn't create anything. There be no space, no forms, no earth, no fire, no water, no air. There'd just be there'd be nothing. So when we talk about dhamma, it is pure consciousness

that you realize for yourself. You say budget to be realized individually. Omuhi means to be realized individually through wisdom. This is where I encourage you to to really be the witness, the bu in in this life that we have left in the form that we identify with. We begin to

use it. No matter how good or bad it is or beautiful or ugly, whether it's male or female, whatever it age, if we reflect on it, we're not judging it. We're knowing bad is impermanent, good is impermanent. When I talk about wisdom, you know, many of you probably think you you lack wisdom or we think other monks or nuns don't have wisdom or we have

more wisdom than lay people or wisdom is a word in the English vocabulary. But wisdom is our true nature. All every one of us it's available apparent here and now is through seeing all conditions are impermanent. That's very that's wisdom and that's the Buddhist teaching what he always refers to. All conditioned

phenomena, all it is earth, fire, water and air, space is conditioned. So this is wisdom is not something that is made up by Buddhists or that other religions lack or that only Buddha wisdom is is real wisdom. We can be very powerfully clinging to the idea of being a Buddhist

which is, you know, if you're going to cling to something, Buddhism is, you know, I find one of the more pleasant conditions to cling to. But it's pointing beyond itself, beyond its forms, beyond its doctrines, beyond the scriptures

to dharma. All conditions are impermanent. And we need to realize this for ourselves, not just quote it because it's a Buddhist teaching or because we think it's wisdom. It's it's a form pointing to the way things really are because it's true. You can prove all conditions are impermanent. And that's what like in

vipasana meditation it is the whole point of that zen type of meditations are to to realize all conditions are impermanent not just to assume they are or take for granted because the Buddha said so but to be realized individually budget So like the word reposina is insight into the way it is into dharma

and dharma is apparent here and now. So consciousness when we talk about awareness or mindfulness that's what you know not just mindful through senses we can be you know mindful of objects but mindfulness as we have become aware of our clinging

habits Our desires to get something we don't have. Our desires to get rid of what we don't like. Desire is a sankara. It's a condition. It's not it's not good or bad. You can have good desires to help the world and solve all the problems of everyone in the on the planet is is a rather noble though unrealistic desire. But desires like this, it's wanting

something to be different than the way it is for this moment. It's like this, you know, whatever your body feels like at this moment. Whether you feeling discomfort or comfort or whatever, that's the way it is. When we when we spend our time thinking I don't want to feel discomfort that's whippleha desire to get rid of something that is apparent here and now

that you don't like sensual desire senses are all about desire you see beautiful flowers you want them you see when they get old and faded and wilted. We don't like them anymore. We see how, you know, it how the weather affects us. We want nice weather, warm weather. We want delicious food, not boring and

nasty food. We want to be respected and appreciated. We don't want to be despised and looked down on, you know, in a personal way. We want respect, but we're afraid of being disrespected because we're clinging to the desire to be respected and then we're always sensitive when we feel somebody's not respecting me. It's

like this to when you feel disrespected. It's like this rather than you shouldn't feel that. I'm not saying you shouldn't feel disrespected or slighted or abused by life, but to use it to see that it is a condition that arises according to other conditions. So desire what we see,

hear, smell, taste, touch. That's quite obvious. Desire dana poly word for desire is a sankara. Whether it's desire to be respected or feeling hurt because people don't respect you. It's all good for reflection.

Like being summoners, we can think we should be respected. because we're surrendering our lives to live in for requisites and on arms and so forth. And this is worthy of respect. This is a culture and religious conditioning. It is conditioning. And you can say true but not right. Right. But not true. it. You don't learn

from being respected all the time. You don't learn that that all conditions are impermanent if all you get is respect, love, success in life. We learn from old age, sickness, and death. We learn from being unappreciated, disrespected, ignored. They're all conditions that we can reflect on with wisdom. All conditions are impermanent.

And then the second wise statement is all dhamma all the dharma pure consciousness is not personal. It's universal. It's one in the sense that universe is one. So this is a reflective teaching and Delicious or impermanence

is not personal not a separate self when we identify with the form then I'm separate because the forms are separate in space forms can't you know they they have as I've said before Space allows things to be separate. Allows earth, fire, water and air to manifest in different forms.

And that's the way it is. Why does it do that? Why is there a god that is judging the universe that's creating it? Is there uh some ultimate universal force that governs everything that passes judgment? when when you die with will God judge you according to how much merit you made or how many sins you've committed. These are all questions we we think

about and people ask questions about because we see ourselves in such limited ways as a physical body, as a personality, as a success or a failure, as beautiful or ugly. We see ourselves as male or female. And all these are the illusions that we've been conditioned to grasp and never question because it's taken for

granted. Am I really a male? You know the body is male. But then ask am I really the body and according to the conditioning I say yes I'm this is my body I have passport a birth certificate to prove it I exist as a person I'm a citizen we identify with our age being Young or

old, with our race, with our sexual inclinations or habits. We identify, we cling to these identities in and create a separateness in space. because they always make us feel separate. So the separations are inevitable

because that's the way it is on the worldly plane. The created conditioned realm that we identify with is a realm of suffering because it's it's about good and bad, right and wrong, young or old, male or female. And that's all and that's what we think is our reality is the world of discrimination of right and wrong of good and evil.

But when you realize your true nature is not limited to the forms that you've been conditioned to cling to and identify with. Not that you know some of them are good forms or bad forms but it's not about good and bad anymore. It's about realization of ultimate reality dharma

which is apparent here and now timeless invitation a pos is a way of come and see for yourself. you know don't just believe me or you know discriminate about what I'm saying but a he means to come and see looking inward rather than outward open rather than trying to find my true self externally in space

or just through my vision seeing my body. It's going inward. Open to see the suffering that we create out of this ignorance of not realizing for ourselves the wisdom of all sankaras are impermanent, unsatisfactory and not ultimate reality, not a permanent self.

So the separate self is a realm of suffering. As a person, separate person in space, we suffer. But as ultimate reality, the suffering is a noble truth rather than curse on humanity or because humanity's sinned in the past. These are made up stories

but this is to be realized individually by the wise budget way. So I offer this as a reflection. Hallelujah.