Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 35 (d31_tVwN3OA)
Video ID: d31_tVwN3OA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d31_tVwN3OA

Good afternoon lup. >> Good afternoon. >> So, thank you for taking time to do another Q&A today. Today is Saturday the 6th of September and today I'd like to ask you to share some reflections around the experience of grief, losing loved ones or just grieving in general in life. Well, grief is a part of life itself,

the human existence in forms that are mortal and limited, that have a lifespan, that change according to age, get sick and die. Then these are all the conditions for feeling sense of loss. When you take life personally, then of course some loved one passes and you if you can't reflect on it and with

wisdom then you just get caught in the feeling of grief or sadness or negative emotions that can can last you many years. because we cling to it. We we make it into a very personal experience and in all cultures there's a sense of grief and you know the wailing walls and crying and the in England we try to control our

emotions more but you go to Middle East and they have special walls and Jerusalem for people to cry and whail because basically life in this very limited form that we cling to and identify it is about suffering. It's the reality of suffering. It's not ever going to be a real happy forever after experience.

And so so many people spend their lives trying to avoid grief and suffering and seeking happiness and pleasure because we get a certain amount of happiness through our senses. When we see what pleases us or think happy thoughts, smell fragrant perfumes and hear beautiful music, we feel pleasure and and a certain kind of

happiness that comes from pleasure. But then very quickly that can turn into suffering like displeasure. Grief to me is a natural emotion. We don't choose it. You know, you don't we are choosing to grieve when our parents pass away or our teachers. We we it's just a natural human expression of sadness and and loss and uh we can see it in a personal way

like I I shouldn't cry or shouldn't grieve but that is another opinion we form about, you know, we must have a step up our lip and get on with life and all these kind of truisms can come to us through others or through our own minds. But um we're all going to die anyway is is true. It's true, but it's not very comforting when you're feeling grief at

loss. So what I recommend is really being the witness to grief. It is like this, you know, just get a feeling for for the the sadness, a sense of loss is like this. And you kind of watch the mood, the state of mind that's sad. And don't try to do anything with it.

Just let it arise and cease according to conditions. Then we learn from grief. We become strong. It doesn't mean we never grieve. Doesn't mean that we'll never grieve again. This means that when loss happens to us in our lives and we this feeling arises, tears come to the eyes. It's natural. It's it's part of our human karma. Our human

existence is about grief. In the monastic reflective state, we all is fine, beloved and pleasing will become otherwise will become separated from me. And that is in Thailand, a source of reflection. It's not a kind of depressing uh experience but to to contemplate you

know we have have to see like when a child passed away I felt when my brother-in-law passed away years ago my sister he were he and I weren't that close but he was a good and that I respected them until I I noticed that even though I was I was in Sri Lanka at the time, I I felt this sense of grief of tears

and I could observe it. I could witness it and I wanted to be alone, not be with the others because you can very well witness grief when you're with other people. It's interesting to notice when grief arises, we don't all grieve the same way and we don't always grieve the always oneself grieve the same way. Sometimes there's very little sadness. Other times

it's almost overwhelming and there's no way of anticipating which way it's going to manifest. No, because it's spontaneous. It's not a contrived emotion. You know you don't choose it and try to grieve you if you don't but no sadness or grief and none of them is like this. It's interesting to notice that

sometimes where very little grief arises, people ask if there's something wrong with them, that they're not grieving or others grieve a lot and they also wonder is there something wrong that I'm so sad and so overwhelmed. Yeah. Well, we you know we make judgments about others and they somebody close to them passes dies and

then we they're really making a scene. It's embarrassing. And that's another person that hasn't lost has no immediate loss in their lives. Passing judgment on somebody else, which is very cruel and coldhearted kind of intellectual state. We're all going to die. Why make a scene about

she was old and sickly and ready to go and it's good thing she died all kind of you know matter of fact but the actual hearing when when I heard Lacha died I wasn't with him at the time And uh and even though I'd been intellectually prepared, he'd died many

times before he almost died and they'd revive him. And then when I actually heard I heard it in we were driving from the Uborn hospital to Wap where they took at the time cuz he wanted to pass away in his monastery and he passed away before he reached the monastery and when I heard he's already passed away

I felt grief Even I was prepared to feel, you know, for many times were he was seriously ill for 10 years. And we're always thinking they had emergency meetings. They had special care units and doctors waiting to to try to keep him alive. And actually when LH had his attack, he wanted to he he told

everybody to let him go. He knew it was he'd never get any better. So he was quite eager to pass on, but nobody would let him. They keep pumping them full of medicines and entropiness experiences and and hospitals and they had the best hospitals like in Bangkok and and Uborn and all ready to

take him on and try to pump life into him, keep him going because we all want child to It was none of us wanted him to die. And when he did die, it was expected, you know, he couldn't live much longer. And so in spite of that, in fact, that's intellectual. He's he's going to die

soon. It's it's a good thing. It'll go to eternal rest feast and nana and and you can make all the nice contemplations on where and how and we go when he passes away and all are very positive and so we should rejoice in his death but that's not what I experienced.

I experienced sat gregard the tears coming down my out of my eyes which you know intellectually I is not intellectual grief is not an intellectual experience it's emotional and there's something just basically incredibly sad about death loss of life. And in the morning I listen to the BBC World Service and they always

reporting on how many deaths in in Gaza, how many deaths in Sudan and in Ukraine and Russia and and other places and all like 23,000 people have been killed in Palestine and And I mean we can that's a statistic that you don't feel grief at that you know 20,000 people you don't know. You feel sadness

you know but you don't know any of them. And then when it's a large number like 23,000 it loses its significance like one person close to us a relative a mother and father they pass away unless one person passes away when they are 100 years old and still the emotion

is grief. But if a 100 people pass away at the same time, that's a statistic. So, so, so you didn't none of the hundred people who who were reported dead, but the one person you did know or were close like your mother or father

or even your pet, your dog or cat, you can feel grief because there's an emotional relationship with with a pet or with parents, relatives, friends. >> Any uh advice on how to receive an emotion, such an experience such as grief? Because a lot of people seem to wrestle with grief, either trying to resist it or suppress it or get carried

away with it. Just open it. May not the gver but the watcher of grief. When when you make grief personal then it you know you you're trying to do something with either indulging in it or suppressing it. But when you're when you realize you're not the griever, you're the observer of grief,

then you you're the witness to the way it is. Grief is not permanent. It's not meant to be happy or it's not a static state. It comes and goes. And so, you know, like I'm my generation of Americans are very much men. Boys don't cry. So it's when you're early age you're kind of ashamed of crying and tears and

emotional states that you see a movie and very sad theme and you're crying and you're hoping nobody notices if you're a real man. But there are when even when you're watching a movie, you get personally involved. You know, you're emotionally wound up in the in the film. And even though it's on the screen far away from you,

uh it's still when the the heroin heroine or the hero get killed or your favorite horse dies or you feel like this because you're observing it with your eyes and that brings then That's the emote when you get very much attached to the say the horse that that died is is even on a screen you're going to

feel grief. It's just the way life is. It's not a sign of weakness or not trying to be dramatic about life, but it's it's a part of all our existence. We all have to experience it. Recently you and I were at the chapel of rest here and we were talking with a relative of the diseased and you were

mentioning that little verse that we chantara and the reflection around that. Yeah. In Thailand, that's the custom child. Two line child is somebody invites you to their home because somebody died there and the monks go. Usually it's four monks, isn't it? Four according to Thai

custom, culture. And uh he said all conditions are impermanent and in their passing is peace. So then when you realize death is peace or the person who died, you know, then that helps to to accept life as you experience. That death is not some horrific event or something bad or unwanted.

We're living in a conscious human form is all about suffering and art warfare and jealousy and fear and getting old and getting weak and getting cancer and I mean there's so much to fear and and imagine for the future. You know what will happen to me when I'm old and gray? You know what? What do you still feed me? What do you

still need me when I'm 64? You know, it's just part of the, you know, when you're young, you you you don't really think about getting old till you get in your 50s. And and you have this idea that old people are, you know, people ignore old people generally cuz they aren't cute, they aren't

precious. Where, you know, you look at a newborn baby and think, "Oh, isn't it sweet? It's so nice. So beautiful. Babies are lovely." And and uh because babies are beautiful. When you're 91 years old, you're you're no longer beautiful. You look like this. And people really don't want to look at

it. Thank you for these reflections of God. Appreciate it.