Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 22 (6rPtQQMGR9E)
Video ID: 6rPtQQMGR9E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6rPtQQMGR9E

The more sambas samba for the one time. [clears throat] This afternoon is this opportunity to reflect on dharma the way it is. And this word reflection

isn't thinking you know in terms of right and wrong good or bad but in observing when I give these teachings how they affect you just to be and not to judge it say you like or don't like but just be the witness the pure Never witnessed the bu observing the arising and ceasing

of sankara because that's the nature of sankara is to arise and cease And I was talking with a generous yesterday whose father passed away recently. And so he suggested I reflect on how you can feel that it's a good thing he died and also

feel sad because you you recognize how your your intellect can produce you know one way in a practical way. The end of his life was there. His there was no chance of getting better. He was emaciated and in a lot of pain. He wanted to go. He was ready to go. And so Ahsoko and his sisters both [sighs]

were glad in a way that he passed away but not happy but because the experience of loss is sad. So just to point out that it's a good thing he passed away is an intellectual statement. just doesn't feel the intellect

just you know passes judgments and things like that but doesn't really feel like with emotion the feeling of loss is like this when you one of your parents pass or your loved ones or even your pet dog or pet. It's when when they die, it's like this. It's it's sad. It's not and because sadness is that is the way

it is. And the passing of loss of a loved one is like this. And at the same time you can think that it was a good thing they passed away. [sighs] So just to point out that these two the the intellectual judgment the practical rational approach of the

intellect and the emotional feeling of loss may not be the same in any way. right there. That's the way they are. Intellect can't feel. When you examine your ideals about how you should be about [sighs] life should be about how a monastery should be about other monks other nuns should be

you know that's the intellect which is judgmental it's about how things should be but emotionally It's not about being perfect but recognizing that sankaras are in their very nature imperfect because they arise and cease. They can't sustain themselves

[sighs] because the nature of Sankara which is your body, your eyes, your ears, your tongue, your brain, your emotions, they arise and cease according to conditions. And you can observe that like reflecting on the wind is is reflecting how impermanent

the experience in limited to this form is very impermanent, very unstable. It's not an ideal condition. We're not ideal forms. We're sankara. These are sankaras. And then you ask yourself, are we really a sankara? Because can one sankara observe another sankara? When we talk about reflecting on the way it is. Can can a sankara observe another

sankara? No, it's the consciousness pure consciousness because consciousness through the eyes, ears, nose, the body, brain, mind is impermanent, unstable, unsatisfactory. But behind sens sensory experience is pure consciousness. So I emphasize this to encourage you

during this winter's retreat to reflect on that to to really observe. Ask yourself are you really what you you believe what you've been told you are? Are you really that? Are you really a man or a woman? There's a lot of problems around the relationship between men and women. And as much as

people want equality, the Sankaraas are not equal. They can't be. They're all different. So these sankaras that we identify with are in space which is quite obvious. You can just look around the temple and see all you see is space. And then you go outside and you see the temple's in space and it goes on and on.

So the sankaras are in space and space. Is it a sankara? Because if there was no consciousness, would there be any space? Space. has no beginning or end, but it has no purpose of its own. It has no no reason to exist other than through consciousness. And then you realize your true nature is

pure consciousness rather than the limited consciousness. You believe you've been told you've been convinced you are this limited form, this gender, this [clears throat] monk or none and all that. These are conventions. Conventions are also in cars. They're formed. So we have a this Thai forest convention,

the terraada poly tradition is a convention, the Sankara. So it's not perfect. But it's managed to survive for 2,500 over 60 years as a convention which says a lot for it. It's not anything to just dismiss old-fashioned conventions. The intellect can dismiss it and say it's

old-fashioned. It's out of date. that terab Buddhism without obtain I've heard people criticize western intellects criticize the ancient religions religious forms as they're out ofd you've got to modernize it who says that you know it's another sankara

talking about a sankara that really doesn't understand but just has views about ideal modern conventions are better than ancient ones. [sighs] These are viewers and opinions. So when you put consciousness first and you talk about dependent origination ignorance creates that's the beginning of pata samuada

So when we create sars out of ignorance they affect consciousness. Sankaras don't create consciousness they influence it. So aija is the poly word for not understanding dharma. Not under realizing pure consciousness we create sankaris which we grasp and identify with. So our whole sense of a personal unique

self [sighs] separate self is an illusion. Now when you get old you, [clears throat] if you look back on my poor, I have so many memories and they arise and cease. And so I I have very happy memories of my early childhood life. It was a happy childhood.

My parents were quite kind, caring and loving parents. Uh I I didn't I would never felt abused or unloved. Because my first experience, first five years of experience were just generating a sense of it was security and happiness. And so that that has affected my whole life because what you get when you're born,

what your mother tells you or your carer tells you, your nurse tells you is is about how to be a good boy, good girl, how to, you know, how good boys act, how good girls act, how right and wrong things are, and when you're naughty or you you get punished. And when you're obeying your mother and father, you get rewarded. When you you are a good

student and you bring an apple to the teacher, you get rewarded. When you play a practical joke on the teacher, you get punished. So you learn that reward and punishment depends on playing the game of life. Now on a karmic level, we all have different backgrounds. So a child told he or she was unloved, unlovable, ugly, wicked, and basically

evil. That's their initial view of themselves that they get from an unloving mother or nurse or nanny which they carry through their whole life. It you just think in your own life how much your early life affects your present experience of life. So it's important to reflect on it. The memories

of the past aren't only saras, you know, they're like phantoms that arise and cease. at 91 years old. I still can remember when I was five. And it's like memories of being five years old. It's like, you know, they come and go. They have no sustaining. They can't sustain themselves. You can't keep them. They're like phantoms or ghosts that

pass through your conscious mind. [clears throat] This year I'll be my 60th vasa 60 years as a biku and uh this has given me this wonderful opportunity to really learn from love to have the time the encourage encouragement, the convention that helps one to realize what you really truly your true nature

is. It's not that after 60 years I've just become a good Viku. It's because during this the teachings that I've received and this tradition have given me all the encouragement support to investigate life was an investigator. He really encouraged investigation

using the for noble truths as a kind of foundation for doing that. So 60 years of having such marvelous encouragement is a wonderful thing you know and I'm look back on my life as a monk and I have nothing but gratitude because I don't know what it was within me that kept me in the row for so or how I could endure all kinds of

difficulties, physical, emotional difficulties, having to [sighs and gasps] conform to conventions and vinaya and having to live in in a kind of Indicant style of life, but I could have easily just as a layman

or I could have easily disroed gone back to the United States where I could get further education and make money and buy a car and all kinds of luxuries that a monk can't do can't have. But this sequence [snorts] of means pure consciousness,

not consciousness depended on sense organs. And this needs to for you to really treasure this that your true nature is pure consciousness rather than [sighs] consciousness through your senses which can be very deluding. Senses are not trustworthy. Basically they change They weaken with age. [clears throat]

They can easily create fantasies, ghosts, delusions, caught up in all kinds of conspiracy theories, ideas, ideals. But when you know your true nature, then there's nothing left to know. What do you need to know beyond your true nature is perfect? Now, if I go around saying my true

nature is perfect, then you're going to interpret the kind of overestimation is overestimating. He's going around telling people he's perfect. So it's something you don't you don't say in words. You know through experience through realizing dhamma for yourself. It's apparent here and now timeless.

Wake up and see it. Come and see. Investigate it. So I was telling one of the monks the other day about living in Hamstead in the first two years in London. And there was a Hamstead is a very nice interesting part of London to live in.

And so a lot of artists, writers, celebrities live there and it's near Hamstead Heath which is a extraordinary park. The highest point in London is on Hamstead Heath. And so every morning we take our obstacles and we walk from the Bihara to Hemstead Heath. Spend the morning

walking around. It's quite spacious. A lot of it's cultivated. A lot of it is just wild heath land. And there was a woman fiction writer that started coming to Hamstead and she was lived in Hamstead village. and she told me she had been with the previous the lay teachers that had occupied the Hamstead Vihara before

after the founder of the Hamstead Vihara passed away. So there was a a young man who was a disciple of Kaplavado and his wife who used to teach dharma to this woman, this writer. And then they went to Thailand. They went to some monastery

in Tonbury on the other side of the Chaia River from Bangkok and uh they became arahuts. [snorts] So when they came back to Hamstead they told everybody that there ars [sighs] and this writer said there were much better teachers way before they were arrogant you know that's a convention

And you think what becomes an if it's a sankara can this body ever become an arahant? Can can my memories can my thoughts if I can grasp the idea I'm an arant delude myself ignorance produces sankara [clears throat] what is there is this body an orant

is it my memory, my mind, my emotions, you know, my emotions are still like everyone else's. When my mother died, I felt sad. When my father died, I felt sad. When Lacha passed away, I grieved. Those are just human emotions. are not emotions that

that they're produced through a vicha through sankara rather than through enlightenment through dharma. to investigate in the just the this h old human body. It's nothing, you know, nothing to grasp or identify with it. It's an old human male form and it it's not a really it is a empty sankara

rather than claiming to be enlightened or as stream or as sakodakami or anakami or Marot these are these are superlative words you know the ego wants to become a stream enterer the ego wants to become an arahant so you can't trust that and you grasp that word then you're deluding yourself

so when I There are no arahants as persons as physical forms was lump and he never made any claim to attainment of even the slightest hint. He was very careful not to to proclaim any gift, any psychic powers, any special gifts that he might have acquired as a monk. But our hardship is apparent here and

now, timeless. It's through being the witness to dharma to the nature of sankar as impermanent and not personal. So is this old body a person according to convention? Yes. Fair enough. [sighs] Fair enough to say it's a person. But and that's convention. But is it is this whole body is it? No, it's not.

So what is arahhatship other than the realization of your true nature? Pure consciousness, less apparent here and now. Timeless encouraging [clears throat] investigation looking inward rather than outward open apparent here now and timeless and to be realized

individually. You have to realize it for yourself. So when one time in my early monastic life I felt I was a I've attained stream entry. So I went to Lua Cha and I asked Anjuna am I a stream enter? And he said, "How should I know?" Which was absolutely brilliant. There is only you know,

you know, you know, you're the one that's witnessing life through this separate form. But I kept thinking I want I want to verify I'm a premanter and then I can tell everybody what is that? That's saki. That's ego. Now I experience when I was a summoner in Nonkai before I met Ajan Sha.

I went through a period. I lived in a little hut, a meditation hut, a couti. And they bring me food once a day, but there was no teacher that there was no medit teacher that could speak English. And all I had was that book that I give to every one of you, [sighs and gasps] the Word of the Buddha.

And so that's all I had to read. I didn't take any books, any novels, any anything other than that slim volume called Word of the Buddha. And I'm a by nature as a layman, I was a real bookworm. I loved reading. I read the classics of Shakespeare and all those kind of things. So I really didn't want to get involved in this experiment as a summon era

and so I completely determined not to take anything no newspapers no journals and just if I had to read I'd read where the Buddha so The first three months, the first three days were quite pleasant because I'd been living a very busy life

and suddenly I was all alone in a little hut in a forest in northeastern Thailand. And I just felt such a kind of relief of not having to relate to anybody. Didn't have to teach any. I was a English language teacher. And so I first three days were like bliss and then

after that it all became rather hellish. All my past started arising and I learned this meditation technique the what they call the mahasi sadal technique [clears throat] which you have to move in slow motion and eat your food in slow motion and do everything in slow motion [sighs]

and just 24 hours a day trying to do that just with with the most conflicting nightmarish thoughts coming into my mind and I tried to suppress them through mindfulness of the breath through the technique but I couldn't suppress all the all the repressed anger of 31 years I couldn't in no way being alone I could suppress it as a layman by watching

television or smoking cigarettes or doing something eating munching on pastries and things like that or calling my friends on the phone. There were so many distractions available as layman. But as this kind of hermet hermit life of a summoner in noai, there's no escape. Just the four walls of a wooden hut

which had no electricity. They gave me a candle to light in a box of matches. And for three months, three first three months I was there, I it was like a living nightmare. Not due to any of the people in the monastery. They were very good to me. But just uh so much repressed anger in my life of 31

years. I always thought I was not very angry person. Saw myself as being a rather nice guy. But so much hatred and criticism and anger that I'd repressed. And when I had no way to stop it, I just had to endure it. [clears throat]

After about 3 months, it stopped. All the this anger just vanished. And I thought, you know, suddenly I woke up one morning and I wasn't angry. The kouti looked like a palace to me. Everything was beautiful. It's like a marvelous stunning experience of luminosity.

And I kept hearing this what I call sound of silence just like a hum. I didn't know what it was though. I had no idea. I had no what to call it. But I I still believe that all conditions are impermanent. So I saw it as a condition [clears throat] and then I thought it was enlightened.

I thought this, you know, 3 months and I'm enlightened. That's pretty good. So, so then I lasted for about a week and then I had to renew my visa and there's a immigration office in known kind. And they were very rude to me. And suddenly this luminosity just

like disappeared completely vanished. But it was like a act of grace, a gift that just through being able to endure just being alone and witnessing the most ugly kind of thoughts and feelings without trying to suppress them and they all went away.

All that anger, repressed anger completely disappeared. So it gave me a lot of inspiration to pursue the the word of the Buddha through suffering and its causes. So suffering is the nature of sankara. Trying to repress

and run away from suffering doesn't resolve the issue at all. It just creates more suffering. So through sati through mindfulness and wisdom one can realize what the Buddha is pointing to that all conditions are impermanent and there's no separate self to suffer. So that's

speaking from personal experience. The the silence behind all the emotions, behind all the anger, behind all the resentment is pure consciousness and it's perfect and it's not personal. It's not like mine. So you see that consciousness pure consciousness is the universal reality.

It's wholeness completeness. It can't be sullied or soiled in any way. And yet out of avicha out [clears throat] of ignorance of that we grasp the saras seeing them in seeing the body the the past history memories and emotions and so forth as very personal experiences. So the personal the first fetter is saki

which is poly word for the what we translate as the ego midoni is the the big obstruction. So in during this winter's retreat just to get to realize what you're thinking the belief of yourself as a separate person as in any condition form a monk or none a

man or woman this is convention it's sankara and you begin to to lose interest in You're not trying to become enlightened or a stream ant or anything. You you're not trying to get samadi or get rid of kilasis. You're beginning to realize that dharma is apparent here and now. It's conscious awareness

that is not personal. So like consciousness in this sense pure consciousness is universal it's where it covers all space all forms without if there was no consciousness how could there be forms or space. So consciousness is is the word of the

age because nobody seems to understand it. They're look, you know, like psychiatrists, psychologists are looking for consciousness, trying to define it. You can't define it. There's no definition for consciousness except it's pure, apparent here and now and timeless.

And that's what you realize for yourself is budget budget using that word budget. needs to be realized individually through wisdom. So I offer this as a reflection for today. [clears throat] Hallelujah. Hallelujah.