Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 7 (O1LX9PXGQtQ)
Video ID: O1LX9PXGQtQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O1LX9PXGQtQ

more. Ta some more. for the one Fore. Listening to the silence. It's like this. And it seems like a

nonsense statement because we think the silence is something we've got to get. So when we, you know, when I say dhamma is silent, then we want to get it. But it's like this. And how many of you start looking for something called silence? You hear the sound of silence. You're trying to find a sound because that's the condition mind, the

artifice that was created for our identity as a separate human being. Each separate from the other. Then we have to ask ourselves where where are we one? Where are we no longer separate? And then we assume with the thinking mind that we will always be separate because we can't imagine unity

with all these many forms, all these male, female, monks, nuns ever being completely unified, being one. Not to mention the population of the world. So imagination is is a is a divisive condition that we strongly identify with. We build images.

We think all thoughts are separate thoughts. We might be very welleducated intellectuals with all kinds of knowledge that we've acquired about Buddhism. We might have uh PhD in Buddhist studies been practicing meditation for many years. But we still think in terms of my

meditation, my practice, my knowledge because knowledge about Buddhism is not dharma. So what what do I mean by that? Because we can spend years studying religious texts, the propetica, the aidama and still not understand dharma. The reality of here and now is like this.

So in these reflections where we're not trying to just believe we're one. It's not about believing in unity or oneness or believing in dharma. It's like dhamma is apparent here and now. It's timeless. And time is always about change. So as long as we identify with time,

space and time, then we're caught in the delusion of ignorance or aicha. Space and time is why the world is the way it is. Why we have endless problems, wars, social conflicts, family conflicts because thinking the thinking mind is a discriminating function. It discriminates right and wrong, good

and bad, male and female. It gives names to everything. You want to know the name of this tree, this flower, this sign, this word. So we imagine we names are images that we project onto objects that we see here. Smile taste touch. So why do we meditate? What do who who

meditates? You know it's my my practice, my meditation. It's all about me, my samadi, my insight. And as long as we see the divisiveness of that, you know, as a separate individual, we can practice meditation for years and still be caught

in the illusion of my practice is I've got this lip this level I've attained. Have I attained stream entry? So the other day I was asked whether I had attained stream entry or when when I had attained it. And so You know as a person personality I can

think of many instances where that perception of attaining stream entry has entered my mind. But is that stream entry is that sod up you know and can I as a separate person monk attain stream entry as long as I'm identified with this body with my thoughts my habits my emotions Can my what are what are the emotions

like of a stream Android? Do they still show anger? Do they cry? You know, so we we have we form an image of a stream entra or an arah and we think of them as the arahad never cries. He's beyond sorrow. That's an image we create with words. Ara is just another word. Stream entry is a word

and we as long as we're attached to being separate identified with the body with the thoughts with the emotions and then we always remain in this realm of suffering because that's why the world is a realm of suffering. Sara the world that we experience

through the senses is a realm of suffering and that's its nature. It's a personable truth. So these words that we have when child once said there there are no streamers no hubs no bodhicadas don't mean anything and then we might as our personalities listen to that we try to well I'm not

really anything but it's still words I'm nobody or I'm somebody but not being anything or not being anybody is a reality that we we realize when we practice in the right way. So if somebody said a you've been practicing for 60 years now what have you attained

as a person? You mean what do I I've attained old age? My body's will be 92 next month. Is that an attainment or just the natural flow of phenomena, the natural movement of conditions in space is that they change. So space and time

are apparent here and now. We can be aware of the body is like this. Sitting is like this. The mood that I'm experiencing is like this. This is a way of practice to just settle into the present reality of being nobody. Not trying to attain to become somebody. So the second noble truth is about

letting go of desire. Letting go is the practice of when you think you are somebody, when you want to become somebody, when you want to get rid of something you don't like. It's like this is a way of letting go of it. Not by destroying it, but by no longer grasping

it. So letting go is letting go of sankas, letting go of phenomena, letting go of one's identity, no matter how elevated or humble it might be. And that leads when you really let go of everything then there you can't let go of the silence. It's the substratum which the behind all the noise of sara

it's here and now it's dhamma it's timeless doesn't doesn't change is not anata is not changeable is not suffering is not personal This is why we realize unity that the unity is behind all the changing conditions that we cling to. we've been conditioned to cling to and

identify with. So the Buddhist practice is to realize this for yourself, not just to believe what the teacher says or the scriptures or the Buddha, but the way of practice is letting go. And to let go, you you have to Now it's not about getting rid of words can be misleading. Just wanting to

let go of the world is not the answer. Letting go is relaxing. It's it's relaxing. is letting things this moment is like this. Letting go of it doesn't mean you you destroy the moment, but you free yourself from attachment, wanting to

cling to it or get rid of it. So I have these little pins I give out to people. It says it's like this. And then uh I give them to people who practiced many years to monks, nuns, lay people, Buddhists, non Buddhists, and we can consider it Kong sucks kind of because I gave them a pin. It's a sacred

object. That's not the point. it when merely says the most obvious thing you can say it's like this and more you reflect in this way whatever state you're in whether you're happy grieving sad angry it's like is so everything that we think or feel anger can lead us to awareness to silence. When we say anger, when you

feel angry towards someone, it's like this. And it it changes the perception of yourself being angry or blaming somebody else by just being here and now. Because each moment in time is the way it is whether we approve or disapprove, like or dislike it. I remember in my junior years

reflecting a lot on impermanence and so I even while walking jung walking meditation I'd be aware of just walking this movement of change from one step to another and turning around. I notice the things around me, the changing of the seasons and reflect that it's the way it is. Do we want the seasons to be

what we like or don't like? You know, like we went through a heat wave recently which was very welcome after the first half of the month of May was very cold and then suddenly we were nice and warm. that it got too hot and then we can say, you know, we'd like it just like perfect weather all the time

because weather is imperfect. It's changing. It's a permanent. We have no control over it. And that's the way it is. It's like this. Heat is like this. Cold is like this. Or maybe it's too simple. It's like this is too simple. But it is a good reflection to kind of open up to the present moment. Just to be the being

here and now and the witness to the what the body is like. When it's hot, it's like this or when it's cold or when you feel positive and happy. When you feel miserable and depressed, all conditions, all our emotions, extreme or minimal, right or wrong, sinful or not, lead us to wisdom. It's like this. So it's not a teaching to be create

fear. It's not about you go to hell if you break a precept or you you don't follow the commandments. It's not about trying to convince you that you must obey rules in order to go to heaven. Those are belief systems. That is about believing in right and wrong, good and bad, heaven and hell.

But Buddha is pointing to Nibana. which is the freedom from ignorance. Not labeling something as right or wrong but observing being the witness to being right is like this wrong is like this. Whatever you feel if you feel right or wrong it's the way it is. is like this and it changes. You can't be right all the time or wrong all the time.

So in the terms of sara then there's heaven and hell, good and bad, right and wrong. But in Nevada there's no right or wrong good or bad. It's like this. It's silence. And silence is apparent here and now and timeless. And this is what you realize when you let go of everything. Realizing

this for yourself. You're not just a limited person that you've been told you are just the physical body male or female. These are limitations. Just like physical body, 92 year old body is increasingly limited. Is this who I am? Just an aging body? As one poet politely puts it, a tattered

coat upon a stick. This is no country for old men. And so this is you know Sara is not a country for old men. A tattered coat upon a stick. But for old men, zsar is just a natural flow of condition of phenomena that was born, grows up, gets old,

and then passes away, dies. That's natural. That's the way the Buddha pointed to to get us to realize the true nature of phenomena. And what I'm encouraging you to do is say that you're not what you think or been told by someone else. You're not just a limited phenomena. So that's beginning to realize freedom or not being bound to limitation

is silence. Silent has no silence has no limitation except we don't notice it. We tend to ignore it. We tend to see it as boring. But is silence boring? And I encourage you to give it a try, you know, to to just rest, abide in the silence of being here and now, not being any or anybody.

These compulsions have to prove yourself or prove your worth. These are illusions that the society creates that you have to prove you're right or you're somebody or even trying to prove you're nobody is still an illusion. Nobody means nobody. You're not a body or a thing. And that is

universal union. What is there to you know it's the peace, it's bliss, it's freedom. And so the Buddha point the third noble truth is about freedom. the road to the end of suffering. There is suffering and there is an end to it. It's not the end of ssara as an experience. But we no longer feel

deluded by ssara as we experience it through our bodies anymore. our refuge, our two refugees in Buddhasa. So I offer this as a reflection for this afternoon.