Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 25 (f6tKkLDLs0E)
Video ID: f6tKkLDLs0E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f6tKkLDLs0E

The moon buddy. So the one to So this afternoon we have this opportunity to reflect on the way it is [sighs] the dharma understanding the self to you need to really understand the

ego, the self view in order to let it go. You can't just suppress your ego. [sighs] Or you can, but it also is not understanding it, not letting go of it. It's just a matter of resistance suppression, which is more karmic experience. So the ego saki the first pattern

is to be understood it's it's a created thing what you believe you are what you think you are your memories of the past or create the sense of being a separate ego, a separate self, a separate being. And that sense of separation is the cause of suffering.

Being an isolated ego in the vast universe, when you think of it in in those terms, is rather frightening. So to understand the ego, you have to not just think you you're getting rid of it, but to recognize it is a creation. It's it's created through thought, through memory,

through identity with emotions. Emotions are impermanent. All words, all thoughts, all memories are impermanent. And this gives us the the kind of clues to investigating. Can you find a permanent ego, a permanent man or woman or a permanent personality that is with you through every

experience of life? So we live in a the delusions of a fleeting self [sighs] that we make judgments about. We think I'm a frightened person. I'm egotistical. I'm [sighs and gasps] I'm good. I'm bad. I'm mediocre. These are judgments. These are words in in the language that are creations. They're not real.

They're not real solid descriptions of anything. But what we how we pass judgments on our feelings, on our past, on ourselves as a man or woman. So understanding is a is a point to understand suffering. You're not trying to think of suffering as something outside. There's a lot of suffering in

the world. So we we kind of understand that that what's going on in the the wars, the political problems, the political trends, the the tyrants, the dictators, the all the problems that the world creates through its ignorance of the the ego. Go. So we, you know, we're here to come to this moment to reflect on the ego to to not judge it as right or wrong, good or

bad. It is the way it is and it's impermanent. So investigating understanding the ego is to be behind the ego to to be behind the thinking process to witness. So this position of the witness is the pH, the ability to

be the non-judgmental witness to [snorts] the ego in any way it manifests. Whether it's positive, negative, right or wrong, good or bad is not the issue. It's just to see that the ego, your bad ego is like this. A good ego is like this. And they rise and cease according to conditions.

So this is an ongoing investigation and next month is the beginning of the winter's retreat. three months retreat in which I try to encourage you or I'm trying to encourage you to investigate the ego your regards to the when I say the winter's retreat what arises in your mind right now it's just to witness it's

like this whether you're looking forward to it or God pure, but just the words winter retreat at this very moment sitting here in the last few days of December and they say next month, next year is the winter's retreat. Three months, January, February, March, and then how does that affect you?

Does it seem like a long time or a short time? Whatever it seems, just be the witness, not the judge. Yeah. I'm not telling you what to think or feel about the winter's retreat. Just encouraging you to witness what just those words, how they affect you. Now [sighs] it's like this rather than

is there some you should look forward to it or deter make strong determinations aanas get through the you're going to conquer the ego in the 3 months or whatever reaction you have is the way it is. I'm not telling you what to think or what you shouldn't think, but just learn to relax and be right now looking forward to next month is like

this. It's as simple as that. the weather, you know, weood, it's getting much colder. Winter in England is is those words, the English winter. How do how does that affect you right now? just the the words when I say those two

words it's like this is a you know so you begin to be the witness rather than the person reacting to whether you like it or don't like it look forward or dread it or have views about it length or wanting the winter to pass or English winter is like this. It's words.

English and winter are words. The weather is the way it is. So we begin to instruct ourselves with wisdom. begin to see wisdom rather than how use wisdom in our life rather than just be caught in the momentum of habit, patterns, ideas, views, biases, prejudices and by just being the puto, the witness, you know, suddenly the Words lose their

importance. You know, we're no longer just affected by the views or opinions or perceptions that we cultivated throughout our life. So I see the winter retreat and encourage this time. It's a special time where you're not drawn outside. You don't want to go on long walks or it's not like springtime which is very

beautiful. You want to go out and look at the flowers and the grass and but the trees are barren and it's cold. It can be icy. And so it's a time for hibernation where animals are hibernating during the winter because of it. It's cold and it doesn't draw you out into the into the beautiful scenery.

So when establishing a Buddhist sa in England, it's different than Thailand. This time of the year is is when monks go on walking trips and the weather is not rainy and it's good time to what we call go toong. go walking. But when you live in northern European climate, then it's like this adapting to climate,

to culture. It's learning to trust in awareness which is a common theme you hear from me. It's a matter of trust and in being the witness rather than the judge or the personality. They're very important to to really trust in witnessing not judging. The judgmental

critical function is language you know. So every language whatever there's an ancient sacred language like poly or Sanskrit or just common English or Thai or whatever then it they all have the same structure they're created they're not perfect and yet we live with these words of you know

English winter, the f the three months winter's retreat, the English climate, our views about Thailand, Sri Lanka, India. We had news this week that the oldest time disciple of Bla died. Lumpi at 102. [clears throat] I knew Lumpori very well. I'm a very fine monk

lived to 102. That's a long life. And then for somebody my age, I think I hope I don't live that long. another decade old age but being a witness of who who doesn't want to live to 102 [sighs and gasps] is it Ajan Samato is it

should I want to live to 102 or should I just take it as it comes you know it be common sense So, [sighs] [gasps] but just the witness of 102 seems like a very long lifetime. [clears throat] So even numbers have their have their effect on us. So we can witness

am I really 91 years old? You know, and according to convention, conventional reality, that's true. But am I really 91 years old? Ultimately, no. The pure consciousness doesn't have an age, doesn't have a language. Pure consciousness is doesn't have a birth or a death.

And when you realize your true nature is pure consciousness, that's your real refuge. Then you're no longer clinging to the age of your body, the gender of your body, the color of your skin, your nationality. All these seem irrelevant or just conventions. So Lua used to in you know insist on

talking about ultimate reality which is dhhamma appearing here and now consciousness pure consciousness and and conventional reality such as Thailand, England [sighs and gasps] male female these are conventions. So contemplate a convention is a creation. It has no real

core to it or permanent essence. You can't find anything lasting in convention. They change according to time and place. This is for reflection not for grasping believing but conventional reality is what we like the vini is a convention. Buddhism as a religion is a convention. Terravada Buddhism is a convention. Thai

first forest monks are conventioned. They're creations. They have a beginning and end. They they change according to time and place. Then asking what doesn't change according to time and place is pure consciousness. It's silent without a language. When I realized the pure consciousness

as ultimate reality, I realize that it is apparent here and now. It's timeless for me now. It's the most apparent reality. It's what I God's ultimate reality but is silent where the conventions that we use winter retreat

ambati all these conventions Tabata Buddhism Thai forest Buddhism you know they they still operate but they're no longer one's refuge or identity. We're not really male or female or Thai or European. We're not really anything at all. But we can our identity is unity, is

perfection, is purity in the dharma. So in these talks I give therefore reflection to to really I found's emphasis on conventional reality very helpful because I never thought of it in those terms. Baramata such such baramata such is ultimate reality. Samacha is convention and so conventional reality is

is what we live with in these forms. They're conventions. This 91y old body is a convention. It's not a kind of permanent person is a convention. Go Buddha was a convention. But Buddha is a is a conventional word. a poly word but it also is has a a direction of looking inward apparent here and now

timeless come and see. So Buddhist teaching basic teaching and for noble truth is you know I find over the years of my monastic life such a freedom arising from just this one sermon he gave after his enlightenment because rather than just believing it or looking at it in terms of how I think

about it or what my personal views about the four noble truths is and argue about the meaning of suffering or or you know carry on uh scholastic conversations about poly and Sanskrit and Mahayana Badriana all the conventional forms of Buddhism at this time just this one sermon there is suffering

it's to be understood the ego psyched is suffering when you operate through life as an ego and is [clears throat] filled with suffering and despair and fear here because it's a false identity and it is very vulnerable to be a a man or woman old or young identities, racial prejudices,

gender biases. All this is by attached to these forms leads to a lot of fear and and worry, anxiety haunt the human race because they're caught in the delusion that they actually are a conventional form which is very unsatisfactory. Buddhist countries like recently the war in Thailand with Cambodia.

Both terabad and Buddhist countries should know better than to fight over a border or a piece of land. Yet that's convention. When you define, make boundaries. This is mine. This is not yours. Then we create the the sense of me and mine. my country, my nation. And then people are willing to die for that delusion,

willing to fight over some kind of desolate piece of land and die for it. Because what are they attached to? to their convention identity, conventional identity. They're not reflecting that that is merely a convention. when you know when I [snorts] first came to England,

I remember walking jung walking meditation practice here at Amraati and and I kept looking at the Jungr path out in the field and I kept saying this is England and then I say Well, we call it England, but the land really doesn't have a name. It's not saying it's England. It's we, just me.

So we see England as a separate place that we culturally identify with or feel have views and opinions about. But this land that we call England is just it's it's a convention. The land doesn't have a name. We call it that. We call it England, Scotland, Wales. We divide up the island into three different states

and each with our own views and opinions about North and South, about Europe, about United States. We we're willing to fight and quarrel endlessly over empty phenomena. [sighs] So the conventional world is the source of suffering because it isn't what we believe to be real. It can't be. It's not his nature is to

change just as our bodies they get old. Shakespeare's words, "Life is but a walking shadow, a poor player that struts and [snorts] threats for an hour and then is seen no more." It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fairly signifying nothing. And that's a McBth as many heard that his wife

committed suicide. And I think a tale told by an idiot and full of sound and fury because Sangsara is all about sound and fury, about war, about preference, about prejudice. A walking shadow that stretchs and threats its time on the stage and then is seen no more. It is a tale told by an idiot full of

sound inferior signifying nothing. So that sounds like despair. And in the play McMath, it signifies despair. A negative view, a tail toe by it meaning nothing. That's quite those words are quite desparing when you want to think of life as a positive experience full of happiness and

good luck and joy and find the right person live happily ever after. These are beautiful dreams. But also there's certain truth signifying you know what we fight over what we believe in and grasp is empty phenomena. There's nothing to it. It's might be full of sound and fury signifying nothing.

So this opportunity to reflect on that to is is silence [snorts] depressing or is it like despair? You mean life has no real important meaning? or when we investigate who's who's thinking these words who wants meaning from and purpose to their life you know I see in my cultural conditioning I

definitely been brought up to want my life to be meaningful and have a purpose so That's my cultural conditioning. But investigating who really wants purpose and meaning. These are words, English words that very nature is you know when we grasp it you know we become when we feel our life has no purpose then we feel

depressed but when we realize our true reality the dharma apparent here and now, timeless. It's perfect and pure and it's what we all really are. When we realize through understanding the ephemeral nature of the ego not to trust it or just perpetuate our

lives through an ego that is a delusion. But this uh Amraati is a place where this kind of encouragement is the whole purpose of this monastery to make it possible to reflect on life not to just be caught up in a Buddhist cult or become a Buddhist or convert Christians into Buddhists or our

duties are are not, you know, with no intention of coming to disrupt British society, but to provide a place that people can come to reflect on their lives with wisdom. and integrity. So I offer this as a reflection for today.