Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 9 (KkPR2kS1QEE)
Video ID: KkPR2kS1QEE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KkPR2kS1QEE

Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa. Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa. Namo Tassa Bhagavato Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa. Aparuta desa amata dvāra ye sotavanto pamuñcantu saccaṃ. So, I welcome everybody on this lovely

afternoon. And uh this is a chance to reflect on Dhamma the way it is. So, what I say I've repeated so many times, I sometimes wonder whether I should keep giving these talks cuz I say the same thing all the time. But, we we do need to be reminded. We we've get so caught up in our worldly

conditioning. And that's why the first fetter to develop wisdom is sakkāya-diṭṭhi or the the ego, the sense of being solely identified with one's form. So, form is is about time. All

forms conditions are time-bound. They have a beginning and an end. They have a birth and death. And when you see yourself as your body, then you're a time-bound condition. But, are you really a time-bound condition? This is the question to ask yourself. Is this your limitation? Is your physical

form? Because it is a limited form. And as you get older, it becomes even more limited. So, >> [sighs] >> you know, ask yourself, am I really this body? Whether it's male or female, black or white, it doesn't It's a form. A conscious form

in space. So, this is the way it is. In terms of eye consciousness, like I can see your forms. I can see space. But where is consciousness? You know, so then we think of eye consciousness.

So then we we think that consciousness is is not separate separate according to the senses, which are part of the aging process. The impermanent nature of senses. So then when our vision, like my vision is not very good. Where I used to have 20/20 vision. I used to have perfect vision.

But as I grew older and I became 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, it's getting dimmer and dimmer. And that's just the way it is. Eye consciousness is is still operative, but it it's not like it was 60 years ago.

So this is just a to reflect on the way it is that what we identify with when we identify with objects all the time. My body. My thoughts. Thoughts are are impermanent. Every thought you think, whether it's good or a bad thought, it is very nature is change. And so this continuous reflection on

change is practicing to develop wisdom in your life rather than be caught in the conditions that you didn't even ask for. Did you remember ask to be reborn again in your body? Or did you ask for your name? Did you ask for your parents? Did you ask for anything to any form that you will

might have you might imagine? No, they're given to you. They're all givens. They're not what you are. Your body is a part of the natural condition of forms in nature. They're natural in nature. They have a

beginning of birth and they will have a death. And this is the way it is rather in even though we reflect on that. It's important to to really investigate. Who am I? Am I really what I've been told? Because what we've been told, we didn't ask for. We We formed a sense of our self-worth when we were

innocent children. So our sense of our self, our whether we good looking or not or male or female or black or white. These things are are not we we identify with strongly. But they're all impermanent, unsatisfactory. So we're buying binding

ourselves to what is basically not self and not satisfactory. So, consider this. This is why this the first noble truth is dukkha or suffering. There is suffering that should be understood. So, the Buddha's teachings are very direct and very uh practical.

Cuz they're not asking us to believe in Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha or asking us to just accept what the Buddha taught, but he he actually gave us a way of investigating to realize for ourselves. We're not what we think. We're not the form we've been told we are. We're not a man or a woman. These are conventions.

Then what are we if we're not something a form in space? And we limit consciousness to the senses, then of course it's it's we're binding ourselves to the body because consciousness through senses is is impermanent. Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, feeling, thinking are all

impermanent, unsatisfactory. So, there's a way to investigate, to find out. You know, if I tell you what you are, it's still me telling you what you really are, but when I reflect like this, it's an encouragement to to realize this for yourself. So, consciousness

is itself pure consciousness doesn't have eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, or brain. So, when the manifestation of human form we all have eyes ears, nose, body, and brain. And then we try to perceive or imagine conscious

pure consciousness. We want to give it a name. We want to name it as because we believe in names as our reality. Like believing in the triple gem or the trinity in Christianity is it's a belief given to us. >> [snorts] >> So, belief is a

is done through every tower ignorance. You can believe in anything. I remember there was a kind of comic belief in the Flying Spaghetti Monster. And they they call themselves Pastafarians. So, is anything more ridiculous than flying spaghetti

as a monster? But some people can believe in the most ridiculous forms of deities or that because belief it comes from ignorance. In ignorance of Dhamma. So, is Dhamma something to believe in? You know, as I say, you should believe in the Dhamma. What What am I asking you to do? You know, what is Dhamma?

So, you can believe that Dhamma is ultimate reality. That's still a belief. Absolute reality. >> [clears throat] >> Give it all the English superlatives you can imagine, and it's still a name that is by its very nature impermanent. So, where do we come from, these forms in space? Where does space come from?

This is like investigating. This We think we just assume that space is here cuz we we're in it all the time. But could space is that the ultimate reality? Is just space? Cuz we can't see the beginning or ending of space. The other morning on the world service, BBC world service, they were talking

about the planet Pluto, which is in doubt whether it's really a planet or a some other form of in space. Because we want some people think it definitely is a planet, others think it's not really a planet. It's some meteoroid or something. So,

then we want to prove that this far away object we can't, you know, in it's in space just like we are. At this very moment, these forms are in space. Cuz without space, there could be no forms. >> [snorts]

>> There'd be no mountains, no Pluto. No planets if there wasn't space. So, space is a you can actually perceive with your eyes. But with consciousness, can you perceive consciousness as yourself? I consciousness, you can and our noses and so forth are

perceivable, but pure consciousness consciousness without forms. And that's dhamma. Dhamma is apparent here and now. It's the substratum the what is behind all the space and forms. What is the background, the ultimate reality that doesn't

have a beginning or end. It's not dependent on senses. >> [sighs] >> So, in my own practice of Dhamma, I just through this kind of relentless investigation, you get the insight yourself. The silence >> [snorts] >> behind the sound, behind the noise of

the world, is apparent here and now. And then that is right understanding, sammā diṭṭhi or perfect understanding. The path is apparent here and now. It's timeless. It's not not to be seen or heard or smelled, tasted, or touched. But you can't imagine that. You can't

imagine ultimate reality or Dhamma because imagination is always words, which are in their very nature impermanent and artificial, made up phenomena. And in that realization of the silence which allows the noise to manifest into the silence. And then Buddha pointed the way to realize

Dhamma for uh, directly, not just have a fixed belief in something in a word that you've learned from somebody else. So, psychic identity or the ego, are you really what you think? What your passport says, what your birth certificate it says. Are you really a separate person in space

>> [sighs] >> as the uh, definition for the meaning of your life, that you are just this very separate form in a vast universe of space? Taking it to an extreme, such as I am this isolated form in a vast universe with something called Pluto in outer space, which they can't determine

what to really what its true nature is, but it's a form they can see through powerful telescopes. But, that's I consciousness, which is very limited. You can hardly see beyond it, beyond what telescopes can see, can can help us see. And then you realize you are Dhamma

itself. The deathless reality. To be realized by yourself, not to be told you are that. I can tell you that. That's what you you really are. Every single person in this temple >> [sighs and gasps] >> on planet Earth.

But we identify with nationality, with religion. So there's endless wars, quarrels, family problems because the the separateness that we feel, the loneliness of being a separate form. Even in a marriage or in a Sangha life, you can feel lonely. Because what you're identifying with is

lonely. Being a a separate individual in a vast universe is the definite and definitely loneliness. When you think of it, you keep yourself busy by joining clubs, religious cults, >> [snorts]

>> depending on best friends, people you know, to keep us occupied with a sense of of to to really not be caught in the state of perpetual loneliness. >> In my own practice, following the basically the first sermon of the Buddha,

I'm put a lot of effort into really following just the instructions that you have in the Four Noble Truths. The >> [clears throat] >> And I found that, you know, being a guide to always a a pointer, making me look internally rather than

looking for answers to every question or solutions to every problem. Whereas a person, I can really feel, you know, I want to have answers to questions. Like doubt itself is is not, you know, what somebody's name and you As you get older, you have a lot of

senior moments where you can't even remember the name of the monks sitting next to you. And one doesn't like that. One doesn't like to doubt. We want to know, have a name for every tree, every flower, every planet, everything in space.

We want to name, and then that sense of knowing is gives us a sense of of set security. When we know the name of everything, but doubt is the third fetter, which is grasping thought. Cuz thought is created in That's why we As I've said before, we name things. We give names to

everything that we perceive through our senses. Or we give our own opinion about it, whether it's good or bad, right or wrong. Language is that way. It's a critical function that we've learned. We weren't born speaking any language. So, all languages are artificial conditions. They're sankharas.

So, you can believe in the Flying Spaghetti Monster if you want to or not. Or in a deity that we call God or Brahma or Allah. We give it a name that ultimate reality a name. But, it's also an artifice, the name that we give to

ultimate reality is still not the ultimate reality. Because actually you are the ultimate reality yourself, but you don't know it. Because you see yourself always as this very mortal creature in space. So, clinging to play the in just space and time. All crea- All forms are creations in space.

Without space, there'd be no there'd be no way for the forms to manifest, to be born into. >> [sighs and gasps] >> So, space is and time and as I've pointed out before, is space ultimate reality? It's empty. It's apparent here and now. But, how

But, is God really space or is Dhamma just the we give it the word just space empty space but then there's also consciousness. When you any doesn't know anything something wrong pure consciousness

where all forms cease. So developing the path is beginning to realize that the silence that you realize for yourself the silence behind the noise, behind the thoughts where space manifests and time manifests through space. So forms space are all time bound conditions.

But the supreme consciousness is not was never born and never dies. So when I think of death which I is very close to my age you know you think that the body will go because that's what it's supposed to do. It's old [clears throat] worn out. But will I really die?

If I'm body does that mean I'm really dead? Or if my real refuge is in Dhamma and the deathless then I'll never die. Ajahn Sumedho will die. The words, the titles, the body, the senses no longer work.

All of that is what we call sankhara or created phenomena. So, this is you know, in some way this is a very simple teaching. It's not It's And when you use it in the right way for investigation, then you realize it's budget tongue weight in a pouring you heat to be realized

individually through wisdom. And that's dhamma. It's to be realized, not to just be caught in some believing belief about ultimate reality that we now adopt the word dhamma. So, this is what we call liberation or freedom or nibana. Freedom from the restrictions that we bind ourselves

to through ignorance of dhamma. So, it's a The Buddha's message is just the four noble truths. I found enough, you know, it's a it's complete in itself, isn't it? You know, this is why I've took such an interest in it because why did he when he was enlightened, according to

the scriptures why did the Buddha go back to Gaya and tell the five colleagues of his who were expert in jhanas and concentration practices but still hadn't realized liberation from all suffering. You know, you think of somebody so

expert in attaining all the highest states of concentration you you think you know, why would you teach something so basic as there is suffering? Because those high states of concentration are artificial, they're dependent on objects. >> [snorts]

[sighs and gasps] >> On concentration on an object. >> [sighs] >> Silence is not an object you concentrate on. But it is apparent here and now. Timeless. And find out for yourself. It's a direct pointing at the here and now. It's not some kind of

belief system where you hope to attain an enlightenment as a person. >> [clears throat] >> So, Sakya deity or the personality, the ego, never gets enlightened. It can't. It's just a artificial form that was created. So, it you know, it's not the body that's enlightened.

The body, the Buddha passed away at age 80. So, that's the Buddha's Gautama, the Buddha's body grew old, got sick, and died. And that's natural. That's a phenomena that you have no control over. Once you're born, you you just grow, get old, get sick, and die. And that's the way it is. It's not

good or bad. But, religion is always searching for ultimate reality. You know, so whether we see our Is Buddhism really a religion? You know, some people say it's more like a psych- psychology. Or they call it atheism or

humanism or they have different words to to describe something that doesn't have God as its object or some deity as its object of of worship. So, when you come into the Amaravati Temple and you look at the golden Buddha rupa in the shrine, is that Buddha?

You know, it's a Some people think it has Buddha vibrations or you can imagine anything. Maybe the flying spaghetti monster's inside it somewhere. You can imagine that. You can imagine You can imagine anything. But, this is a symbol, isn't it? This is an icon for enlightenment. It's a human

form. That's why you can make Buddha images because according to the tradition, there was a living Buddha 2,500 years ago. But, you can't make human images of Dhamma. You know, so they use Dhamma jaggas or wheels as a symbol for

the way it is. All conditions are impermanent and not self. Not a isolated form in the universe. So, the result of this kind of insight is then they kind of four heavenly viharas I was seeing your moment, right? Metta, karuna, mudita, upekkha.

They operate through this silence. You know, you don't become just a a zombie that through through being silent. Your responses to life are more under loving kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity.

Those operate in enlightened individuals. Quite easily. They're not created. I don't think I have to have metta for everybody or or compassion or that they These naturally come from pure conscious awareness from that out of the silence.

>> So the directions are simple enough contained in those four noble truths of the first sermon of the Buddha. Easily obtainable in many languages. But you can just see it as a sacred text and worship it, put it in a on a shrine in your house and worship the book of four noble

truths. But then you're missing the point of it. It's actually to be taken seriously, to be examined, investigated. Does it work or not? And only you know, for me it's worked. It's not something that I have any doubts about any but whether for you, you've got to find that

out for yourself. To be realized individually. And so this reflection this afternoon is to encourage that in all of you. Whether you're a monastic or lay is not the issue but it's available to anyone that is interested in it. So I offer this as a reflection.