Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 36 (hRPApfO6CfA)
Video ID: hRPApfO6CfA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hRPApfO6CfA

Fore! Foreign! Foreign! [Music] Wonderful. So this afternoon we have this opportunity to reflect on dharma the way it is apparent here and now timeless. So reflection means looking inward doesn't mean just trying to understand the words but how the words

affect you personally because words have a effect on our minds. We hear good words, we feel like this. We hear bad words, we feel like this. And who is the witness to how we're feeling? And so we usually identify as my feelings. I am the witness.

And this sense of I am the the body, this person sitting here in the temple is how we tend to experience the world that we have to experience through a body through the senses, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue. So experience

is based on the changing conditions that we identify with. So when we talk about dharma, we're not dharma is doesn't change. It's the changeless reality of here and now. But out of ignorance and not really looking closely just by operating from habits, conditioning, from our biases, our pretensions, our

prejudices. We tend to see the world through a very narrow lens that often distorts our lives into a realm of suffering. So really considering how the world is a realm of suffering. What we see, hears, smell, tastes, what we think. Our bodies are all about change. Ch changing phenomena.

And that's our experience is with changing phenomena. And yet we long for peace, permanent peace, permanent happiness. Because we like that. We like the idea of being permanently happy and peaceful. That's a very ideal, a beautiful ideal

that almost all human beings hold to and want. But what is peaceful truly peaceful and doesn't change is overlooked. We don't reflect on dharma. We reflect on my feelings, my views, my opinions, my perceptions, or what we think about others. So seeing the world as it really is, you know, seeing the world is is a realm

of suffering and change. Everything that has a beginning and must has an ending. And everything that we think see here taste touch feel emotions is about change and change can be for the better. Things get can get better but they can't sustain being better. They don't you know they they because of the law of change

better is there's not something that can be stable and fixed. So consider this what are you attached to? What are you why are you suffering here at Amiratanti or in your home life or working life? Because you know it is a changing experience and when many of us when we come to

monastic life we're very idealistic. So we we hold our views about how a monastery should be, how a teacher should be, how a monk should be, how a nun should be. And because we're inspired, so inspiration is gives us that impetus. It's necessary at first. It brings us here and but then the reality of living

anywhere whether it's in the a beautiful paradise or the monastery or your homes things change and that's and change can also be for the worse. Because better progress I believe in progress progress we think everything are getting better and better

we have and then we think of the future when we all can go and live on Mars or some beautiful place like that life will be we'll set up perfect communities of peaceful loving friends and live forever in happiness and we can expand our lives to live 500 years. These are thoughts or ideas and that's all they are. They're just ideas are not realistic

where we can think well when I get an increase in my salary or I get a title or I think things will be better. And so we think in the future our lives should be getting better and better. And that's what we hope. Just reflect on this that hope is about the future. Hope is not not now because

you know it's an idea hoping for the best. You don't hope hope for now because it's here and now. There's nothing to hope for. But the future you can hope for success, fame, finding the right partner, having a beautiful house,

traveling around the world. You can all these are hopes and ideas that we can live for. But recognize that hope itself is a is a word, is a condition, is an experience, not based on reflection, on dharma, on the way it is, but on the idea that the future holds this sense of hope. Or maybe you're suffering from chronic depression

where the future seems hopeless. But hope is another word in the English language and it's and it's what we want. We hope for the better that Amarati will get better and better and in the future next year they're going to rebuild the monk's accommodation. They'll destroy take down the existing

monks vihara and we hope that everything the building projects will not be too inconvenient for our quiet lives here. And we hope that the buildings are successful and practical and that the monks will then live happily ever after in better accommodation.

Then we can be sarcastic because that is sarcasm. So that's the future right now. much like this. And so you you're looking you're not trying to pass judgment on how it is that you individually experience this moment. Some of you are interested. Some of you

may be bored or disagree or whatever. But uh we're not all going to feel the same. But we can be aware of what we're feeling is like this. The feelings, the conditions that we're experiencing through this form, through the sensual, the senses that we cling to are like this. So this is this statement like

this is a way of reminding yourself be here and now can you imagine a timeless can you can you form any image of timelessness you know I can't do And yet the dharma is timeless. It's not in time. [Music]

So you you know just try to imagine timelessness. You can kind of define the words but can you imagine it have an image or describe it you know so this is a challenge to you to just try to reflect if the dharma is timeless we don't even know what that is on a

personal level cuz we're aging and we get old and that's all about time. The world is all about time. This is 2025 next year. This 2026 you can't stop it. You can use different calendars is about the best you can do but according to the one we're accustomed to is 2026. So we can imagine

you know what's going to happen in 2026 but if building the monsara if that is in that is obviously in time it's a time condition you can't imagine in rebuilding the bikers vihara without time because the bikers viara is in time. All our thinking all our thinking is time is about time. Every word

every concept in any language is about time. Space and time are our reality. So when we live for the future or we regret the past, you feel guilty about mistakes we made in the past. But what is the past at this very moment? you you can remember things things you've said or done that you regret or

feel guilty about. But where is the past now? It's memory. remember the yesterday or the day before or last year. We have memories of when we first came to Hammerati site in 1984. So what's happened to 1984? It appeared and then went into 1985. And that's the way it is. That the

conditioned realm is about incessant changingness. And we're clinging to this and expecting to find permanent peace and happiness in something that has no sustainability. And so we suffer from life because we're clinging to illusions, things that are not really true or real that pass that arise in the present and pass into the

future. So when you question like this, you begin to no longer try to operate from opinions and views and ideals. You can let go and this is the way to timeless reality. What is apparent here and now is is put it into a oneword consciousness.

It's apparent here and now. You know you're conscious and that's a fact. That's not an ideal or a Buddhist teaching. It's the reality that that at this moment in time and space consciousness is consciousness does it have any

quality? Is it does it have any color? Does it have any sound? Does it have any form at all? So we look around to find what's conscious, what consciousness is. And that's the big subject of the age. So all because nobody knows what it really is.

And yet it is us. All of us are exper the reality of consciousness. When we go unconscious, does consciousness disappear? When somebody thinks somebody goes to the unconscious state, do they really does unconsciousness really cease? This is another question.

Can consciousness cease when we die? When the body dies, does consciousness cease? So these are all intelligent questions to ask yourself before death happens or you be become unconscious but the the conditions can disappear

when somebody actually dies or They what happens to their consciousness? Well, consciousness never dies. It's dharma. It's reality. Ultimate truth. Absolute reality. Without consciousness, there would never be any space. Well, there'd never be any forms. If consciousness is just trapped within the physical body,

then the sense consciousness changes. Sense is not due to the consciousness itself but but the senses deteriorate. We go blind, deaf. lose our sense of smell. We lose our memory. We can lose anything that we've acquired. But consciousness, we didn't acquire it.

It's not ours as any personal way. It is ultimate reality or dharma apparent here and now. And as you really put forth the effort to to establish the trust in that. Trust that reality dharma is here and now. And but dhamma doesn't have a form. It's not you can't make a a dhammajaka

look like a Buddha rupa. So they have symbols dhamma wheel and things for dharma but the symbols are also very impermanent can change but the reality of dharma is apparent here and now timeless. So this is a very important reflection if you want to uh let wisdom guide you in your life because it's through this reflective

ability that human beings have to be the watcher. the one who observes rather than the owner of the changing conditions. The suffering we experience is always we're identifying being the owner of our suffering, our feelings, our emotions, our thoughts, our memories.

So is dhamma person that has no personality. There's no form, no personality, no emotion. But the realization of dharma apparent here and now timeless is What I encourage you to reflect upon during this time, the vasa, the pansa

that we're experiencing through these forms. So is consciousness for you and me different? Where is Sam to consciousness consciousness? Is it different? Does it have nationality? Does it have gender? No. It's where gender, nationality,

differences, all the opposites that we can create in our minds cease. I remember contemplating about good and evil ceasing in consciousness where my cultural condition is to believe we want every goodness should should reign. We want everything to be good and right and fair and just.

That how that's how everything should be. because that's right. But right has an opposite called wrong. And they cease in consciousness when you're just abiding in pure conscious awareness. The opposites, the dualistic opposites and extremities of thought and conditions cease there.

And what's left when you let everything cease then you have no understand peace like you can't you know trying to describe nibbana the the poly word nibana or the Sanskrit nirvana you know in terms terms of words it's eternal peace which are other more words

freedom from suffering. So when the Buddha was enlightened, he still lived many years onward in a changing body with many experiences. Some marvelous and wonderful, others are horrible. Because that's the world that we have to understand is not

the reality of not permanent happiness. We can never find permanent peace or happiness in the world. So when you understand the world as as it is, you you you have this insight into letting go of it, not destroying it. You're not trying to get rid of it because then you're judging the world is something you want to get rid of.

But it's not about destruction. It's about letting go a sense of nonattachment which you can realize for yourself and that's nirvana realizing it for yourself. So it's not something you can imagine. But something you can actually realize realization

of dharma it's ultimate reality or absolute reality. There's an interesting time now because with the internet and YouTube and all that there's so much interest in religion and meditation, in Buddhism and things that that were not very

readily available. before the modern technology. So there are these atheist videos on YouTube. There's a lot of criticism of religion and uh people who call themselves atheists. So is Buddhism an atheist religion? And you can look at it because we don't believe in God.

We don't have a God. And if you don't believe in God, then you're an atheist. These are all assumptions one makes through the intellect. And then you ask yourself, what do you mean? What do you mean by God? You know, you're supposed to believe in God, but what uh what what is it? Is God really a a man?

Or is God a judge? You know, he judges. I was taught my Christian upbringing that God was loves us all equally but judges us separately. So this is you know how do you figure that one because God is is what what is it? That's the question to ask. What does what does it mean in terms of reality itself?

If it's a old man with a white beard, well, that's just an image and best you know at the time of establishing Christianity that was and Judaism believes in God. So it was very much the u way of visualizing dharma or ultimate reality. What are you

going to call it? So in the English language you you you take the the word go which is actually from the German folklore. So God is is a madeup word in itself. But what is it pointing at? What is what is the word ultimately pointing at is ultimate reality. God is ultimate reality. Then

then it's not a matter of believing in symbols of ultimate reality but in realizing it for oneself. So different religions have different names for ultimate reality usually personifications of males like Allah. When you think of the Muslim

God is Allah, you think of a man because that's the way we've been conditioned to think. But is Dharma male or female? It's where male and female cease. That's where we're all equal is in Dhamma. So rather than just criticize religion because they

they they try to teach morality or good actions, generosity and but the idea of religions tend to be presented as something you cling to. You must cling to Buddhism or Christianity or Judaism. You you know and that very clinging creates into an experience of suffering. So do we cling to Buddhism?

You know, should I demand that you believe in everything Buddhist and cling to Buddhist identity and become a Buddhist and and then look down on other religions, you know, because they're not Buddhist. They're not wisdom teachings. We can pass judgment upon all other religions. We conditioned to do that. You know so it's uh

you know even in the Buddhist world you one forms views about Mahayana Tibetan Zan terraada and clings to their views and so then we feel I kind of sense that we're our religion is the right presentation that what the dharma really taught and we can blindfold with Tibetan

Buddhism or whatever but uh because it's not exactly but at heart it's the same Tibetan Buddhism Buddhism it aim is pointing that what is apparent here and now timeless aico come and see for yourself. So it's a I always like that it's come and see. Don't just believe me. A sense of invitation, an encouragement to find out

for yourself, not just grasp the words of a teacher or a religious convention. [Music] You have to look inward. You're not trying to find dhamma as something you can see, hear, smell, taste, touch, think or feel. The realization is actually you are that dharma. So it's time to find a real dharma

teacher. true dharma. All this is is we can cling to these perceptions. But when we're going out looking for the perfect dharma teacher and the perfect situation, you know, the best we can find is is another person who inspires us.

But that's not realizing dharma for yourself. You can be inspired by what teachers say, but open academ is looking inwards, not at a wise teacher, expecting him to him or her to enlighten you. and to be realized individually through

wisdom. So wisdom whether you think you're wise or not. How many of us really think we're really wise people? It sounds very conceited, even arrogant. I'm very wise teacher. This sounds even to me like an arrogant announcement because wisdom is apparent here and now and we can all learn from wisdom that

it's natural not created through words or philosophies or religions. So budget is to be realized individually like even the Buddha in the scriptures the sutras couldn't really enlighten his disciples you he wasn't going around didn't have a magic wand to suddenly tap you on the head and you're

enlightened or even to say, you know, with words that enlighten you. The Buddhist words, the scriptures are directional science. I've said this many times that there's all if you really understand the the four noble truths, they're not doctrines. They're not things you grasp and and

believe in. They're directing you to look inward. Do not just study philosophy and religion and metaphysics at some famous university, but to look inward. Whether you're literate, illiterate, high IQ, low IQ, or whatever, it doesn't matter. The dharma is apparent here and now. And as we

begin to trust this and this is an act of trust or sata in the poly word trust this trust that what I'm saying is is a direction it's not doctrine. Trust that that a dama is here and now and you are that not personally as a individual but as ultimate reality and that's oneness that's complete

wholeness perfection where when you look at yourself when you develop critical minds. I can't see where I'm perfect as a person. But trusting in awareness, conscious awareness here and now, I trust that. And that's the liberation from delusion. The letting go that the Buddha

advised to let go not destroy but is like a relaxed state of just witnessing experience life in the form that you've let go of. So you're witnessing what happens to this body, the emotions I feel in life and the perceptions that arise, memories of the past,

you know, your witness to it. It is about change. What doesn't change is is the dharma. So that is perfect peace. It's not a creative state that you can create through controlling conditions. that your true nature is blissful, peaceful, loving rather than a man or woman who's caught in views, opinions, ideas

that tend to separate us and cause wars, friction, conflict. So I offer this for today's reflection. Where am I?