Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 47 (nLa6jGXxk5c)
Video ID: nLa6jGXxk5c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nLa6jGXxk5c

No more sort. [Music] Mortas wonderful. So on this day Easter Sunday have this opportunity to reflect on dharma the way it is. And reflecting isn't thinking, it's

witnessing. When we say contemplate the truth or reflect on the way it is, then we we immediately start thinking and uh trying to describe how you might how you feel or experience this moment. But when I use the word reflection, it's or the word contemplation, it's not thinking. It's being a witness. Pure witnessing

of all conditions are impermanent. All dhamma is not personal. So all dhamma is not a person. P dharma is ultimate reality. And so we try to imagine ultimate reality. You can't do it. You can imagine all kinds of things, sense, nonsense, right and wrong, good and bad, virtue,

advice. But ultimate reality one's mind goes blank. It's just empty. So is ultimate reality is the dharma as we say. Is it just emptiness which in terms of the intellect seems rather unpleasant because our minds are filled with a sense of self personal self is very strong

because we've been conditioned to do that. So learning to see the ego as a condition rather than as a person who really cares about life, good and bad, right and wrong. And you can see that it's personal, very personal about what's right, what's wrong, what's true, what's

false. But in you really penetrate that who really cares. You realize that the dharma the dharma the pure consciousness doesn't care. It's not it doesn't produce caring feelings or anything. It's pure, unblenmished, perfect. So I found a very useful

practice to say to myself, who cares when things crisis arise in the SA or in the nation or whatever, whether it's you know natural disasters or upheavalss or revolutions. I can say my personality cares can feel more can take sides but I'm aware of that. So this reflection on the way it

is that that my personality still functions but I know what it is. It's a empty phenomena where we when we see ourselves through the delusion of a separate self then we feel victims of fate or misfortune or we get caught up in taking sides in jealousies and conflicts, personal preferences, strong views and then there's conflict and

that's the nature of ssara is it's a realm of conflicts whether personal, family, political, religious. We can make causes out of almost everything. What's right, what's wrong, and not that but The practice of mindfulness of awareness is to see that right and wrong are

relative to conditions. There's nothing absolutely right or nothing absolutely wrong. When the conditions for right arise and right is like this but it is not stable. It's not going to last when you are the witness rather than the victim of karma. I found the escape from suffering is

in taking refuge in awareness, conscious awareness in dharma. It's not just an imagined refuge of an imagined dharma. It's not some kind of abstract idea I have developed uh about what dharma is. It's the realization of dharma is apparent here and now as I've said many many

times. So it's not something that you find. It's something that you are. So that means the reference to the world that we experience through the the body and the senses is the way it is. You know, we have we've been conditioned in so many ways to in what's right and wrong and what's true and false, what's good and bad.

Because that's the world. That's sara. It's all about right and wrong, good and bad, virtue and vice. God and the devil. So understanding the personality is the first fatter that and it is the the major fatter that blinds us to the way it is. As long as you operate trying to get enlightened or get something out of

meditation as a person sometimes it's going to go well. you your people will say I had a really good meditation and then next day they'll say oh my meditation was bad and so because they're expecting peace and harmony and and what what they desire a good meditation and they interpret it in that

in those terms of good and bad meditation. And once told me he said good meditation is good bad meditation is good. So that was and if you understand what reflection is then you realize what what that really means.

Don't expect your meditation to be always peaceful and quiet and and you're in a temple or in a on a retreat because then you're still operating from the separate self. The separate self is a basic delusion. You know ask yourself who am I? Who am I really? Am I the the body this

body? Who am I? This personality you know and then when you investigate the personality the ego you're witnessing it rather than grasping it. And that's why I give so many encouragements and instructions to be the witness to thought rather than trying to imagine or have definitions for

everything like what is good meditation, what is bad meditation. So good meditation is we in quotes means that you know the conditions are quiet and peaceful and the the world is not you're not in conflict at the moment. You're you feel at peace. You might feel unconditioned love for all sensient beings. You might feel really happy. These are all

desirable conditions. But then when something happens distressing noises or news or whatever, then that's interfering with my good meditation. We can feel angry and upset at somebody who sneezes or makes a loud noise, slams a door. But if you're the being, if you're take refuge in bu the witnessing

position of dharma, it's only through that Buddha is not a person. is not taking refuge in in a person. Buddha is awareness here and now. It means awakeness rather that always referring to to the sage go to mother Buddha. People always are asking questions about sound of silence or

emptiness because you know I use those those words and when you when you just the heard sound of silence. The words themselves are sankaras. So if you're wanting to notice the sound of silence as a person, you know, you miss it every time because you the personality is is not

silent. Personality is words, concepts, views and opinions. And I review my life as I get old about all the memories of the past and how my sense of a separate self was formed from a you know when I was a child and you know you you awaken to the fact you're not

really what you been told or been conditioned to believe where so much of my suffering was because I I had all these strong views about sin and virtue and values of my culture about good and bad, right and wrong.

This is a Christian holiday today, Easter. And I was conditioned to actually believe this is when when Jesus arose from the grave. And as a child I could believe that because what references did I have except my mother's absolute faith and belief in the actual terminology. So every morning on Easter morning my mother would greet greet me

saying he has risen and then I am supposed to say reply he has risen indeed and one's supposed to feel very happy that this happened on Easter and Easter is a celebration Easter eggs but chocolate bunnies And it's a joyous day because our savior has physically written risen from being dead into risen into heaven. Well,

that's I'm not criticizing that, but that's part of a conditioning you receive and genuinely felt by my mother and father, by Christian religion that I grew up in. But witnessing isn't Christian or even Buddhist. It's it's not it has no name. Buddha is not a

Buddhist. Buddha is awakened awareness here and now. And when that memory of he has risen on Easter comes, I can see it as just words that I was programmed with in my innocent years as a child. My mother was very virtuous person. So you know I had no reason to disbelieve or question her.

So then in teenage when I became a teenager that's the years where you your kind of rebellious instincts start operating starting to question and uh then I when I started questioning then I was told that you shouldn't Question is the doubt. You shouldn't doubt. Doubt is a

sin. Well, in Buddhism, Buddh Buddha, doubt is a fetter because it's all about grasping thoughts, views, opinions. So when people ask me about death and a deathless and sound of silence and and emptiness, these words aren't are just, you know, the best you can do with conditioned phenomena to try to point to the unconditioned reality of

consciousness. So they're all words. Absolute reality are two words. Buddha is a word. Dama is a word. Sana is a word. They have a beginning and an end. There are good words, virtuous words or vulgar words. But wild words whether they're

virtuous or vulgar are impermanent phenomena when you are the witness the puto of the way it is you know I used to practice just trying to hold a word and observe how it affects my mind you know then I a teenager I kind of rebelled against Christianity Because then I took an opinion. It's it's not true. It's not human body from

a grave rising up into heaven. It didn't make any sense cuz heaven, you know, is supposed to be where everything is beautiful and wonderful. who wants to rise from the grave at 90 years old and live forever in heaven. You know, when you ask yourself these kind of

questions, it doesn't sound very attractive. But then they they explain it that you get a a celestial body or ethereal body or but it's very personal. Everything is personal. Your soul is personal. We have separate souls and we believe that. So we because we never investigate. Can you really find a

separate soul through investigation? Or what is a soul? When they talk about my soul and we tend to think of it as something very personal. What happens to the soul when the body dies? And so these are questions that people ask because you can't help but wonder is it when the body dies is it

just oblivion? There's no soul, no nothing. You just dead just memories that you leave behind. But when you investigate sakiadi, the first fatter or the ego sense of a separate self, you begin to see it's something to no longer cling to. No longer have to

feel separate. So separation is is the division of male and female. It's a division between black and white, Jew and Gentile. It's a division between We we divide the world into our friends, our enemies, the nations we approve of and

nations we don't like. That's news. And we do have preferences with people. So like the the problem with DEI diversity, equity and inclusion, you know that in my personality that appeals to me diversity, equity and inclusion.

But then in the United States now there is somebody is DEI there they're considered dangerous because people have taken sides. Now the diversity, equity and inclusion are really rather uh kind of ideals that people think in their mind because on the level of of experience we're all diverse. The forms are

diverse and we we have prejudice against some forms and some people and some religions, races, genders. And uh this idea of diversity is to is to be tolerant which to me is very kind of a skillful state of being tolerant of diversity rather than being intolerant of the diversity

of human beings, genders, races, religions. Because what mine I've been very much a kind of idealistic person equity equality. Well, in equality, we can't be equal in forms, you know, because some young and old people, are they equal? male and

female or or Africans and Europeans and and equal in terms of form and and experience, but equality in terms of of accepting the differences and not identifying as superior or better. I'm better than you or I'm not as good as you

are. And inclusion has a more kind of being able to include people rather than form exclusive cults that exclude. That's how I interpret that. And yet there are many people that see it as a threat to their position in in the world because they hold firmly two views about superiority or

inferiority, right and wrong. We have memories and we remember, you know, I have many memories going back to the 1930s. And so there's a whole lot of of uh things that have changed a lot where I think my youth my youth was in the 50s when I was a

young older teenager. I was 19 when I enlisted in the Navy in 19 53. And there was just so many things taken for granted that you never questioned. The questions that DEI bring up in the mind were not questions that one thought or had it during my experience in the 1950s. There just a lot that seemed normal and

right according to the way you experience it. You saw many inequalities that especially racial equalities and inequalities that you felt were wrong. I felt that you never was a racist, but they weren't big issues back in 1950. They weren't in the in the

accepted consciousness of most people. this is the way it is and it's always been this way and and just the assumption being a white Christian male was you know that was never a problem being feeling it uh never feeling inferior as a race because it was assumed the white

race was superior and one didn't question that assump assumption and then the questioning takes place in during my youth during my middle age and so forth and you know towards move moving more towards equality, inclusion, diversity and now those very words are

very dangerous in the United States because people there's a movement to to create that is very threatening to one's position that one is clinging to in society. So in my when I think who who cares that sounds rather callous because you know in my

liberal woke personality it tends to you should care about the this these problems political racial international problems because they are something to care about. But in terms of meditation and dharma, they are all just changing conditions. The ego, the the viewpoint, the de I all these are

concepts that have risen due to other conditions. And in that in realizing just the ephemeral quality nature of phenomena, you no longer want to hold on to phenomena. You realize it like that where the suffering of life is taking sides and carrying and hating the opposite and worried about the

inequalities or worried worried about losing your superior position in the society or in the world. All these are phenomena that arise and cease according to other conditions. And when you let go of all that complete letting go of opinions and views. Then there is silence. Conscious

awareness is silent. It's not a sound. Sound of silence. Those words are a bit misleading. But when you let go, you do experience peace. And peace is silent. It's not about right and wrong, good or bad, male and female anymore. And that's what we all really long for. We want

peace. And when we're looking for peace as something to find, you know, we're going to see conflicts and unpaceful things that are unfair, unequal, that separate and divide and discriminate. And Because that's what the personality does. It's it's you can't help it feel separate from everyone around. What is

loneliness? What is it? How does loneliness arise? Because people you know and you know feel very lonely even though they they have family and they have friends but loneliness is is the ego because you know it's hard to find somebody who agrees with you who can be

your true friend loyal and loving your whole life because things change. You know, when we're trying to find a a partner, a friend that's going to be my best friend for life, then that the cause of loneliness because even best friends don't agree on everything. Husband and wives don't

agree on every issue. Brothers and sisters don't agree on everything because that's the nature of ssara and the ego. So in feeling loneliness is refuge and dumb. Is that lonely? Well, there's no no one to be lonely in

dharma. The separateness is gone. There's silence which is peace, bliss. So who really cares? And I found that a relief just to not be caught up in my ideals, no matter how noble they might be, or caught up in issues about who's right and who's wrong and and all the the issues that even SAS

produce because then it then one if it takes sides one can't help can have preferences what's right and what's wrong. Just around Vinaya alone, monks can quarrel endlessly about how to what's right or wrong with the Venia rules. So I remember in reading life of the

Buddha, the Kosami Bikus were having some kind of argument about water in the bathroom. some some kind of trivial issue and they were fighting with each other and it was Buddha became so fed up with the whole thing. He went off, lived in the jungle and was supported by a monkey and an

elephant. And often times I felt that like I just fed up with all the trivial opinions and views around rules and precepts. Because it's is you know who's there strict and loose and ways of looking at venia that which is right and which is wrong and being a bigu for so many

years. You know, you've been through the years of being very tight and rigid about the rules and then realizing the suffering of of just being caught up in when I see things as not as as my view of being right or somebody else's view of being right. As a person, I can easily get caught up in in those kind of situations. But then I ask myself, who

cares really? Does pure conscious awareness care? And then you begin to see Vina as not something rigid and absolute right and wrong but just guiding principles towards behavior. So it's more a sense of sana through vinaya that's managed to survive to this present

moment. You know how many Buddhas have appeared in history you know so there's like 28 Buddhas we can chant and uh be buddhas. What are beaca Buddhas? You know, they're Buddhists that never left any uh teachings behind to follow or never established a vin program. So

then go the Buddha established the dharma which has no words. So like how do you teach dhamma? You know that was his first and according to the scriptures his first question was how there's nothing to teach and then he was encouraged to go forth and then then his teaching was based on the

common human experience that we all recognize of suffering. So that's insight that's helpful because why do we suffer? What is the cause of suffering? Why why when I come from a good family and have all kind had all kinds of advantages and opportunities as an individual, why should I

suffer? And then investigating the ego, I say when I don't get my own way, I suffer as a person. When somebody insults me, I suffer as a person. When people want to have bi racial biases, gender biases and all this, I you know, and they don't agree with me, I suffer as a person. But as absolute reality which is

conscious awareness here and now then who cares? It drops away and you begin to have a clear view of the way things are as all that arises ceases. All dhamma is not self. The dharma is not a person. And as a person when you try to realize dharma, you can't do it. Our

personalities, you know, they they're limited because they're forms, empty forms that arise and cease. So the the grief and despair and doubt that arise amongst the Buddhist community who meditate are caught in in views and opinions and and about themselves or about their teachers, about the

scriptures, about the precepts. And that when we make everything personal like that, what I believe, my view is right view. What does that sound like in a very conceited way when when somebody says I'm a stream enterer? Well, the personality wants to be a stream enter. You ordained to become an arahant to

realize nana. Those are all words we say when we're ordained. ordaining to realize ultimate reality or nibbana and then in investigation observing just the ego my ego I realized my ego is very limited condition it can't it you know even at best even after all these years as a Buddhist

monk the personality is still very limited and suffers from the conflicts and problems that arise that one experiences in life in old days. So thinking is empty. Dharma is perfect and it's apparent here now. So as a person none of us are perfect but our real nature is perfect. So when I tell people their

true nature is perfect, they they tend to see that very personally and they think I'm a bit crazy or idealistic. But it's true. When you realize your true nature is apparent here and now is dumb. The silence, the peaceful blissful silence of here and

now. Then the personality is just a function that carries you through life. But it it's no longer what your refuge. You're no longer idealizing life and how it should or shouldn't be. You realize that the nature of phenomena is to change and that the Buddha pointed out

very clearly in his first sermon, the four noble truths. So ask yourself am I a good meditator? Is my meditation good or is it bad? And just listen to it. And people say I can't meditate at Damraati. I need to go off to a cave and meditate or there's too much work or too much busyiness. Just listen to it. Not to to you shouldn't think like that but

the practice is being a witness to how you actually feeling. Amovati is like this rather than I think it should change the way I think I believe you know I've got the right view and then we get caught up in in our egos which want to be right and make everything right but then that will

never happen. Emmaati is a place for reflection, encouragement to to investigate and is very clearly explained in the Buddhist teachings and the his for noble truth his basic basic sermon as well as all the other sutas that exist. The dependent origination I found all these teachings very helpful

not as grasping teachings trying to personally understand them but to use them for investigating experience. I remember when I first came across peticha samu powder or dependent origination it just seems so complicated and I kept thinking I can't get my mind around this my mind wasn't conditioned to think in terms of the

concepts that follow in sequence ignorance is the cause of suffering. Well, that's very basic. But in in pet in and dependent origination, as long as their ignorance, there's going to be suffering. It traces to the whole realities of of Sankara's consciousness. feelings and then

grasping that take us to griefs, sorrow, despair, anguish and that you can actually witness to in your in your life here as long as I operate from my personal operating as a separate person. then there's grief, sorrow, despair and anguish as a result of that. But if I see that if I let go of that grasping

of of it ignorance of dharma, if I let go of of that of my grasping tendencies, then what's left when you're not grasping anything is dhamma. where the whole sequence of peticha samada collapses. So this is you know it's to be a skillful means to investigate experience not something just to

chant in poly but to you know it's an investigatory teaching that I found extremely helpful in breaking through my own grasping tendencies as a So I end this reflection and uh say happy Easter everyone. The cosmology.