Title: Ajahn Sumedho Dhamma Talk 46 (D40NwEOQPAQ)
Video ID: D40NwEOQPAQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D40NwEOQPAQ

Summer one I have a moment to sat down. So this afternoon is an opportunity to reflect on dharma reality the way it is. And so this is our ability as human beings to reflect on the way it is. We can be the bu the watcher rather than just the victim of habits of karma. And that separates us from other

animals who operate according to their karma, their forms but don't reflect on them. But as human beings like the word man itself, the English word man really means a thinking creature. Mano is from the poly or Sanskrit word

mono mental be able to create languages thoughts. So this is also you know it can be seen as a great gift like the Buddha the historical Buddha of ancient India and it also can be a curse because we can create a whole world of delusion with our thoughts and that's what why there's so

much conflict in the world because of our thinking. Ability to think and create ideas, have views, have opinions. And of course, we're not going to always share the same views and opinions because the thinking ability is uh is created ability. It's not natural. It's not like you're you're born

thinking. We were none none of us born thinking about anything. But we were born in a human form as a conscious being, as a human being that could be taught languages and educated to be reasonable, logical, or just be superstitious, caught in delusions that you acquire from your culture, your

religion, your tribe, whatever you acquire the kind of world view that that you get when you're an innocent child before you discriminate. So like with many of us, we were taught according to our parents about what's right and wrong, what's true and false about religion. about political views, gender views. All these are views

and opinions that that have have come into consciousness, but we're not born with them. So now is a time where there's so much conflict in the world because of the differing views and opinions and some are very intelligent views. You know, one can have very intelligent, reasonable views and

opinions and others can be very uh selfish and evil, destructive, but whatever the category is that they're all views and opinions. Even the rational, reasonable, intelligent opinions are still phenomena that arises and ceases. And so the wisdom of the Buddha was pointing

to the nature of phenomena. So that all phenomena is impermanent. Now that when asked about wisdom, there's worldly wisdom like how to survive in the society you're living in. How to survive in a marriage and a family and all the crises, problems, earthquakes, fires

that this planet that we depend on can produce. So there's a kind of worldly wisdom acquired knowledge about how to survive street wise or intelligent rational views about right and wrong and what's true and false. But in ultimate reality there is no right and wrong, true and false.

virtue or vice in ultimate reality which is dharma right and wrong true and false cease and that's noda the third noble truth the the end of suffering Right. So then the thinking mind can be quite upset by that kind of view because virtue and vice, true and false, right and wrong are strongly grasped and held and believed in as absolutes.

Absolute right, absolute evil. We absolutize the the relevant the impermanent conditions of our ideas and thoughts. So that kind of absolutizing making a like a righteous view is a real divisive position to take on life. Many of us have experienced that in monastic life. Very people who are convinced they're absolutely right

and that everyone who doesn't agree is wrong. And when you try to talk to them, give this kind of reflection, they just don't pick it up. Because being right is so secure. feeling I'm absolutely right is a sense of what we call narcissism or sense of self-importance because you believe in righteousness and that you are somebody who is right all

the time without taking into account the conditions that you're actually experiencing through your body through your senses. Yes. So that's why all conditions are impermanent. It's so important is a is not a worldlywise teaching. It's pure wisdom. unadulterated universal wisdom to be in it's a investigation of right and

wrong all our conditioning whether it's good or bad right or wrong true or false male or female because whatever is conditioned is impermanent so like a condition a sankara a phenomenon they are impermanent And then you're encouraged to to observe that for yourself. Not just grasp the the statement of the

Buddha, but the whole point of baana or meditation is to see for yourself the impermanence, the ephemeral nature of righteousness, of wrongness, of views and opinions, good or bad, true or false. So how do we do that? If we are grasping our view as right and don't listen to anyone else, we just consider everyone else

wrong. Or it can go the opposite. We see ourselves as a sinner, someone who's wrong, who's abused, who's committed crimes, who's done bad deeds, told lies, deluded people, and then we think of ourselves as a criminal. And that's not a very nice way to see oneself as a

criminal. Though according to worldly wisdom you may be a criminal but just the word criminal is a phenomenon that arises and seizes and we can grasp that we can go through our life when we've committed crimes told lies when we were young and still before we pass away at 100 we still think of ourselves as a criminal if We don't see and don't

investigate this grasping tendency to hold to what is unstable and impermanent. This is a very interesting time to live. When I look at my life and now the conditions say from my youthful years to the present day have changed considerably and so you know you look all that is history

now. I have photo albums of when I was a little child, when I was a teenager. And so these are what are these these photographs of oneself when one was four years old or 15 years old. You know, they are like ghosts or memories of the past printed onto a to a

paper or in an iPad or an iPhone. They are Is that really me? Is that picture of this four-year-old boy really me? And according to the way the identity with my body and yeah that was me at four years old but all that the sense of that was me when I was four years old is a creation of thoughts. If you don't think then you

can't create identities with photographs of yourself. So what is the ultimate reality in comparison? What are we working for? What did the Buddha point to in his teaching? What was he? You know this is this is so important at this time to realize that this teaching that the of

the Buddha Gautama the Buddha of ancient India that it's it's not about ancient Indian culture. It's about here and now about the human condition that we all share. Whether you're a criminal or a saint, we share the same experience of life through seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching,

thinking. The differences are come through what we call karma. the DNA of our mother and father, our social background, our education, our age. But these are all changing conditions. They're all saras. They're all phenomena. And then to see phenomena as impermanent, you can't just grasp the

words. Even though the it's a wise teaching, it's not wisdom in itself. It's it's pointing to investigation. This is what ba or meditation is. Is to investigate. Can you find a condition that's permanent? Now, if you're really stubborn and and determined to be righteous and hold to your opinion no matter what the cost,

then you think being right is permanent. Right is right. Right is good. And that's true. Right is good. But it's not permanent. So in this position of Buddha knowing Dhhamma, this configuration of the witness, the Buddha, the P is a witness position.

And that's what we encourage you all to do is take the Pluto witness position of being the observer of the rising ceasing of thoughts of emotions right or wrong good or bad without judging them because as soon as you judge it you have a bad thought and you then you say I that's a bad thought you made it more than what it is. It's a phenomena that

arises and ceases through witnessing its its absence because whatever arises ceases and the dharma is apparent here and now you know so it's not something remote or something you as a person never get hold of. You can't grasp dhamma. You can grasp dhamma teachings. You can memorize the trapetica. But that kind of grasping is

grasping something good. Yes. But it's still grasping. It's not ba. It's not investigating the way it is. All conditions, all phenomena are impermanent. So this word impermanent and nature in Pali we use that in this tradition that's what Dhama wisdom is. is not grasping that statement but Bana is investigating is that true

or false? And if we're devoted Buddhists, we think, well, the Buddhist said it's true, so we must believe that if we're Buddhists, so we take another position of being a Buddhist who believes everything in the scriptures. So that's the form grasping the form of what we now call teraba [Music]

Buddhism poly tradition Thai tradition and it is all these things in themselves are you know quite admirable but they're still phenomen And that's their very nature. They can arise and cease. Buddhism as a condition can come and go. But dharma doesn't come and

go. So what is dharma? What is the dharma in terms of apparent here and now? What is nibana that is apparent here and now? Because this word nirvana or nana is a is a high-minded word you know it's a goal to attain nana to realize dharma and so these are ceremonies we take we give

the refuges the precepts and we have uh meditation classes and We encourage people to to ba to meditate but often times we're just uh conditioning them to think like a Buddhist become a Buddhist rather than actually realizing the ultimate nature. The Buddha was pointing to the dharma which is apparent here and now something that you don't have to look

for. You can't find the dharma. It's no has no objective presence. You can't see it, hear it, smell it, taste it, touch it or think it. And the word dhhamma is another word, another sankara, another [Music] phenomenon. So taking refuge in in a phenomenon is not a real

refuge because Buddhists become disillusioned. They say, "I've tried Buddhism, but it didn't get me anywhere." And and I've heard those refrains because they they grasp the teachings or the meditation techniques without investigating. That all that they're grasping is impermanent, unstable. So they looking for stability in Dharma

through grasping the word Dharma or Buddhism. So in Buddha's awakening teaching is to wake up and see and to realize even though in many ways we find ourselves limited through the form of our bodies there are very limited forms. Our true nature is dharma. The deathless nibana here and now

timeless. Wake up and see for yourself. Don't just believe these these these inspiring words. So then we think my true nature is the deathless nibana nib the dhama ultimate reality which is still grasping that when I say your true nature is the deathless reality of dharma then we It's not to create a

sense of I am the dharma as a person but to be the be the witness to all the phenomena that you experience through your senses and body whether it's pleasant or unpleasant healthy diseased male or female So when you you know it's always amazed me in my own insights into this path is

that that the dharma is apparent here and now. And then I can think I am the dharma. I am pure. And then something within me says no you're not. That's ego trip. If I start thinking I'm the ultimate reality. You know it's a road to madness because grasping the idea that

this body is ultimate reality or this person this personality is absolutely pure and perfect because it's not. When you reflect on your own body, you realize how ephemeral it is and untrustworthy that it changes. It gets sick. It gets growing up. We have to go

through growing pains and growing. We have to deal with sexual desires and and our emotional sense of fear and anger that is a part of this life within this human form. This planet earth that we live on is ephemeral. It's not a trustworthy stable condition as we can see with climate change.

All the predictions for the future and references to prehistoric past of meteorites slamming into the earth and terrible earthquakes, tsunamis, atomic energy, the bombing of Hiroshima, That's scary, isn't it? Because we can destroy this planet. We can make it unlivable because of our

intelligence, you know, to create a weapon of mass destruction. It takes a level of intelligence, scientific knowledge to create such a menacing image. So then we can take a very negative view that it's all just impermanent doesn't matter. But that's another view. You know whatever we think is a is a viewpoint. It's a it's taking a

position grasping an idea. an ideal without realizing that all the ideals that we can create in our minds are phenomena. They're impermanent. They're sankaras. Then they're they're unstable. So what is stability? What doesn't arise and cease? What is not created by human beings,

invented by human beings or creatures, animals that think is consciousness. So consciousness is where space can manifest. You know try to imagine if there was not any consciousness then there'd be no space. What what makes us aware of space is

consciousness. You know, I've done a lot of meditations and contemplations on space because you can actually perceive it, you know, through seeing the space in this temple, the space in the new cell, big space, or there's bigger spaces, uh, arenas and theaters that are huge, enormous

athletic fields, big space. But these fields and temples and salads and that are in space and it's the consciousness that allows us to perceive space because consciousness is apparent here and now. It's not imagined. It's not an imagination. So I consider it the magic

of the mystery of life. What is consciousness? It you know is it God? When we think of all the attempts to to name ultimate reality, you know, we come up with Krishna, Brahma, Allah, God, there's so many names, you know, attempts to name what has no name, which

is apparent here and now. And that's what the Buddhist teachings are pointing at to wake up and obser realize this for yourself. Ahico means come and see for yourself. It's a invitation, an encouragement to see for yourself. Don't just believe these words. Cuz if I'm just believing that

I'm the pure pure universal consciousness as a person, that's madness. That's going into madness. But when I've been through reflecting on the nature of Sankaraas for 58 years now I've not found any Sankara to be permanent. I've tested it out. I've I've doubted. I've

examined everything from all my thoughts, my emotions, my body, my senses. My ideals, my faults, my sins, my weaknesses are all sankara. It's I'm no doubt. because I've investigated this for myself. And when you realize this, then the insight into letting go. It's not a

destruction. It's not annihilation. It's not neism. We call it the middle way machima because it's not grasping ideals or trying to destroy everything but in waking up to dharma to ultimate reality which is silent. It has no voice has no language.

It's silence that is peaceful and loving and and non-judgmental because to judge things to judge yourself or judge others is always a grasping of you. You you personally have a reaction you have to somebody else. So in many people, monks, nuns like to live alone where they're not confronted with

their relationships with others. So this idea of going off to a cave in the Himalayas or I I always had this this uh a bamboo hut in the forest in the jungles of Thailand all by myself where I completely alone and I don't have to deal with the way I react to other monks or nuns or lay

people. And so being alone is one way and you can realize silence when you're alone. And then that that creates this image that you have to be alone to be silent. And that I was told, I [Music] remember years ago before I ordained when I was living in Bangkok, they said, um, you know, you've got to stay in the

forest your whole life and be alone because as soon as you get into Bangkok, it's full of temptations and advertisements, attractive people and like that. So you can't meditate in Bangkok. You can't meditate in London. You have to find a cave in the Himalayas or a bamboo hut in the forest

or are the ideals of just being alone. But many people's karma is different. When they were alone, they they they they get bored. Being alone can be very boring. Where living in Bangkok can be very exciting. London is is a very interesting, beautiful city to look

at, to experience. So, so these are, you know, these obstacles to awakening. Can you right off Bangkok or London as just sensory indulgences? They can be. Or we hold the view that I've got to be alone. I want to be alone. I don't want to be with anyone else. I can't have a relationship with anyone. And these are

feelings, emotions one can experience. But the witness is aware that that's all they are. They're empty phenomena. All this idea that I have to be alone to realize nibbana is the realization is that that's my thinking habit. That's my karmic tendency because living with other people it presents

conflict because we don't share the same karmas. You don't you're not going to think like and agree with everything I say or believe. It's impossible for, you know, unless you would try to brainwash people, which happens where you you kind of uh form a cult that worships you and agrees with everything you

say and continually, obviously believes that you're absolutely right. That that is still a sankara. Sankara are they changed. All conditions are impermanent. And uh if the nibana is is dhamma is apparent here and now then it can't be a thought or an

emotion, an idea, an ideal. It can't be right or wrong. It's it's where right and wrong cease. Good and bad cease. And what's left is bliss or nibana or if these words are too strong as peace or silence. So silence is you know listening

to various mystics about the silence and seeking silence and praising silence and silence is our refuge and and uh silence can be for you know the word itself is a phenomenon it's a sara but When you realize silence as a person is boring you know ideals are can be interesting having high-minded thoughts about right and wrong about

religion about God about Buddhism that can be very interesting So but silence is not interesting. It's but apparent here and now timeless. Come and see for yourself. looking inward, openayakadama, looking inward and not not seeking silence, expecting, you know, to find it in a cave in the Himalayas or a bamboo hut in Thailand or in a

temple or a church or basilica or any anywhere. You know, you're not trying to find silence as some kind of permanent refuge for for oneself as a person. But silence is apparent here and now. And this you must be realized individually through wisdom, through ba, through reflection on the way it is. And I remember when I I spent one

year before I met Locha in monastery in Nonai where I was a sera and I experienced this silence. I had a very incredible insight and uh the first few months, the first three months when I was living alone in this hut, it wasn't a bamboo hut. It was a wooden hut, a kouti with a tin roof in

a scrubby forest in this monastery in northeastern Thailand. And so I uh the first three days when I was there, my upachai, my preceptor took me to to live there and I nobody could speak English. Nobody and I couldn't speak Thai and they spoke Laian dialect. It's Nongai is right across the river from the Meong River from

Laos. So the native tongue was Laian. So I was there alone for a year and the first three months first three days was heaven. I thought this is what I've always wanted just to be alone. just not have to relate to other people. I'd been in the universities. I'd been in the military. I've been to the Peace

Corp. I've been married and divorced. And suddenly all I wanted was just to be alone without having to relate or justify anything. And in this kouti in nonkai I I was they they brought me one meal a day and never said a word and uh the first three after the first three

days of thinking this is what I've always wanted this reclusive life silence then I began to experience what I call my past karmic habits started arising when I try to meditate by developing concentration on my breath. I'd just be overwhelmed with fear. And it was wasn't that there was anything to be afraid of in in the

circumstances I was living in. It wasn't you know it was a fairly close to the town and you could take a lot for granted about surviving people the monks marches there were all very supportive you know I wasn't in conflict conflict with anybody I had no personal knowledge of anyone but fear overwhelmed

and anger and resentment. And uh I I was 30 years old and 31 years old and been repressing these emotions most of my life. You know, I was told that you shouldn't be angry. as a good Christian and you've got to conquer anger and jealousy and

fear. There are evil forces and suddenly here I was in this place where all these evil forces were presenting themselves. And so I like this this one of these pictures of the life of the Buddha where he's under the boot tree and all the forces of Mara pleasant and unpleasant come and attack him. And that's what it felt like. I was

just being attacked by anger and not because of anyone or the situation I was in. a fear. Well, there's nothing to fear. Nobody nobody was making me angry. The food they were giving me was very nice. Very wealthy woman in the in the town was supporting it, sending very delicious Chinese food every day.

And I was alone. I I only had one book, The Word of the Buddha. with me which I give copies to to all the monks and nuns. So I had to read that if I wanted to distract myself. And then after about 3 months of this attack by Mara, I suddenly woke up in this

hut in a state of bliss ringing silence, you know, and everything was beautiful. I was like in a in in a palace. The kouti was a rough coarse kind of wooden structure with a tin roof. I went to the bathroom, the toilet, which was very crude and un beautiful, but it looked absolutely stunning. The forest around with scrubby

trees looked like paradise. Everything was I could not even imagine an a of anything to fear or get angry about. There was no anger, no fear, no jealousy, no resentment. But at that time, I didn't know what had happened. I didn't have a teacher. So I thought, you know, I I just assumed I

was enlightened. And so I I uh because I never experienced anything uh of that beauty or level of bliss until I came in conflict with the immigration service in Nongai and then it all completely collapsed. But it was, you know, when I I didn't I never spoke about this

before reflecting on it. I never I never even told Lacha when I met him because I didn't know what had happened. And I assumed he'd think I was mad or crazy. So I kept it to myself from many years, many, many years. And then as I grew in understanding Dharma, then I began to see it was a like a blessing. Suddenly I' I'd managed to release all these repressed fears and desires

and resentments because I didn't know what to do with them for three months. What can you do? You mean you can't meditate on the breath. become walking jung just practicing formal meditation practices were I was just overwhelmed with these suppressed emotions. I had hallucinations like going

mad and then uh then like the Buddha sitting under the bodhi tree not to compare myself with it I could have left you know many monks there were many monks came to this monastery who couldn't stand it and left after a few weeks But I managed to sit through three months of of absolute misery and

hell. And then something changed, shifted. And so I, you know, now I can interpret it as like all these repressed feelings, emotions. It's the way I was brought up. My parents were idealistic Christians and they, you know, so I was brought up to be very polite. My mother was would teach my

sister and I etiquette and good manners and we're never allowed to use swear words. So I was, you know, conditioned from early age into being a a nice boy, a beha, a a well- behaved boy, which got me through a lot of difficult situations in the world. There's a certain amount of worldly wisdom in

being nice and good. But in the process, you know, it managed to suppress. I had not really looked at the range of emotions and fears and self-consciousness and resentments that accumulate in a human lifespan from you know for 30 years. I managed to present this image of being nice and even fooled myself.

So then in this situation where suddenly being nice there's nobody to be nice to you know it wasn't just trying to sit there in in a hut in Thailand trying to be nice because there is no reason to be you know I wasn't relating to anybody when the seminary came to bring the meal then

I was nice to him. So I didn't dump my anger or fears on any of the people around the the nuns would come and offer food and things like that. So so you know I was nice to them. That's how I've been conditioned to be nice guy. But in terms of actual experience being

alone there was those maras that attacked were not nice. There are scary, frightening, ugly, nasty, vulgar, dirty, and uh and it's through somehow just staying there and and observing it. I I had no instruction to do that, but that's what I did. just intuitively stayed in this one

spot which was the couti and nonai until all these maras suddenly disappear. So that I consider an awakening experience because after that when I had the went to the immigration office and was treated rudely, I um I tried to get back this this this state of of

bliss, you know, and I couldn't couldn't do it. I tried all the techniques. Uh you know by this time I learning to sit and just meditate and trying to get back this blissful state wasn't working. But there was a level of change in the realization after that experience where I

realized that I needed to be disciplined. I needed a training. I needed to ordain as a biku. I couldn't live my life in a couti and nonkai as a sire expect to survive that the rest of my life. So it was insight into uh I started taking interest in vinaya which I had no interest in before. All

these precepts I just dismissed them as unnecessary like an arrogant intellectual would do. They're not inspiring. So then uh then after that I met a disciple of Locha who was a wandering monk wandering in Hong Kongai and he could speak English. Suddenly after that my life

changed. I knew what I needed to do. I needed to become take full ordination train myself with the precepts. I needed to bow my head to a teacher. I needed to keep celibacy, rules of celibacy. I needed all this through the support of a community which eventually this disciple of Ajan Cha

uh took me I ordained in Nonkai and went to stay my first punch as a bu at Watong and then that gave me a form to to survive in in life as a individual person as a monk. I had a community around me. I had a teacher and the support, the incredible support that the local people gave,

providing me with meals and shelter and robes, medicine for illness. Suddenly this was like some great gift presented to me which I didn't imagine but I just this insight I needed discipline because I I tended to be very manipulative person by nature trying to get things my own way and and kind of righteous and and

uh conceited and and I realized that conceit was was a sankara. So then I trained with Locha for for many years and that was the training that led me onto to this moment here in the temple to share this kind of opportunity that's made available to people in this country

because European western values are basically sankas that you know they're they're delusions of the mind and that's why no matter how idealistic they are they tend to break down like we see with democracy the ideal that I was raised with was democracy was really the best. And we can see how people holding on to this view of democracy when we see

all kinds of authoritarian leaders rising in the world and endless wars and conflicts. What happened to democracy? you know, is are we going to lose it? You know, when you look at the word itself, it's it's a it's an ideal. It's a good [Music]

perception. But it is a sar. So it's unstable. It's very nature to change. But what doesn't change through 90 years of my life is consciousness, conscious awareness. And people ask how are you? Well, you know, I'm fine because basically consciousness is fine. It's not old. It's not 90 years old. It's not about good vision or

hearing well and and being vigorous and strong and healthy. Because physically that can't happen anymore. I can expect to find youth and and vigor and all that. You know the images of youth are passed but what's left is consciousness which hasn't changed. But I didn't realize consciousness was

my real home, my refuge until I awakened through mainly through developing awareness around the nature of the body and the senses through guidance of the four noble truths through surrendering myself to the limitations of the vinaya the discipline uh the precepts that that uh are part of this

tradition you know and some of the precepts make no sense anymore they created in India 2560 years ago but still it doesn't matter you know I used to be critical of the py moa chanting you know sit there for 45 50 60 And it's listening to someone reciting in poly 227 precepts and my American

conditioning, you know, was very critical of it. But I was but I used it as a way of being aware of, you know, me and my conditioning having formed. It was not asking me to do anything bad or unre I know evil or but it seemed about reciting 227 rules every fortnight. you know

how an an American mind conditioned to think differently, you know, was was, you know, could see all kinds of is this necessary? Is this reasonable? And and after all these years, 57 58 years, you know, I realize the importance of it of of the community of Bikuz collecting together every fortnight to this this ceremony of

reciting the pad moat is keeps the community together. Otherwise, we're too apt to go off on our own views and opinions. We have nothing to hold us together as a community that can relate its history back to 2560ome years because of just the vinay kind of holds the whole thing together with this

this common commitment to the discipline of that particular tradition. So in this tradition I really grateful to it for Terravada for the Thai forest monastery lua my preceptor. You feel nothing but gratitude because it's something

that I didn't create. I didn't it's not like my ideal fit my ideal of what I would create if I would create a sa or a religion of any sort because it's pointing to dharma the way it is all conditions are impermanent. I have no doubt about that anymore. All dhamma is not

personal. So I've seen through the how I create myself as a person. I'm a senior monk. I'm a have a title. I'm 90 years old. I've got all these these titles, names, but they're all sankaras, you know, not grasping any of

them. They function on on a conventional level but ultimately there's no longer any re reason to hold to grasp to identify with anything at all in the ssara or the worldly life that we experience through these forms. So I offer this as a reflection for this afternoon. Hallelujah.