| 1
Ajahn Chah
Ajahn Sumedho

2 |

| 3
This is a new translation and edition of “Gratitude to Parents”, with  
additional sections on gratitude to Luang Por Chah and the Buddha.
When I reflect on my life as a Buddhist monk, I found one of the most 
significant turning points was when I started experiencing gratitude 
(kataññū-katavedī). Gratitude arises spontaneously when one reflects on one’s 
parents, who made it possible for one to exist as a human being,  
Luang Por Chah, the teacher, whose wisdom was always directly pointing  
to the way out of suffering, and the Lord Buddha’s teaching giving direction 
for one’s life.
Gratitude gives you a strong foundation that is not made up out of the 
thinking process but is the heart’s openness to reality. 
I wish to express my gratitude to the translator and those who have helped  
in editing and producing this work.
                     Ajahn Sumedho
                  September 20, 2018
                  Wat Pah Ratanawan

4 |

| 5
Published by Amaravati Publications,
Amaravati Buddhist Monastery
St. Margarets Lane, Great Gaddesden, 
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire HP1 3BZ UK
www.amaravati.org, (0044) (0)1442 842455
This book is offered for free distribution, please do not sell this book.
Sabbadānaṁ dhammadānaṁ jināti
The gift of the Dhamma surpasses all other gifts.
If you are interested in translating this text into another language,  
please contact us at publications@amaravati.org
ISBN: 978-1-78432-082-9
Copyright © 2020 Amaravati Publications
Copyright © 2020 Pra Depnyanavidesa (Ajahn Sumedho)
Content: Pra Depnyanavidesa (Ajahn Sumedho)
Illustrations: Kullachart Sitjasech 
Proofreading: Thanyathorn Chatlaong
First edition, 30,000 copies, 2020, Printed in Thailand
Print: Aksorn Sampan Press (1987) Co., Ltd.

6 |

| 7

8 | 
“I tell you, monks, there are two people who are not 
easy to repay. Which two? Your mother and father. 
Even if you were to carry your mother on one 
shoulder and your father on the other shoulder 
for a hundred years, and were to look after them 
by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing 
their limbs, and they were to defecate and urinate 
right there on your shoulders, you would not 
in that way pay or repay your parents. If you were to 
establish your mother and father in absolute 
sovereignty over this great earth, abounding 
in the seven treasures, you would not in that way 
pay or repay your parents. Why is that? 
Mother and father do much for their children. 
They care for them, they nourish them, 
they introduce them to this world.
“But anyone who rouses his unbelieving mother 
and father, settles and establishes them in faith; 
rouses his unvirtuous mother and father, settles 
and establishes them in virtue; rouses his stingy 
mother and father, settles andestablishes them 
in generosity; rouses his foolish mother and father, 
settles and establishes them in wisdom: to this extent 
one pays and repays one’s mother and father.”
AN 2.33

| 9
Gratitude, kataññū katavedī, is a positive response to life. In  
developing this, we deliberately bring into our consciousness the 
good things done to us in our life. So on this day especially we 
remember the goodness of our parents and we contemplate it. 
We are not dwelling on what they did wrong; instead, we  
deliberately choose to remember the goodness and the kindness 
that our parents had for us – even though in some cases,  
generosity might not have been there at all times.

10 | 
A life without gratitude is a joyless life. If we don’t have anything 
to be grateful about our life is a dreary plane. If life is just a  
continuous complaint and moan about the injustices and  
unfairness we have received and we don’t remember anything 
good ever done to us – all we do is remember the bad things – 
then that’s called depression. This is not an uncommon problem 
now. When we fall into depression we cannot remember any 
good that has happened to us. Something stops in the brain and 
it is impossible to imagine ever being happy again: we think this 
misery is forever.
In Sri Lanka and throughout Asia, kataññū katavedī is a cultural 
virtue; it is highly regarded and cultivated. Being able to support 
and look after our parents is considered to be one of the great 
blessings of life. This is interesting for those of us who come from 
Western cultural background, because Western values are  
slightly different. Many of us have had fortunate lives, but we can 
tend to take a lot for granted. We have privileges and benefits, 
and much better lives than a good portion of people in the world 
can ever hope to expect. There’s a lot to be grateful for, a lot to 
feel kataññū for when you live in a place like Britain.
I think back to when I was a child, and the way my parents  
devoted their lives to look after my sister and me. When I was 
young, I didn’t appreciate it at all. As a child in the States, we 
didn’t think about it; we took our mother and father for granted. 
We could not realize what they had to sacrifice, what they had to 
give up in order to take care of us. It’s only when we are older and 
have given up things for the sake of our own children or  
somebody else that we begin to appreciate and feel kataññū 
katavedī for our parents.

| 11
My father was an aspiring artist before the Depression in 1929. 
Then the Crash came and he and my mother lost everything, so 
he had to take a job selling shoes. My sister and I were born  
during the Depression and he had to support us. When the  
Second World War started, my father was too old to enlist in the 
military. He wanted to support the war effort, so he became a ship 
fitter in Seattle. He worked in a shipyard. He didn’t like that job, 
but it was the best way he could help in the war effort. After the 
war he went back to his shoe business and became a manager 
of a retail store. Talking to him when I grew up, I found that he had 
never really liked that work either, but he felt he was too old to find 
another profession. The sacrifice of his own preferences was 
mainly to support my mother, my sister and me.
I had a much bigger choice, much better opportunities. My  
generation had a whole range of possibilities available to us since 
we were young. My parents did not have such opportunities; 
people in their generation had to get on with their lives and start 
working when they were still quite young. When I was at  
university in the 1950s, it was fashionable to study psychology. At 
that time, the trend was to blame your mother for everything that 
went wrong in your life. The focus was on mothers, and what they 
had done to cause ME to suffer now. I didn’t realize then that  
suffering was a natural thing for human beings. My mother was 
not a perfectly enlightened being when she had me, so naturally 
there were things she could have improved on. But generally 
speaking, the dedication, commitment, love and care were all 
there – and directed mainly to making the lives of my father’s, my 
sister’s and myself as good and as happy as could be. It was a 
dedication – she asked very little for herself. So when I think back 
like this, “kataññū”, gratitude, arises in my mind for my mother

12 | 
and father. Now I can hardly think of any of the faults that used to 
dominate my mind when I was young; they seem so trivial now,  
I hardly recall any.
If we just go on with the force of habits and conditionings, we  
remain more or less stuck with all kinds of things instilled into us 
– with habits that we acquired when we were young – and these 
can dominate our conscious life as we get older. But as we  
mature and grow up, we realize that we can develop skilfulness in 
the way we think about ourselves, and in the way we think about  
others. The Buddha encouraged us to think of the good things 
done for us by our parents, by our teachers, friends and others; 
and to do this intentionally – to cultivate it, to bring it into  
consciousness quite deliberately – rather than just letting it  
happen accidentally.
When I became a Buddhist monk in Thailand, I was very fortunate 
to meet a teacher, Luang Por Chah, who became the catalyst for 
the kataññū in my life. At that time I was thirty-four years old and 
I must say, kataññū was not yet part of my life’s experience. I was 
still very much obsessed with myself, with what I wanted and 
what I thought. However, after training as a Buddhist monk for 
about six years, I had a heart-opening experience that was very 
much the experience of kataññū katavedī.
I had been a Buddhist for many years before I met Luang Por 
Chah. I became attracted to Buddhism about the the age of 
twenty-one, and I had tremendous interest and faith in Buddhism 
as well as an eagerness to study and practise it. But it was still 
coming from the sense of me doing it, me studying it, me trying to 
practise it. When I became a monk there was still this dominant 
interest in my mind: ‘I want to get rid of suffering, I want to be

| 13
enlightened.’ I was not much concerned about other people, 
about my parents or even about Luang Por Chah with whom I 
was living with at the time. I was grateful that he was helping me 
but it was not a deep gratitude.
There was a conceit, an unpleasant kind of conceit: I had the idea 
that life owed all this to me. In my kind of middle-class situation 
we take so much for granted. My parents worked hard to make 
my life comfortable, but I thought they should have worked  
harder; I deserved more than what they gave me. Even though 
this was not a conscious thought, there was the underlying  
attitude that I deserved all I had: it was right to get all this, people 
should give me these things, my parents should make my life as 
good as possible, as I wanted it to be. So from that viewpoint, it 
was Ajahn Chah’s duty to teach and guide me! Sometimes I had 
the conceit that my presence was a great blessing and asset to 
the monastery. It was not all that conscious, but when I began to 
contemplate things in my mind I could see this conceit and  
became aware of this insensitivity. We can take so much for 
granted and complain that life is not as good, as abundant, as 
privileged as we would like it to be; or else we think that others 
are much better off than ourselves.
In Thailand, I practised with diligence and was determined in my 
monastic life. After five vassas a monk is no longer considered  
to be a novice and can get away on his own. I felt that being with  
a teacher was fine but I wanted to go away on my own, so I went 
to Central Thailand from North East Thailand. Then, after  
the vassa I went on a pilgrimage to India. This was around 1972, 
and I decided to go as a tudong bhikkhu – that is, to walk from 
place to place as part of my practice as a monk. Somebody  
provided me with a ticket from Bangkok to Calcutta, and I found

14 | 
myself in Calcutta with my alms-bowl, my robe and that’s all.  
In Thailand, it had been easy, but in India it seemed that  
wandering around with an alms-bowl and no money would  
be quite frightening. As it happened, the five months I spent in 
India were quite an adventure and I have very pleasant memories 
of that time. The life of an almsmendicant worked in India. Of all 
countries it should work there, as that’s where the Buddha lived 
and taught.
It was about this time that I began to think of Luang Por Chah. My 
mind began to recognize the kindness he had extended to me. 
He had accepted me as his disciple, looked after me, taken an 
interest, given me the teachings and helped me in almost every 
way. And there was his own example. If you wanted to be a monk, 
you wanted to be like him. He was a full human being, a man who 
inspired me, someone I wanted to emulate – and I must say there 
weren’t so many men that I had had that feeling towards. In the 
States, the role models for men were not very attractive to me: 
John Wayne or President Eisenhower or Richard Nixon were not 
men I wanted to emulate. Film stars and athletes were given great 
importance, but none of them inspired me. But then in Thailand,  
I found this monk …
He was very small; I towered above him. When we were together 
sometimes that surprised me, because he had such an  
enormous presence. He seemed always much bigger than I was. 
It was interesting, the power, the aura of this little man. I didn’t  
really think of him as a little man; I thought of him as a huge man 
because of the mettā (lovingkindness) in his life. He was a man of 
enormous mettā. There was this feeling about him that attracted 
people; he was like a magnet and you wanted to be close to him. 
So I found myself going over to see him at his kuti in the evenings,

| 15
or whenever it was possible; I wanted to take every opportunity  
I had to hang around. I found that was the way most people  
tended to behave towards him. He had an enormous following in 
Thailand, both Thais and Westerners, because of his mettā  
practice. I asked him once what it was that drew people to him 
and he said, “I call it my magnet.” He was a very charming  
person; he had ebullience, a radiant quality. And he used his 
magnet to attract people so that he could teach them  
the Dhamma. This is how he used the charismatic quality he had: 
not for his ego, but to help people.
I felt a great sense of gratitude that he should do this – that he 
would spend his life taking on laypeople and difficult monks like 
myself, having to put up with all of us endlessly creating  
problems; we were so obsessed with ourselves; with our desires, 
our doubts, our opinions, and our views. To be surrounded day 
and night by people who are endlessly irritating takes real mettā, 
and he would do it. He could have just gone off to a nice place 
and had a quiet life. That’s what I wanted to do at the time.  
I wanted to get enlightened so that I could just live a nice peaceful 
life in a happy way; in a pleasant, peaceful place. I wanted  
everyone in the monastery to be harmonious, to have the right 
chemistry and to harmonize with me so there would be no conflict 
or friction. But in a Thai monastery, there are always problems 
and difficulties. The Vinaya Pitaka presents all the background 
stories of what the monastic community used to do that caused 
the Buddha to establish these disciplinary guidelines. Some of 
the rules deal with horrible things. Some of those monastics 
around the Lord Buddha were abominable.

16 | 
After his enlightenment, the Lord Buddha at first thought that the 
Dhamma was too subtle, that no one would understand it so 
there was no point in teaching it. Then, according to the legend, 
one of the gods came forth and said, ‘Please Lord, for the welfare 
of those who have little dust in their eyes, teach the Dhamma.’ 
The Buddha then contemplated with his powerful mind who 
might understand the Dhamma teaching. He remembered his 
early teachers but through his powers realized that both of them 
had died. Then he remembered his five friends who had been 
practising with him before and who had deserted him. Out of 
compassion he went off to find these five friends, and expounded 
his brilliant teaching on the Four Noble Truths. This made me feel 
kataññū katavedī to the Lord Buddha. It’s marvellous: here I am 
– this guy, here, in this century – having an opportunity to listen to 
the Dhamma, and to have this pure teaching still available.
Having a living teacher like Ajahn Chah was not like worshipping 
a prophet who lived 2,500 years ago, but was actually inheriting 
the lineage of the Lord Buddha himself. Perhaps because of  
visiting the Buddhist holy places, kataññū katavedī began to  
become very strong in me in India. Seeing these holy places and 
then thinking of Luang Por Chah in Thailand, I remembered how 
I had thought: ‘I’ve done my five years, now I’m going to leave. 
I’m going to have a few adventures, do what I want to do, be out 
from under the eye of the old man.’ I realized then that I had  
actually run away. At that time there were many Westerners  
coming to our monastery in Thailand, and I did not want to be 
bothered with them. I did not want to have to teach them and 
translate for them; I just wanted to have my own life and not be 
pestered by these people. So there was a selfish motivation in me 
to leave, on top of which I had left Luang Por Chah with all these 
Westerners who didn’t speak Thai. At that time, I was the only

| 17
one who could translate for the Westerners, as Luang Por Chah 
could not speak English. When I felt this kataññū katavedī, all I 
wanted to do was get back to Thailand and offer myself to Ajahn 
Chah. How can you repay a teacher like that? I did not have any 
money, and that was not what he was interested in anyway. Then 
I thought that the only way I could make him happy was to be a 
good Buddhist monk and to go back and help him out; whatever 
he wanted me to do, I would do it. With that intention, I went back 
after five months in India and gave myself to the teacher. It was a 
joyful offering, not a begrudging one, because it came out of this 
kataññū, this gratitude for the good things I had received.
From that time on, I found that my meditation practice began to 
improve. That hard selfishness cracked in me: me trying to get 
something, my desire for harmony, me and my desire to practise 
and to have a peaceful life, me not wanting to be responsible for 
anything but just to do my own things. When I gave up all that, 
things seemed to fall into place. What used to be difficult, like 
concentrating the mind, became easier, and I found that life  
became joyful to me. I began to enjoy monastic life. I wasn’t just 
sitting around thinking, ‘You are disturbing my peace, I don’t like 
this monastery – I want to go to another one’, as I used to do. Nor 
did I feel as resentful as I had before: ‘This monk is disturbing my 
practice, I can’t live here’, and so on. This grumbling used to be 
an obstruction in my practice, but now suddenly these things 
were no longer important issues.
In fact I thought that when I went back, I would ask Ajahn Chah 
to send me to a monastery to which no monk wanted to go, like 
a certain branch monastery on the Cambodian border. It was 
called Wat Bahn Suan Kluey, ‘Banana Grove Village Monastery.’  
It was in the backwoods, it had no good roads and it was in an

18 | 
undeveloped part of Thailand where people were quite poor.  
It was very hot there and all the trees were shorter than myself, 
although I didn’t see many bananas around! It would have been 
like being exiled to Siberia. When I returned, I suggested to  
Ajahn Chah that he send me there. He didn’t, but he did  
encourage me to go to Bahn Bung Wai, which was a village about 
six kilometres from the main monastery. In 1975 we established 
Wat Pah Nanachat, the International Forest Monastery near this 
village. Before we went there the place had been a charnel 
ground, a cremation area for the village, and it was believed that 
the forest was filled with ghosts. At first we didn’t realize exactly 
what the place meant to the villagers. Then I became aware that 
I was staying at the spot where the most fiendish ghost in the  
forest was supposed to live, so the village headman used to come 
and ask, ‘You sleep all right? Seen anything interesting?’ I didn’t 
see anything at all; the ghosts didn’t bother me. But that  
experience helped me to prove my worth as a monk, and that 
was due to kataññū.
When Luang Por Chah asked me to come to England in 1977,  
I was determined to stick it out and not just follow my own  
particular feelings and moods; I felt pretty awful that first year and 
was ready to go back to Thailand. But because of this sense of  
gratitude, I wasn’t going to follow a personal whim. Kataññū gave 
me a tremendous sense of duty, of service, but not in a heavy 
way. It meant that I did not stay here out of a sense of duty – 
which makes life unpleasant – but out of a willingness to sacrifice 
and to serve. This is a joyful thing to do.
This reminds me of an interesting story. The monk who took me 
to see Luang Por Chah, Phra Sommai, was the same age as I 
was; he had been in the Thai Navy, and I had been in the

| 19
American Navy during the Korean War. He could speak English 
and had been on tudong – wandering from Ubon province, where 
Ajahn Chah lived, to Nong Khai where I was. It was my first year 
as a novice monk and he was the first Thai monk I had met who 
could speak English, so I was delighted to have somebody to talk 
to. He was also a very strict monk, adhering to every rule in the 
Vinaya. He would eat from his alms-bowl and wore dark-brown 
forest robes, whereas in the monastery where I lived, the monks 
wore orange-coloured robes; he really impressed me as an  
exemplary monk. He told me that I should go and stay with Ajahn 
Chah. So after I received bhikkhu ordination, my preceptor agreed 
that I could go with this monk to stay with Luang Por Chah. But 
on the way I began to get fed up with this monk – who turned out 
to be a pain in the neck. He was forever fussing about things and 
condemning the other monks, saying that we were the very best. 
I could not take this incredible arrogance and conceit, and I hoped 
that Ajahn Chah would not be like him. I wondered what I was 
getting myself into.
When we arrived at Wat Pah Pong, I was relieved to find that 
Ajahn Chah was not like that. The following year the monk  
disrobed and he became an alcoholic. The only thing that had 
kept him off alcohol had been the monastic life, so he fell into  
alcoholism and became a really degenerate man with a terrible 
reputation in the province of Ubon. He became a tramp, a really 
pathetic case, and I felt a sense of disgust and aversion towards 
him. Talking to Ajahn Chah one evening about it, he told me: ‘You 
must always have kataññū towards Sommai because he brought 
you here. No matter how badly he behaves or how degenerate he 
becomes, you must always treat him like a wise teacher and  
express your gratitude. You are probably one of the really good 
things that has happened to him in his life, something he can be

20 | 
proud of. If you keep reminding him of this – in a good way, not in 
an intimidating way – then eventually he might want to change his 
ways.’ So Luang Por Chah encouraged me to seek out Sommai, 
talk to him in a friendly way and express my gratitude to him for 
taking me to Ajahn Chah.
It really was a beautiful thing to do. It would have been easy to 
look down on him and say, ‘You really disappoint me. You used to 
be so critical of others and think you were such a good monk, 
and look at you now.’ We can feel indignant and disappointed at 
somebody for not living up to our expectations. But what Luang 
Por Chah was saying was: ‘Don’t be like that, it’s a waste of time 
and harmful; do what’s really beautiful out of compassion.’ I saw 
Sommai in the early part of this year, degenerate as ever; I could 
not see any change in him. Yet whenever he sees me, it seems to 
have a good effect on him. He remembers that he was the one 
responsible for me coming to stay with Luang Por Chah, and 
that’s a source of a few happy moments in his life. One feels quite 
glad to offer a few happy moments to a very unhappy person.
I remember a woman on one of our retreats who, whenever it 
came to spreading mettā to her parents, would go into a rage; 
then she felt very guilty about it. This was because she only used 
her intellect; she wanted to do this practice of mettā, but  
emotionally felt anything but that. It’s important to see this conflict 
between the intellect and the emotional life. We know in our mind 
that we should be able to forgive our enemies and love our  
parents, but in our hearts we feel: ‘I can never forgive them for 
what they’ve done.’ So then we either feel anger and resentment, 
or we go into rationalizations: ‘Because my parents were so bad, 
so unloving, so unkind, they made me suffer so much that I can’t 
forgive or forget’, or: ‘There’s something wrong with me, I’m a

| 21
terrible person because I can’t forgive. If I were a good person I 
would be able to forgive, therefore I must be a bad person.’ These 
are the conflicts that we have between the intellect and the  
emotions. When we don’t understand this conflict, we are  
confused; we know how we should feel but we don’t actually feel 
that way.
With the intellect we can figure it out in an ideal way; we can  
create marvellous images and perceptions in the mind. But the 
emotional nature is not rational. It’s a feeling nature; it is not going 
to go along with what is reasonable, logical, or sensible. So, on 
the emotional level, we have to understand how we actually feel. 
I’ve found it helps to have mettā for my own feeling. When we feel 
that our parents are unkind and unloving to us we can have mettā 
towards the feeling we have in the heart; not being judgemental, 
but having patience with that feeling – to see that this is how it 
feels and then to accept that feeling. Then it is possible to resolve 
that. But when we get stuck in a battle between our logical  
perceptions and our emotional responses, it gets very confusing. 
Once I began to accept my negativity rather than suppress it,  
I could resolve it. When we resolve something with mindfulness, 
then we can let it go and free ourselves from the power of that 
particular thing – not through denial or rejection, but through  
understanding and accepting that particular negative feeling. The 
resolution of such a conflict leads us to contemplate on what life 
is about.
My father died about six years ago. He was then ninety years old 
and he had never shown love or positive feelings towards me, so 
from early childhood I had this feeling that he did not like me.  
I carried this feeling through most of my life; I never had any kind 
of love, any kind of warm relationship with my father. It was

22 | 
always a perfunctory: ‘Hello son, good to see you.’ He seemed to 
feel threatened by me. I remember whenever I came home as  
a Buddhist monk he would say, ‘Remember, this is my house, 
you’ve got to do as I say.’ This was his greeting – and I was  
almost fifty years old at the time. I don’t know what he thought  
I was going to do!
In the last decade of his life, he was quite miserable and became 
very resentful. He had terrible arthritis and was in constant pain; 
he had Parkinson’s disease and everything was going wrong. 
Eventually he was completely paralyzed and had to be put in  
a nursing home. He could move his eyes and talk, but the rest of 
his body was rigid, totally still. He hated this and was resentful of 
what had happened to him because before that he had been  
a strong, independent man, able to control and manage  
everything in his life.
During my first year here I remember discussing my parents with 
my sister. She pointed out to me that my father was a very  
considerate man. He was considerate and thoughtful towards  
my mother. He was always eager to help her when she was tired 
or unwell – a very supportive husband.
Because I came from a family where it was normal for a man to 
be like that, I had never recognized those qualities. My sister 
pointed out that it is not often that a husband is supportive or 
helpful to his wife. For my father’s generation, women’s rights and 
feminism were not the issue. ‘I bring in the money, and you do the 
cooking and washing,’ was the attitude then. I realized then that  
I had not only completely overlooked these good qualities, I had 
not even noticed them.

| 23
The last time I went to see him, I decided that I would try to get 
some kind of warmth going between us before he died. It was 
quite difficult to even think this, because I had gone through life 
feeling that he didn’t like me. It is very hard to break through that 
kind of thing. Anyway, his body needed to be stimulated so I said, 
‘Let me massage your leg, you’ll get bedsores’, and he said, ‘No, 
you don’t have to do it.’ So I said, ‘I would really like to do it.’ He 
said, ‘You don’t have to do it.’ But I could tell that he was  
considering it, and he said, ‘So you’d really like to do it?’ and I 
said, ‘Yes.’ I started massaging his feet, his legs, his neck and  
shoulders, his hands and his face, and he really enjoyed the  
physical contact. It was the first time he had been touched like 
that. I think elderly people really like being touched, because 
physical contact is quite meaningful; it’s an expression of feelings.
I began to see that my father really loved me, but because of his 
upbringing, he didn’t know how to say it. He’d been brought up 
in an Edwardian time in a very formal environment. His had been 
a ‘don’t touch, don’t get emotional’ sort of a family; feelings were 
always controlled. Now I realized that my father was quite a loving 
man and I had this great sense of relief. I couldn’t understand him 
when I was young. I did not understand the consequences of 
having such an upbringing, and that once you are conditioned in 
that way it is difficult to break out of it. When I looked back, I could 
see that behind the behaviours of my father’s there was love, but 
it always came out in a commanding or demanding way. It was 
the only way he knew how to talk. When he said: ‘Remember, this 
is my house, and you have to do what I say’, maybe it was because I saw him as an old man losing his control, and he could 
see that and felt I was a threat. He probably thought: ‘He’s going 
to think I am a hopeless old man, but I’m going to show him.’

24 | 
Life is a difficult, ongoing experience; you keep learning until you 
die. You keep thinking that it should not be so, that it should be 
easy. Now, I think that life should be difficult because that’s the 
way we learn.
Now I look back and feel kataññū for all those who have been 
responsible for encouraging me and helping me when I needed it. 
What they have done since then, or whether they have lived up to 
my expectations is not the point. Having mettā and kataññū is 
about not being critical or vindictive or dwelling on the bad things 
people have done; it’s about being able to select and remember 
the good they have done. Having a day like this when we  
consciously bring to mind thoughts of our parents with gratitude 
is a way of bringing joy and positive feelings into our lives. Taking 
the Five Precepts and offering food to the Sangha as a way of 
remembering our parents with gratitude is a beautiful gesture. At 
a time like this, we should also consider expressing kataññū to 
the country we live in, because usually we take this for granted. 
We can remember the benefits made available to us by the state 
and society, rather than thinking of what’s wrong with it. Kataññū 
allows us to bring into consciousness all the positive things  
concerned with living in this country. We should develop kataññū, 
even though modern thinking may not encourage us to do so. It 
is an appreciation and expression of gratitude for the  
opportunities and the good we derive from living in this society. 
We’re not thinking always that this nation and society owe us 
everything, caught in the ‘welfare mind.’ We are grateful for the 
welfare state, and also recognize that it can breed complaining 
minds, minds that take things for granted.

| 25
So today is a day to develop kataññū. Do not think it is just a day 
to be sentimental. Kataññū is a practice to develop in daily life, 
because it opens the heart and brings joy to our human  
experience. We need that joy; it’s something that nurtures us and 
is essential for our spiritual development. Joy is one of the factors 
of enlightenment. Life without joy is a dreary one – grey, dull and 
depressing. So today is a day for joyous recollections.

26 |

| 27

28 | 
“That is true, Ānanda. When someone has enabled you 
to go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma 
and the Sangha, it’s not easy to repay them by 
bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them 
with joined palms, and observing proper etiquette 
for them; or by providing them with robes, alms-food, 
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.
When someone has enabled you to refrain from killing, 
stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and alcoholic drinks 
that cause negligence, it’s not easy to repay them …
When someone has enabled you to have experiential 
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, 
and the ethics loved by the noble ones, it’s not easy to 
repay them …
When someone has enabled you to be free of doubt 
regarding suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the 
practice that leads to its cessation, it’s not easy 
to repay them by bowing down to them, rising up 
for them, greeting them with joined palms, and observing 
proper etiquette for them; or by providing them with 
robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicines and supplies 
for the sick.”
MN 142

| 29
Ajahn Chah began life as a monk at the age of twenty, in a village 
monastery where he studied the pariyatti Dhamma, the more  
academic aspects of practice. After four years or so, he decided 
to develop his meditation practice, and travelled through Thailand 
seeking out various teachers. He spent some time with one 
teacher in Lopburi and then with another teacher in Ubon, but 
most of the time he travelled alone, gradually gaining insights 
through his practice of meditation. It was during this period that 
he spent two nights at Ajahn Mun’s monastery where his insights 
were affirmed by the great teacher.

30 | 
Luang Por Chah liked the style of practice of the Dhammayut 
sect, one of the two sects in Thailand, in which the monastic  
discipline, Vinaya, was very much part of the practice. It offered a 
complete monastic lifestyle and was therefore unusual in  
Thailand. Much of the meditation in Thailand was taught as a 
technique and could therefore be quite separate from  
monasticism. For example, with the Mahasi Sayadaw system it 
didn’t matter if you were a layperson or a monk. It’s a technique 
that works just as well for a layperson. But Luang Por Chah’s  
approach was in mindfulness through ordinary monastic life.  
It was a way of using the monastic form to develop awareness 
and reflectiveness. He didn’t encourage studies and when  
I eventually met him he saw that studying was the last thing  
I needed to do. I had been through the university system in the 
United States and was an obsessive reader – addicted to  
literature. Wherever I went I always had to have a book with me 
or I would feel nervous and ill at ease. When I met Ajahn Chah  
I didn’t tell him this, but he seemed to pick it up intuitively  
because he said: ‘No books!’
In Thailand they always ask me: ‘How could he teach you?’  
because when we met I couldn’t speak Thai and he couldn’t 
speak English. Ajahn Chah always put a reflective tone into  
answering this by saying: ‘Sumedho learned through the  
language of Dhamma.’ And then people would ask: ‘Well, what 
language is that?’ They obviously didn’t quite understand that the 
language I learned from wasn’t English or Thai but came through 
living, through awakening and learning from the experience of  
being conscious, of having a human body, feelings, thoughts, 
greed, hatred and delusion. These are common human things; 
they are not cultural things. This is what we all share, they’re  
common human problems and conditions.

| 31
I remember feeling an immediate confidence and trust in Ajahn 
Chah. I met him through a series of coincidences, or maybe  
it was good luck – although some people like to think that I was 
meant to be with him. Anyway, meeting a teacher like Ajahn Chah 
wasn’t what I was expecting. By the time I met him I had been to 
many other teachers – and it wasn’t that I didn’t like those  
teachers or that I was critical of them, it was just that nothing 
‘clicked.’ I didn’t feel I wanted to be with them, so I went my own 
way, became a samanera in Nong Khai in the North East of  
Thailand and spent my first year teaching myself.
However, while living alone I had the insight that I would be able 
to get to a certain point with my practice, but never get beyond it; 
I’d never see clearly unless I learned humility. I remember having 
a wish that I could meet a teacher – then, almost immediately, 
Ajahn Chah’s disciple, Phra Sommai, appeared. Coincidence? I 
don’t know. He was about my age, thirty-two or three, and could 
speak English. When we met I hadn’t spoken English for months 
and months. If you haven’t spoken your native tongue for months 
and months, then the first opportunity is like a dam-burst. You 
can’t stop. At first I thought I had frightened him, but he stayed 
with me at this monastery for a while and eventually convinced 
me that I should go and meet Ajahn Chah. My preceptor agreed 
with this. He gave me upasampadā and sent me off to stay with 
Ajahn Chah.
At that time Ajahn Chah was not well known in Bangkok even by 
Thais, not to mention the Western community, but he was  
increasingly well known in the North East of Thailand – an area 
known as the ‘Isahn’. It’s strange, because the Isahn was the last 
place that I had wanted to live. It’s the poorest part of Thailand. I 
had always imagined living down on the coast where all the

32 | 
resorts are now. I had this romantic image of being a monk sitting 
under a coconut palm tree on a white sand beach. Instead I  
ended up spending ten years in Isahn.
What impressed me about Luang Por Chah was his emphasis on 
teaching the Four Noble Truths. I hadn’t come across this before 
with other teachers, or perhaps I just hadn’t picked it up – there 
was always a problem around language because I didn’t speak 
Thai. Many of the meditation techniques I learned were based on 
Abhidhamma teaching, which I found very boring. The last thing I 
wanted to learn was all that incredibly complex Abhidhamma. I 
thought: ‘That’s not what I want from this religion.’ In that first year 
on my own, learning from a little book, I had developed a lot of 
insights into the Four Noble Truths. I found it a powerful teaching, 
very simple in its form; just ‘one-two-three-four.’ That’s easy 
enough, I thought. It pointed to suffering – and I had plenty of 
that. I didn’t have to go looking for it. I realized that this was the 
teaching I had been looking for. And when I met Luang Por Chah 
I found his whole emphasis was also in developing insights into 
these truths through daily life in the monastery.
Luang Por Chah had a great deal of mettā (lovingkindness), so I 
felt very welcomed by the way he received me at Wat Pah Pong. 
When I first met him, I felt he was very interested and I felt  
intuitively that he was a wise man. I couldn’t understand Thai very 
well at the time, but what I saw of how he lived his life and his 
general way of being was pleasing to me. As a teacher, he seemed 
to pick up quickly where I was at. His teaching was very direct.
Even though he was giving a lot of talks – which I couldn’t  
understand for the first two years – he very much emphasized 
‘kor wat’, the way you live in the monastery: paying attention,

| 33
being mindful with the food and the robes, with the kuti and the  
monastery. I found him very much like a mirror that would reflect 
my state of mind. He always seemed to be completely present. 
I’d get carried away with my thoughts and emotions, and then 
suddenly discover that just being around him meant I could let 
go; I could drop what I was holding on to without even telling him. 
His presence helped me to see what I was doing and what I was 
holding. So I decided that I would live with him as long as I could 
since such monks are hard to find. I stayed with him for ten years 
at Wat Pah Pong and branch monasteries.
Luang Por Chah could be very charming and make you feel very 
good but he could also be critical and fierce. But I always trusted 
him; even when he was being critical of me, I could use that.  
I could see my feelings of anger towards him. One had to  
conform with everything at Wat Pah Pong and he would give very 
long desanās in the evening, sometimes four or five hours. And of 
course, I couldn’t understand them. So when he would start to 
give a talk in Lao, I asked him if I could get up and go back to 
practise at my kuti. He said: ‘No, no, you have to stay and  
develop patience.’ I thought I’d better do what he said, so I did 
that. Of course, when you are feeling bored or have a lot of pain 
from sitting so long, you feel anger. And he’s the one with all the 
power; he’s the one sitting up in the Dhamma seat and he can 
decide to stop when he wants to. So, I’d start feeling all this rage, 
and I’d start thinking, ‘I’m going to leave this monastery; I don’t 
want to be here.’ But then it would drop very quickly. It didn’t 
hold, for some reasons. I didn’t carry it. One time, I remember  
I was really angry. He’d been talking for a long time; I was so fed 
up and tired with the whole thing and then at the end of his talk 
he looked at me and smiled and asked me how I was doing. I said 
I felt fine, because all that anger and rage had just dropped away.

34 | 
Basically I had so much faith in him that I could allow him to do 
things that would push me to the edge, to make me see what I 
was doing. Basically I trusted him, so I never felt like I was used 
or abused or exploited because I trusted that he was helping me 
even when I didn’t like what he was doing.
Luang Por Chah’s way of teaching was about getting to know 
yourself, about looking at your mind, at your citta, so you’re aware 
all the time of what you’re feeling. Know your emotions; do not 
get caught up in your own emotions. Keep observing what you’re  
feeling emotionally. I had a lot of emotions coming up about being 
the only ‘farang’ (foreigner) there, feeling insecure and not  
understanding things very well. Sometimes I’d feel lonely and 
other times arrogant. I felt that a lot of what they were doing was 
of no values’ and I didn’t agree with it. But there was this  
emphasis on knowing yourself, knowing your emotions, to be the 
one who knows, or ‘pu-roo’ in Thai. The pu-roo style, being the 
knowing, I found really helpful.
I began to see how I was creating my own suffering by holding on 
to views or by projecting things on to other monks. When I  
actually reflected on the existing conditions, I saw they were very 
good. I had food and requisites, a good teacher, and the monks 
were basically all good people. So when I really contemplated the 
actual situation, I saw it was a very good place. Then because of 
the pu-roo style I could see whenever jealousy or fear,  
resentment or arrogance arose, how I created those things.
Once I could see this, I could let go. I didn’t have to hold on. Once 
I saw that I was the one who created these ‘arom’ (moods), I 
could take the position of being the one who knows, the one who

| 35
is aware. I worked through a lot of emotional habits that way. You 
know how it can be when you’re the only foreigner; you don’t 
know what’s happening or what they’re thinking. I experienced 
times of paranoia thinking, ‘What are they really thinking? Why do 
they do that?’ And yet because of the teaching, the pu-roo, I 
could see that I was making it up myself, that my fear or  
projection of them was what I made. It wasn’t the others. It was 
what I was creating in my mind.
I feel that I have received the very best from life, not only in terms 
of the Buddha’s teachings, but also in terms of its manifestation 
in the life of Ajahn Chah. I feel a lot of gratitude to Ajahn Chah, but 
it’s not that I’m a devotee of Ajahn Chah or a cult follower of his. 
He didn’t want us to make him into a cult figure. He never pointed 
to himself saying that he was a sotāpanna or an arahant.  
Whenever one wanted to find out where he was at – and I don’t 
know how many people asked him if he was an arahant – he 
would answer in a way that made you look at what you were  
asking. ‘Who is it that is asking? Why do you want to know?’ So 
he’d point you in the right direction, by refusing to answer either 
yes or no.
What I gained from that ten-year period was a good foundation in 
practice and in Vinaya. By the time I came to England I had only 
been a bhikkhu for ten years. I sometimes think that I was crazy 
to come here having just ten years in the robes. Nowadays we 
wouldn’t think of putting a ten-year monk in such a position. But 
my confidence in the practice was firmly established during those 
ten years, and Luang Por Chah obviously realized that, because 
he was the one who encouraged me to come here.

36 | 
During the early years of Cittaviveka Monastery, Luang Por Chah 
invited me back to Thailand before the five years. I took a group 
of English people with me. Anandho and I went to visit Luang Por 
Chah at Pah Goodwai [a house, by the Moon River, offered to 
Luang Por Chah by Khunying Toon]. I was feeling quite confident 
in what I was doing and in my practice. Because all that time I 
could use the situation I was in—praised or blamed for things—
as a way of practice. And it worked. Luang Por Chah saw that. 
He could see that I didn’t have any doubt about the practice. 
Even though I have been through some troubles and difficult 
times, it hadn’t destroyed my faith and confidence in the practice. 
During the time at Pah Goodwai, I had a feeling that something 
might happen; that it might be the last time I see Luang Por Chah 
in good shape. And I had a feeling that he also was aware of what 
was going to happen to him even though he didn’t say anything. 
It was a touching leave-taking Anando and I had. And then we 
went back to England. The following year, Luang Por Chah had a 
stroke and was taken to Chulalongkorn Hospital in Bangkok. It 
was during the Pansa [Vassa or the Rain Retreat]. Right after the 
Pansa I flew to Bangkok to see him in Chulalongkorn Hospital. 
It was a moving scene to see him in such a helpless state. He was 
staying in this suite. Luang Por Liem was there and some of the 
senior Thai monks. Ajahn Pabhakaro wheeled him out in a  
wheelchair. He was just sitting there. Luang Por Chah had a kind 
of charismatic personality, but this time it wasn’t there. It was like 
a sack of potatoes in his body. I was with Mae Pao [one of the 
very first Bangkok residents to become a student of Luang Por 
Chah, in the 1970s]. She broke down and cried. We were on the 
floor bowing to him, and I was crying. I looked at Luang Por Chah

| 37
and I thought he’s quite helpless now, but it must be quite hard to 
see his disciples all crying. So many monks said that we’ve got to 
cure him, get him back to what he was before. The whole country 
was in desperation to try to heal him. And I kept thinking and  
reflecting in my own mind that I didn’t want Luang Por Chah to be 
like this. I wanted Luang Por Chah to return to the charismatic 
and charming teacher I remembered. 
Suddenly I saw what I was doing and thought ‘oh this is the way 
it is now.’ He taught me all I needed to know, and I’ll do that! 
That’s the right thing to do as an act of gratitude to Luang Por 
Chah. This is what would please him. My determination was even 
stronger to do what he had already pointed out how to practice. 
Whether he was cured or not didn’t matter anymore. The sense 
of love and gratitude was so strong I felt like I want to repay him 
and honour him, honour what he had done. So that was my  
motivation from that time on. I didn’t look to any senior monk,  
really, in the same way. This was what I mean—unfortunate  
circumstances strengthened determination. Going back to  
England I knew how to deal with my own Vipakkamma [kammic 
results]. The point wasn’t to be a missionary or spread the  
Dhamma or anything other than keeping myself from being caught 
up in my own emotional habits and delusions unaffected by  
praises and blames, successes and failures. I remember Luang 
Por Chah used to give a lot of talks on the Eight Worldly  
Dhammas. And I found that really skillful. He would say praise is 
equal to blame. In a life time you will get both, but they are  
equally valued. That always impressed me. When I was being 
praised, not to expect to get lost in being praised or get  
depressed or despairing when I was being blamed or criticised. 
So the practice was to be always observing the effects it had on

38 | 
conditions arising when being praised or being blamed and  
criticised. So I never lost the practice at all. In England there are 
so many unknown factors. There wasn’t a supporting society like 
in Thailand. I think because of that, knowing what to practice  
was why it worked. This is what Luang Por Chah conveyed to me 
while living with him in Thailand. And he was somehow able to 
develop and nourish that in me. That’s why I have so much  
gratitude for him, even now when I think of him. 
I was honored to have met such a wise human being.
Reflectiveness is always the way. Once you have confidence in 
awareness, then whatever happens to you, you can reflect on it 
and learn from it. I’ve been in England for over twenty-six years, 
which has been a time of learning from all the many things that 
have happened to me: I get praises and blames, things go well 
and fall apart, people come, people go. And even a teacher isn’t 
a refuge; Ajahn Chah became ill and was incapacitated for ten 
years. He couldn’t say a word and was nursed until he died in 
1992. So the refuge is not in a teacher or in the scriptures or in a 
monastery or in a religious tradition or Vinaya or anything like that, 
but in awareness. Awareness is so ordinary, so natural to us that 
we ignore it, we overlook it all the time. This is where we need 
continuous remindings and wise reflections, so that when  
tragedies and difficulties happen we can use those very things as 
part of our training, as part of the path of cultivating the Way. This 
is the fourth Noble Truth.

| 39
You only need the confidence to reflect, to be aware – not of how 
things should be, but of what you are actually experiencing,  
without claiming it, without adding to it in any way. Thus when I 
feel sad, if I think: ‘I am sad’, then I have made it more than what 
it is. Instead, I am simply aware of the sadness, which is  
preverbal. So awareness exists without the arising of thoughts. 
The habitual tendency is to think: ‘I am sad, and I don’t want to 
be sad. I want to be happy.’ Then it becomes a big problem for 
us. Awareness is not a special quality that I have more of than 
you. It is a natural ability that we all share. The practice is in using 
this natural ability and in being willing to learn from it.

40 |

| 41

42 | 
“And Pokkharasati, having seen, attained, 
experienced and penetrated the Dhamma, 
having passed beyond doubt, transcended uncertainty, 
having gained perfect confidence in the Teacher’s 
doctrine without relying on others, said: 
‘Excellent, Lord, excellent! It is as if someone were to 
set up what had been knocked down, or to point out 
the way to one who had got lost, or to bring 
an oil-lamp into a dark place, so that those with eyes 
could see what was there. Just so the Blessed Lord 
has expounded the Dhamma in various ways ... 
I go with my son, my wife, my ministers 
and counsellors for refuge to the Reverend Gotama, 
to the Dhamma and to the Sangha. 
May the Reverend Gotama accept me 
as a lay-follower who has taken refuge 
from this day forth as long as life shall last!”
DN 3.2.22

| 43
My faith in the Buddha’s teaching arose when I was 21 years old 
and in the U.S. Navy. It was 1955 and I was on a supply ship  
traveling to various American military bases in Japan and the  
Philippines. At the time I was very disillusioned with Christianity 
and felt quite open to other possibilities. When I came across Zen 
Buddhism in Japan, it sparked an interest that has carried me 
through to this present moment. 
I would say that faith arose when I realized that the Buddha’s 
teaching wasn’t about believing or holding to doctrines, but about 
investigating — the willingness to doubt and investigate the  
nature of the mind through directly observing it yourself. I found 
that I never felt much faith arisen in the blind beliefs that most 
other religions demand. I may have been interested in them as a 
subject of study, but not as a path for myself.

44 | 
By the early sixties, I had completed my tour of duty and was 
working in the Peace Corps in Sabah, North Borneo and Thailand 
was an easy place to get to on holidays. While living there, I twice 
came to Thailand and Cambodia. I felt great interest in a country 
that was so completely Buddhist — where the King himself was 
a Buddhist and 95% of the population identified themselves as 
being Theravāda Buddhists. Although I didn’t know much about 
Theravāda before I came to live in Southeast Asia as there wasn’t 
much available to read in English, I started investigating it and 
wrote to Sri Lanka, Bangkok, and Kuala Lumpur for literatures.
During those first 10 years of my faith in Buddhism, I was mainly 
just reading about it. By the time I became a Sāmaṇera (novice 
monk) in 1966 in Thailand, I had acquired a small book called 
‘The Word of the Buddha’ which was a compilation of the basic 
teachings on the Four Noble Truths taken from the Suttas  
(Buddhist scriptures). I spent the first year as a sāmaṇera just  
inquiring into this book, putting it to the test. Having so much time 
to be by myself, I could actually investigate these Four Noble 
Truths through observing them myself rather than just reading 
more Theravāda literatures. During that year as a sāmaṇera,  
because I was pretty much living alone in a hut in a country whose 
language I couldn’t speak, I didn’t have any kind of distraction 
from the practice of meditation and thus I had many insights. 
At first, I was mainly focusing on concentration practices, but  
after so much of that, I found it impossible to sustain. Then the 
actual investigating of the Four Noble Truths became my practice. 
Of course, living alone and having nothing to do all day and night, 
there are all kinds of conditions arising that don’t arise when you 
are living a social or more engaged life in society. A lot of  
repressed anger, resentment and fear started arising and I would 
apply the Four Noble Truths to these conditions.

| 45
One thing was very clear: the Buddha stated that all conditions 
are impermanent. So I was determined to understand  
impermanence, not through thinking about it, but through  
watching it. Naturally, these mental states were impermanent — 
they came and went. Eventually, through patient endurance, the 
resentments and the fears accumulated over 31 years of life  
began to cease. I began to feel a sense of relief and lightness as 
I learned how to simply observe conditions as they arise and 
cease in the present moment. This led to an understanding of  
suffering, which is the first Noble Truth. 
I have applied this insight throughout my life as a bhikkhu, living 
with Luang Por Chah for the first 10 years, and through the many 
experiences I’ve had: living in the UK, teaching Dhamma to  
others, ordaining monks and nuns, etc. Different situations would 
bring up various emotions or feelings — some positive, some 
negative — but the main focus was always on the impermanence 
of the condition rather than grasping it, believing it, or just trying 
to dismiss it. 
This bore great benefits. It led to understanding how to let go of 
conditioned phenomena and to profound insights into the  
Dhamma that the Buddha proclaimed in his first sermon. This is, 
of course, because it is a practical teaching based on something 
that is ordinary in life: suffering. It is something that you can prove 
to yourself by investigating the source — the natural state beyond 
these conditions that arise and cease, the pure consciousness 
that they arise and cease in. So when you let things cease, then 
what is left is consciousness and awareness. You begin to see 
that this is what ‘anatta’ is. This is non-self. This is not a personal 
possession nor a personal identity. The actual teachings as  
recorded in the Suttas, in the Tripitaka, began to resonate with

46 | 
me in a way that wasn’t just an intellectual exercise, trying to  
figure out and understand through thinking, but from the actual 
ability to have profound insights into the nature of Dhamma, to 
recognise Dhamma, to know Dhamma in a very direct way.
These days, when I look at Buddha statues, I take refuge in the 
Buddha. I feel this sense of gratitude, because it’s such a great 
gift to humanity in general that the teachings of the Lord Buddha 
have survived through 2,560 years — through many situations, 
from ancient India to modern day Thailand. Buddhism has been 
popular and it has been persecuted. It once was a major religion 
on the planet. It has developed in many ways, in many cultures 
and societies, but the essential teaching has never been  
corrupted. It’s quite incorruptible. It’s still workable and practical 
in the present day, in modern life. 
I lived in England as a Buddhist monk for over thirty years,  
wearing these traditional robes and trying to keep my actions and 
speech within the boundaries of the traditional Vinaya as I learned 
it from Luang Por Chah in Thailand. I wanted to see if one could 
survive as a monk in a non-Buddhist country. It turns out that  
living for thirty-four years in England wasn’t that difficult. There 
was enough interest and enough opportunity to live easily within 
the traditional structure of the Vinaya. Quite a lot of interest was 
generated in the society through the practice of Dhamma.  
England is a very multinational country. You have the Thai,  
Sri Lankan, Cambodian, and Laotian communities that are all 
very supportive of the monasteries in England. During this time 
when I was there, most of the ones that ordained and took on 
monastic life were Westerners: Europeans, Americans, and  
Australians.…

| 47
There is amongst us a feeling that the ordinary life of an average 
person, i.e. just living a life of entertainment and material values, 
is a humdrum life. One feels that there’s something more to learn 
than just acquiring more money or more security. This Buddhist 
teaching points to the potential for all of us to awaken to ultimate 
reality, to see it and know it rather than live in the tiny world of 
materialistic values or never feel any possibility of getting beyond 
it. The Buddha Dhamma has given me this opportunity. 
From 2,500 years ago to the present moment, the first sermon of 
the Buddha in India still applies. It’s a work of genius actually! It is 
a teaching that is important, whatever country and whatever  
religion you happen to identify with. The Noble Truths speak to 
the human side of our lives. It’s not about belief. It’s not a denial 
of doctrines of other religions. It’s a willingness to investigate  
reality as you are living it, as you experience it: your own feelings 
of self-consciousness, doubts, resentments, fears, ambitions. 
Whatever conditions arise in your mind, you become more adept 
at seeing them as impermanent conditions — they arise and 
cease. As you learn to let go of them, you don’t experience the 
suffering that comes through the ignorant grasping of these  
various conditions, beliefs, opinions or emotions. I used to grasp 
and be carried away by fear, anger or resentment without finding 
any other alternative, but to suppress them or try to forget them. 
But no matter how much we try to forget, there’s still this lingering 
sense of something missing in life. The Buddha approached this 
with a teaching pointing directly at the exploration and  
investigation of the reality common to all human beings: the  
experience of suffering.

48 | 
One cannot help but feel an enormous sense of gratitude to the 
historical Buddha who established this teaching and to the  
lineage of his disciples down to my own teacher, Luang Por Chah, 
who have practiced according to his instructions and advice. In 
terms of Dhamma practice, there’s gratitude to Luang Por Chah 
and the Buddha. Gratitude to parents come through the fact that 
they actually gave me life and gave me the opportunity to  
encounter Buddhism. Luang Por Chah gave me opportunity to 
cultivate the way. Of course these are all pointing back towards 
the Buddha himself.