# Fear & Learning

- 24 - 
 
Fear & Learning 
A section from Ten Years in Suan Mokkh, a memoir written in 1943 
Each morning I set out for alms round through Suan Mokkh’s broad 
confines, along the narrow path through thickets next to the big pond. 
In the middle of that path I have ‘wasted time’ waiting for a young 
buck otter that has come out to roll and frolic in the sandy soil. Then 
after finishing its business, it gets out of my way. While I wait, it from 
time to time raises itself up on two legs to gaze at me. It’s as if it were 
challenging me: ‘If you dare to hit me then come on. ’ When it raises 
itself up to the height of my chest at a distance of just eight or nine 
meters, I am just like all of you who have never met up with this sort 
of problem before. Also , I am in the beginning stages of training 
myself in the Blessed One’s highest way of Dhamma – that is , in not 
fighting and not protecting myself , yet not fleeing , not being afraid , 
and not retreating. What would you expect or what would you have 
me do except stand and wait for it to go away? 
Another aspect of this , which ought to be considered quite special 
and has been a major support for me, is the love of learning that

- 25 - 
 
wants to understand and wants to try things out. When mental 
strength and mindfulness are still with me , all I want to do is give it 
a try, even if it means finding out what a tiger’s bite or a snake’s bite 
or a ghost’s tricks or a conversation with nasty spirits is like. These 
all can be taken as opportunities to study such things as well as to 
test my own strength, courage, and sensitivity. 
It seems, however, that fortune doesn’t lead in that direction. Fear 
turns out to be something deceptive and pointless , in other words , 
I’ve wasted my chances as befits this stupidity that has made itself 
afraid. Thus , if we have wisdom and reasoning sufficient for 
maintaining ourselves , we can hope for both safety and 
opportunities for more refined studies.  
The things that I’ve been afraid of increasingly become ordinary stuff 
until there are times that they become objects of amusement and I 
find myself changing into another person. And when things carry on 
like this further , the fear-based obstacles that have interfered with 
mental stability and concentration decrease and eventually 
disappear. I become able to sit in quiet places outside all alone at 
night without any form of protection other than the robes I am 
wearing. Then, mind is firm and direct in its practice as intended.  
I used to think that that we ought to rely upon protections such 
as fences and mosquito nets to help diminish the anxiety of sitting 
alone in scary places. However, I must confess to my fellow students 
that such isn’t likely to be true. We will never achieve a new mind 
that has fully let go through that approach. That mind remains

- 26 - 
 
anxious and never has sufficient strength and motivation. Once we 
leave aside such comforting supports , the foolishness of ordinary 
people returns again. 
❖  ❖  ❖
