FEAR 
by Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu 
Translated from the Thai by Santikaro  
First edition e-published by Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archives, 2020 
© Kevala Retreat, July 2020 
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution–NonCommercial–NoDerivatives 4.0 International License 
Cover: ‘Macroscopic #1,’ an acrylic painting by Pierre Wittmann (Ref. 355) 
Photograph of Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu from the Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archives 
collection (Ref. D-143) 
Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archives (BIA) 
Vachirabenjatas Park 
Nikom Rot Fai Sai 2 Rd. 
Chatuchak, Bangkok, 10900 Thailand 
Tel. +66 2936 2800  
suanmokkh_bangkok@bia.or.th 
www.bia.or.th 
« The gift of Dhamma surpasses all other gifts. » (Dhp 354)

Anumodanā 
To all Dhamma Comrades, those helping to spread Dhamma: 
Break out the funds to spread Dhamma to let Faithful Trust flow, 
Broadcast majestic Dhamma to radiate long-living joy. 
Release unexcelled Dhamma to tap the spring of Virtue, 
Let safely peaceful delight flow like a cool mountain stream. 
Dhamma leaves of many years sprouting anew, reaching out, 
To unfold and bloom in the Dhamma Centers of all towns. 
To spread lustrous Dhamma and in hearts glorified plant it, 
Before long, weeds of sorrow, pain, and affliction will flee. 
As Virtue revives and resounds throughout Thai society, 
All hearts feel certain love toward those born, aging, and dying. 
Congratulations and Blessings to all Dhamma Comrades, 
You who share Dhamma to widen the people’s prosperous joy. 
Heartiest appreciation from Buddhadāsa Indapañño, 
Buddhist Science ever shines beams of Bodhi long-lasting. 
In grateful service, fruits of merit and wholesome successes, 
Are all devoted in honor to Lord Father Buddha. 
Thus may the Thai people be renowned for their Virtue, 
May perfect success through Buddhist Science awaken their hearts. 
May the King and His Family live long in triumphant strength, 
May joy long endure throughout this our world upon earth. 
        from 
 
Mokkhabalārāma 
Chaiya, 2nd November 2530

Contents 
Anumodanā ..................................................................................................................................  
Contents ........................................................................................................................................  
Fear ............................................................................................................................................... 1 
Fear & Learning .................................................................................................................... 24 
About the Author ..................................................................................................................... I 
About the Translator ............................................................................................................ II 
Recommended Reading (Books) .................................................................................... III 
Online Resources .................................................................................................................. IV 
Kevala Retreat (Liberation Park) .....................................................................................V 
Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archives ....................................................................................V

- 1 - 
 
Fear  
A 
talk given to monks on 23rd April 1969  
at Suan Mokkh's Spiritual Theater 
I call this style of talk Dhamma-Paṭimokha. You are accustomed to 
paṭimokha being about the monastic discipline (vinaya). In fact , it 
means the important gist of a subject summarized point by point in 
a concise , easy- to-remember form. Paṭimokha are the main topics 
that must be spok en, remembered , and practiced. A prominent 
example of this is the Buddha's Ovāda-Paṭimokha, which 
summarizes his teaching in three aspects , four central reminders , 
and six fundamental practices. First , the three aspects of all the 
Buddhas' teachings:  
Sabbapāpassa akaraṇaṃ  
Never doing the least evil. 
Kusalassūpasampadā  
In virtue always fulfilled, 
Sacitta pariyodapanaṃ  
Purifying one's own heart: 
Etaṃ buddhānasāsanaṃ  
These are the teachings of all Buddhas.

- 2 - 
 
Next, reminders of four central principles:  
Khantī paramaṃ tapo tītikkhā  
Patience is the supreme crucible of kilesa. 
Nibbānaṃ paramaṃ vadanti buddhā  
All Awakened Ones say Nibbāna is Supreme. 
Na hi pabbajito parūpaghātī  
Those who harm are not truly gone forth; 
Samaṇo hoti paraṃ viheṭhayanto  
Those who oppress others are not yet calmed. 
Then, fundamental principles to be learned and acted upon: 
Anūpavādo anūpaghāto  
Not speaking evil, not doing harm, 
Pātimokkhe ca saṃvaro  
Restraint within the Training Discipline, 
Mattaññūtā ca bhattasmiṃ  
Knowing what is proper in taking food, 
Pantañca sayanāsanaṃ  
Sleeping and sitting in solitary places, 
Adhicitte ca āyogo  
Devoted in training the mind ever higher: 
Etaṃ buddhānasāsanaṃ  
These are the teachings of all Buddhas. 
These are essential Dhamma teachings that must be remembered.

- 3 - 
 
Here in these talks , we speak only of Dhamma essentials. We 
repeat and emphasize them over and over , especially matters 
concerning Ego and Mine.1 We summarize in terms of Ego and Mine 
for the convenience of ordinary people in memorizing, studying, and 
practicing. In fact , the entirety of Buddhism can be summarized in 
many ways. However , the most concise is the Buddha's single 
sentence, ‘All things ought not to be clung to.’ This clinging brings up 
Ego and Mine ; if there's no clinging , Ego and Mine don't occur. 
Therefore, we take the subject of Ego and Mine as being the most 
concise summary of the Buddha's words. On the suffering side are 
matters of Ego and Mine. On the side of no suffering are matters 
without Ego and Mine. 
Matters of suffering are spread out over many topics. Here , we 
constantly discuss the dukkha of Ego and Mine. We also discuss the 
quenching of Ego and Mine all the time. Consequently, here we don't 
talk about anything other than Ego and Mine in one aspect or another 
for the sake of increasingly clear understanding. 
                                                   
1 Tuakoo and khongkoo are central terms in Ajahn Buddhadāsa's teaching. I've tried 
various translations over the years and am now using Ego and Mine, capitalized to 
distinguish from ordinary meanings of the words and to convey intensity. Koo is an old 
Thai first person pronoun that came to be considered coarse in modern times. Tuakoo 
(Ego) is the sense of subjectivity and self assumed to exist independently and that 
constellates self-centeredness. Khongkoo (Mine) is everything appropriated by this selfcentered Ego. Tuakoo and khongkoo inevitably are connected with the frequent 
references to kilesa (defilements) – the ignorant, reactive, selfish, and destructive egostates that are central to Buddhist understanding of dukkha.

- 4 - 
 
Fear, a Greatly Disturbing Suffering 
In today's discussion of Ego and Mine, I'd like to discuss fear. Fear is 
a form of suffering that hugely disturbs human well-being. Some of 
that fear ought not to be so disruptive , but is. Yet , we mostly hear 
about lust and greed (rāga and lobha), anger and hatred (kodha and 
dosa), when discussing the sources of suffering.  Delusion (moha), 
with its broad boundaries, gets less attention.  
Fear Falls under the Moha Category of Kilesa 
Here, we will consider fear as a variety of delusion. You should 
situate it correctly within the three kinds of kilesa, the defilements 
that obscure and pollute mind's natural freedom and purity. Fear 
isn't a form of greed or hatred , which means it's a form of moha 
(delusion), of stupidity and blindness , of non-understanding. Not 
understanding something, we can be afraid of it continually. Clearly, 
greed, lust, anger, and hatred are matters of Ego and Mine. Loving 
something, we pull on it. Angry or hating , we push away or destroy. 
Both cases are rooted in Ego and Mine. Greed and lust insist on 
having or getting ; anger and hatred are offended or obstructed. 
Delusion is foolish. It neither wants something nor wants to harm or 
destroy. In the case of fear , the foolishness is afraid of losing 
something one has.  
Know how to distinguish among these three categories of kilesa: 
rāga and lobha, dosa and kodha, and moha. The rāga and lobha (lust 
and greed ) bunch wants to have what it likes or is in love with

- 5 - 
 
whatever it already has. The dosa and kodha (hatred and anger ) 
bunch is different. They want to harm or destroy what they're 
involved with. Greed pulls towards and anger pushes away. Delusion 
is, again , different. Moha is confused , unsure whether to like 
something or dislike. For example , instead of loving or hating , it's 
afraid of losing what it loves or of being unable to fight off what it 
doesn't like or destroy its enemies.  
On reflection, we can see that all fear depends on fear of death. 
This requires attention and examination. Whatever we may be afraid 
of, the fear comes down to being afraid of losing life. Whatever we 
fear, whatever is frightening for us – creatures such as tigers , 
immediately threatening dangers, even thunder and lightning – are 
because we're afraid they will endanger our lives. 2 This phenomena 
applies to little things like geckos and millipedes , too. They all have 
their roots in the fear that they might endanger our lives. Then we 
hate them. Our fear is mixed with strong aversion. Still , the essence 
is fear that they are a threat in one way or another. We can't bear to 
face them or to associate with them. This habit goes so far as to fear 
things we cannot see, such as spirits, as well as things that we don't 
know what they are and yet fear that they may harm our lives. When 
                                                   
2  In this talk, tigers and snakes are not simply metaphorical. Before the massive 
environmental destruction that came with rapid economic development, tigers and 
leopards lived in the forests near Suan Mokkh, occasionally wandering into the monastery, 
and crocodiles were common around Pum Riang where Ajahn Buddhadāsa grew up. 
Cobras and kraits are still common.

- 6 - 
 
we say we're afraid of being spooked by ghosts , the meaning is that 
they might kill us or deprive us of something important.  
The animal instinct that doesn't want to die and wants to 
survive doesn't require thought or decision. There's no reasoning 
involved because it's inborn. We instinctively don't want to lose our 
lives, we don't want to die. As soon as something has a hint of death 
or of killing us, we're afraid. This makes fear a form of selfishness, of 
being centered on Ego and Mine. Such Ego and Mine can be intense. 
The survival and self-preservation instinct is the essence of Ego and 
Mine. Consequently , there is no way for this selfishness to escape 
having to suffer.  
Fear Is Both Root Cause and Suffering Itself 
From these reflections we can see that fear is a root cause of dukkha 
(suffering). We also can say that it is itself suffering. The terms 
‘dukkha’ and ‘root cause of dukkha’ can be separated verbally and 
conceptually but not in experience and practice. There's no time to 
separate them ; as soon as there's the root cause of suffering , it's 
already suffering. The things that bring dukkha are already dukkha. 
Fear is the same. As soon as there's fear , it's dukkha right then. 
Consequently, we can say that fear brings suffering and that it is 
suffering. The experiential moments are so closely connected that 
they can't really be separated. In short, fear is suffering. 
Fear is a problem about which we need always to be careful. If 
you compare opportunities for love and greed , opportunities for

- 7 - 
 
hatred and anger, and opportunities for fear, you will find there's at 
least as much opportunity for fear as there is for the others.  Love 
and anger, if we look carefully , are also matters of fear. We fear not 
getting what we love and also fear losing what we love. Thus , 
wherever love occurs , fear will also happen there. Once we have 
something we love , there will be concern and worry of losing the 
beloved. Also, before we have it, we fear not getting it.   
Consequently, the whole time there is hope of getting what is 
loved, it will be full of fear or mixed with fear. The fear of not getting 
will oppress and burn the mind. For just this reason , fear can burn 
up anything. The whole time there is fear of not getting the loved , 
that love will burn. Once acquiring something loved, the fear of losing 
it will burn. If fear can be removed from love , it won't have any 
toxicity.  
Anger is the same. To be even a little angry at something , there 
must be fear that it is a danger to us , is our competitor , or is our 
enemy. Therefore, we don't like it. We don't like how it looks ; we 
dislike even just seeing it , maybe hate it. When we are on fire with 
anger at somebody , the root cause must be that this person 
endangered us. We're afraid we will die. Or we fear that something 
beloved of ours will be damaged or harmed , or that we'll lose 
something we cherish. Consequently, we hate it or are angry about it 
from the get- go, in advance. Once there's any demonstration of 
actual harm to our life or our beloved stuff , our anger goes through 
the roof. This is how anger and hatred are connected with fear of

- 8 - 
 
losing life or beloved things. Both matters of liking and disliking , 
loving and anger , have fear thoroughly implicated and acting to 
destroy our well-being.  
As for fear by itself , such as being afraid of the dark , of ghosts, 
or whatever, it's based in believing or wondering or worrying that 
‘This is dangerous. It will harm me. It's a danger for me. ’ That's how 
we fear things we cannot see or touch. On the other hand , there are 
things that are real and clearly dangerous , such as a leopard 
approaching. We are afraid of tigers and leopards because we have 
knowledge that they are dangerous. Even if we have never seen one 
personally, we have seen pictures and heard stories that lead us to 
believe they truly are dangerous. Our fear of them is complete, even 
before we've met a real live tiger or leopard. We can dream of them 
and be afraid. This is how fear can happen all the time , whether 
occasions of love, of anger, of hatred, or of fear all by itself.  
In our current world of materialism and consumerism , we are 
afraid of losing our material and consumer pleasures. Thus , we 
strongly protect against such eventualities , to the extent of fighting 
and killing. Those who've accumulated lots of material goods fear 
those who lack them. For example, the investors and capitalists fear 
that the laborers will seize their property. Laborers don't have as 
much to fear. We can say that whoever clings the most will have the 
most fear. Whoever has a lot of Ego and Mine will have a lot to fear. 
This is why the capitalists have trouble sleeping –
 they have a lot of 
Ego and Mine, and thus a lot of fear. The laborers have very little fear

- 9 - 
 
and sleep more soundly. This is significant in the current war 
between capitalists and laborers.  
If free of Ego and Mine, life is at ease. There's no fear. But people 
say it can't be done. They claim it's impossible to have no fear , just 
like they say free-empty mind is impossible. Everybody cries out that 
it cannot be done. If free-empty mind can't be done , they'll have to 
settle for taking dukkha instead. It's the same with fear. A life without 
fear is impossible, they say. That they can't have such a life is true in 
that ordinarily it can't be done. Usually, people can't let go of Ego and 
Mine. Will they carry on being ordinary people like this forever?  
 If we are to settle for being such ordinary people continually, it 
means we settle for suffering over and over again. We would choose 
to be commoners, fools, and weaklings continually. If we don't want 
to be such continually ordinary people , we must uplift ourselves to 
the level of doing what we've claimed can't be done. Everything we 
thought we couldn't do can and must be uplifted , for example , 
destroying clinging so that mind is empty and free of Ego. Just this is 
what must become doable.  
Fear Is Because of Foolishness 
Being afraid is something that doesn't require much investment. The 
question, ‘Why don't we live without fear?’ is well worth pondering. 
Is it possible , can we live without fear bothering us? It must be 
possible because people have done it. In particular , arahants have

- 10 - 
 
done it.3 In them fear has disappeared completely and unequivocally. 
For those of us who aren't arahants, do we take it that we can't do it 
at all, or, rather, that we can do it in some aspects according to our 
ability?  
We might think, using our common sense reasoning, that fear is 
a version of stupidity , as was said earlier. Such fear can't be other 
than foolish. Fear of ghosts, fear of things with no substance, fear of 
the dark, fear of things that aren't real , is very foolish. Even fear of 
things that actually exist, such as a tiger walking towards us , is still 
stupid. Think about it.  
First of all, fear of ghosts is stupid because we were taught to be 
stupid from childhood. Dogs and cats aren't afraid of phii because 
nothing taught them to be.4 They actually can bite and devour things 
people say are ghosts. They go into the charnel grounds and dig up 
phii (corpses) to feast on them. Why aren't they afraid? When people 
see even a little piece of bone , they're afraid , so afraid their hearts 
tremble. This is a stupidity animals don't have. The skeleton hanging 
in the old Dhamma Hall is a good example. Some people were afraid 
at first, but then smartened up and lost their fear. At first , everyone 
is afraid of it.  
Let me tell you about when we first hung the skeleton there. 
When people heard about it , they came to look. A teacher brought 
                                                   
3 'Worthy Ones' who are free of egoism, greed, hatred, and delusion.  
4 Phii generally refers to various spirits and ghosts, mostly malicious. It is also a popular 
term for corpses.

- 11 - 
 
thirty or forty students , who varied a lot in their reactions. Two or 
three of them hugged the post at the bottom of the stairs and 
wouldn't go up. They stayed there hugging and shaking, truly afraid. 
But still, their eyes wanted to look. Most of the students went up but 
kept their distance. Only a few students went up close. Two, no more 
than three, students dared to touch it. Just a single student dared to 
put his head into the skeleton and be hugged by it. That's how 
different the children were in their fear. The very same skeleton 
provoked disparate reactions. The two or three who clung to the 
bottom of the stairs went home and were feverish all night. One 
bunch of them wasn't affected very much and some weren't affected 
at all. Although the skeleton was the same , because of the different 
levels of stupidity, the reactions were on different levels.  
These children couldn't do basic addition. If they had the 
thinking ability, they could figure out that within themselves a full 
skeleton also existed. Whatever was in the skeleton hanging in the 
Dhamma Hall also exists in each of us. Yet, in us there is much more 
that the skeleton lacks , such as blood , flesh, heart, liver, and lungs. 
We contain much that the skeleton doesn't have. And if we imagine 
that the skeleton is inhabited by a spirit , then we also are inhabited 
by a spirit. Our spirit is better and stronger. If we are to fight, we will 
be better because we have muscles, sinews, blood vessels, and much 
more. We would certainly win the struggle day or night. If they could 
only count and add, these children would have nothing to fear. This

- 12 - 
 
is how it is if we speak directly and reasonably. There's nothing to 
fear. 
Nowadays, it's only stupidity that makes us afraid. Many people 
have been willing to listen and ponder carefully until their fear is 
reduced. If we aren't diligent in thinking through this perspective, we 
won't be able to overcome the fear that lingers in the mind. Thus, it's 
necessary to think , reflect, and contemplate constantly in order to 
eradicate fear.  
Concerning things that don't actually exist , it's apparently 
rather easy to destroy fear. Concerning things that actually exist in 
front of us , such as our fears of tigers , snakes , and lightning that 
might kill us, it will be more difficult to get rid of fear when they are 
facing us. The strength of the fear will be stronger. Even so , we can 
observe in the same way that we are still being foolish. Fear makes 
the situation more difficult. Wouldn't lack of fear be better? No 
matter what were to happen, wouldn't fearlessness be better? 
Fear usually exceeds whatever cause triggered the fear. In 
seeing something we're afraid of , there's fear. Sometimes , we're 
thinking ahead to make ourselves afraid, and there may be no actual 
existing danger. Imagine if you saw a fake tiger placed somewhere 
you believe tigers to be by someone wishing to deceive you. You'd be 
just as afraid as with a real tiger. Deceitful appearances can cause 
fears and fevers just the same. This means that fear doesn't come 
from the real thing , as people think. Instead , it comes from the

- 13 - 
 
stupidity of what we're creating. With the fake tiger that we think is 
real, we create a real tiger in our minds and then experience fear.  
Imagining Things Can Make Us Afraid 
Creating mental pictures , what we call ‘imagination,’ is the real 
culprit. Imagination is the main factor in creating fear. If we destroy 
this, fear won't exist. It could not exist. If we saw a tiger , we would 
have to imagine that it would attack us. We can imagine that even a 
fake tiger will attack us. Seeing a real tiger that doesn't attack or 
harm anyone doesn't cause fear. Actually, tigers don't automatically 
attack everyone, but we imagine that they always do. This is a crucial 
fact of the things we fear. It creates the image that makes us afraid 
automatically, all by itself, without any intention on our part. Then it 
dominates our minds so that there's no room for intelligence at that 
time. Fear is the result.  
Whoever has a big ego will be especially afraid of dying. 
Whoever really loves themselves, or really loves their property and 
wealth, will be really afraid of dying. Whoever really loves their 
spouse and children will be really afraid of dying. Whoever doesn't 
have so much of such loves won't be so afraid of dying. Seeing a tiger, 
they won't be all that afraid compared to those who really love 
themselves. Some people are terrified, others barely have any fear at 
all. Hunters who go into the jungle regularly have very little fear of it. 
Further, instead of being afraid, they only think of shooting the tiger 
and forget to fear the tiger. In this way, the fundamental imagination

- 14 - 
 
is suppressed and doesn't manifest. There's only ‘I will shoot you ’ 
and nobody is afraid. 
Arahants aren't afraid because there's no sense of Ego. Without 
the feeling that something is Me or Mine , they aren't afraid. There's 
absolutely no fear because there's no upādāna (clinging) to Ego. 
There's no subject to be harmed or destroyed – that is, there's no Ego 
to be attacked by the tiger. There's nothing to be afraid. When fear 
doesn't take over , the mind is full of awareness and intelligence , 
enough to know what to do. Should one stand still or calmly walk 
away? What is most fitting in the circumstances? It isn't that 
complicated. If the tiger actually approaches, there's no need to flee. 
It will eat us anyway. If we can avoid being eaten , then do so 
appropriately without excess.  
This brings us to a question concerning the difference between 
ordinary humans and arahants. Arahants aren't afraid to die because 
there's no clinging to Ego and Mine. For ordinary folks to not fear 
death, to some degree, they need something to cover up this clinging. 
For example, if strong enough, recklessness can conceal this clinging 
and not fear death. If a hunter is to shoot a tiger , he can't let himself 
be afraid. He needs another feeling to suppress this clinging so that 
it can't function and induce fear. Certain insane people don't feel fear 
either and can be reckless , even wanting to box or wrestle with the 
tiger to show off to others. Such lack of fear is possible. 
Therefore, fearlessness depends on the principle that clinging to 
Ego and Mine doesn't function, either because there's no clinging left

- 15 - 
 
or it temporarily cannot function. If clinging remains , but it doesn't 
have the opportunity to act , fear doesn't occur. In the absence of 
clinging, such as with arahants' fearlessness , clinging cannot 
function because it doesn't exist. Sometimes an insane person or a 
vicious criminal can act seemingly like arahants, such as when not 
fearing death.  
Now, it's best to focus on ordinary people , such as ourselves , 
who are in the process of uplifting themselves. Don't let fear 
dominate, oppress, and tyrannize to the degree allowed in the past. 
It's better to diminish and weaken it progressively. And there's no 
other way to do so than study the details and subtleties of the 
arahants in order to follow their footsteps. That is , weaken clinging 
and steadily replace upādāna with awareness and wisdom , until 
clinging is destroyed. 
Do you get this? The self-oriented clinging makes one afraid 
when seeing a tiger. With mindful intelligence we don't let that 
happen; clear comprehension takes its place. Wise thinking is better 
because there's less fear and less suffering. In meeting a tiger , we 
needn't let fear take over until we can't do anything right: trembling 
with fear, fainting with fear, unable to function at all because of fear. 
Instead, we create aware, wise experience.  
Why be afraid when meeting a tiger? We ought to use our 
intelligence instead of such fear to consider what we ought to do. If 
we should run, then we run. If we ought to climb a tree, then we climb. 
If we should hide, duck, or whatever, we do it without fear. If we run

- 16 - 
 
with fear, we will fall down. If we try to climb a tree while afraid, we 
either can't get up or slip and fall down. At each attempt to climb, we 
slip and fall. All of these allow the tiger to eat us. The tiger always has 
the advantage. 
Without fear , we can run to the best of our ability or we can 
climb a tree skillfully. Whatever escape we prepare , we are able to 
do it well. If we run out of escape routes , or there are no trees to 
climb, and we must face the tiger – don't be afraid. Turn and face the 
tiger without fear because there is nothing better to do. There is still 
a chance we can fight off the tiger with our bare hands and do so 
without fear. This is better than someone who only knows to be 
afraid. Maybe we have the intelligence to use judo or whatever is at 
hand. We won't suffer and might even enjoy the challenge.  
Know How to Quench without Remainder and Become Arahant  
What of situations where we're not able to fight off the tiger, the tiger 
has already bitten, or the tiger is chewing on us? There's no need to 
fear. There's still hope of being the jīvitasamasīsī kind of arahant, 
that is, awakened and liberated at mind's extinguishing (at physical 
death). If unafraid until consciousness dissolves , it's jīvitasamasīsī. 
Someone who has studied remainderless quenching deeply , has 
already committed to remainderless quenching, and is still intent on 
remainderless quenching right now becomes a jīvitasamasīsī

- 17 - 
 
arahant in the tiger's mouth at the last second. 5 If one must die, this 
end is better than any other.  
I've been using the excellent example of a tiger because people 
fear them a lot. If we want to uplift ourselves and stop being overly 
foolish and thick-skulled, I'm using tigers to discuss how we should 
be when facing dangers and death.  
There's a story told in the commentary to the Great Sutta on the 
Establishments of Mindfulness  that fits the situation I've discussed 
here. A certain monk, not an arahant, just an ordinary monk, was in 
the forest striving in meditation for the sake of arahantship, when a 
tiger attacked. He cultivated the contemplation of vedanā as an 
establishment of mindfulness, seeing that vedanā, the feeling tone of 
the experience , was nothing more than a natural mechanism 
occurring with the mind through causes and conditions, according to 
natural law. It isn't self, ego, person, us, them, or anything of that sort. 
He took the painful vedanā of the tiger's bite as the object for 
establishing mindfulness and investigated. The tiger chewed and ate. 
This monk increased the mind's strength enough to sustain the 
contemplation despite intense vedanā. He contemplated while the 
tiger ate him, until the last second when the tiger's feasting killed him. 
He was arahant just the same, of the jīvitasamasīsī variety.  
                                                   
5 With ‘remainderless quenching’ Tan Ajahn's emphasizes the cooling and ‘going out’ that 
doesn't reignite. Nirodha is translated in Thai as dab, which commonly is used for lights 
and fires going out, yet liable to come back on or reignite. To avoid misunderstanding, 
Tan Ajahn emphasizes quenching without any remainder left to reignite.

- 18 - 
 
If we must confront something we've been afraid of or that is a 
serious threat to life , we ought to be unafraid , at least less so tha n 
other people. Take this opportunity to become arahant. Have the 
strength to become arahant simultaneously with dying. This is better 
than never being arahant. If afraid-afraid-afraid, nothing one does is 
right and one dies unnaturally and badly. It serves us fools right. To 
die unnaturally is to die while not wanting to die. So just about 
everyone dies unnaturally because they die trying to avoid it. Yet 
when something makes death inevitable , without clear awareness 
and understanding they die unnaturally, even violently.  
We can prevent unnatural deaths by being unafraid. Don't let 
death happen while afraid of dying. Don't be mixed up in not wanting 
to die although death is happening anyway. As soon as something 
deadly starts to happen , be immediately mindful , clear , and 
comprehending, even in the case of accidents and unexpected 
occurrences, such as a bomb exploding or a train wreck. We can 
master our mindfulness. If death is unavoidable , then we die 
mindfully, rather than uselessly and unnaturally. In large train 
wrecks, people don't want to die and are terrorized , thus they die 
violently and unnaturally. We, however, won't let ourselves die like 
that. With mindfulness and insight , as the various aspects of life 
come to an end , we take these endings as our object for 
remainderless quenching and not being born further. In this way, we 
might be arahant without even knowing it. This isn't something all 
that difficult, if we train well.

- 19 - 
 
These are the facts of the matter with fear. We can turn them to 
our advantage. The things that provoke fear and the occasions for 
fear can become beneficial in our Dhamma life. Conversely, they can 
be used to create cowards and the ghosts of those who die badly. 
Therefore, be careful not to waste too much in fear. Think and 
consider carefully. Prepare yourself well ; after all , we must meet 
with fear all the time.  
Tonight, as you walk back to your hut in the forest , if you are 
afraid of snakes the whole time , you'll be foolish the whole time. Or 
you can walk without fear. At the times you are afraid , you will find 
out and know what fear is like and how we are susceptible to it. You 
won't know it now in this place; there's nothing to be afraid of here, 
where everything is fine here and you all are comfortable and clever. 
However, when you must walk in the dark along narrow paths, even 
if there aren't any snakes, you'll be afraid there are snakes the whole 
time. Then you can know for yourself that you can't distinguish fear 
from your mind, if you let it happen just like everyone who doesn't 
understand. If we are disciples of the Buddha , we ought to have 
something that can distinguish the fear, or maybe not fear at all, and 
still have the intelligence to take precautions for the snakes.  
Should you in fact be bit , you can benefit from it in many ways. 
The method is the same: understand the facts of nature , life, world, 
body, and conditions. This doesn't mean I'm teaching you to go find 
a tiger or snake to bite you. I only wish for things to go naturally 
according to causes and conditions and that you have the knowledge,

- 20 - 
 
mindfulness, and intelligence to observe and study , taking every 
occasion as a lesson to increase wisdom. Measure yourself 
constantly. Know yourself continually. Uplift yourself steadily in 
terms of freedom from kilesa. 
When fear can be diminished , other kilesas will diminish 
accordingly. Love and anger will diminish because they all come 
from the same taproot – clinging to Ego and Mine. They will weaken 
together. If we eradicate one kind of defilement, whether rāga, dosa, 
or moha, doing so will shake the taproot in Ego and Mine. The 
question is which kilesa disturbs our peace and happiness the most; 
we should focus on that one. If fear disturbs all the time, then tackle 
it first. For a start, at least, attack the little fears that you carry, such 
as fear of the dark, ghosts, snakes, and the like.  
We take real life stuff as our lessons in how to practice. Don't lie 
around dreaming of things that aren't real; such fantasies of practice 
will all look wonderful and perfect. We must work with real things 
that have actual power to take over our minds. Do you have the fiber 
and strength to take them on? Give it a go. Don't be so afraid of them 
that you don't dare do anything about them. Be careful, before long, 
you won't dare do anything real. Can you understand this?  
The Epidemic of Fear and Testing Yourself  
If you allow your fears to expand and spread , you won't dare do 
anything. You'll be afraid to eat almsfood from this village where the 
food isn't clean and there's typhoid , dysentery, and other bacteria.

- 21 - 
 
You might be afraid to eat anything here , which is the sort of thing 
that can get carried away. In this case , what I'm saying is true ; I'm 
not trying to trick you. It's a fact that villages like this aren't able to 
practice the sanitation required to eradicate such bacteria.  
It used to be much worse. The first day I stayed here , I had 
dysentery. With time and familiarity, my body developed immunity. 
We ought to be grateful to these bacteria – typhoid,  dysentery , 
whichever – that create immunity in us once we are exposed. 
Eventually, we can eat more and tolerate more of these germs. This 
is a better way to consider such things. If we afraid of things , you 
need not bother eating. Or , you will eat with difficulty and 
trepidation. Your health will deteriorate and eventually you would 
die. 
An actual case like this happened to a judge in Ban Don , the 
provincial seat , decades ago. Everything had to be perfectly clean. 
Even the big water storage jars and stairs were washed and scrubbed 
over and over , steamed and boiled over and over. All had to be 
thoroughly cleaned. He didn't last very long. He had no immunity in 
him and one little infection killed him. This story illustrates that we 
must know the limitations of fear. To be afraid like that, what do you 
think, was he a fool or was he intelligent?  
This is why we ought to be grateful for the things that make us 
afraid. We should thank them for making us increasingly intelligent 
and skillful. We will get the greatest benefit from the things people 
are afraid of if we have the intelligence to receive them with the skills

- 22 - 
 
of the Buddha. Such intelligence considers them lessons for knowing 
that this vedanā is merely vedanā, this experience and how it feels is 
just vedanā, and not a separate being, individual person, lasting self, 
us, or them.  
There are many ways of speaking about arahants, such as , 
ajjhambhī (never startled ) and anuttarāsī (not frightened ). Their 
hairs never stand on end, they have nothing to do with fear, and they 
are always calm and composed because they've given up regarding 
Ego and Mine. With no more Ego and Mine experienced or ready to 
be born, fear is finished. 
This matter of Ego and Mine is the single most important theme 
that everyone must study, train with, and practice. Don't assume that 
this can't be practiced. True , it's impossible , but only when there's 
refusal and unwillingness to practice.  
Fear can be abandoned ; it can be weakened. Therefore , we 
should test ourselves consistently: is this month an improvement on 
last month? Is this year better than the last in terms of fear and 
startle? Do things that used to raise our hairs no longer stimulate 
them? Things in the dark that we used to fear , are they no longer 
frightening? Really, there's nothing hiding in the dark. But something 
pops up and our hairs stand on end , even if it's only just a cicada. 
That our hairs stand up is something silly for humans, who are lower 
than animals in this issue.

- 23 - 
 
Well, that's dhamma-paṭimokha in which we continuously and 
exclusively discuss matters concerning Ego and Mine.  
And that's all the time we have today.  
❖  ❖  ❖

- 24 - 
 
Fear & Learning 
A section from Ten Years in Suan Mokkh, a memoir written in 1943 
Each morning I set out for alms round through Suan Mokkh’s broad 
confines, along the narrow path through thickets next to the big pond. 
In the middle of that path I have ‘wasted time’ waiting for a young 
buck otter that has come out to roll and frolic in the sandy soil. Then 
after finishing its business, it gets out of my way. While I wait, it from 
time to time raises itself up on two legs to gaze at me. It’s as if it were 
challenging me: ‘If you dare to hit me then come on. ’ When it raises 
itself up to the height of my chest at a distance of just eight or nine 
meters, I am just like all of you who have never met up with this sort 
of problem before. Also , I am in the beginning stages of training 
myself in the Blessed One’s highest way of Dhamma – that is , in not 
fighting and not protecting myself , yet not fleeing , not being afraid , 
and not retreating. What would you expect or what would you have 
me do except stand and wait for it to go away? 
Another aspect of this , which ought to be considered quite special 
and has been a major support for me, is the love of learning that

- 25 - 
 
wants to understand and wants to try things out. When mental 
strength and mindfulness are still with me , all I want to do is give it 
a try, even if it means finding out what a tiger’s bite or a snake’s bite 
or a ghost’s tricks or a conversation with nasty spirits is like. These 
all can be taken as opportunities to study such things as well as to 
test my own strength, courage, and sensitivity. 
It seems, however, that fortune doesn’t lead in that direction. Fear 
turns out to be something deceptive and pointless , in other words , 
I’ve wasted my chances as befits this stupidity that has made itself 
afraid. Thus , if we have wisdom and reasoning sufficient for 
maintaining ourselves , we can hope for both safety and 
opportunities for more refined studies.  
The things that I’ve been afraid of increasingly become ordinary stuff 
until there are times that they become objects of amusement and I 
find myself changing into another person. And when things carry on 
like this further , the fear-based obstacles that have interfered with 
mental stability and concentration decrease and eventually 
disappear. I become able to sit in quiet places outside all alone at 
night without any form of protection other than the robes I am 
wearing. Then, mind is firm and direct in its practice as intended.  
I used to think that that we ought to rely upon protections such 
as fences and mosquito nets to help diminish the anxiety of sitting 
alone in scary places. However, I must confess to my fellow students 
that such isn’t likely to be true. We will never achieve a new mind 
that has fully let go through that approach. That mind remains

- 26 - 
 
anxious and never has sufficient strength and motivation. Once we 
leave aside such comforting supports , the foolishness of ordinary 
people returns again. 
❖  ❖  ❖

I 
 
About the Author 
Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu was born in 1906, the son of a southern Thai 
mother and an ethnic Chinese father. He followed Thai custom by 
entering a local monastery in 1926 , studied for a couple years in 
Bangkok, and then founded his own refuge for study and practice 
in 1932. Since then , he has had a profound influence on not only 
Thai Buddhism but other religions in Siam and Buddhism in the 
West. Among his more important accomplishments, he: 
 Challenged the hegemony of later commentarial texts with the 
primacy of the Buddha’s original discourses. 
 Integrated serious Dhamma study , intellectual creativity , and 
rigorous practice. 
 Explained Buddha-Dhamma with an emphasis on this life , 
including the possibility of experiencing Nibbāna ourselves. 
 Softened the dichotomy between householder and monastic 
practice, stressing that noble eightfold path is available to 
everyone. 
 Offered doctrinal support for addressing social and 
environmental issues , helping to foster socially engaged 
Buddhism in Siam.

II 
 
 Shaped his forest monastery as an innovative teaching 
environment and Garden of Liberation (Suan Mokkh). 
After a series of illnesses, including strokes, he died in 1993. He was 
cremated without the usual pomp and expense. 
About the Translator 
Santikaro trained as a bhikkhu under Ajahn Buddhadāsa during the 
final years of his life (1985-1993). During that time, Santikaro 
translated for Ajahn Buddhadāsa bot h orally during talks and 
interviews, as well as in printed works. Santikaro continues 
translation and other Dhamma work at Kevala Retreat in 
Wisconsin, USA, and is a close collaborator with the Buddhadāsa 
Indapañño Archives.

III 
 
Recommended Reading (Books) 
• Buddha-Dhamma for Inquiring Minds 
• Christianity and Buddhism 
• The First Ten Years of Suan Mokkh 
• Handbook for Mankind 
• Heartwood of the Bodhi Tree 
• Keys to Natural Truth 
• Living in the Present without Past without Future 
• Mindfulness with Breathing: A Manual for Serious Beginners 
• Natural Cure for Spiritual Disease: A Guide into Buddhist Science 
• Nibbāna for Everyone 
• No Religion 
• Paticcasamuppada: Practical Dependent Origination 
• The Prison of Life 
• A Single Bowl of Sauce: Teachings beyond Good and Evil 
• Under the Bodhi Tree: Buddha’s Original Vision of Dependent     
     Co-Arising

IV 
 
Online Resources 
• www.bia.or.th 
• www.suanmokkh.org 
• www.kevalaretreat.org 
• www.liberationpark.org 
• www.soundcloud.com/buddhadasa 
• www.facebook.com/suanmokkhbangkok

Kevala Retreat (Liberation Park) 
Kevala Retreat (Liberation Park) is a Dhamma refuge in the USA’s 
Midwest inspired by Suan Mokkh. Here, Santikaro and friends work 
to nurture a garden of liberation along the lines taught by Ajahn 
Buddhadāsa, where followers of the Buddha -Dhamma Way can 
explore Dhamma as Nature and in the Pāli suttas. 
 
Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archives 
Established in 2010 , the Buddhadāsa Indapañño Archives collect , 
maintain, and present the original works of Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu. 
Also known as Suan Mokkh Bangkok , it is an innovative place for 
fostering mutual understanding between traditions , studying and 
practicing Dhamma.