## Introduction

This book, Peace is a Simple Step, is the first in a series of all the written teachings (so far) of Ven. Ajahn Sumedho. The entire anthology is offered in commemoration of his eightieth birthday, July 27, 2014. The teachings included here have been gathered from books, magazines and newsletters ranging between 1981 and 2010, the majority of his teaching career in the West. Sizeable as the collection is, it only represents a fraction of his recorded output, which itself is only part of the teachings that he has given throughout his life. Nevertheless it gives ample indication of Ajahn Sumedho’s approach to Buddhist practice, an approach that is rooted in his training under the meditation master, Ven. Ajahn Chah, in North East Thailand, between 1967 and 1977.

This approach, based on direct experience of living under the exacting standards of the Vinaya discipline within the austere setting of a Thai forest monastery, threw a refreshing light on the practice of Theravada Buddhism in the West. Prior to Ajahn Sumedho’s arrival in Hampstead, London in 1977, the presentation of Theravada had predominantly been of a scholastic nature, interspersed with formal meditation instructions. No one had presented Theravada, let alone monastic training, as a way of life and support for the realization of nibbāna. Not only that, but the training that Ajahn Sumedho spoke of and embodied was earthy, and gave rise to deep insights into the Western mind. It gave rise to ease, contentment and a surprising degree of flexibility and good humour. And as he and his growing number of followers demonstrated, it wasn’t just theory – this way of life, drawing close to the lifestyle of the early Sangha, could be lived in the contemporary West.

Ven. Ajahn Sumedho: a brief biography

Ajahn Sumedho was born as Robert Jackman in Seattle in 1934. He served as a medic in the US Navy in the Korean War, during which visits to Japan awakened an interest in Asian studies, an interest that he pursued after leaving the Navy and enrolling at the University of California in Berkeley. This was succeeded by voluntary service in the Peace Corps in Sabah, Malaysia, 1964-66. However, still searching for inner peace, he visited monasteries in Bangkok but ended up travelling on impulse to North East Thailand where at Wat Saket in Nong Khai he became a novice monk (samanera), in 1966, and a bhikkhu in 1967.

The young Bhikkhu Sumedho was inspired to take on training under Ven. Ajahn Chah in Wat Pah Pong, a forest monastery near Ubon, about 450 kilometres/275 miles south-east of Nong Khai. He felt drawn to Ajahn Chah’s more exacting standard of training, which he felt would build greater self-discipline. As he frequently recounts, it made him aware of his emotional immaturity and provided the means to take personal responsibility for the suffering that his mind created. Out of gratitude for the ‘Dhamma-parenting’ of Ajahn Chah, after his fifth rains season as a bhikkhu, Ven. Sumedho offered his life to serve his teacher. This led him to accept the invitation to start a monastery for Westerners (Wat Pah Nanachat) close to Wat Pah Pong in 1975. His sojourn as abbot there was relatively brief however: when Ajahn Sumedho1 stopped in London for a few days on returning from a family visit to California in 1976, he stayed at the Hampstead Buddhist Vihara and there met George Sharp, the chairman of the English Sangha Trust – a charity set up in 1956 to support the establishment of a Bhikkhu-Sangha in the West. Their meeting led to Mr. Sharp travelling to Thailand to visit Ajahn Chah and invite him and Ajahn Sumedho to London in 1977. With Ajahn Chah’s permission and blessing, Ajahn Sumedho stayed on at the vihara, where he was joined by Ajahn Khemadhammo, Ven. Anando and Ven. Viradhammo.

Ajahn Chah had emphasized that, even though they lived in London, the group of bhikkhus should go out on the streets on a daily alms-round: both to let people see them and to keep the bhikkhus tuned in to the principle of alms-mendicancy. What no one expected was that this would result in the sangha being offered a sizeable tract of woodland in West Sussex. But a chance encounter with a jogger crossing Hampstead Heath in 1978 resulted in just that – with the enticing possibility that the sangha could live in an environment more suited to their training. However, as the woodland had no accommodation facilities, and as the legal process of transferring the ownership to the English Sangha Trust was protracted, it wasn’t until June 1979 that, with the chance sale of the nearby Chithurst House, the move could take place.

As the house was derelict, it required the community to commit to a very full schedule of work to make it livable. But Ajahn Chah, visiting Britain in June 1979, spent a week at Chithurst and gave it his blessing. Ajahn Sumedho, realizing that, at this time, there would be no possibility for any of the community to practise solitary dwelling (kāyaviveka), decided that the name of the monastery, punning on ‘Chithurst,’ should be ‘Cittaviveka’: ‘the mind that has withdrawn from corruptions’. It was the first forest monastery in Britain, and in 1981, the first permanent ordination precinct (sīmā) in the West was established there by Ven. Ananda Maitreya Mahanāyaka Thera of Sri Lanka.

At that time, Ajahn Sumedho had just recently been given the authority to grant Admission to the Bhikkhu-Sangha (upasampadā), the formally established sīmā meant that he could begin to induct men into the Bhikkhu-Sangha, which he first did in July 1981. He followed that up by requesting and obtaining permission to give the Going-Forth (pabbajjā) to women, which he began doing in 1983. This meant that the Sangha was now properly established in Britain.

Through accepting many invitations to teach, and adopting the ten-day retreat form popularized by U Ba Khin and Goenka-ji, Ajahn Sumedho soon became a very popular teacher in the West. With popularity came requests to start other monasteries where his monastic disciples could live, practise and be a support to local lay communities. The first of these branch monasteries, now called Aruna Ratanagiri, was established at Harnham, in Northumberland, in 1981. Within a couple of years, supporters in Devon also set up a residence for bhikkhus; this led to the subsequent establishment of Hartridge Buddhist Monastery. Requests for monasteries in New Zealand and Switzerland soon followed; and in the 1990s monasteries were also established in Italy and California. However before these later foundations had come to be, Ajahn Sumedho had taken a step to realize his own vision of a setting for the practice of Dhamma. Sensing the limitations of Cittaviveka, and acknowledging both the growth of the nuns’ sangha and the eagerness of laypeople to hear talks, spend time in a monastery and go on retreats, Ajahn Sumedho was, by the early 1980s, on the lookout for a property in Britain that could provide suitable facilities. In 1984, a couple of close supporters found something suitable: a school that had also been a place to evacuate children to during the Second World War, north of London and near to Hemel Hempstead. It was fairly basic – a cluster of long single-story wooden buildings around a central playground with a few acres of meadow out back. However, St. Margaret’s School was up for sale at a bargain price, and so – ‘Amaravati’ (‘the Deathless Realm’) was born.

From August 1984 until his retirement as abbot in November 2010, Ajahn Sumedho was based at Amaravati. It was here that he attempted something new in terms of the Forest Tradition – a monastery that was envisioned as offering laypeople with a retreat facility, and a venue for festivals and public talks. It remains as Ajahn Sumedho’s offering to society as a place for teaching, for meditation and for family occasions.

The Teachings

One thing that Ajahn Sumedho did not do was write down Dhamma instructions. So all the material here is from edited transcripts of talks and interviews that he gave. The process of recording his instructions was partial – because he would deliver instructions at any time that he felt the occasion called for it. For many of us, some of his most memorable presentations were at the morning community meetings, when over tea and porridge, the daily duties, events and reminders would be brought up. After this view of the day from the mundane perspective, Ajahn Sumedho would regularly reflect on the mood and energy of the community – busy or on retreat, uplifted or struggling – or on current affairs, such as the Gulf War in 1991. This was all impromptu and unguarded, but full of spirit; largely all of these went unrecorded. Which is good; he would sometimes be addressing ‘in-house’ business that needed to remain as such.

Still, there is much that has been recorded, because his output was prodigious. When I took Ajahn Sumedho as my teacher in 1978, our tiny sangha (then of three bhikkhus, three samaneras and three anagārikas) had moved from Hampstead to what was then Oaken Holt Buddhist Centre in Farmoor, a country house near Oxford. Throughout the three months of the vassa (Rains Retreat) he gave a talk to the community every morning; then followed that up with regular evening talks and question and answer sessions on the weekly all-night vigils. This output wasn’t unusual: when we moved to Chithurst, it was much the same; and similarly when we moved again to Amaravati in 1984. In the early 1990s, the structure of the community day changed, so that there were fewer morning meetings – but ‘Luang Por’, as he was known at that time, would often present Dhamma during the morning meditation period in a stream-of-consciousness reflection on the meditative process as it was happening. More formal instructions were given in the evenings, generally on the ‘Wan Phra’ (Sabbath, or ‘Observance’ days). At Amaravati there were also regular Sunday afternoon talks given throughout the summer with a more discursive and thematic approach to suit the general public. His other teaching platform was that of the formal meditation retreat of either ten days’ or (in the monastery) several months’ duration.

Talks to the monastic community also had a thematic flavour. Although the talks were generally untitled and, true to the approach of Ajahn Chah, delivered without notes or preparation, certain themes, or even Dhamma-slogans would be kept running through his talks for months on end. One of these themes would be offered as a contemplative reference point to the community repeatedly for a period of time. Although it might seem unusual to those expecting a sermon or public lecture, this informal approach is the standard of the Forest Tradition, where the Dhamma is transmitted through the teacher preparing his or her own mind and addressing the listeners with concern for their welfare. Accordingly, in the Hampstead days, Ajahn Sumedho would offer reflections on aspects of the Triple Gem, to get us grounded in Dhamma whilst in the middle of London. At that time these reflections would present for example the Buddha as ‘the knower of the world’ (lokavidū): this was to encourage us to also witness ‘the world’ as it arose in our minds. Dhamma as ‘directly-knowable, not delayed in time’ would also be a favoured theme, one that cast awareness on any strategies that aimed for awakening, as an experience in the future – let alone the planning that accompanies any enterprise in the West. In the early Oaken Holt days, more or less any talk he gave would centre around impermanence and uncertainty (as indeed the future of our sangha was at that time). In the early days at Cittaviveka, when we were working for seven or more hours each day, it was all ‘letting go’ – or the question: ‘What is it that Buddhas know that unenlightened beings don’t know?’ To which he would provide the reply: ‘All that arises passes away and is not-self.’ The effect was one of establishing a simple reflective motif for us, time and time again, to help us get through the complexities of the day mindful of Dhamma.

So, as you will see, Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings do not present a detailed exposition of the Buddha-Dhamma, but are offered to lay down Dhamma-foundations that can underpin daily experience so that it is contained in a way that suits contemplation. For those of us who lived with him, there were many other opportunities – exchanges over tea, or while massaging his feet, or when walking together. Of all his presentations, not least was his living example of commitment, service and vigour. When I lived at Amaravati, Luang Por’s day began by rising at 2:30 a.m. to do an hour or so’s vigorous exercise, followed by bathing and then meditating for another hour before going over to the meditation hall, into which the rest of us would gather around 5 a.m. to sit and listen to his instructions. He would then stay with the community through the morning meeting, give another talk, then start meeting people or check in with the monastery’s management. After the midday meal, he would receive people offering the meal or members of the public in order to offer advice, then return to his dwelling around 2 p.m. for a break. In the afternoons, he’d meditate or read unless someone wished to see him, and often meet people around 5 p.m. for tea. This would be followed by the evening puja and meditation, a talk a couple of times a week, to return to his dwelling around 9:00–9:30 p.m. for final reflections before retiring for the night. This went on, interspersed with travel, on a daily basis, for a decade before he adopted a more detached role.

He stepped back from direct community involvement in the late 1990s, in order to encourage the community to grow on its own. His emphasis was that something in us already knows and is Awake; it was up to each individual to bring it forth in themselves. Also aware of his own ageing and mortality, his distancing from the day-to-day life of the community (he continued to attend the morning and evening meditations) was to lessen the inclination to depend on him. He would often say, ironically to us who had received so much, ‘I don’t have much to teach.’ Or ‘You know what to do by now.’

His sense of completing his service as our Teacher came in 2010, when he realized that in his own terms at least, he had done enough. The topics of his talks had developed over the years, but the inclination was to an increasing simplicity in pointing to an awareness void of clinging, that he refers to as the Deathless. During the thirty-three years of teaching in the West, other people had likened his approach to Zen, to Dzogchen and to Advaita; you will notice in these books insights from psychology and from Christian mysticism, but from Ajahn Sumedho’s perspective the central theme has always been the ‘one thing’ that the Buddha taught: suffering, its origin, its ceasing and the Path to that ceasing. And his attitude had been one of carrying, out of gratitude, the transmission of Ven. Ajahn Chah’s teachings to the West. By 2010, he realized that he had completed that service. Now was the time to hand over the responsibility and step back. At the time of writing, he is based in Thailand, enjoying seclusion and the fruits of his practice.

This Collection

Most of Ajahn Sumedho’s books were created out of the enthusiastic response that his teachings elicited. The method would be that a number of recorded talks were selected, transcribed and then edited. The editorial process would often involve two or more people: a monastic who could verify the meaning, in cases of doubt, and others – monks, nuns and laypeople – to work the material into a grammatically sound written text. Much of the material has been published before, through our own free-distribution channels. However, Wisdom Publications kindly contributed the material from The Mind and the Way and The Sound of Silence as an offering to the dissemination of the Dhamma; and we are also indebted to the Buddhist Publications Group in UK (who have published two books of Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings: Teachings of a Buddhist Monk and Don’t Take Your Life Personally) for a series of articles from their magazine Buddhism Now.

As far as this current edition goes, Ajahn Amaro and I have gathered texts from a range of sources and ordered them in terms of collections that present the development of Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings from the early days on through 2010 and beyond. The material has been re-edited, by Don Carney, Nick Dwyer, Jāyasiri, Pamela Kirby, Adam Long, Ron Lumsden, Alison Moore, Nyāniko Oren Sofer, Wendy Parker and Linda Tomlinson – and others who wished to remain anonymous. The work of typesetting, design and layout has been supervised by Nicholas Halliday. We also give thanks to the many people whose painstaking efforts (some from before the advent of word processors) have contributed to this gift of Dhamma. And last but by no means least, anumodanā to the Kataññuta Group for initiating and sponsoring the entire project. It is a worthy way to commemorate a great teacher.

Ajahn Sucitto Cittaviveka 2013

1 The change of honorific indicates that he had passed his tenth Rains in the Order.