## Preface

Peace is a Simple Step brings together material that forms a foundation to Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings, from talks that were given in the late 1970s and early 1980s. It is a collection made up of three books – Cittaviveka, Teachings from the Forest and The Four Noble Truths.

Of these, Cittaviveka was the first to be printed. It was put together in 1983 at the request of supporters who asked for a book about the monastery. Hence the title, and the fact that the first edition also contained narrative pieces – a brief history of the events that led to and included the arrival of Ajahn Sumedho and his sangha in West Sussex, an account of the first bhikkhu upasampadā (Admission to the Sangha) in Britain, and an account of the first tudong walk in Britain. The rest of the book comprised articles that had been published in The Middle Way (the journal of the Buddhist Society of London) and freshly transcribed material. This text was assembled using a typewriter, as computer word processors had not come into sangha use at that time. It was created in about three weeks, and because of this and other factors, was not very thoroughly edited and designed. A second edition was created that included Ajahn Sumedho’s talk on mettā. Subsequently, the book was redesigned without the section on tudong, and with amendments to the historical account in order to address later developments. In this edition of Ajahn Sumedho’s teachings we have used only the material from his talks.

Teachings from the Forest is a collection of talks given over several years by Ajahn Sumedho at Wat Pah Nanachat (International Forest Monastery) in Ubon province, North East Thailand. The conversation with Ajahn Khantipālo and the subsequent three chapters draw from Ajahn Sumedho’s visit in December 1982, and have not been published before. The chapters “Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, ‘Ānāpānasati’” (which was composed from several separate talks on the theme) and “Happiness, Unhappiness and Nibbāna” have appeared before in a small book called Now is the Knowing, which was published in 1984 from material gathered by the sangha, and in places draws from that same 1982 retreat. This collection presented Ajahn Sumedho’s evocative three-line teaching: ‘Yesterday is a memory; tomorrow is the unknown; now is the knowing’ – a reminder that was appearing on tee shirts and wall-hangings some twenty-five years later.

The last five chapters of Teachings from the Forest are from talks that Ajahn Sumedho gave in a visit to Wat Pah Nanachat in May 1989. This collection was originally published at Cittaviveka, Chithurst Buddhist Monastery in 2005 to mark the completion of Ajahn Sumedho’s thirty-ninth vassa (his fortieth counting a year as a samanera), and in appreciation for his teachings.

The Four Noble Truths appeared in 1992. It was a work constructed by a lay disciple that drew from some of the Dhamma presentations of the Buddha’s central teaching that Ajahn Sumedho had given over the years. This teaching of the Four Noble Truths – of suffering, its cause, its ceasing and the Path to that ceasing – was the first discourse that the Buddha gave. Hence it has been a recurrent theme in Ajahn Sumedho’s teaching, and forms the heart of his practice.

Ajahn Sucitto