## Preface

This small book was compiled and edited from talks given by Venerable Ajahn Sumedho on the central teaching of the Buddha: that the unhappiness of humanity can be overcome through spiritual means.

Venerable Ajahn Sumedho is a bhikkhu (mendicant monk) of the Theravada tradition of Buddhism. He was ordained in Thailand in 1966 and trained there for ten years. He was the founder and abbot of Amaravati Buddhist Monastery, as well as teacher and spiritual guide to many bhikkhus, Buddhist nuns and lay people.

This book has been made freely available through the editorial skills of Dorothea Bowen and the efforts of many people; may they receive the goodness of their actions!

Note on the text

The first exposition of the Four Noble Truths was a discourse (sutta) called Dhammacakkappavattana  Sutta – literally, ‘the discourse that sets the vehicle of the teaching in motion.’ It was first expounded in 528 BCE[*] in the Deer Park at Sarnath near Varanasi, and has been kept alive in the Buddhist world ever since. Extracts from this sutta are dotted throughout the text of this book. Ajahn Sumedho’s renditions of these key passages introduce the theme of the chapter, and are in italics. The Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta can be found at Collected Discourses (Samyutta Nikāya) 56:11; however the theme of the Four Noble Truths recurs many times, for example in the quotation that appears at the beginning of the Overview.

Note on the illustrations

The illustrations in this book were originally created by Ajahn Sucitto between 1981 and 1984. Drawing inspiration from the illuminated manuscripts of early Celtic Christianity, they used the knotwork of that genre. The illuminated text was composed mostly using inks and acrylics, with one panel being worked in oil paint. The original work was of A4 size and, mounted on boards, was displayed on the walls of the main meeting hall at Amaravati monastery.

Subsequently Ajahn Sucitto composed a text, which was a commentary on the sutta and on the paintings, and which was published as The Dawn of the Dhamma by Buddha-Dhamma Foundation in Thailand in 1996. This book is no longer in print. (We may be able to make a digital copy of it in due course.) The original artwork was eventually taken down, cropped and bound into a book. A DVD of the paintings with a brief commentary was created in 2010 and copies are in circulation.