# PART THREE | The Cessation of I-Making

173
PART THREE
The Cessation of  
I-Making

174
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Cessation of I-Making, Mine-Making,  
and the Underlying Disposition to Conceit
The cessation of I-making, mine-making and the underlying  
disposition to conceit is the culmination of the Buddha’s path to 
liberation. It is a shifting of our mind state from self-centredness to 
reality-centredness. This is accomplished through dis-engaging from 
actions which nourish self-centredness while increasingly engaging 
with	the	reality	of	the	way	things	really	are.	For	this	to	be	truly	effective	
at the deepest levels of our being, a considerable degree of spiritual 
development is usually required to be able to penetrate through the 
diverse levels of the I-making processes. 
As you can probably appreciate from your reading so far, I-making, 
mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit is deeply rooted 
within our being. For example, the underlying disposition to conceit 
is the basis of our psyche, so much so that even spiritual practice can 
be co-opted by conceit. It is all too easy to be proud of our generosity, 
conceited	by	our	strict	morality	or	inflated	by	our	accomplishments	in	
developing meditation techniques. 
While intellectual study may well reveal some level of understanding  
of the processes of I-making, thinking is also an I-making-process,  
so can penetrate only so far. To go deeper, the Buddha outlined a wide 
range of spiritual practices to suit people of various temperaments  
and degrees of spiritual maturity. 
In deciding amongst these spiritual practices, ideally one would approach 
a teacher for personal advice and guidance. In the present time, more 
often than not, an aspirant tries out teachings, successfully or not, 
as they come across them. A major danger of this is frequenting the 
‘spiritual	supermarket’	and	merely	‘snacking’	on	the	spiritual	‘flavour	of	
the month’ rather than sticking with fundamental practices when the

175
going	gets	difficult.	This	is	where	a	teacher,	spiritual	friends	or	a	humble	
guide can be helpful. 
My usual advice to spiritual aspirants is to suggest practising with the 
most basic and easily available teachings for a reasonable time, and 
then	re-evaluate	their	effect.	It	can	then	be	helpful	to	supplement	
practice with further study, investigation, and experimenting with other 
approaches.	Most	of	the	benefit	of	spiritual	practice	comes	from	the	
steady continuity of practice, much as it is with regular physical exercise 
and healthy eating habits.
Unlike the development of I-making, which is an evolving maturity of 
ego, the cessation of ‘I-making’ is not always so sequential, as some 
individuals are able to penetrate several levels simultaneously. The heart 
of spiritual practices for the cessation of I-making is concerned with the 
cessation	of	identification.	Most	of	the	practices	require	refinement,	
persistence and increasing maturity for insight to be actualized for the 
complete realization of liberation.
In explaining the processes for the cessation of I-making, for the 
sake of symmetry, I will proceed in reverse order through the four 
stages of the I-making process, starting with the coarsest level of Self 
Views, proceeding through to the most subtle level of the Underlying 
Dispositions. In so doing, I will explore sequentially the various means 
that the Buddha taught to guide beings to the experience of liberation, 
each	of	which	has	an	effect	at	different	stages	of	the	‘I-making’	
process.	The	Buddha	offered	a	vast	range	of	spiritual	practices,	
however, in this presentation I limit the discussion to the most 
commonly referred to methods.1 
I begin with the Progressive Path of Practice, which is the foundation for 
a deeper level of investigation.
1 Perhaps a second volume will expand on more specialized methods.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently, and bring attention to breathing.
•  At the present moment, is your attention 
pervaded by an obvious sense of self? What 
form does this take? Some ‘object’, physical 
or mental, that reminds you of self; a view 
(e.g., I am breathing); your environment; or 
something else?
•  Or, has your sense of self mostly ceased?
•  If so, where does your attention abide?
•  Have you noticed times when your sense of 
self is not so prominent?
•  Do you notice the cause(s) of this?
•  When suitable, you can open your eyes and 
relax your posture.

177
In three of the four contexts in which the Buddha responded to the  
query of how ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition  
to conceit’ reach cessation, he was responding to his senior disciples, 
or to the Wanderer Vacchagotta; thus his answers are succinct and 
somewhat ‘technical’. However, on one occasion the Buddha gave a  
more detailed response, describing comprehensively the progressive 
path of practice (M.III,32ff). 
The Progressive Path
On a number of occasions, the Buddha described the Path of Spiritual 
Practise as a spiritual progression or evolution2. On one such occasion, in 
answer to the query about how to realize the cessation of I-making, he 
elaborated	as	follows:
2	 This	general	outline	is	presented	in	many	places	in	the	Pali	Canon,	sometimes	with	alterations	(MN.27,	
MN.38,	MN.39,	MN.51,	MN.53,	MN.107,	MN.125).	The	version	in	DN.	2ff	also	includes	many	similes.
In	a	different	context,	another	form	of	‘spiritual	evolution’	is	outlined;	that	is,	associating	with	worthy	people	
nourishes listening to the true teachings, this nourishes faith … appropriate attention ... mindfulness and 
clear comprehension … sense restraint … practising the three ways of right conduct … the four attendings 
with mindfulness … the seven factors of awakening, arriving at true knowledge and liberation (A.V,115). 
FOURTEEN
The Progressive Path
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

178
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘A person hears the Dhamma taught by the Buddha or one of his 
disciples. They gain faith and, recognizing that it is not easy to practise 
the teaching as a layperson, eventually go forth into the monastic life 
and undertake to follow the detailed moral guidelines. They become 
content with robes to protect the body and almsfood to maintain 
bodily strength. They develop restraint of the six senses and maintain 
mindfulness and full awareness regarding all bodily and verbal actions.  
They retire to a solitary place and cleanse the mind of the Five 
Hindrances. With a mind free of the hindrances, they proceed to develop 
the	four	fine-material	absorptions,	and	then	direct	the	mind	 
to the waning of the Outflows	(of	selfhood).	Through	the	direct	knowing	
of the Four Noble Truths and the cessation of the Outflows,	the	mind	is	
liberated.’ M.III,33f summarised
This is the ideal path of practice as envisioned by the Buddha. He went 
on to say that it is by knowing and seeing thus that I-making, minemaking and the underlying disposition to conceit are uprooted, which is 
equivalent to directly knowing the Four Noble Truths and liberation from 
the three Outflows.	
Since the Buddha was addressing monastics, the path of practice is 
modelled on that life style. However, there are common principles 
applicable to anyone interested in spiritual practice. These begin with 
faith	in	the	teaching,	which	leads	to	earnestness	in	undertaking	refined	
moral training, and proceeds to the principles of contentment with 
simple living, restraint of the senses, and the training in mindfulness 
and full awareness. This is then the basis for training the mind in 
collectedness and contemplation of the Four Noble Truths and the three 
Outflows,	resulting	in	liberation.

179
In the present time, most spiritual aspirants are ‘self-taught’ or  
‘do-it-yourself’ practitioners. The self-taught student needs to be 
particularly vigilant and astute, especially due to the insidious power 
of	self-referencing	and	self-deception.	We	can	easily	find	ourselves	
choosing the easy, self-supporting option of spiritual practice, rather 
than developing a more comprehensive approach, one that involves 
practices	that	are	challenging	and	difficult	for	our	self.	A	helpful	reminder	
at	this	juncture	is	that	anything	our	self	finds	challenging	(within	reason)	
is very likely ‘good practice’, because it is our self-satisfaction that is 
being challenged. 
This Buddhist Path of Spiritual Practice is a very practical, stepby-step approach to spiritual development, providing a stable and 
comprehensive foundation, leading to a direct realization of liberation.  
It	can	therefore	be	beneficial	to	investigate	this	path	in	more	detail.
The Noble Eightfold Path
The Buddha’s Path of Spiritual Practice, in its most succinct form,  
is presented as the development of The Noble Eightfold Path, comprising 
the	following	eight	factors:
1.  Right View/Understanding: understanding the Four Noble Truths;
2.  Right Aspiration: aspiration to renunciation, non-ill-will  
and harmlessness;  
3.  Right Speech: speech free of falsehood, slander, harshness  
and frivolity;
4.	  Right Action: behaviour free from killing, stealing  
and inappropriate sexual conduct;
5.  Right Livelihood: livelihood free from trading in weapons,  
human	beings,	flesh,	intoxicants	and	poisons;
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

180
BEYOND I-MAKING
6.  Right Effort: avoiding and giving up unwholesome states,  
developing and maintaining wholesome states; 
7.	 	Right Mindfulness: cultivating mindfulness of body, feelings, 
conditions	of	mind	and	specific	phenomena	–	The	Four	Noble	 
Truths, The Five Hindrances, The Five Groups of Grasping, 
 The Six Sense Bases and The Seven Factors of Awakening;
8.	  Right Collectedness: developing	the	four	fine-material	absorptions.
These	eight	factors	are	sometimes	grouped	in	three	categories: 
Morality	(factors	3	to	5),	Meditation	(factors	6	to	8)	and	Wisdom	 
(factors 1 and 2) (sīla, samādhi, paññā)3. This comprehensive path  
of spiritual development is a way of life encompassing all aspects  
of human nature – physical, mental and spiritual; all physical actions,  
speech and mental activities.
It can be assumed that anyone wishing to pursue the Buddhist Path 
of Spiritual Practice is familiar with Right View and Right Aspiration. 
Specifically,	Right	View	is	the	basic	understanding	of	the	Four	Noble	
Truths	–	human	life	is	imperfect	and	subject	to	suffering;	there	are	
causes for this inherent unsatisfactoriness; when those causes are 
removed, unsatisfactoriness ceases; and, there is a clear path of spiritual 
practice to arrive at this cessation. This is the basic dynamic of Buddhist 
spiritual development – recognizing unsatisfactoriness, understanding 
its cause, experiencing its cessation through the practice of the Eightfold 
Path. Right View also includes understanding the principles of kamma, 
that	skilful	intentional	actions	result	in	beneficial	effects	and	unskilful	
intentional actions result in harmful results. The path is properly 
channelled and nourished with the Right Aspiration of renunciation, 
non-ill-will and harmlessness.
3 Occasionally, there is mention of two more factors, Right Knowledge and Right Liberation. These are 
unique	to	the	arahant	who	has	completed	the	training	of	the	Eightfold	Path	(D.II,217;	III,271;	M.I,42;	A.II,89;	
S.V,20).

181
Generosity
A	spiritual	practice	not	specifically	mentioned	in	this	context,	but	which	
the Buddha greatly encouraged, is the practice of generosity (cāga) 
or giving (dāna). Generosity is a way of practising renunciation, the 
fundamental basis of spiritual practice, through learning to give up, let 
go or surrender our grasping of selfhood in a practical, everyday context. 
Everyone	can	participate	in	the	joy	of	selfless	giving.	
Our usual approach to life is based on ‘mine-making’ or possessiveness, 
adding more supports to our self. Generosity, ideally, is the opposite – 
turning away from ‘mine-making’, relinquishing possessiveness, and 
thus reducing the supports for self-centredness. Without generosity as a 
guiding attitude, we may pursue spiritual practice with a ‘gaining mind’, 
which adds to our sense of self, rather than releasing it.
Unfortunately, even generosity can be turned into a way of feeding 
selfhood, such as ‘Look how generous I am’, or trading generosity for 
some	heavenly	pay	off.	Our	motivation	is	then	to	try	and	gain	spiritual	
progress for ourselves – the proverbial ‘spiritual materialism’ syndrome 
– rather than practise the giving up of selfhood through everyday  
acts of joyful generosity.
‘Bhikkhus, if beings knew the result of giving and sharing, as I know, 
they would not eat without having given, nor allow the stain of avarice to 
obsess or abide in the mind. Even if it was their last morsel, their  
last mouthful, they would not eat without having shared it, if there  
is a recipient.’ It. 264
4	 In	the	translated	text	by	John	D.	Ireland,	it	is	Sutta	22,	since	Sutta	9	is	five	suttas	combined.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

182
BEYOND I-MAKING
Skilful Living
Skilful living, or morality, is intimately linked to the principle of kamma, 
or	ethical	causality.	Put	simply,	living	skilfully	provides	an	efficacious	base	
for	well-being	and	for	the	refinement	of	spiritual	practice.	While	following	
a	set	of	moral	precepts	is	in	itself	beneficial,	what	is	especially	important	
is how applying these precepts can increase self-knowledge. Thus, in 
order to speak and act within the bounds of the precepts, one needs to 
be vigilant to know what one is saying and doing at any time of the day or 
night. We also need to be mindful, honest and humble enough to clearly 
know whether our intentions and actions are indeed skilful or unskilful.
Living a skilful life provides a groundedness and viability for spiritual 
practice throughout one’s day-to-day activities, where the sense of 
self	is	ever	present.	The	emotional	stability	and	confidence	this	practice	
engenders imbues the mind with an inherent calm which supports  
the development of ever-deepening degrees of calm and clarity.  
Though all kinds of unskilful thoughts may cascade through the mind, 
our	hearts	are	settled	in	harmless	and	beneficial	intentions.	This	also	
provides the possibility to just watch and get to know the entire range of 
selfish	expressions,	without	needing	to	follow	or	react	to	them,	 
nor blindly deny, repress or ignore them.
Training one’s bodily actions and speech in skilful behaviour is a means 
of attenuating the over-riding sense of self. Firstly, one learns to step 
away from following personal likes and dislikes, and instead is guided by 
a universal standard of skilful behaviour. What is called ‘skilful  
action’ in Buddhism is the qualities that tend to lighten, attenuate,  
or relinquish self-referencing; whereas ‘unskilful action’ tends to 
increase or strengthen self-referencing.

183
‘Ananda, skilful conduct gives freedom from remorse (avippaṭisāra) 
as its gain and advantage; freedom from remorse gives gladness 
(pāmojja) as its gain and advantage; gladness gives joy (pīti) … ; joy 
gives tranquillity ... ; tranquillity gives well-being … ; well-being gives 
collectedness … ; collectedness gives knowledge and vision of things 
as they really are … ; knowledge and vision of things as they really are 
gives disillusionment and dispassion … ; disillusionment and dispassion 
gives knowledge and vision of liberation as their gain and advantage. So 
indeed, Ananda, skilful conduct gradually leads on to the highest.’ A.V,2.
Precepts – Moral and Renunciant
Precepts are the Buddhist guidelines for skilful living which we 
voluntarily undertake to train ourselves in, ideally because we know the 
benefits	of	skilful	living.	The	precepts	have	different	levels	of	refinement	
and	subtlety.	Thus,	the	basic	five	moral	precepts	can	 
be	practised	at	a	coarse,	moderate	or	refined	level.	They	can	also	 
be extended to the eight renunciant precepts, and further to the ten 
precepts	of	a	male	or	female	novice,	the	227	precepts	of	a	Buddhist	monk	
or the 311 precepts of a Buddhist nun. 
The initial stage of working with precepts is that we honestly need  
to know at what level we are able to consistently follow and stabilize 
them in our life. To develop our spiritual practice further we can then 
make	an	effort	to	‘stretch	ourselves’	out	of	old	behaviour	patterns	 
and	establish	a	more	refined,	skilful	mode	of	being.	The	refinement	
of skilful conduct provides a foundation for the causal arising of the 
successive stages of spiritual development. Maintaining precepts 
is not merely an end in itself, although some people may see the 
freedom from remorse or purity of being which morality engenders as 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

184
BEYOND I-MAKING
a state of high spiritual attainment. With such a view there is often an 
attachment to the purity, rather than using this causally-conditioned 
state as a stepping stone to further realize the qualities of collectedness, 
knowledge and vision of things as they really are, disillusionment and 
dispassion, culminating in liberation.
We	develop	more	refined	skilful	conduct	by	bringing	mindfulness  
and clear knowing to our speech, actions and livelihood. Just to  
have these particular means of skilful living pointed out to us can  
be helpful, but a considerable degree of self-awareness, honesty  
and wisdom is required to transform these principles into ways  
of	being.	The	Pali	word	for	morality,	sīla,	literally	means	‘character’;	 
that is, skilful conduct becomes integrated into our character  
and,	with	its	refinement,	becomes	a	means	of	‘character	building’.	 
Only	through	directly	experiencing	the	beneficial	results	do	we	 
gain	the	wisdom	and	confidence	to	further	develop	skilful	living	 
for	the	increasing	refinement	of	spiritual	practice.
Major supports for morality are the ‘two bright qualities which protect 
the	world’	which	are:	moral	shame	and	moral	dread	(hiri-ottappa),  
or personal and social conscience (A.I,51).
Contentment
‘And how is a bhikkhu contented? Here a bhikkhu is contented with a 
robe to protect his body, with alms food to satisfy his stomach. Having  
accepted (sufficient), he goes on his way, just as a bird flies about taking 
nothing but its wings. Even so is a bhikkhu contented.’ D.I,71.
Contentment and simplicity of life-style are universal aids to peace 
of mind, for monastic and lay person alike. The four basic supports for

185
human life are food, clothing, shelter and medicine. Their purpose is to 
support our spiritual aspiration rather than to be self-satisfying ends in 
themselves. To have few possessions to worry about and to be content 
with what we have means our life is uncluttered and unencumbered, 
so our heart/mind can rise above the mundane concerns of the world, 
just	as	a	bird	flies	aloft	however	it	wishes.	We	also	have	more	time	and	
energy available for sustained spiritual practice. While we all need some 
basic material comforts, how much do we need to provide us with the 
fundamental support for seeking the ultimate ‘comfort’ of spiritual 
liberation?
Guarding the Doors of the Senses
Two methods of guarding the doors of the senses and one method 
of practising sense restraint are outlined in the Pali Canon. The most 
common method of guarding the sense doors is in the context of 
developing	the	path	of	practice:
‘On seeing an object with the eye they do not take hold of its signs 
or characteristics. Since, if they left the eye faculty unguarded, the 
evil, unwholesome states of covetousness and displeasure would 
attack them; thus they practise restraint, guard the eye faculty, 
undertake restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the 
ear … on smelling an odour with the nose … on tasting a flavour with 
the tongue … on contacting a touch with the body … on knowing a 
mental phenomenon with the mind they do not take hold of its signs or 
characteristics. Since, if they left the mind faculty unguarded, the evil, 
unwholesome states of covetousness and displeasure would attack 
them.’ M.I,346.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

186
BEYOND I-MAKING
The second method of guarding the sense doors is that when one 
receives	a	sense	contact:
‘… they are not drawn to an enticing image or repelled by a disagreeable 
image. They abide having established mindfulness of body, with 
measureless mind, and they clearly know as it really is that liberation of 
mind, that liberation of wisdom where those evil, unwholesome states 
cease completely.’ S.IV,120. 
Practising	in	this	way	one	is	‘uncorrupted’	amidst	sense	contacts,	Māra	
does not gain access or a support, one overpowers the sense objects 
rather than be overpowered by them, and one overpowers the ‘evil 
unwholesome states which defile, lead to renewed existence, are 
troublesome, result in suffering and birth, ageing and death in the 
future’ (S.IV,186f). When mindfulness of body is established then the six 
senses do not pull towards agreeable or disagreeable contacts (S.IV,200).
The method of practising sense restraint (saṃvara) is explained as, 
‘… not seeking delight, welcoming or holding to sights, sounds, smells,  
tastes, sensations and mental phenomena which are agreeable, enjoyable, pleasing, endearing, accompanied by sensuality, enticing.’ S.IV,79f. 
In some contexts, guarding the doors of the senses is followed by 
‘moderation in eating’ and the practice of ‘wakefulness’ (M.I,273f;	355f;	
S.IV,103f). Moderation in eating, in common parlance, is ‘eat to live  
and not live to eat’. In the monastic training it is one of the themes  
for	frequent	reflection	recited	daily	in	many	Forest	Monasteries5.  
In	shortened	form	this	reflection	is:	‘Wisely	reflecting	I	use	almsfood:	 
… only for the maintenance and nourishment of this body, for  
keeping it healthy, for helping with the religious life …’.
5 See Chanting Book, vol.1, p.53f. Available for free download from www.forestsanghapublications.org.

187
The practice of ‘wakefulness’ (jāgariyā) is diligence in developing the 
meditation	exercises	or,	specifically,	to	spending	the	day	and	night,	
except for sleeping four hours between 10pm and 2am, developing 
walking and sitting meditation, while ‘purifying the mind of  
obstructive states’.
Mindfulness and Clear Comprehension (sati-sampajañña)
The development of mindfulness proceeds from the direct, nonjudgemental awareness of experience (rather than thinking about, 
analyzing or interpreting it) to a meditative contemplation of the arising 
and	passing	away	of	each	of	four	main	themes:
‘Herein, bhikkhus, one abides contemplating the body as body… 
contemplating feeling as feeling, … contemplating states of mind as 
states of mind, … contemplating phenomena as phenomena, earnestly, 
clearly comprehending and mindful, having put away covetousness and 
distress concerning the world.’ M.I,55.
‘In this way, one abides contemplating the body as body internally,  
or one abides contemplating the body as body externally, or one  
abides contemplating the body as body both internally and externally. 
One abides contemplating the nature of arising in the body, or one 
abides contemplating the nature of passing away in the body, or one 
abides contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away  
in the body. Or mindfulness that ‘there is body’ is established for  
the purpose of knowledge and mindfulness. One abides independent, 
not clinging to anything in the world.’ M.I,56.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

188
BEYOND I-MAKING
[The	instructions	continue	similarly	contemplating	feelings,	states	 
of mind and phenomena.6]	
We can say that these four areas of experience (body, feeling, states  
of mind and phenomena) are what we usually take as our sense of self. 
It is only through mindfulness, developed to the level of being objective 
and non-judgemental, that we can be freed of self-interest. Any 
interpretation of experience is usually tainted with some degree of  
self-interest. In the last paragraph of the instructions on mindfulness 
this mindful awareness is developed in a comprehensive and balanced 
way to become all-encompassing.
Clear Comprehension is formally explained as being aware of all bodily 
activities:
‘ … acts with clear comprehension when going forward and backward; 
who acts with clear comprehension when looking ahead and behind; 
who acts with clear comprehension when bending and stretching; 
who acts with clear comprehension when wearing robes and carrying 
the bowl; who acts with clear comprehension when eating, drinking, 
chewing and tasting; who acts with clear comprehension when 
defecating and urinating; who acts with clear comprehension when 
walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, talking and being silent.’ 
M.I,346. 
6  ‘Phenomena’ are the particular categories of The Four Noble Truths, The Five Hindrances, The Five Groups 
of Grasping, The Six Sense Bases and The Seven Factors of Awakening. For details of the practice see MN.10 
and	DN.22;	also	S.V,311-341,	for	in-	and	out-breathing	and	A.I,43-46	for	benefits	of	mindfulness of body.

189
Collectedness (Calm Meditation) 
The development of collectedness7 (samādhi) is usually explained as 
the	development	of	the	four	fine-material	absorptions,	which	require	
the suspension of the Five Hindrances and cultivation of the absorption 
factors (jhānanga).
In	developing	collectedness,	we	first	focus	attention	or	concentrate	 
on a meditation object, such as breathing. Through continuous 
focused attention, and through not giving attention to distractions, 
the	mind	gradually	becomes	more	settled,	centred	and	unified	with	the	
meditation object and, as a consequence, calmer. With some degree  
of perseverance (how long depends upon one’s individual character  
and degree of earnestness), most people can experience a quietening 
down of the usual incessant internal dialogue and increase in 
collectedness. For a few people, strong collectedness induces an 
inhibiting of distractions, formally called the Five Hindrances. 
Suspension of the Five Hindrances
Through the development of collectedness common mental 
disturbances are temporarily suspended, as concentrated attention  
is	absorbed	by	the	meditation	object:	
7	 Samādhi	is	usually	translated	as	‘concentration’,	however,	concentration	(or	one-pointedness)	 
is only one of the ‘absorption factors’ of samādhi,	as	mentioned	in	the	quotation.	I	thus	use	 
‘collectedness’ as a more comprehensive term for samādhi.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

190
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Giving up worldly desires, he abides with a mind freed from worldly 
desires, his mind is cleansed of them. Giving up ill-will and hatred  
... friendly and compassionate to all living beings, his mind is cleansed of 
ill-will and hatred. Giving up mental sluggishness and lethargy  
... perceiving light, mindful and clearly knowing, his mind is cleansed  
of mental sluggishness and lethargy. Giving up restlessness and worry 
... with an inwardly calm heart, his mind is cleansed of restlessness and 
worry. Giving up doubt, he abides having overcome doubt, without un- 
certainty as to wholesome things, his mind is cleansed of doubt.’ D.I,71.
Developing the Four Fine-Material Absorptions
Supported by the suspension of the hindrances, strong collectedness 
can then result in a state of deep focused absorption called jhāna, which 
can	be	refined	through	four	successive	degrees.	As	focussed	attention	or	
concentration increases, it is supported and strengthened by a number 
of associated mental qualities, formally referred to as the absorption 
factors (jhānanga).
‘When he sees that these Five Hindrances have been given up, gladness 
arises, greatly gladdened, joy arises, joyful, his body is calmed, with a 
calm body, he feels well-being, with well-being, his mind is collected.
Being thus aloof from sensuality, aloof from unskilful conditions,  
he enters and abides in the first absorption, which is accompanied  
by initial and sustained thought, and with joy and well-being born  
of seclusion. And with this joy and well-being born of seclusion,  
he fills, suffuses, overflows and pervades his entire body so that  
there is no part which is untouched by this joy and well-being  
born of seclusion ...

191
Again, with the cessation of initial and sustained thought, he  
enters and abides in the second absorption, inwardly tranquillized, 
one-pointed, without initial and sustained thought, and with joy and 
well-being born of collectedness. And with this joy and well-being born 
of collectedness, he fills, suffuses, overflows and pervades  
his entire body so that there is no part which is untouched by this  
joy and well-being born of collectedness ...
Again, with the fading out of joy, he abides with equanimity, mindful 
and clearly comprehending, experiencing bodily pleasure; he enters and 
abides in the third absorption, of which the noble ones say,  
“Being equanimous and mindful is a pleasurable abiding.” And  
with this [bodily] pleasure without joy, he fills, suffuses, overflows  
and pervades his entire body so that there is no part which is untouched 
by this [bodily] pleasure without joy ...
Again, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and with the previous 
passing away of ease and dis-ease, he enters and abides in the fourth 
absorption, which is neither painful nor pleasant, with mindfulness 
purified by equanimity. And he sits suffusing his body with the mind 
purified and cleansed, so that there is no part which is untouched  
by this purified and cleansed mind.’ D.I,73f.
Five more absorptions are sometimes mentioned in the texts; the 
four	immaterial	absorptions	–	infinite	space,	infinite	consciousness,	
nothingness and neither-perception-nor-non-perception, and the 
cessation-of-perception-and-feeling. The Buddha refers to the four 
fine-material	absorptions	as	‘pleasant abidings here and now’, and  
the four immaterial absorptions as ‘peaceful abidings’ (M.I,40f).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

192
BEYOND I-MAKING
Contemplation (Insight Meditation)
The development of advanced states of collectedness is not the end  
of the Path of Spiritual Practice. It is only through the penetrative insight 
produced by contemplation that liberation can be realized. Therefore, 
when the collected mind is ‘composed, purified, cleansed, passionless, 
without defilements, supple, workable, steady, imperturbable’, it is 
directed	to	the	destruction	of	the	outflows	(āsava)	and	directly	knows:	
‘This is dukkha’; ‘this is the cause of dukkha’; ‘this is the cessation of 
dukkha’; and, ‘this is the path to the cessation of dukkha’. It directly 
knows:	‘These are the outflows’; ‘this is the cause of the outflows’; ‘this 
is the cessation of the outflows’; and, ‘this is the path to the cessation of 
the outflows’. 
The Knowledge of Dukkha
A bhikkhu is encouraged to ‘make a thorough investigation’ 
(parivīmaṃsati)	(S.II,80f), or ‘engage in an inner exploration’ (antara 
sammasana) (S.II,107f) of ‘the diverse kinds of dukkha that arise in  
the world [headed by] ageing and death’, to discover its cause (nidāna) 
and origin (samudaya), what it is born from (jātika) and produced from 
(pabhava); and, with what existing does it come to be, and, with what not 
existing does it not come to be. The Buddha realised that the only way to 
completely resolve dukkha is to uproot the fundamental cause of dukkha, 
which is craving.
The Pali term ‘dukkha’ is not easily summarised in one word of English. 
However, although somewhat weak, the most expressive word might 
be	‘unsatisfactoriness’.	In	the	chapter	on	Nibbāna,	the	word	‘dukkha’ is 
described as unpleasant feeling (dukkha vedanā), and in the theme of

193
the Four Noble Truths with the wider connotation of unsatisfactoriness, 
imperfection	or	incompleteness.	A	comprehensive	definition	of	dukkha 
given	by	the	Buddha	covers	not	just	the	ordinary	sufferings	of	life,	such	
as sorrow and distress, but also includes some of the fundamental 
frustrations of living, such as ‘not getting what one wants’, and three  
of the great existential dilemmas of human existence – birth, ageing  
and death. 
‘And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of dukkha? Birth is dukkha, 
ageing is dukkha, death is dukkha; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief  
and distress are dukkha; association with the disliked is dukkha; 
separation from the liked is dukkha; not getting what one wants  
is dukkha; in short, the five groups of grasping are dukkha.’ D.II,305.
The Buddha discovered that the basic cause of dukkha is the three 
forms of craving, which are connected with delight and passion, and are 
nourished by whatever is endearing and agreeable. An initial thought 
would probably be that we just need to simply get rid of craving, however, 
this is nothing other than further craving, the craving for non-existence 
(of craving). We therefore need to be careful how we handle craving.
‘And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the origin of dukkha?  
It is that craving which gives rise to again-becoming, connected  
with delight and passion (nandirāga), finding delight in this here  
and that there; that is, craving for sense pleasures, craving for existence 
and craving for non-existence. And where, bhikkhus,  
does this craving arise and settle? Wherever in the world there  
is anything which is endearing (piya) and agreeable (sāta), there  
this craving arises and settles.’ D.II,308.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

194
BEYOND I-MAKING
The cessation of dukkha does indeed result from the cessation of  
craving, however the cessation of craving occurs through ‘relinquishing,  
giving up, release and renouncing’, which arises through fully knowing 
the disadvantage and ultimate impermanence of this craving.
‘And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the cessation of dukkha?  
It is that complete fading away and cessation of this craving,  
its relinquishing (cāgo), giving up (paṭinissagga), release (mutti)  
and renouncing (anālaya).’ D.II,310.
‘And what, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the path leading to the 
cessation of dukkha? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path, that is: right 
understanding, right aspiration, right speech, right action, right 
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right collectedness.’ D.II,311f.
Some people interpret the teaching on dukkha as pessimistic, since  
who wants to be reminded of their unhappiness. For others, the teaching 
brings great relief, since acknowledging dukkha can suddenly open 
up vast areas of life which had previously been ignored or denied. The 
Buddha	has	given	us	the	tools	to	realistically	relate	to	life’s	difficulties	
and to work through them.

195
The teaching on dukkha is actually a very realistic assessment of  
the human condition – a simple and honest acknowledgement  
of the inherent imperfection and unsatisfactoriness of human life.  
It shows that unsatisfactoriness is self-created through our own 
cravings, and can therefore be resolved. If we are blind to this 
fundamental reality of life’s imperfection, how can we understand  
what life is really about in all its dimensions? 
An acknowledgement of dukkha can be a powerful stimulus for spiritual 
practice, because it shakes us out of our complacency. Whether we 
realize	it	or	not,	we	spend	most	of	our	time	and	effort	trying	to	avoid	
dukkha. Due to the nature of habit, and what I call ‘existential inertia’, 
most of us simply drift along in life until we meet some crisis. Such a 
crisis could be a deterioration in health, passing of a loved one, or a loss of 
livelihood. When dukkha	crashes	into	our	life,	we	either	flee	from	it	using	
avoidance strategies – mood-altering substances, entertainment or 
psychological disturbances like depression, numbness, etc., or we come 
to terms with it. For discerning people, the only real solution is a spiritual 
one. Thus, at such a time of crisis, trust in a spiritual teaching can arise, 
which, if pursued, can give rise to many more positive qualities such as 
gladness, joy, tranquillity and well-being. These become a basis for Calm 
and Insight Meditation, which bear the fruit of letting go and liberation. 
Therefore, surprisingly, the seed of dukkha can bear the fruit of liberation.
‘Just as, when rain pours down upon a hilltop, the water runs with  
the slope filling the clefts, the gullies and the creeks; these, being 
filled, fill the streams ... the rivers ... the great ocean. In the same way 
ignorance is a condition for Willing and Habiting, Willing and Habiting 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE PROGRESSIVE PATH

196
BEYOND I-MAKING
are a condition for Bare Knowing ... dukkha is a condition for trust,  
trust is a condition for gladness, gladness is a condition for joy, joy  
is a condition for tranquillity, tranquillity is a condition for well-being  
... for collectedness … for knowledge and vision of things as they  
really are … disillusionment ... dispassion ... liberation, and liberation  
is a condition for knowledge of the ending of the outflows.’ S.II,32.
Cessation of the Outflows
You	may	recall	from	the	chapter	on	Nibbāna	that	the	Outflows	are	 
one of the basic categories of fuel for maintaining the ‘I-making’ process. 
They	are	often	identified	as	three	basic	outflows:	sensuality,	existence,	
and ignorance (S.IV,256;	A.III,414), but sometimes a fourth, views, is 
included	(D.II,81). You might also recognize that the basic three Outflows	
are the roots of human wanderings in renewed existences – fettered by 
ignorance and hindered by craving – since sensuality and existence are 
two kinds of craving.
‘And what kind of collectedness meditation, bhikkhus, if developed  
and made abundant, conduces to the destruction of the outflows?
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides observing the rise and fall of the 
Five Groups of Grasping, ‘This is Embodying, this is the arising of 
Embodying, this is the passing away of Embodying; this is Feeling ... 
Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... ; this is Bare Knowing, this is  
the arising of Bare Knowing, this is the passing away of Bare Knowing.’ 
This, bhikkhus, is collectedness meditation, developed and made 
abundant, which conduces to the destruction of the outflows.’ A.II,45.

197

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently, and bring attention to breathing.
•  When suitable, see if you can observe a view  
you have about the nature of yourself.
•  As you observe that view, see if you  
can imagine letting it go.
•  Are you able to release it?
•  Do you notice any emotional response  
to that release, or inability to release?
•  Do you notice any change in how you  
view your self?
•  When suitable, bring your attention  
back to the breath. Then open your  
eyes and relax your posture.

199
Views are a major theme of the Buddha’s teaching. Right View is the 
first	factor	of	the	Eightfold	Path	which	culminates	in	Right	Knowledge	
and Right Liberation (A.V,212). Wrong view is one of the Underlying 
Dispositions, one of the Outflows,	one	of	the	Graspings	and	one	of	 
the three types of perversion (vipallāsa) (A.II,52).
Self	views	have	two	aspects;	firstly,	the	identity	view	that	there	is	 
some kind of permanent, stable self and secondly, views about the 
nature	of	that	self,	which	serve	to	reinforce	the	first	view.
The Buddha generally dismissed views about the nature of the self,  
since they were mostly based on the wrong view that there is a 
permanent self. Self views cease when the true nature of self is  
realized	at	the	first	stage	of	awakening.
Views
Whether we are aware of it or not, most of us hold certain views  
which can be obstacles to spiritual practice. The Buddha’s approach  
to spiritual practice is aimed at direct realization rather than having  
a particular view or belief. Liberation is realized not through changing 
one’s view (to a more enlightened one!) but through a comprehensive 
FIFTEEN
Self Views
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

200
BEYOND I-MAKING
path of spiritual practice which undermines reliance on any view  
at all, so that we can directly see things as they really are. To help  
counter the tendency to hold on to obstructive views, the Buddha 
resorted to various approaches.
The Buddha was astute enough to recognize that most views are  
based on incomplete understanding or wrong understanding, and  
that holding on to views invariably leads to disputes. His analogy  
to explain this is a story of a king who had all the people in his realm  
who were born blind assembled together and introduced to an elephant. 
The	king	then	asked	them	what	an	elephant	was	like:	
‘Those blind people who had been shown the head of the elephant 
replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a water jar.” Those  
blind people who had been shown the ear of the elephant replied,  
“An elephant, your majesty, is just like a winnowing basket.” Those  
blind people who had been shown the tusk of the elephant replied,  
“An elephant, your majesty, is just like a ploughshare.” Those blind 
people who had been shown the trunk replied, “An elephant, your 
majesty, is just like a plough-pole.” Those blind people who had been 
shown the body replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a 
storeroom.” Those blind people who had been shown the foot replied, 
“An elephant, your majesty, is just like a post.” Those blind people who 
had been shown the hindquarters replied, “An elephant, your majesty, 
is just like a mortar.” Those blind people who had been shown the tail 
replied, “An elephant, your majesty, is just like a pestle.” Those blind 
people who had been shown the tuft at the end of the tail replied,  
“An elephant, your majesty, is just like a broom.” Saying “An elephant  
is like this, an elephant is not like that! An elephant is not like this,  
an elephant is like that!”, they fought each other with their fists.  
And the king was delighted [with the spectacle].’

201
The Buddha noted that ‘wanderers of other sects’ who held to  
different	views	quarrelled	amongst	themselves.	He	then	spoke	 
the	following	verse:
‘Some recluses and Brahmins, so called,
Are deeply attached to their own views;
People who only see one side of things
Engage in quarrels and disputes.’ Udāna	6.4,	(John	D.	Ireland	translation)
On several occasions the Buddha directed his listeners away from 
dependence upon the views of others, and encouraged people to enquire 
for	themselves:	
‘Now look, Kalamas, do not be led by oral sayings or tradition  
or hearsay; nor by the authority of scriptures; nor by reasoning  
or inference; nor by reasoned reflection; nor by accepting a view  
after pondering; nor by possible conformity; nor because we  
respect this teacher.
When, Kalamas, you know yourselves, ‘These things are unskilful, these 
things are blameworthy, these things are censured by the  
wise, these things, if undertaken, lead to harm and suffering’;  
then abandon them.’ A.I,188f;	cf.	A.II,191.
Right View
On	the	other	hand,	the	Buddha	saw	the	benefit	for	people	of	attending	 
to	Right	View	in	order	to	appreciate	the	value	of	initiative	and	effort.	 
He	therefore	established	Right	View	as	the	first	factor	of	the	Eightfold	
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

202
BEYOND I-MAKING
Path (M.I,288;	III,72;	A.I,269;	cf.	M.I,401ff). Right View is explained as being of 
two kinds – mundane or conventional Right View and supermundane or  
ultimate Right View, the Right View of one who has attained to the path.1
Mundane	Right	View	is	expressed	as:	
1.	 there	is	what	is	offered,	what	is	bestowed,	what	is	sacrificed;
2. there is fruit and result of good and bad actions;
3. there is this world and the other world;
4.	 there	is	mother	and	father	(to	be	respected);
5. there are beings born spontaneously;
6.  there are in this world samana-brahmana who follow the right path 
and right practice, who have realized by direct knowledge this world 
and the other world and make it known.2 M.I,288;	III,72.
Other references to what is Right View in the Pali Canon refer to that  
of the ‘noble disciple’, one who is at one of the stages of awakening.  
The most comprehensive of these is spoken by Venerable Sariputta  
and covers understanding the object, its origin, cessation and the  
path to its cessation of what is wholesome and unwholesome, and  
their roots; the four nutriments, the Four Noble Truths; the twelve  
links of Dependent Origination; and the Outflows	(M.I,46f.).3 The Right 
View of the noble disciple is elsewhere explained as knowing what 
are the wrong and right factors of the Eightfold Path (M.III,71ff); as 
understanding the Four Noble Truths (M.III,251); as fully understanding 
that the Five Groups of Grasping are impermanent, which then leads to 
disillusionment (nibbidā) and the wasting away of delight and passion  
resulting in liberation (S.III,51-2); or, seeing the six-fold sense sphere, 
contact, Bare Knowing and feeling as they really are, one is no longer 
1	 MN.9;	MN.117.	Also	see	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	notes,	MLDB.	n.114.
2	 For	an	explanation	of	some	of	these	views	see	MLDB.	n.425
3 These are listed in detail in Chapter 20.

203
inflamed	by	passion,	craving	is	abandoned	and	one	experiences	 
bodily and mental pleasure (M.III,288ff.).
Several	other	principles	the	Buddha	confirmed	as	true	are:	there	 
is	(effectiveness)	of	doing	(kiriya), there is causality (hetu-paccaya)  
(for	defilement	and	purification)	(M.I,406f). He stated that he taught  
the doctrine of kamma, of deeds (kiriya), of energy	(A.I,287). 
Right	View	arises	from	either	of	two	conditions:	the	words	of	another	 
or	appropriate	attention.	When	it	is	supported	by	the	five	factors	 
of virtue, learning, discussion, calm and insight, Right View results  
in liberation of mind (M.I,294).
The Buddha was pragmatic in his teaching of Dhamma principles. 
For example, in his explanation of the ‘incontrovertable teaching’, 
he outlines various wrong and right views, and, through reasoned 
discussion, he concludes that, although we do not yet know if the  
right view is truly right, there are better results in this life and the  
next life if one follows Right View (M.I,400f)4. In contrast to teachings 
which depend upon ‘faith, approval, tradition, careful consideration 
and acceptance of a view’, which may be either true or false (M.II,170f), 
the Buddha claims to be one teacher who has directly and uniquely 
experienced Dhamma for himself (M.II,211).
Although	Right	View	is	the	first	factor	of	the	Eightfold	Path,	the	 
Buddha also emphasized that right views are merely a means to  
an end, and not an end in themselves.
‘Bhikkhus, as clear and pure as this view is, if you adhere to it,  
take pride in it, treasure it, cherish it, would you then understand  
that the Dhamma has been taught as being like a raft, for the  
sake of crossing over, not for the sake of acquiring?’ 
‘No, Venerable.’ M.I,260
4	 M.60	cf.	MLDB.	n.620-1.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

204
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Bhikkhus, when you understand that the Dhamma has been taught  
as being like a raft [for the sake of crossing over, not for the sake  
of acquiring], you should give up the Dhamma, how much more  so what 
is not Dhamma.’ M.I,135. 
Views on the Nature of Self
As the Buddha recognized, views on the nature of self abound,  
so he also mentioned ways in which they can be undermined. 
The most comprehensive description of sixty-two views is in the 
Brahmajāla	Sutta	(DN.1). The Buddha dismisses these various views  
by saying that they are all conditioned by contact. He goes on to  
say	that	when	one:	
‘ … understands as they really are the arising and passing away  
of the six bases of contact, their gratification, disadvantage and escape, 
he knows what goes beyond all these views.’ D.I,45;	cf.	M.II,238.
The Ten Undeclared Views
Another set of views, which are indirectly about the nature of self,  
is the Ten Undeclared Views (listed in Chapter 13). When the Wanderer 
Vacchagotta asked the Buddha which of the Ten Undeclared Views  
he held, the Buddha responded by saying that he does not hold any  
of	these	views,	because	all	these	views	are:

205
‘… the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the agitation of views, 
the writhing of views, the fetter of views. It is connected with suffering, 
with vexation, turmoil and distress. It does not lead to disillusionment, 
to dispassion, to cessation, to calming, to direct knowledge, to 
awakening or to Nibbāna.’
Vacchagotta then enquires if the Buddha holds any views. The Buddha 
replies that he has relinquished views because he has ‘seen’ directly  
the	arising	and	cessation	of	the	Five	Groups:
‘Speculative views, Vaccha, have been put away by the Tathāgata.  
The Tathāgata, Vaccha, has seen this: thus is Embodying, thus  
is Embodying’s arising, thus is Embodying’s disappearance; thus  
is Feeling ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing,  
thus is Bare Knowing’s arising, thus is Bare Knowing’s disappearance.
‘Therefore, I say with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, 
relinquishing of all conceivings, all mental disturbances, all I-making, 
mine-making and underlying dispositions to conceit, the Tathāgata is 
liberated without grasping.’ M.I,485-6	abridged. 
The two views about the nature of self which the Buddha most criticised 
were the views of ‘eternalism’ (sassatavāda), that a permanent self 
persists after death, and ‘annihilationism’ (ucchedavāda), that there is 
the destruction of an existing self at death.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

206
BEYOND I-MAKING
Eternalist View
His main criticism of the eternalist view was the mistaken belief that 
there is a permanent self which persists after death. His point is clearly 
summed	up	in	this	passage:
‘There being a permanent self, bhikkhus, would there  
be for me what belongs to a permanent self?
Yes, Venerable.
Or, there being what belongs to a permanent self,  
would there be for me a permanent self?
Yes, Venerable.
Bhikkhus, since a permanent self and what belongs to a permanent  
self are not truly and reliably found, this standpoint for views, “The self 
and the world are the same; after death I shall be permanent, stable 
(dhuva), eternal (sassata), not subject to change; I shall endure for ever 
and ever.” Would it not be a wholly and completely foolish teaching?
What could it be, Venerable, but a wholly and completely foolish 
teaching?’	M.I,138.
Annihilationist View 
Similarly, the main criticism the Buddha had for the annihilationist  
view is that it is based upon the mistaken belief that there is a  
permanent self which is annihilated after death. The main point is that  
in order to annihilate a self one must believe in a self to annihilate, and 
are thus back to self again!

207
‘Those samana-brahmana who declare the annihilation (uccheda), 
destruction (vināsa), extermination (vibhava) of an existing being 
(satta), through fear of identity and disgust with identity, keep  
running around and circling around that very identity.’ M.II,232f.
Another	view	which	the	Buddha	refuted	is	that	of	‘Nibbāna	here	and	
now’. 
‘When he regards himself thus, “I am at peace, I have attained Nibbāna,  
I am without grasping,” that too is declared to be grasping.’ M.II,237.
Although this view arises from bona fide meditative experience,  
the Buddha pointed out such a conclusion is incomplete, since there are 
usually	more	refined	meditative	experiences.	Also,	the	statement	makes	
clear	that	the	meditator	has	identified	with	the	experience,	and	thus	has	
not realized the cessation of self identity.
Identity View
Grasping any of the Five Groups of Grasping is the cause of identity  
view (sakkāya diṭṭhi), ‘view of self’ (attānudiṭṭhi) (S.III,185f), and a range of 
other views about self (S.III,182f;	203ff). These all cease through realization 
of	the	first	stage	of	awakening,	that	of	the	stream-enterer,	which	occurs	
with the arising of the ‘vision of Dhamma’ (dhamma-cakkhu, lit. ‘eye of 
Dhamma’).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

208
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Then the Revered One gave Siha, the general, a graduated discourse 
on generosity, morality and heaven; he explained the disadvantage, 
degradation and defilement of sensual pleasures and the profit of 
renunciation. When the Revered One knew that the mind of Siha, the 
general, was receptive, pliable, free of hindrances, uplifted and trusting, 
he explained that Dhamma teaching praised by the Buddhas: dukkha, 
its origin, its cessation and the path. Then, just as a clean cloth free 
from stain would readily receive dye, so too, as Siha, the general, sat on 
that seat there arose the undefiled, stainless vision of the Dhamma: 
“Whatever is of a nature to arise, all that is of a nature to cease.” 
Then Siha, the general, became one who has seen Dhamma, reached the 
Dhamma, known the Dhamma, penetrated the Dhamma, over-come 
doubt, gone beyond uncertainty, attained self-confidence and become 
independent of others in the teacher’s dispensation.’ A.IV,186. 
The ‘vision of Dhamma’ is essentially a profound understanding of the 
truth of impermanence, which undermines any belief in a permanentlyabiding self. The cessation of identity view is also the cessation of all the 
various views that arise (S.IV,287). Identity View (sakkāya diṭṭhi), as well 
as View of self (attānudiṭṭhi) and Wrong View, are abandoned when one 
knows and sees (jānāti passati) the internal senses, the external sense 
bases, sense knowing, sense contact and the feeling arising from sense 
contact as impermanent (S.IV,147).

209
‘Bhikkhus, Embodying … Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting 
… Bare Knowing are impermanent. What is impermanent  
is unsatisfactory. What is unsatisfactory is not a permanent self.  
What is not a permanent self should be seen as it really is with right 
wisdom: “This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.”
When one sees this as it really is with right wisdom, one has no more 
views about the past … about the future … no more vigorous holding. 
With no more vigorous holding the mind detaches itself and is liberated 
from the Outflows without grasping.’	S.III,45f.
Upon	reflection,	it	seems	logical	that	all	the	views	we	have	about	our	self	
and the nature of that self depend upon the identity view that there is 
actually some permanent self which we can hang our views upon. Thus, 
the cessation of all views results from the cessation of identity-view, 
which	comes	about	through	the	cessation	of	identification	 
– the theme of the next three chapters.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently, and bring attention to breathing.
•  When the mind seems to be reasonably calm, 
bring	up	the	enquiry:	How	do	I	acknowledge	
my own identity – physically, or with 
feelings, or with emotional/mental activity?  
Or maybe a combination of these?
•  How do you feel about that sense of identity 
– comfortable, not so comfortable or fairly 
neutral?
•  Can you imagine letting go of that sense  
of identity – physically, or feelings, 
• or emotional/mental activity?
•  Does	one	form	of	identification	seem	 
easier to let go of than others?
• Is there some prominent emotion/mental  
 state that arises?
•  Can you sustain awareness of this? 
•  When suitable, bring your attention  
back to the breathing. 
•  Open your eyes and resume your activity.

211
It	is	through	identification	that	beings	continue	to	‘wander	on’	through	
countless renewed existences. This is because they are ‘hindered by 
ignorance and fettered by craving’. Therefore, the short version of the 
cessation	of	identification	is:
‘With the fading away of ignorance, friend, with the arising  
of true knowledge (vijjā), and the cessation of craving, renewal  
of being in future is not generated.’ M.I,294.
In	theory,	the	cessation	of	identification	is	simple	–	developing	true	
knowledge and relinquishing of craving – which means no longer 
regarding	the	objects	of	identification,	the	Five Groups of Grasping  
or the Sense Bases, as a permanent self in any way. In practice, however, 
the	situation	is	somewhat	more	complex,	since	identification	is	
extensive, multifaceted and deeply-rooted. Therefore the Buddha 
recommended wide-ranging and comprehensive means to assist 
in the realization of the cessation of the ‘I-making’ processes at all 
levels	of	identification.	They	necessarily	involve	a	number	of	carefullycrafted methods and various modes of contemplation to relinquish the 
SIXTEEN
Identification	|	Ignorance:	Theory
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

212
BEYOND I-MAKING
active processes of ignorance and craving. Fortunately, there are many 
discourses in the Pali Canon which explain how this is accomplished, 
usually contrasting an unawakened person, experiencing the disturbing 
results	of	identification,	with	the	experience	of	the	noble	disciple	who	
does	not	engage	in	identification	and	is	at	peace.
Dimensions of Spiritual Practice Leading  
to the Cessation of Identification
Some people may have an initial insight into the reality of no permanent 
self, but the deeply-penetrating experience of the complete  
cessation of ‘I-making’ generally proceeds in stages, as spiritual practice 
deepens and matures. 
The main focus of practices which lead to the cessation of ‘I-making’ 
is	on	the	cessation	of	identification.	As	a	means	of	explanation,	I	
designate	three	dimensions	of	this	spiritual	practice:	de-identification;	
non-identification;	and	dis-identification.	Ideally,	these	should	be	
developed in a well-integrated way so that they support the cessation 
of the I-making process at its various levels. Otherwise, there is the 
danger of a disconnect at some level. For example, in the present time 
people have access to a variety of spiritual exercises. Some of these are 
specifically	aimed	at	the	dis-identification	level.	However,	if	someone	
developing these exercises has not established a way of life supporting 
de-identification,	then	their	everyday	life	can	be	at	odds	with	their	
spiritual exercises. One result of this is ‘spiritual bypassing’1.
1	 See	for	example:	Spiritual Bypassing by Robert Augustus Masters, North Atlantic Books, Berkeley.

213
De-Identification
The	process	of	‘de-identification’	is	facilitated	by	living	a	life	which	helps	 
to	de-emphasize	self-affirmation	and	self-referencing,	in	contrast	to	
our usual mode of living based upon self-centredness. People committed 
to religious principles usually follow this way of life, even though they 
may	not	know	that	the	ultimate	purpose	is	selflessness.
For	Buddhists,	‘de-identification’	occurs	through	a	lifestyle	modelled	 
on the three ‘bases of meritorious activity (puñña-kiriya-vatthu)’ 
consisting of generosity, morality and meditation (A.IV,241). An extension 
of	this	is	the	development	of	the	Eightfold	Path,	a	refinement	 
of which is outlined in the chapter on the Progressive Path. 
Another	model	is	the	Ten	Pārami,	the	ten	‘perfections’	which	the	Buddha	
is said to have developed over many lifetimes.2 In the Buddhist tradition, 
these	have	become	the	ideal	model	of	selfless	virtues	which	eventually	
leads	to	Buddhahood.	The	ten	virtues	are:	generosity,	morality,	
renunciation, wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, resolution, 
friendliness and equanimity.
Non-Identification
While	de-identification	occurs	subtly	and	often	unconsciously3,  
non-identification	is	making	a	conscious	effort	to	change	our	habitual	
self-referencing	in	order	to	stop	nurturing	or	fuelling	identification.	
The	first	stage	of	developing	non-identification	is	clearly	knowing	the	
real	purpose	of	spiritual	practice	and	how	identification	is	created.	The	
second stage is learning to ‘starve’ our habitual I-making responses of 
nourishment by no longer feeding them. 
2	 Mentioned	in	two	later	works	of	the	Pali	Canon,	the	Buddhavaṁsa	and	Cariyāpiṭaka.
3	 That	is,	many	people	do	not	know	the	‘de-identifying’	effect	of	skilful	actions,	believing	only	that	they	will	
lead to a heavenly rebirth. That is, they do not understand that ‘a heavenly rebirth’ is attained because one is 
more	dis-identified	with	the	‘earthly	self’!
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

214
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
personal story
One example from my own experience along these lines was when 
I was Abbot of Bodhinyanarama Monastery in New Zealand. At one 
stage, while dealing with administrative issues with the monastery 
committee,	I	would	often	receive	baffling	emails	from	one	of	the	
members. My speculations about these emails inclined along the lines 
that there were some emotional issues involved but, being an intelligent 
and well-educated person, the member was attempting  
to present business in what was perceived as a reasonable way.  
One day in particular, I was so confused by the communication that  
my mind was spinning. In such turmoil I decided to go for a walk,  
to get grounded in the body and clear my head.
As I trekked up the steep pathway through the monastery forest,  
I recognized that my problem was twofold – an inability to perceive 
what the committee member was trying to communicate and  
not knowing how to respond. In Buddhist terms, these two issues,  
i.e., perceiving and thinking of a response, are saññā and saṇkhārā. I 
then	recalled	one	of	the	reflections	we	chant	every	morning	which	says:	
‘perceiving is impermanent, perceiving is not a permanent  
self; thinking is impermanent, thinking is not a permanent self’. 
Reflecting	upon	these	truths	–	that	perceiving	and	thinking	are	
constantly-changing and uncontrollable – my mind settled and relaxed 
in	the	realization	of	my	‘self’	limitations:	I	realized	that	 
the faculties of perceiving and thinking are not ultimately under  
my control; and at some later date they will change, and perhaps 
function	more	efficiently.	I	was	then	able	to	let	go	and	stopped	
identifying the situation as my personal problem.

215
For example, when we notice thoughts of ‘I’ or ‘me’ arise, we can step  
back and observe the process of thought, and maybe disengage from  
personalization.	More	formally,	when	we	understand	that	identification	
is the grasping of any of the Five Groups as self, we can try to relate 
to any of the Five Groups more objectively and less subjectively – it is 
just Embodying, Feeling, Recognizing, Willing and Habiting, and Bare 
Knowing impersonally functioning – rather than allow our relationship 
to the Five Groups to continue feeding I-making.
Dis-Identification
For	the	unawakened	person,	much	identification	continues	
unconsciously through the activity of ignorant habits. To uproot these 
deeper	levels	of	identification,	it	is	usually	necessary	to	actively	engage	in	
contemplations	that	support	dis-identification.	
What	is	required	for	dis-identification	to	really	take	effect	is	a	thorough	
investigation of one’s own experience in order to ‘see as it really is with 
right wisdom’ (yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati) (S.III,80), or  
‘fully understand as it really is’ (yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti) (S.III,13). This, of 
course, requires more than intellectual or conceptual understanding, 
since	conceptualizing	is	also	an	aspect	of	identification	and	is	therefore	
compromised and limited. Conceptualizing is only an abstract 
perception	of	experience,	whereas	identification	inhabits	the	very	core	of	
our immediate experience.
Therefore,	what	is	most	beneficial	is	the	development	of	meditation	
exercises:	firstly,	exercises	in	Calm	Meditation	to	quieten	the	
conceptualizing activity; and secondly, exercises in Insight Meditation 
that hone in from various angles and directions to help clarify, 
undermine	and	ultimately	uproot	the	identification	process.	In	effect,	
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

216
BEYOND I-MAKING
we apply the meditative exercises to deeply contemplate our immediate 
experience beneath conceptualizing to know and see the forces at work 
creating the ‘I’, which we then can release for liberation.
This	section	on	the	cessation	of	identification	is	the	longest	and	most	
extensive in this book, as it gives a very detailed explanation of the 
specific	form	of	meditation	practice	which	the	Buddha	outlined.	 
Thus, in order to manage the material in a satisfactory way, I have divided 
it into three chapters. In these chapters I have presented the means of 
dealing	with	the	cessation	of	the	active	processes,	firstly,	of	Ignorance, 
and then Craving, in direct relation to the objects of identity, the Five 
Groups of Grasping and the Six Sense Bases. This is in contrast  
to dealing with processes and objects separately, as used in Chapters  
10	to	12	on	the	arising	of	identification.	
Also,	since	the	first	section	of	the	cessation	of	ignorance	is	so	long,	 
I have divided it into two chapters. This chapter, Chapter 16, will focus 
on the theory underpinning the meditation exercises the Buddha gave, 
while	Chapter	17	will	focus	on	the	practice	of	the	meditation	exercises	
themselves. In this way, if the theory becomes too convoluted for  
you,	it	is	possible	to	skip	to	Chapter	17	for	the	meditation	exercises	
proper,	with	a	short	summary	of	the	theory.	Chapter	18	will	continue	the	
theme	of	the	cessation	of	identification	with	the	focus	on	the	cessation	
of craving.
In	approaching	the	subject	of	the	cessation	of	identification	in	this	 
way, I hope the explanation is easier to understand.

217
SECTION 1: The Cessation of Ignorance
Part 1: The Theory
As we saw in Chapter 11, ignorance is extremely deep, all-encompassing 
and self-perpetuating. However, it can be resolved through ‘the arising 
of true knowledge (vijjā)’. True knowledge is the knowledge (ñāṇa) of the 
Four Noble Truths 
(S.V,429f). Ironically, this is equivalent to saying that 
true knowledge is knowing ignorance, since the Second and Third Noble 
Truths are expressed through the Conditional Causality formula, which is 
headed by ignorance. 
Our usual dualistic, conceptual thinking assumes that the cessation 
of ignorance comes about through countering it with its opposite. 
However, the Buddha’s approach – following the principle of the Four 
Noble Truths – is that, if you wish to resolve something, you have to 
thoroughly study that issue in order to discover its cause. Only when 
the cause is completely removed will the issue be ultimately resolved. 
Thus, the cessation of ignorance is accomplished through the careful 
investigation of ignorance itself (which results in true knowledge).
Elsewhere in the Pali Canon true knowledge (vijjā) is variously  
defined
	
as,
	
or
	
arises
	
from:	
1.
  clearly kno
wing (pajānāti) the Five Groups of Grasping, their origin,
their cessation and the path to their cessation (S.III,163); 
2.
  clearly kno
wing as it really is the Five Groups of Grasping subject to
arising, subject to decay (vaya) and subject to arising and decay as
they really are (S.III,171);
3.	 	clearly
	
knowing
	
as
	
it
	
really
	
is
	
the
	
gratification,
	
disadvantage	
and escape fr
om the Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,174);
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE: 	 THEORY

218
BEYOND I-MAKING
4.	 	clearly	knowing	as	it	really	is	the	origin	and	passing	away,	
gratification,	disadvantage	and	escape	from	the	Five	Groups	 
of Grasping (S.III,174);
5.  knowing and seeing the internal and external sense bases, sense 
knowing, sense contact and feeling as impermanent (S.IV,31;50).
A	number	of	different	forms	of	knowing	or	understanding,	from	the	
root jān or ñā, are used throughout the Pali Canon in various contexts. 
As explained in the chapter on the Five Groups of Grasping, they include 
two	functional	forms	of	knowing:	viññāṇa (bare knowing) and saññā 
(associative knowing). 
There is ‘knowing’ (jānaṃ, jānati) or ‘clear knowing’ (pajānāti), and there 
is ‘knowledge’ (ñāṇa), mostly used in the phrase ‘knowledge and vision’ 
(ñāṇa-dassana). There is also a possible progressive development of 
knowing and understanding such that it becomes ‘thoroughly knowing’ 
and	‘full	understanding’.	In	regard	to	the	cessation	of	identification,	the	
two forms most often mentioned are ‘thoroughly knowing’ (abhijāna) 
and ‘higher knowledge’ for abhiññā (abhi + ñā), and ‘fully understand’ 
(parijāna) and ‘full understanding’ for pariññā (pari + ñā).4
‘The wasting of passion, the wasting of aversion, the wasting  
of delusion; this is called full understanding (pariññā).’ S.III,27.
4	 At	 CDB.	p.1052,	n.42		Bhikkhu	Bodhi	points	out	that	in	the	Pali	suttas	the	forms	of	abhijāna are used for 
both	the	disciple	at	the	first	three	levels	of	awakening	(sekha) and the arahant, while the forms of parijāna are 
only used for the arahant. (cf. MLDB. p.1200, n.200).

219
The form of developed knowledge most often mentioned in the Pali 
Canon is paññā (pa + ñā) meaning ‘knowing to a marked degree’ 
or ‘wisdom’, as in the phrase ‘see as it really is with right wisdom’ 
(yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passati) (S.III,80). One is wise when they 
‘possess wisdom regarding the arising and passing away which is noble 
and insightful, leading to the wasting away of dukkha. They clearly know 
as it really is [the Four Noble Truths].’ (S.V.199; cf. M.I,356). Three kinds of 
paññā	are	distinguished:	wisdom	based	upon	thinking	(cintā-mayāpaññā); wisdom based upon learning (suta-mayā-paññā); and, wisdom 
based upon meditation (bhāvanā-mayā-paññā) (D.III,219). Wisdom is one 
of the three summaries of the Eightfold Path as Right View and Right 
Aspiration. It is also one of the Five Powers and one  
of	the	Ten	Perfections.	Also	significant	is	the	perfect	knowledge	 
(aññā) of the Arahant.
Knowing and Understanding as ‘Seeing’
In the Pali Canon, seeing (passaṃ or dassana) is often used in place of 
knowing and understanding. There are numerous discourses where  
the Buddha directly states the facts of reality, for example that the  
Five Groups of Grasping are impermanent (S.III,19), concluding with  
the	phrase:	‘Thus seeing (evaṃ passaṃ), bhikkhus, the instructed noble 
disciple …’.	The	phrase:	‘regarding,	seeing	or	perceiving	as	 
it really is’ (yathābhūtaṃ samanupassati)	[i.e.,	the	impermanence	 
of Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,52)]	is	used	often,	and	there	are	also	 
the	phrases:	‘seeing rightly’ (sammā passaṃ)	[i.e.,	the	Five	Groups	 
of Grasping as impermanent (S.III,51)]	and	‘seeing things as they  
really are’ (yathābhūtassa dassana) (S.III,49). 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

220
BEYOND I-MAKING
In a similar vein, there is also ‘looking at, observing, contemplating’ 
(anupassati), which is used in the development of mindfulness, and  
of course there is the most exceptional form of seeing, which is vipassanā, 
clear seeing or insight.
Both references to understanding are combined in the frequently used 
phrase:	‘knowing and seeing as it really is’ (jānaṃ passaṃ yathābhūtaṃ) 
(M.III,288) and ‘knowledge and vision’ (ñāṇa-dassana). The most 
comprehensive	use	of	‘knowledge	and	vision’	is	in	the	Buddha’s	first	
discourse, the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta (S.V,420f) where three 
‘phases’ of knowledge are distinguished.5 
Thus, ‘knowing and seeing’ and ‘knowledge and vision’ are a 
comprehensive type of knowing – comprehensive in depth rather 
than extent. It is not merely intellectual knowledge, but a realization 
knowledge to be fully understood, as well as a retrospective knowledge, 
that has been fully understood. It was this type of knowing that allowed 
the arising of ‘vision, knowledge, wisdom, true knowledge and light’ 
(S.V,422) during the Buddha’s awakening. Knowledge and vision, as well 
as ‘knowing and seeing’, express a complete form of understanding, 
‘knowing’ providing the cognitive side and ‘seeing’ the experiential side. 
As it Really is (yathābhūtaṃ)
The Pali word yathābhūtaṃ, comes from yathā, meaning ‘as, like, in 
relation to, according to, just as’, and bhūtaṃ, meaning either what  
has ‘become’ or what is ‘real’ or ‘true’. The word has been researched by 
Bhikkhu Analayo (2012,	p.176-8)	distinguishing	three	designations:	‘as	it	
has come to be’; ‘according to reality’ or ‘truthfully’; and, ‘as it really is’. 
5	 Bhikkhu	Bodhi	(CDB.	p.1962,	n.382)	summarizes	them	as:	‘(i)	the	knowledge	of	each	truth	(saccañāṇa), 
e.g.,	“This	is	the	noble	truth	of	suffering”;	(ii)	the	knowledge	of	the	task	to	be	accomplished	regarding	each	
truth (kiccañāṇa),	e.g.,	“This	noble	truth	of	suffering	is	to	be	fully	understood	[pariññeyya]”;	and	(iii)	the	
knowledge of accomplishment regarding each truth (katañāṇa),	e.g.,	“This	noble	truth	of	suffering	has	been	
fully understood.”’

221
Supports for True Knowledge, Knowing and Understanding
True Knowledge, knowing and understanding do not, of course, simply 
arise by themselves, but function within the principles of cause and 
effect.	At	a	number	of	places	in	the	Pali	Canon	a	sequence	of	causal	
conditions is outlined leading to knowledge and vision of the way things 
are, and liberation. The short version begins with virtuous conduct being 
the cause (upanisā) of collectedness, collectedness being the cause of 
knowledge and vision of the way things are, knowledge and vision of 
the way things are being the cause of disillusionment and dispassion, 
and disillusionment and dispassion being the cause of knowledge and 
vision of liberation. This sequence is compared to a tree with branches 
and foliage where its shoots, bark, softwood and heartwood all grow 
to fullness (A.III,20). The expanded version proceeds from virtuous 
conduct conditioning freedom from remorse, freedom from remorse 
conditioning gladness (pāmojja) … joy (pīti) … tranquillity … well-being 
(sukha) … collectedness … knowledge and vision of the way things 
are … disillusionment (nibbidā) … dispassion (virāga) … conditioning 
knowledge and vision of liberation (A.V,311ff;	cf.	A.V,1-2). Another sequence 
begins with appropriate attention (yoniso manasikāra) conditioning 
gladness … as above … dispassion conditioning liberation (D.III,288).
These causal conditions amount to a comprehensive path of spiritual 
development,	as	outlined	in	Chapter	14.	There	are,	however,	a	number	
of ways spiritual development is presented in the Pali Canon with 
certain factors specially mentioned as supporting knowledge and 
understanding:
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

222
BEYOND I-MAKING
1 | Collectedness (samādhi)
‘Bhikkhus, develop collectedness (samādhi). A bhikkhu who is collected 
clearly knows things as they really are (yathābhūtaṃ pajānāti). And what 
do they know as it really is? The origin and passing away of Embodying 
… Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … the origin and 
passing away of Bare Knowing.’6 S.III,13f. 
A similar statement is made regarding seclusion (paṭisallāna) (S.III,15), 
which is the basis for developing meditation. 
2 | Appropriate Attention
‘Bhikkhus, attend appropriately (yoniso manasikarotha) to Embodying. 
See as it really is (yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha) the impermanence  
of Embodying … Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting …  
Bare Knowing …. ’ S.III,52.
One	skilful	mental	quality	the	Buddha	described	as	significant	in	the	 
mental training of meditation and fundamental to the path to liberation  
is wise or appropriate attention (yoniso manasikāra). Attention 
(manasikāra) is a mental function present in every act of knowing,  
but	what	we	attend	to	and	how	we	attend	have	a	strong	effect	upon	 
the mind. Focussed attention can lead to ‘one-pointedness of mind’, one 
of the factors of absorption, while directing attention to the four subjects 
of mindfulness can give rise to contemplating (anupassati).
It is extremely useful to transform functional attention into ‘wise  
or appropriate (yoniso) attention’. In general, appropriate attention is 
giving attention to whatever is skilful (kusala) or supports skilful mental 
factors, while inappropriate attention gives rise to what is unskilful. It  
is through knowing and seeing appropriate attention and inappropriate 
6	 At	S.V,414	the	things	as	they	really	are	which	are	known	are	the	four	Noble	Truths;	at	S.IV,143f	the	six	
internal sense bases, six external sense bases, sense knowing, sense contact, feeling as impermanent 
‘become manifest’ as they really are.

223
attention that there is wasting away of the Outflows:
‘Bhikkhus, when one gives attention appropriately, unarisen  
Outflows do not arise and arisen Outflows pass away.’ M.I,7.
Thus it is appropriate to give attention to whatever does not give rise  
to the Outflows	of	sensuality,	ill-will	and	ignorance,	and	whatever	causes	
them to pass away. For example, rather than give attention  
to speculations about yourself (i.e., ignorance), it is appropriate to  
give attention to the Four Noble Truths (M.I,8f).
Appropriate attention is instrumental in ‘seeing as it really is 
(yathābhūtaṃ samanupassatha)’ the impermanence of the Five Groups 
of Grasping (S.III,52) and the Sense Bases (S.IV,142). Appropriate attention 
was key to the Buddha’s (and the previous six Buddhas’) ‘realization 
by wisdom (paññāya abhisamayo)’ of the process of Dependent 
Origination (S.II,6f). It is an important factor in de-nourishing the Five 
Hindrances (S.V,85;105) and developing the Seven Factors of Awakening 
(S.V,65f;79;84;101;104), in developing the Eightfold Path (S.V,31;35f), and in 
the arising of Right View (M.I,294). It is also a chief factor of skilful (kusala) 
states (S.V,91; A.I,13) and doing good kamma (A.V,87).
3 | Aids to Awakening (bodhipakkhiyā dhammā)7
Several	of	the	Aids	to	Awakening	are	specifically	mentioned	 
as	supporting	knowledge	and	vision:
7	 Aids	to	Awakening	(bodhipakkhiyā dhammā)	are	the	collection	of	the	37	spiritual	qualities	under	seven	
categories which are mentioned at various places in the Pali Canon. These include the Four Attendings with 
Mindfulness, the Four Right Strivings, the Four Bases for Spiritual Power, the Five Spiritual Faculties, the Five 
Spiritual Powers, the Seven Factors of Awakening and the Eightfold Path. For a detailed analysis see CDB, 
p.1485f.	
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

224
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Seven Factors of Awakening
‘Here, Prince, a bhikkhu develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, 
based upon seclusion, dispassion and cessation, maturing in letting  
go (vossagga). With a mind that has developed the awakening factor  
of mindfulness, he knows and sees things as they really are. This indeed, 
Prince, is the cause, this the condition for knowledge and vision. In this 
way, knowledge and vision have cause and condition.
And further, Prince, a bhikkhu develops the awakening factor 
of investigation of dhammas … energy … joy … tranquillity … 
collectedness … equanimity, based upon seclusion, dispassion and 
cessation, maturing in letting go. With a mind that has developed the 
awakening factor of equanimity, he knows and sees things as they really 
are. This indeed, Prince, is the cause, this the condition for knowledge 
and vision. In this way knowledge and vision have cause and condition.’ 
S.V,128.
On the contrary, the mind obsessed with any of the Five Hindrances is the 
cause and condition for the lack of knowledge and vision (S.V,127).
The Four Attendings With Mindfulness8
‘Here, bhikkhus, one abides contemplating (anupassati) the body 
as body, earnestly, clearly comprehending and mindful, having put 
away covetousness and distress concerning the world. As one abides 
contemplating the body as body, the body is fully understood. Since the 
body is fully understood, the Deathless (amata) is realized.
8	 For	this	rendering	see	Analayo	(2000),	p.29.

225
Here, bhikkhus, one abides contemplating feeling as feeling, … states 
of mind as states of mind, … phenomena as phenomena, earnestly, 
clearly comprehending and mindful, having put away covetousness and 
distress concerning the world. As one abides contemplating phenomena 
as phenomena, phenomena are fully understood. Since phenomena are 
fully understood, the Deathless is realized.’ S.V,182.
The Eightfold Path
‘When a bhikkhu develops and cultivates the Noble Eightfold Path,  
he fully understands by direct knowledge (abhiññā pariññeyyā) those  
things which are to be fully understood by direct knowledge; he 
abandons by direct knowledge those things which are to be abandoned 
by direct knowledge; he realizes by direct knowledge those things which 
are to be realized by direct knowledge; he develops by direct knowledge 
those things which are to be developed by direct knowledge.
And what, bhikkhus, are those things to be fully understood by direct 
knowledge? It is to be answered: the Five Groups of Grasping ….
And what, bhikkhus, are those things to be abandoned by direct 
knowledge? Ignorance and craving for existence. …
And what, bhikkhus, are those things to be realized by direct 
knowledge? True knowledge (vijjā) and liberation. …
And what, bhikkhus, are those things to be developed by direct 
knowledge? Calm and Insight. … ’ S.V,52f;	cf.	A.II,246f.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

226
BEYOND I-MAKING
Developing	the	Eightfold	Path	leads	to	Nibbāna	and	the	realization	
of Arahantship. It facilitates the abandoning of passion, hatred and 
delusion; the Outflows;	ignorance;	craving;	the	Floods;	and	grasping	
(S.IV,252f). It also leads to full understanding of feeling; existence; dukkha; 
and identity (S.IV,255f).
Developing True Knowledge to Fruition
In order for true knowledge, knowing, understanding and seeing  
as it really is to reach fruition, it is important for contemplative 
meditation	to	be	applied:
a. with a particular method, 
b.	in	a	specific	mode,	and
c. towards particular objects.
Fortunately, we do not need to investigate all aspects of reality.  
Once the Buddha was staying in a forest and took up a handful of leaves.  
He asked the bhikkhus which they thought were more numerous, the 
leaves in his hand or those in the forest. When they replied that the 
leaves in the forest were more numerous, the Buddha responded: 
‘Even so, bhikkhus, those things I have known directly are numerous, 
while those I have taught are few. And why, bhikkhus, have I not taught 
them? Because they are not beneficial, not relevant to the basis of 
the spiritual life, and do not lead to disillusionment, to dispassion, to 
cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbāna. 
Therefore I have not taught them.

227
And what, bhikkhus, have I taught? I have taught, ‘This is dukkha’;  
I have taught, ‘This is the origin of dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the 
cessation of dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the path leading to the 
cessation of dukkha’. And why, bhikkhus, have I taught this? Because 
this is beneficial, relevant to the basis of the spiritual life, and leads 
to disillusionment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct 
knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbāna. Therefore I have taught this.’ 
S.V,438.
a. Methods of Contemplation
In many discourses of the Pali Canon, it is simply stated that one ‘clearly 
knows (pajānāti)’, (for example, the unskilful (akusala) and the skilful, 
plus their root	(M.I,46f)), or that one ‘fully understands (parijānāti)’.
Elsewhere,	specific	ways	to	contemplate	are	described.	Thus,	a	bhikkhu 
is encouraged to ‘make a thorough investigation (parivīmaṃsati)’ 
(S.II,80f), or ‘engage in an inner exploration (antara sammasana)’	(S.II,107f) 
of ‘the diverse kinds of dukkha that arise in the world [headed by] ageing 
and death’, to discover its cause (nidāna) and origin (samudaya), what it is 
born from (jātika) and produced from (pabhava); and, with what existing 
does it come to be, and, with what not existing does it not come to be.
The instructions for the development of mindfulness encourage the 
student to ‘look at, observe, or contemplate (anupassati)’ the four 
objects of body, feelings, states of mind and phenomena in order to 
clearly see (vipassanā). One abides contemplating these four themes 
‘earnestly, clearly comprehending and mindful, having put away 
covetousness and distress concerning the world’, as well as abiding 
‘independent, not clinging to anything in the world’ (M.I,55-6).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

228
BEYOND I-MAKING
One of the Seven Factors of Awakening is investigation of phenomena 
(dhamma-vicaya),	which	is	defined	as:	‘he examines it with wisdom 
(pavicinati), investigates it thoroughly (pavicarati), tests it all around 
(parivīmaṃsati)’ (S.V,68).
When the Seven Factors of Awakening are developed ‘based 
upon seclusion, dispassion and cessation, ripening in letting go 
(vivekanissitaṃ viragānissitaṃ nirodhanissitaṃ vossaggapariṇāmiṃ)’  
they ‘complete true knowledge and deliverance (vijjā vimutti)’ (M.III,88). 
When the Seven Factors of Awakening, the Five Spiritual Faculties, the 
Five Spiritual Powers or the Eightfold Path are likewise developed, they 
lead to the Unconditioned (S.IV,365ff).
From a peaceful state of mind, if one attends to the ‘cessation of identity 
(sakkāya-nirodha)’ or to the ‘breaking up of ignorance (avijjāppabheda)’, 
success is only attained when the mind ‘springs forward to it, finds 
satisfaction in it, settles upon it and is drawn to it’ (A.II,166).
b. Modes, or Ways of Contemplating
Following	the	Buddha’s	direction	as	noted	above,	we	find	throughout	the	
Pali Canon a number of modes of application as to how to develop  
true knowledge9.	These	are	beneficial	ways	to	contemplate	specific	
themes, usually sequentially. Completing this progression is most  
important, since liberation results only through developing the  
mode of application to its end. For example, many people – religious,  
philosophers, artists – have made impressive studies of 
unsatisfactoriness, but few have investigated the cause of 
unsatisfactoriness, not to mention investigating the last two stages 
of cessation and developing a path of practice to the cessation of 
unsatisfactoriness.
9 Bhikkhu Bodhi (CDB. p.36f) provides an extensive explanation of what he calls ‘template parallels’ which 
follow	‘the	same	formal	pattern	but	which	differ	in	the	content	to	which	this	pattern	is	applied’.

229
Leaving aside various permutations, the three main modes of 
contemplation	to	develop	true	knowledge	are:	
1.	That	based	upon	the	Noble	Truths:10
In its simplest form, this is clearly knowing (pajānāti) the subject, its 
cause, its cessation and the path to cessation. In its most developed 
form	this	becomes:	knowing	the	subject,	giving	up	its	cause,	realizing	its	
cessation, and developing the path to cessation.
‘The noble truth of unsatisfactoriness is to be fully understood,  
the noble truth of the origin of unsatisfactoriness is to be given up; 
the noble truth of the cessation of unsatisfactoriness is to be realized 
(sacchikātabba); the noble truth of the path to the cessation of 
unsatisfactoriness is to be developed.’ S.V,436.
2. The Three Characteristics (or one of them) – impermanence, 
unsatisfactoriness, and not a permanent self.11
Venerable	Sariputta:	‘Friend Kotthita, a virtuous bhikkhu should 
appropriately attend to the Five Groups of Grasping as impermanent, 
unsatisfactory, a disease, a boil, a dart, as misfortune, as an affliction, 
as alien, as breaking up, as empty, as not a permanent self. … he may 
realize for himself the fruit of stream-entry.’ S.III,167f.
10	This	mode	is	used	regarding:	unsatisfactoriness	(S.V,429f);	the	Three	Outflows	(M.I,55);	the	three	Feelings	
(S.IV,204f);	the	Five Groups of Grasping	(S.III,13f);	twelve	factors	of	Dependent	Origination	(M.I,49ff)	and	
eleven	factors	of	Dependent	Origination	(S.II,57f);	and	the	four	nutriments	(M.I,47f).
11	 This	mode	is	used	regarding:	the	Five Groups of Grasping	(S.III,19-25)	&	(S.III,43-46);	the	six	internal	
and external sense bases (S.IV,1-6); feelings (S.IV,211f); six internal sense bases, six external sense bases, 
sense knowing, sense contact, feeling, perception, volition, craving, (six) elements, Five Groups of Grasping 
(S.II,244-253);	six	bases	of	contact	(S.IV,167);	and	all	states	of	suffering	(S.IV,188).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

230
BEYOND I-MAKING
3.	Gratification,	Disadvantage	and	Escape12  
‘When beings have directly known as it really is gratification as 
gratification, the disadvantage as disadvantage, the escape as escape … 
[regarding the Five Groups of Grasping], they have escaped from  
the world … have become detached from it, released from it, and  
they abide with a mind unrestricted.’ S.III,31.
The well-being and ease (sukha somanassa) that arise in dependence 
on the Five Groups of Grasping	is	the	gratification	(assāda) in them; that 
they are impermanent, dukkha and subject to change is the disadvantage 
(ādīnava) in them; and the removal and giving up of desire and passion 
(chandarāga) is the escape (nissaraṇa) from them (S.III,102f). 
Sometimes the formula is extended to include ‘the origin (samudaya) 
and passing away (atthaṅgama)’ (i.e.,	at	S.III,82). This mode and the  
Four Noble Truths mode are combined at S.III,61f.
Throughout the Pali Canon, the most frequently used mode of 
contemplation for developing true knowledge is the Four Noble 
Truths	mode,	beginning	with	the	Buddha’s	first	teaching.	The	Three	
Characteristics mode is also frequently used, mostly as a ‘fast-track’ 
teaching for devoted disciples, for example, as the second teaching  
to	the	Buddha’s	first	five	disciples.	The	Gratification,	Disadvantage	 
and Escape mode occurs less frequently, but features prominently  
in various teachings.
12	 This	mode	is	used	regarding:	three	feelings	(S.IV,220);	five	feelings/faculties	(S.V,207f);	the	four	elemental	
qualities	of	earth,	fire,	water,	and	air	(S.II,173);	the	Five Groups of Grasping	(S.III,27f);	the	six	internal	and	six	
external	sense	bases	(S.IV,10f);	the	six	bases	of	contact	(S.IV,254);	and	the	world	(A.I,	260).

231
c. The Objects to Know
The	basic	principle	of	practice	is	to	apply	either	of	the	first	two	modes	 
of application to any of the Five Groups of Grasping	(or	specific	aspects	
of	them,	such	as	the	four	elemental	qualities	of	earth,	fire,	water,	and	
air), or the Six Sense Bases (or the six bases of contact), and follow 
the contemplative process to its cessation or escape. Contemplating 
any of these objects by way of any one of the Three Characteristics, if 
contemplated	resolutely,	is	sufficient	to	realize	liberation.
Summary for Developing the Practice
We	now	have	the	various	pieces	ready	to	assemble	into	an	effective	
means	of	practising	dis-identification	–	there	are	the	active processes of 
identification	to	be	engaged	with,	primarily	ignorance	and	craving;	there	
are	specific	methods of contemplation; there are the three principle 
modes of contemplation to developing true knowledge; and, there are 
the objects of investigation, primarily the Five Groups of Grasping and 
the Sense Bases.
The	following	chapter	outlines	various	reflections	and	meditations	
which,	if	developed	sufficiently,	can	lead	to	liberation.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	THEORY

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to the breathing. 
•  How is the connection to breathing – is it steady 
or wavering; clear or faint; strong or weak?
•  When the mind seems to be reasonably calm,  
bring up the theme which is most relevant to you 
at this time, following one of the three main 
modes, either regarding the Five Groups of 
Grasping or the Sense Bases.
•  Can you still maintain a connection to the 
breathing?
• 	Settle	the	mind	on	the	most	relevant	theme	first,	
seeing how deep and long you can sustain it.
•  If investigation does not go very deep or it is hard 
to sustain, either re-settle the mind on 
breathing for some time or try another theme.
• 	It	may	require	some	practice	to	find	the	right	
balance of Calm and Insight.
•  When suitable, bring your attention back to the 
breathing. 
•  Open your eyes and resume your activity.

233
SECTION 1: The Cessation of Ignorance
Part 2: The Practice
We	now	have	the	various	pieces	ready	to	assemble	into	an	effective	
means
	
of
	
practising
	
dis-identification.
	
In
	
the
	
last
	
chapter
	
we
	
learned	
ab
out
	
the
	
four
	
following
	
themes:
1.
  
the active processes
	
of
	
identification
	
to
	
be
	
engaged
	
with
	
are
	
primarily	
ignor
ance and craving. The cessation of ignorance is facilitated 
through the development of true knowledge, other forms of 
developed knowledge, understanding and seeing, as it really is; 
2.		the
	
specific
	
methods of contemplation, for example, the investigation
of phenomena (dhamma-vicaya) factor of the Seven Factors of
Awakening
	
is
	
defined
	
as:
	
‘he examines it with wisdom, investigates 
it thoroughly, tests it all around’	(S.V,68), while being ‘based upon
seclusion, dispassion and cessation, ripening in letting go’ (M.III,88);
3.
  the thr
ee main modes of contemplation to develop true knowledge –
the Four Noble Truths mode, the Three Characteristics mode and the 
Gratification,
	
Disadvantage,
	
Escape
	
mode;
4.		the
	
objects of investigation, primarily the Five Groups of Grasping and
the Sense Bases.
SEVENTEEN
Identification	|	Ignorance:	Practice
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE: 	 PRACTICE

234
BEYOND I-MAKING
Below	are	various	reflections	and	meditations	which,	if	developed	 
sufficiently,	can	lead	to	liberation.	These	meditations	cover	a	wide	range	
of	themes,	since	different	approaches	affect	different	people	 
in	different	ways.	It	may	be	helpful	initially	to	review	the	different	
themes to see which ones appear to interest you at this time.  
Of	course,	only	with	significant	development	of	any	particular	 
theme	may	benefits	be	realized.
A. Contemplation of The Five Groups of Grasping
In order to arrive at true knowledge, a thorough investigation of the  
Five Groups of Grasping is necessary. Thus, from a reasonably calm mind, 
one	carefully	contemplates	these	five	groups.	A	helpful	template	is	
provided in the instructions for developing mindfulness:
‘… one abides contemplating the body as body, earnestly, clearly 
comprehending and mindful, having put away covetousness and 
distress concerning the world.
In this way, one abides contemplating the body as body internally,  
or one abides contemplating the body as body externally, or one abides 
contemplating the body as body both internally and externally. One 
abides contemplating the nature of arising in the body, or one abides 
contemplating the nature of passing away in the body, or one abides 
contemplating the nature of both arising and passing away in the body. 
Or mindfulness that “there is body” is established for the purpose of 
knowledge and mindfulness. One abides independent, not clinging  
to anything in the world.’ M.I,55f.

235
The Four Noble Truths Mode
‘Here, bhikkhu, the instructed noble disciple clearly knows (pajānāti) 
Embodying, clearly knows the origin of Embodying, clearly knows the 
cessation of Embodying, and clearly knows the path to the cessation of 
Embodying. [He clearly knows] Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and 
Habiting … Bare Knowing, ... clearly knows the path to the cessation of 
Bare Knowing. This is called true knowledge, and to that extent one has 
arrived at true knowledge.’ S.III,163.
The origin of Embodying is nutriment (āhāra)1 and the cessation  
of Embodying is the cessation of nutriment. The origin of Feeling, 
Recognizing and Willing and Habiting is contact, and their cessation 
is the cessation of contact. The origin of Bare Knowing is mentality- 
materiality, and its cessation is the cessation of mentality-materiality. 
The	path	to	the	cessation	of	all	five	groups	is	the	Eightfold	Path	(S.III,59ff).
From the perspective of Dependent Origination, Bare Knowing is the 
origin of mentality (Feeling, Recognizing and Willing and Habiting)  
and materiality (Embodying), their cessation is the cessation of  
Bare Knowing2.
The Gratification, Disadvantage and Escape Mode
In this mode, as with the Four Noble Truths mode, one thoroughly 
investigates the Five Groups of Grasping but from the perspective  
1	 In	effect,	nutriment	for	Embodying	is	threefold:	material	food,	liquids	and	breath.	Thus,	any	of	these	could	
be used as a contemplation for the origin of body, the breath being the most directly obvious.
2 Technically, the cessation of Embodying requires not only the cessation of Bare Knowing, but also the 
cessation of life force (āyusaṅkhārā) and heat (usmā) (M.I,296).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

236
BEYOND I-MAKING
of	the	gratification,	the	disadvantage	and	the	escape	from	them:
Venerable	Sariputta: ‘Here, friend, the instructed noble disciple fully 
understands (parijānāti) as it really is the origin and passing away, the 
gratification, the disadvantage and the escape regarding Embodying … 
Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing. This is 
called, friend, true knowledge, and to that extent one has arrived at true 
knowledge.’ S.III,174.
‘The perception of impermanence is to be developed for abandoning the 
view of gratification.’ A.III,447.
The Three Characteristics (ti-lakkhaṇa) Mode
The most comprehensive mode for the contemplation of any of  
the Five Groups of Grasping is through the Three Characteristics  
of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not a permanent self,  
either separately, or together. 
A thorough contemplation of any of the Five Groups of Grasping  
reveals their impermanence. What is impermanent and subject to 
change is then seen as unsatisfactory, since it is uncertain and unreliable, 
which often causes anxiety and irritation, and possibly disappointment, 
frustration and resentment. 
The conclusion is that whatever is impermanent and unsatisfactory 
cannot	be	regarded	as	a	self,	which	by	definition	should	be	permanent	
and	satisfying.	Therefore,	despite	our	attempts	to	confirm	a	permanent	
self, when considered in this way, we realize that each of the Five Groups 
of Grasping is ultimately not a permanent self.

237
The intrinsic purpose of this contemplation is that once we see 
as it really is that there are no ‘solid objects’, because everything is 
changing, there is no longer any stable ground for subjective selfaffirmation	–	there	is	nothing	reliable	to	grasp	onto	as	a	permanent	
self. We still have a ‘sense of a self’ because the Five Groups of Grasping 
are	still	functioning,	but	we	can	now	flow	with	the	natural	changing	
processes of reality rather than trying to grasp or hold them to a 
particular deluded, self-imposed form. 
When we are able to see this truth ‘as it really is with right wisdom’, then 
we become ‘disillusioned (nibbidā)’ with our previous relationship to the 
Five Groups of Grasping, which has fooled us for so long. If this insight is 
profound enough, this disillusionment results in dispassion (virāga) and 
liberation from identifying any of the Five Groups of Grasping as a self. 
The contemplation of the Five Groups of Grasping in terms of the  
three	characteristics	is	often	presented	in	the	form	of	a	dialogue:
‘What do you think, bhikkhus, is Embodying permanent or 
impermanent?
Impermanent, Venerable sir.
Is what is impermanent unpleasant (dukkha) or pleasant (sukha)? 
Unpleasant,Venerable sir.
Is what is impermanent, unpleasant and subject to change suitable  
to be regarded as: “This is mine, this I am, this is my self”?
No, Venerable sir.
Are Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing 
permanent or impermanent?
Impermanent, Venerable sir.
Is what is impermanent unpleasant or pleasant?
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

238
BEYOND I-MAKING
Unpleasant, Venerable sir.
Is what is impermanent, unpleasant and subject to change suitable  
to be regarded as: “This is mine, this I am, this is my self”?
No, Venerable sir.
Therefore, bhikkhus, any Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... 
Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing whatsoever, whether past,  
future or present, internal or external, coarse or subtle, base or  
excellent, distant or near, all should be seen as it really is with right 
wisdom (yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya) as: “This is not mine,  
this I am not, this is not my self”.
Thus seeing, the learned noble disciple is disillusioned (nibbidā)  
with Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ...  
Bare Knowing. Disillusioned, he is dispassionate (virajjati);  
dispassionate (virāga), he is liberated; with liberation comes the 
knowledge (ñāṇa): “It is liberated”. He knows clearly: “Exhausted is 
birth, the religious life is fulfilled, what had to be done is done,  
this life is not to be in future.”’ S.III,67f.
The Three Characteristics Contemplated Individually
Quite a number of the discourses mention only one of these ‘Three 
Characteristics’, often using the same general formula. It is thus 
acknowledged that a thorough realization of any one of these ‘Three 
Characteristics’	is	sufficient	for	the	‘breakthrough	to	Dhamma’.

239
Impermanence
The contemplation on the impermanence of the Five Groups is presented 
in	a	number	of	ways:	the	twofold	contemplation	of	the	origin	(samudaya) 
and passing away (atthaṅgama) of the Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,13f), 
the threefold contemplation of the Five Groups of Grasping, their origin 
and their passing away (S.III,85;156f), the threefold contemplation of 
understanding the Five Groups of Grasping subject to arising, subject to 
decay (vaya) and subject to arising and decay as they really are (S.III,171), or 
in the fourfold Noble Truth formula of understanding (pajānāti) the Five 
Groups of Grasping, their origin, their cessation (nirodha) and the path to 
their cessation (S.III,59f). 
‘Bhikkhus, when the perception of impermanence is developed and 
increased it exhausts all passion for sense pleasures, exhausts all passion 
for existence, exhausts all ignorance, and uproots all “I am” conceit.  
…
‘Just as, bhikkhus, in autumn when the sky is clear and without cloud, 
the sun, ascending into the heavens, expels all darkness and shines 
forth bright and brilliant, even so the awareness of impermanence, 
if developed and increased, exhausts all passion for sense pleasures, 
exhausts all passion for existence, exhausts all ignorance, and uproots 
all “I am” conceit.
And how, bhikkhus, is the perception of impermanence developed  
and increased so it exhausts all passion for sense pleasures, exhausts 
all passion for existence, exhausts all ignorance, and uproots all “I am” 
conceit? Thus is Embodying, thus its arising, thus its passing away; 
thus is Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting …; thus is Bare 
Knowing, thus its arising, thus its passing away.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

240
BEYOND I-MAKING
That is how the perception of impermanence is developed and increased 
so it exhausts all passion for sense pleasures, exhausts all passion 
for existence, exhausts all ignorance, and uproots all “I am” conceit.’ 
S.III,155f. 
‘Embodying, Ananda, is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, 
subject to wasting away, to loss, to fading away, to cessation. Due to its 
cessation, cessation is so called.
Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing is 
impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to wasting 
away, to loss, to fading away, to cessation. Due to its cessation, cessation 
is so called.’ S.III,24f. 
‘When one has understood the impermanence of Embodying …  
Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing,  
their change, fading away and cessation, and sees as it really is  
with right wisdom: “In the past and in the present, all Embodying … 
Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing are 
impermanent, unsatisfactory and subject to change,” then sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief and distress are given up.’ S.III,43.
‘There are no Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing  
and Habiting ... Bare Knowing that are permanent, stable, eternal,  
not subject to change or will remain for all eternity.’ S.III,144f.

241
‘Impermanent, indeed, bhikkhus are conditions; thus, indeed,  
unstable; thus, indeed, not comforting. So far that it is enough to 
experience disillusionment towards all conditions, enough to be 
detached from them, enough to be liberated from them.’ S.III,146f. 
Unsatisfactoriness
The Five Groups of Grasping are said to be unsatisfactory (S.III,19f;158), 
a burden (S.III,25), a misfortune (S.III,32). Probably the most poignant 
expression of unsatisfactoriness is given in the Buddha’s third discourse, 
The Discourse on Fire (SN.	35:28).
‘Bhikkhus, all is burning. What, bhikkhus, is the all that is burning?  
The eye is burning, visible objects are burning, eye-knowing is burning, 
eye-contact is burning, and whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as 
condition – whether pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-norpleasant – that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire 
of passion, with the fire of anger, with the fire of delusion; burning with 
birth, ageing, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress and tribulation, 
I say.
The ear is burning … the nose … tongue … body … mind is burning … 
Burning with the fire of passion, with the fire of anger, with the fire  
of delusion; burning with birth, ageing, death, sorrow, lamentation, 
pain, distress and tribulation, I say.’ S.IV,19f.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

242
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Therein, bhikkhus, the learned noble disciple reflects thus:  
“I am now being consumed by Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... 
Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing. In the past I was also consumed 
by Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare 
Knowing in the same way that I am presently being consumed.  
If I were in future to enjoy Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... 
Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing, then in future I would  
be consumed by Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing  
and Habiting ... Bare Knowing.”’ S.III,87f.
No Permanent Self
For most people, an ideal or ‘pristine’ self is assumed to have certain 
essential qualities. First and foremost is some degree of permanence 
and stability, continuity and coherence, at least over a lifetime (and 
maybe beyond). The second quality is complete autonomy (that is, I am 
a unique, free self) and therefore able to assert control over my body and 
mind. A third quality is well-being or comfort – if your self did not give 
some comfort you probably would not tolerate it.
The Buddha approached the theme of not a permanent self from  
a variety of angles.

243
a. Impermanence
The Buddha’s most common method of teaching about no permanent 
self	was	by	way	of	impermanence:
‘The perception of impermanence should be developed to uproot  
the conceit “I am”. When one perceives impermanence the perception 
of no permanent self is established. One who perceives no permanent 
self uproots the conceit “I am” – Nibbāna here and now.’ A.IV,353.
b. Lack of Control
In the Discourse on the Characteristic of No Permanent Self (Anattalakkhana Sutta), the Buddha’s second teaching, he pointed out a major 
inconsistency in the belief in a permanent self, which is that we do not 
have complete control over it.
‘Bhikkhus, Embodying is not a permanent self. If, bhikkhus, Embodying 
were self, it would not lead to affliction, and it could be obtained of 
Embodying that “my Embodying may be like this; my Embodying may 
not be like this”. But because Embodying is not a permanent self, it leads 
to affliction, and one cannot obtain of Embodying that “my Embodying 
may be like this; my Embodying may not be like this”.
Feelings are not a permanent self ... Recognizing is not a permanent self 
... Willing and Habiting are not a permanent self ... Bare Knowing is not a 
permanent self. If Bare Knowing were self, it would not lead to affliction, 
and it could be obtained of Bare Knowing that “my Bare Knowing may 
be like this; my Bare Knowing may not be like this”. But because Bare 
Knowing is not a permanent self, it leads to affliction, and one cannot 
obtain of Bare Knowing that “my Bare Knowing may be like this; my Bare 
Knowing may not be like this”.’ S.III,66f (Anatta-lakkhana Sutta).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

244
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Bhikkhus, give up (pajahatha) what is not yours. When you have given 
it up that will be for your welfare and happiness. What is it that is not 
yours? Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... 
Bare Knowing are not yours, give them up. When you have given them up 
that will be for your welfare and happiness.
Suppose, bhikkhus, people were to carry off the grass, sticks, branches 
and leaves in this Jeta’s Grove, or to burn them or do with them whatever 
they wish. Would you consider: “People are carrying us off, burning us or 
doing whatever they wish with us?” 
“No, venerable.”
What is the reason?’ 
“Because, venerable, that is neither our self nor what belongs to our 
self.” 
Likewise, bhikkhus, Embodying is not yours … Feelings ... Recognizing 
... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing are not yours, give them 
up. When you have given them up that will be for your welfare and 
happiness.’ S.III,33f.
c. Causally-Arisen
Closely	related	to	the	reflection	on	the	impermanent	nature	of	what	we	
take to be a self is the causally-arisen nature of the factors of selfhood, 
the Five Groups of Grasping, which are impermanent because of their 
causally-arisen nature, that is, they depend upon other factors for  
their existence.

245
Sometimes this causally-arisen nature is mentioned together with 
impermanence, for example, when ‘the regarding’ of the Five Groups 
of Grasping as a self in any of the four modes is called a ‘condition 
(saṅkhāra)’ which, together with the craving, feeling, contact and 
ignorance, which cause it, are all ‘impermanent, conditioned (saṅkhata), 
and dependently arisen (paṭiccasamuppanna)’ (S.III,96f; cf. S.IV,211f). 
Elsewhere it is mentioned that the conditioned Five Groups of Grasping 
are to be understood as they really are as conditioned (S.III,56f).
All the factors of the Dependent Origination formula are said to be 
‘impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to wasting 
away, to decay, to waning, to cessation.’ S.II,26.
‘Does not eye-knowing arise on account of eye and sights? 
Yes, friend.
If the cause and condition for the arising of eye-knowing were  
to cease altogether and in every way without remainder, would  
eye-knowing be evident? 
No, friend. 
Thus is the reason that the Revered One has announced, made clear and 
explained, “Thus, bare knowing is not a permanent self.”’ S.IV,166f.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

246
BEYOND I-MAKING
d. Composite Nature
Another aspect of no permanent self is that what we usually take to be 
the self is actually a composite of various factors. For example, at S.IV,196f 
the Buddha tells the story of a king or royal minister who hears the 
‘entrancing’ sound of a lute. He asks someone to bring him the lute, but 
is disappointed by it and requests them to just bring him the sound. He is 
told that the sound comes from the lute, which is composed of numerous 
components,	and	the	effort	of	the	musician.	The	king,	however,	has	
the lute split up into many pieces. The Buddha then says that likewise a 
bhikkhu searches the Five Groups of Grasping	to	their	limit	and	finds	that	
there is no longer any ‘I’, ‘mine’ or ‘I am’.
‘What now, you take for granted “a being”;
Is that, Māra, your view? 
This is a simple heap of conditions,
Here is found no “being”.
Just as with a combination of parts,
The word “chariot” is used,
Thus when the Groups exist,
The convention “a being” is used.
Only unsatisfactoriness arises,
Unsatisfactoriness that stands and falls,
Nought but unsatisfactoriness arises,
Nought but unsatisfactoriness ceases.’
Bhikkhuni	Vajirā,	S.I,135.

247
e. Emptiness
In the Buddha’s teaching, the concept of ‘emptiness’ (suñña)  
is usually applied in the sense of empty of something.
‘In what respect, Venerable, is it said, “Empty world?”
It is, Ananda, because it is empty of a permanent self and of what 
belongs to a permanent self that it is said, “Empty world”. 
What is empty of a permanent self and of what belongs to a permanent 
self? The eye, Ananda, is empty of a permanent self and of what belongs 
to a permanent self. Visible objects are empty of a permanent self 
and of what belongs to a permanent self. Eye-knowing is empty of a 
permanent self and of what belongs to a permanent self. Eye-contact 
is empty of a permanent self and of what belongs to a permanent 
self. Whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition … with 
mind-contact as condition, whether pleasant or unpleasant or neitherunpleasant-nor-pleasant, that also is empty of a permanent self and of 
what belongs to a permanent self.’ S.IV,54.
‘Look upon the world as empty, Mogharaja, always being mindful. 
Remove any view of a permanent-abiding self, and you may pass 
beyond death. If you view the world like this, the King of Death  
sees you not.’ Sn. 1119.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

248
BEYOND I-MAKING
In one of the exercises in the development of the meditation on the 
base of nothingness, (ākiñcañña-āyatana)	the	meditator	considers:	
‘This is empty of a permanent self or what belongs to a permanent 
self.’ (M.II,263). At M.I,297f this is called, ‘deliverance of mind through 
emptiness’.
‘Suppose, bhikkhus, that this river Ganges was carrying along a large 
lump of foam. A man with good sight would see it, reflect on it and 
carefully examine it. It would appear to him to be void, vacuous, 
insubstantial. What substance could there be in a lump of foam?
Even so, bhikkhus, whatever kind of Embodying, past, future or present, 
internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near – a 
bhikkhu sees it, reflects on it and carefully examines it. It would appear 
to him to be void, vacuous, insubstantial. What substance could there be 
in Embodying?
Suppose, bhikkhus, in the autumn, when it is raining large drops, a 
bubble arises and bursts. A man with good sight would see it, reflect on 
it and carefully examine it. It would appear to him to be void, vacuous, 
insubstantial. What substance could there be in a water bubble?
Even so, bhikkhus, whatever kind of Feeling, past, future or present, 
internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near –  
a bhikkhu sees it, reflects on it and carefully examines it. It would appear 
to him to be void, vacuous, insubstantial. What substance  
could there be in Feeling?

249
Suppose, bhikkhus, in the last month of the hot season, at midday, a 
shimmering mirage appears. A man with good sight would see it, reflect 
on it and carefully examine it. It would appear to him to be void, vacuous, 
insubstantial. What substance could there be in a mirage?
Even so, bhikkhus, whatever kind of Recognizing, past, future or 
present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or 
near – a bhikkhu sees it, reflects on it and carefully examines it. It would 
appear to him to be void, vacuous, insubstantial. What substance could 
there be in Recognizing?
Suppose, bhikkhus, a man desiring heartwood, seeking heartwood, 
roaming in search for heartwood, would take a sharp axe and enter into 
the forest. There he would see the trunk of a large plantain tree, straight, 
fresh, growing to a great height. He would cut it down at the root, sever 
off the top and remove the outer layer. As he removes the outer layers 
he would not even find soft wood, whence heartwood. A man with good 
sight would see it, reflect on it and carefully examine it. It would appear 
to him to be void, vacuous, insubstantial. What substance could there be 
in a plantain trunk?
Even so, bhikkhus, whatever kind of Willing and Habiting, past,  
future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or 
superior, far or near – a bhikkhu sees it, reflects on it and carefully 
examines it. It would appear to him to be void, vacuous, insubstantial. 
What substance could there be in Willing and Habiting?
Suppose, bhikkhus, a conjurer or a conjurer’s apprentice would show  
a conjurer’s illusion at a crossroads. A man with good sight would  
see it, reflect on it and carefully examine it. It would appear to him  
to be void, vacuous, insubstantial. What substance could there be  
in a conjurer’s illusion?
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

250
BEYOND I-MAKING
Even so, bhikkhus, whatever kind of Bare Knowing, past, future  
or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior,  
far or near – a bhikkhu sees it, reflects on it and carefully examines  
it. It would appear to him to be void, vacuous, insubstantial.  
What substance could there be in Bare Knowing?
Thus seeing, the learned noble disciple is disillusioned (nibbidā)  
with Embodying … Feelings … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting  
… Bare Knowing. Disillusioned, he is dispassionate; dispassionate,  
he is liberated; with liberation comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”.  
He knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled,  
what had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.” 
Embodying is like a lump of foam;
Feeling is like a water bubble;
Recognizing is like a mirage;
Willing and Habiting is like a plantain trunk;
Bare Knowing is like an illusion;
So expounded the Kinsman of the Sun [the Buddha].
However one may reflect,
Or thoroughly examine,
It is but void and vacuous,
When one thoroughly understands ….’ S.III,140f.
Contemplation of Embodying (or the Elements) and Feelings
In the Pali Canon, special emphasis is given to the contemplation  
of	two	specific	factors	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping, as deep 
contemplation of either of them can lead directly to liberation.  
These two are Embodying (or its Elements) and Feelings.

251
Embodying
You	may	recall	from	Chapter	7	that	rūpa	(Embodying)	is	defined	as	 
the four ‘great elemental qualities’ (mahābhūtā),	of	earth	(solidity),	fire	
(heat),	water	(fluidity)	and	air	(motion),	and	the	physicality	derived	from	 
them. That is, the physical body is the embodying of the four elements.
The Pali Canon states that mindfulness directed to the body 
(kāyagatāsati)	results	in	many	beneficial	things,	including:	ignorance	
passing away, true knowledge arising, the conceit ‘I am’ passing away,  
the underlying dispositions uprooted, the fetters passing away, 
realization	of	Nibbāna	without	grasping,	and	the	realization	of	the	fruit	
of arahantship (A.I,43f).	The	Kāyagatāsati	Sutta	at	MN.119 gives a thorough 
explanation of the practices involved3 and the results to be gained.
The contemplation of Embodying follows the instructions for developing 
mindfulness of the body as outlined in the Discourse of Attending with 
Mindfulness (DN.22 and MN.10)	and	the	Kāyagatāsati	Sutta	at	MN.119. 
Included in these instructions are the contemplation of the Four 
Elements, which (as well as the six elements4) are sometimes referred to 
as	separate	contemplations	which	give	significant	results.
‘… this body is subject to impermanence, to be worn and rubbed 
away, to breaking and destruction. It should be seen as impermanent, 
unsatisfactory, a disease, an abscess, a dart, a misfortune, an affliction, 
as other, as decaying, as empty, as not a permanent self. Seeing the 
body thus, one abandons desire for the body, affection for the body, 
subservience to the body.’ M.I,500.
3 These are equivalent to the exercises on body contemplation in the discourses on developing mindfulness:	
DN.22 and MN.10, without the section on absorptions.  
4	 The	six	elements	are	the	four	material	elements	plus	space	and	bare	knowing/consciousness.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

252
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Elemental Qualities
An associated contemplation is that regarding the four elements  
or six elements. See Appendix 1 for how the internal elements relate  
to the thirty-one parts of the body.
‘Rahula, the internal earth element and the external earth element 
are just the earth element. This should be seen as it really is with right 
wisdom thus: “This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self”. Having 
seen this as it really is with right wisdom, one becomes disillusioned 
with the earth element, one frees the mind from the earth element. 
Rahula, the internal water … fire … air element and the external  
water … fire … air element are just the water … fire … air element.  
This should be seen as it really is with right wisdom thus: “This is not 
mine, this I am not, this is not my self”. Having seen this as it really is 
with right wisdom, one becomes disillusioned with the water … fire … 
air element, one frees the mind from the water … fire … air element. 
When, Rahula, a bhikkhu does not regard these four elements as self 
or what belongs to self, he is called a bhikkhu who has cut off craving, 
turned away from the fetters, and, through right penetration of conceit, 
has made an end of suffering.’ A.II,164f.
‘Friends, I have arrived at no permanent self in the earth element,  
with no permanent self dependent upon the earth element. And with 
the wasting, waning, cessation, giving up, relinquishing of taking up and 
grasping, of resolution, adherence and underlying disposition  
in dependence upon the earth element, I have clearly known that  
my mind is liberated.

253
Friends, I have arrived at no permanent self in the water element …  
fire element … air element … space element … bare knowing element. 
And with the wasting, waning, cessation, giving up, relinquishing 
of taking up and grasping, of resolution, adherence and underlying 
disposition in dependence upon the bare knowing element, I have 
clearly known that my mind is liberated.
Friends, it is by thus knowing, thus seeing these six elements that 
without grasping my mind is liberated from the Outflows.’ M.III,31.
Feeling
As mentioned in previous chapters, Feeling is one of the two most 
prominent of the Five Groups of Grasping, together with Bare Knowing, 
as	it	factors	so	significantly	in	most	people’s	life.	Therefore,	a	clear	
understanding of it can powerfully assist progress on the path to 
liberation.
‘He abides contemplating impermanence in the body and in pleasant 
feeling, abides contemplating decay, abides contemplating fading away, 
abides contemplating cessation, abides contemplating relinquishment. 
As he abides thus contemplating, the underlying disposition to passion 
regarding the body and pleasant feeling passes away.
He abides contemplating impermanence in the body and in unpleasant 
feeling, abides contemplating decay, abides contemplating fading away,  
abides contemplating cessation, abides contemplating relinquishment. 
As he abides thus contemplating, the underlying disposition to aversion 
regarding the body and unpleasant feeling passes away.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

254
BEYOND I-MAKING
He abides contemplating impermanence in the body and in neitherunpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling, abides contemplating decay, abides 
contemplating fading away, abides contemplating cessation, abides 
contemplating relinquishment. As he abides thus contemplating, the 
underlying disposition to ignorance regarding the body and neitherunpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling passes away.
If he feels a pleasant feeling, he clearly knows: “It is impermanent”;  
he clearly knows: “It is not held to”; he clearly knows: “It is not enjoyed”. 
If he feels an unpleasant feeling, he clearly knows: “It is impermanent”; 
he clearly knows: “It is not held to”; he clearly knows: “It is not enjoyed”. 
If he feels a neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling, he clearly knows: 
“It is impermanent”; he clearly knows: “It is not held to”; he clearly 
knows: “It is not enjoyed”.’ S.IV,211f.
‘Aggivessana, pleasant feeling … unpleasant feeling … neitherunpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling is impermanent, conditioned, 
dependently arisen, subject to decay, vanishing, waning, ceasing. 
Seeing thus, the well-taught noble disciple becomes disillusioned … 
Disillusioned, he is dispassionate. Through dispassion one is liberated; 
with liberation comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”. One knows 
clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled, what had  
to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ M.I,500.
‘When the nutriment contact is thoroughly understood, the three 
feelings are thoroughly understood. When the three feelings are 
thoroughly understood, I say there is nothing further that the noble 
disciple needs to do.’ S.II,99.

255
‘When, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu has seen (diṭṭha) pleasant feeling as 
unsatisfactory, unpleasant feeling as a dart, neither-unpleasantnor-pleasant feeling as impermanent, he is called “a bhikkhu who 
sees rightly, has cut off craving, severed the fetters, and by thoroughly 
penetrating conceit, has made an end to dukkha.”’ S.IV,207.
B. Contemplation of The Sense Bases
The	cessation	of	identification	with	the	Six Sense Bases is outlined  
in	much	the	same	way	as	cessation	of	identification	with	the	Five Groups 
of Grasping. In line with the special emphasis given to the  
Sense Bases in the perceptual process and the ‘enlivening’ of the 
Five Groups of Grasping, we are presented with an auxiliary set of 
instructions:	to	guard	the	doors	of	the	senses,	practise	sense	restraint	
and	‘master’	the	states	that	arise	due	to	sense	contact.	Two	different	
methods of guarding the doors of the senses and one method of 
practising	sense	restraint	are	presented	in	Chapter	14	on	The	Path.
If desire, passion, aversion, delusion or repugnance should arise in 
regard to a sense impression, then one should ‘rein in the mind’ (cittaṃ 
nivāreti)	by	considering:	‘This is a way fearful and frightening, thorny, 
dangerous, deviant, wrong and difficult’ (S.IV,195). When the mind has 
been ‘subdued, well subdued’ in regard to the six bases of contact, it then 
becomes	inwardly	settled,	quieted,	unified	and	collected	(S.IV,196).
The second phase of dealing skilfully with the Sense Bases is to learn  
to	be	free	of	the	unwholesome,	negative	and	defiling	states	which	may	
be aroused through sense contact. Thus one can be free of the ‘evil, 
unwholesome states, memories and intentions connected with the 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

256
BEYOND I-MAKING
fetters’5 by ‘not consenting to them, but giving them up, dispelling 
them, putting an end to them and sending them to utter cessation’. 
Thus one can become the ‘master of the sense bases’ (S.IV,77). Through 
sense restraint the mind is not disturbed and thus gladness (pāmojja) 
arises, followed by a series of positive states – joy, bodily tranquillity, 
well-being, collectedness – resulting in ‘things becoming manifest’ 
(S.IV,78f), that is, one sees with wisdom the arising or not arising of  
the	defilements	of	passion,	aversion	and	delusion (S.IV,139).
‘Bhikkhus, if in any bhikkhu or bhikkhuni, desire, lust, hatred, delusion, 
aversion should arise in the mind regarding eye-knowing from visible 
objects, the mind should be thus restrained: “This path is fearful and 
frightening, thorny, a thicket, is off-track, the wrong path and beset 
with danger. This is a path for unworthy people, not a path for worthy 
people. It is not worthy of you.” Thus the mind should be restrained 
regarding eye-knowing from visible objects. So too regarding earknowing … nose … tongue … body … mind-knowing.
Just as, bhikkhus, if the corn is ripe and the watcher of the cornfield 
is negligent, a corn-eating bull will enter the cornfield and exhibits 
intoxication and carelessness as much as he wants. Even so, bhikkhus, 
the unlearned ordinary person who is unrestrained in the six bases  
for contact exhibits intoxication and carelessness as much as he wants  
in the five kinds of sensuality.
Just as, bhikkhus, if the corn is ripe and the watcher of the cornfield  
is vigilant, if a corn-eating bull enters the corn-field, the watcher would 
catch hold of the bull, give him a sound beating and drive the bull away. 
That corn-eating-bull, whether having gone to the village or forest, 
standing or sitting, remembering that beating, would  
not enter that cornfield again.
5	 Following	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	translation:	cf.	CDB,	p.1411,	n.79.

257
Even so, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu’s mind, in regard to the six bases for 
contact, has become subdued, thoroughly subdued, it then becomes 
internally steadied, quieted, unified and collected.’ S.IV,195f.
Contemplation By Way of the Three Characteristics
Once the mind has been calmed and collected, the Sense Bases are  
to be seen clearly as impermanent, dukkha and not a permanent  
self (S.IV,1-6). 
‘Bhikkhu, when one knows and sees the eye as impermanent, ignorance 
is abandoned and true knowledge arises. When one knows and sees 
visible objects … eye-knowing … eye-contact … whatever feeling … 
as impermanent, ignorance is abandoned and true knowledge arises. 
When one knows and sees the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … 
mind objects … mind-knowing … mind contact … whatever feeling … 
as impermanent, ignorance is abandoned and true knowledge arises.’ 
S.IV,31.
‘If someone says “The eye is self”, that is not acceptable. The appearance and decay of the eye is evident, and as its appearance and decay  
is evident, it is concluded: “My self appears and decays.” Therefore  
it is not acceptable for someone to say, “The eye is self”. Thus the eye is 
not a permanent self.
If someone says “Visible objects are self … eye-knowing … eye contact  
… feeling … craving is self”, that is not acceptable. The appearance  
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

258
BEYOND I-MAKING
and decay of craving is evident, and as its appearance and decay is 
evident, it is concluded: “My self appears and decays.” Therefore it  
is not acceptable for someone to say, “Craving is self”. Thus the eye is 
not a permanent self, sights are not a permanent self … eye-knowing … 
eye-contact … feeling … craving is not a permanent self.
If someone says, “The ear is self … nose … tongue … body … mind …  
mental phenomena … Thus the mind is not a permanent self, mental 
phenomena are not a permanent self … mind-knowing … mind-contact 
… feeling … craving is not a permanent self.’ M.III,282f.
‘Bhikkhus, that is the incomparable state of excellent peace and highest 
wisdom realized by the Tathagata, that is, liberation through not 
grasping, through fully understanding as they really are the origination, 
passing away, gratification, disadvantage and escape regarding the six 
bases of contact.’ M.II,238.
One of the most direct and succinct teachings on the Sense Bases which 
lead to liberation was given by the Buddha to the elderly bhikkhu Bahiya. 
When	he	came	to	request	a	‘teaching	in	brief’,	the	Buddha	offered	him	a	
very	profound	teaching:	
‘Therefore, Bahiya, you should train yourself thus: in the seen there  
will be merely what is seen; in the heard there will be merely what  
is heard; in the sensed there will be merely what is sensed; in the known 
there will be merely what is known.

259
In this way, Bahiya, you should train yourself. Since, in the seen is merely 
what is seen ... in the known is merely what is known, then, Bahiya, you 
will not be “by that”. When, Bahiya, you are not “by that”, then, Bahiya, 
you will not be “in that”. When, Bahiya, you are not “in that”, then 
Bahiya, you will be neither here nor beyond, nor in between the two. Just 
this is the end of suffering.’6 Udana, 1.10.
This succinct and very profound teaching explains a way of relating to  
reality in which a self-subject does not arise. To appreciate this teaching 
it may be helpful to review the chapter on the Perceptual Process. The 
gist of the teaching is that if one is able to simply abide with the bare 
knowing and feeling of sense contact then there is no self-subject that 
arises — no sense of ‘you’ and ‘that (sense object)’, no involvement  
‘in	that’,	etc.	With	no	self-subject	there	is	no	one	who	suffers.
Contemplation of the Four Nutriments
The contemplation of the Four Nutriments, although mentioned only 
rarely	in	the	Pali	Canon,	is	considered	to	be	an	especially	beneficial	
contemplation giving rise to the possibility of deep spiritual realization.
‘When the nutriment material food is fully understood, passion for  
the five strands of sense pleasure is fully understood. When passion for 
the five strands of sense pleasure is fully understood, there is no fetter 
bound by which a noble disciple might come again to this world …. 
When the nutriment contact is fully understood, the three feelings  
are fully understood. When the three feelings are fully understood, there 
is nothing further that a noble disciple needs to do ….
6	 A 	similar	teaching	is	given	to	Mālunkyaputta	at	S.IV,73.	There	it	is	elaborated	that	the	process	is	
accomplished through the presence of mindfulness	so	that	the	mind	is	not	inflamed	by	lust	for	sense	objects.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

260
BEYOND I-MAKING
When the nutriment mental volition is fully understood, the three kinds 
of craving are fully understood. When the three kinds of craving are fully 
understood, there is nothing further that a noble disciple needs to do …. 
When the nutriment bare knowing is fully understood, mentalitymateriality are fully understood. When mentality-materiality are  
fully understood, there is nothing further that a noble disciple needs  
to do’	S.II,98f.7
A Variety of Methods to Liberation
Having reviewed the above methods of meditation practice, one 
becomes aware that there are various approaches to meditation  
which	may	be	successful	for	any	individual:
‘A certain bhikkhu approached another bhikkhu and asked him:  
“In what respect, friend, is a bhikkhu’s vision (dassana) thoroughly 
purified (suvisuddha)?”
When, friend, a bhikkhu knows as it really is the origin and passing 
away of the six bases of contact, to that extent a bhikkhu’s vision  
is thoroughly purified.
Then the (first) bhikkhu, not pleased with that bhikkhu’s explanation, 
approached another bhikkhu and asked him: “In what respect, friend, is 
a bhikkhu’s vision thoroughly purified?”
7	 The	results	of	fully	understanding	material	food	only	reach	as	far	as	the	third	level	of	Awakening,	while	the	
results of fully understanding the other three nutriments reach to the fourth stage of arahantship.

261
When, friend, a bhikkhu knows as it really is the origin and passing away 
of the Five Groups of Grasping, to that extent a bhikkhu’s  
vision is thoroughly purified.
Then the (first) bhikkhu, not pleased with that bhikkhu’s explanation, 
approached another bhikkhu and asked him: “In what respect, friend, is 
a bhikkhu’s vision thoroughly purified?”
When, friend, a bhikkhu knows as it really is the origin and passing away 
of the four elements, to that extent a bhikkhu’s vision is thoroughly 
purified.
Then the (first) bhikkhu, not pleased with that bhikkhu’s explanation, 
approached another bhikkhu and asked him: “In what respect, friend, is 
a bhikkhu’s vision thoroughly purified?”
When, friend, a bhikkhu knows as it really is that whatever is of a nature 
to arise, is all of a nature to cease, to that extent a bhikkhu’s vision is 
thoroughly purified.’ S.IV,191f.
The Fulfilment of Contemplation and its Benefits
When the contemplation of the Three Characteristics is developed 
to	a	sufficient	degree,	then	a	new,	wiser	way	of	seeing	reality	arises.	
Depending	upon	the	depth	of	this	insight,	the	different	levels	of	
Liberation manifest. 
‘Embodying, bhikkhus, is impermanent … unsatisfactory … not  
a permanent self, both of the past and future, to say nothing of 
the present. Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple is 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |		IGNORANCE:	PRACTICE

262
BEYOND I-MAKING
indifferent (anapekkha) towards Embodying of the past, does not  
seek delight in Embodying of the future and is practising 
disillusionment, dispassion and cessation towards Embodying of 
the present. Feelings … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting …. 
Bare Knowing, bhikkhus, is impermanent … unsatisfactory … not 
a permanent self, both of the past and future, to say nothing of 
the present. Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple is 
indifferent towards Bare Knowing of the past, does not seek delight in 
Bare Knowing of the future and is practising disillusionment, dispassion 
and cessation towards Bare Knowing of the present.’ S.III,19-20.
‘Bhikkhus, I say that the wasting of the Outflows occurs dependent upon 
the first absorption … second absorption … cessation of perception and 
feeling.
Whatever there is of Embodying, Feeling, Recognizing, Willing and 
Habiting, and Bare Knowing, he regards as impermanent, dukkha, 
an illness, an abscess, misery, an affliction, foreign, breaking up, 
empty and not a permanent self. He turns his mind away from these 
phenomena and focuses on the Deathless element: “This is peaceful, 
this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities (saṅkhārā), the 
relinquishing of all supports (upadhi), the wasting away of craving, 
dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna.” If he is steadfast in this he reaches  
the wasting of the Outflows.’ A.IV,422f.

‘Embodying, bhikkhus, is impermanent; Feelings … Recognizing … 
Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing is impermanent … unsatisfactory 
… not a permanent self. Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble 
disciple experiences disillusionment towards Embodying … Feelings 
… Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing. Experiencing 
disillusionment, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion he is 
liberated. With liberation comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”. He 
clearly knows: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled, what had 
to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ S.III,21.

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently, and bring attention to breathing.
•  When the mind seems to be reasonably calm, 
bring up the theme of Craving – for sense 
pleasure, for existence, for non-existence.
•  Can you contact some direct experience of one, 
or all of them?
•  What is that experience like – pleasant or 
unpleasant; heavy or light; spacious or cramped?
•  Can you still maintain a connection  
to the breathing?
•  See if you can bring up the image of letting go  
of that craving; not pushing it away, but gently 
releasing it, relinquishing it, putting it down.
•  What is that like?
•  When suitable, bring your attention back to the 
breathing. 
•  Open your eyes and resume your activity.

265
SECTION 2: The Cessation of Craving
‘What, sister, is called the cessation of identity by the Revered One? 
Friend Visakha, it is the complete waning (virāga) and ceasing (nirodha), 
the giving up (cāga), forsaking (paṭinissagga), releasing (mutti), and 
relinquishing (anālaya) of that same craving.’ M.I,	299;	cf.	S.III,158.
Craving is an extremely pernicious and pervasive factor in life, so  
not easily put to rest. While it may appear logical to simply get rid  
of craving that is the cause of identity, trying to get rid of craving is either 
craving for non-existence (of craving) or craving for existence free from 
craving. Thus we are still caught in the net of craving. 
Craving	manifests	in	three	forms:	craving	for	sense	pleasures,	craving	
for existence and craving for non-existence. Once we are familiar with 
these various manifestations, we can work to relinquish whatever form 
predominates at any particular time. When one understands craving, one 
realizes that craving is actually a false, insatiable attempt of self  
to	verify	its	existence.	We	crave	sense	pleasures	as	an	object	to	confirm	a	
subject, but sense pleasures are impermanent and unreliable. We crave 
EIGHTEEN
Identification	|	Craving
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

266
BEYOND I-MAKING
existence for self, yet any existence is impermanent. We crave nonexistence but realize that it is based upon the false belief that there is 
something that can be extinguished.
The means to the cessation of Craving which the Buddha discovered  
is through the ‘complete waning (virāga) and ceasing (nirodha),  
giving up (cāga), forsaking (paṭinissagga), releasing (mutti), and 
relinquishing (anālaya)’ of Craving. We can realize this through the  
Way of Relinquishment, of craving directly, or the conditions which 
support it. Or we can use the Way of Development, by developing 
particular	reflections	or	by	the	development	of	suitable	spiritual	
faculties, such as the Seven Factors of Awakening. 
The Way of Relinquishment
The Way of Relinquishment requires a thorough knowledge of Craving 
and	its	negative	effects.	Endowed	with	this	knowledge,	we	are	then	
inclined to forsake, release or relinquish craving as soon as it arises, 
rather than be swept along or reinforce this pervasive force. At the very 
least,	a	clear	awareness	of	the	deleterious	effects	of	Craving can heighten 
our resolve to relinquish it.
Cessation of Craving for Sense Pleasures
In brief, the Buddha teaches that the way to experience the complete 
escape from sensual desires is to understand ‘as they really are’ 
(yathābūta)	the	origin	and	passing	away,	and	the	gratification,	
disadvantage and escape, regarding sensual pleasures. This is called 
‘the severance of the bond of sensuality’ (A.II,11). Thus, when one truly 
understands how unreliable and ultimately unsatisfying sense pleasures 
really are, desire and passion for them completely cease.

267
The Buddha’s view regarding sensual pleasures is that, while 
acknowledging	that	they	do	give	the	gratification	of	well-being	and	ease	 
(sukha somanassa), he warned of their limitations and the dangers  
of	following	them:	
‘The Revered One has said that sense pleasure has little delight, much 
suffering and tribulation, and the disadvantage is much more.’ M.I,130. 
The disadvantages are explained at M.I,85f, while some striking similes 
are elaborated at M.I,364f where the Buddha compares sensual pleasures 
to	a	fleshless	skeleton	unable	to	allay	the	hunger	and	weakness	of	 
a	suffering	dog;	to	a	piece	of	meat	seized	by	a	vulture,	heron	or	hawk	
that is pursued by another vulture, heron or hawk which strikes at it 
maliciously; to a blazing grass torch held by someone against the wind; 
to a glowing charcoal pit to which someone is forcefully being dragged; to 
a dream of pleasant scenery from which someone awakes; to borrowed 
possessions which are retrieved by the owner; and to the fruits on a tree 
that is eventually cut down.
As you review these striking similes, I’m sure you can recall an experience 
where	you	were	thwarted	from	some	pleasure	in	a	way	reflected	in	these	
images; for example, expecting more from some pleasure and then being 
unsatisfied	like	the	hungry	dog.
The Buddha emphasized the disadvantages of sensual pleasures because 
whatever one ‘frequently ponders on or thinks over, that becomes the 
inclination of the mind’ (M.I,116) and also because it is not possible to 
engage in sensual pleasures without having ‘sensual delight, perceptions 
of sensual pleasure and thoughts of sensual pleasure.’ That is, indulging 
in sensual pleasure tends to habituate the mind to sensual thinking, and 
the possibility of being overwhelmed by it (M.I,133). 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

268
BEYOND I-MAKING
On the other hand, the Buddha encouraged and praised spiritual 
pleasure. For example, two of the exercises for developing meditation 
on breathing advise training the mind to follow the breath while 
experiencing joy and well-being (pīti sukha; M.III,82-3).	The	refined	states	
of collectedness (jhāna) the Buddha experienced led to a happiness  
far superior to sensual pleasure (S.IV,226f). He referred to this as ‘the 
well-being of renunciation, the well-being of seclusion, the well-being 
of calming, the well-being of awakening’ (M.III,233;	I,454), which should 
be pursued and is not to be feared. The experience of the joy and wellbeing from states of jhāna breaks the infatuation with worldly sensual 
pleasures (M.I,91), while the pleasant and neutral (equanimity) spiritual 
feelings that arise do not have the Underlying Dispositions to passion 
and ignorance underlying them (M.I,303). 
However,	the	refined	states	of	collectedness	are	only	a	temporary	
respite from the attraction of sensual pleasures. The Buddha discovered 
a complete ‘escape’ from sensual pleasures. This is the ‘putting away 
and giving up of desire and passion for sensual pleasures’ (M.I,87), which 
occurs at the third of the four levels of awakening. 
Cessation of Craving for Existence
Although craving for sense pleasures is the most obvious form of craving, 
craving for existence is the most basic form, in that, craving for sense 
pleasures is simply another form of craving for existence, that is, craving 
for a pleasurable existence.
Craving for existence is conditioned by ignorance (A.V.116). Thus people  
under the sway of ignorance are obsessed with striving for the most 
pleasant form of existence attainable. However, the Buddha realized 
that	all	forms	of	existence,	no	matter	how	exalted	or	refined,	are	
impermanent.

269
One	of	the	‘brahmin	truths’	is:
‘“All states of existence are impermanent, unsatisfactory and subject to 
change.” … having directly known that truth, he is practising  
for the disillusionment (nibbidā), fading away and cessation of just those 
states of existence.’ A.II,177.
It is thus only through higher knowledge (abhiññā) of the way things 
really are that ignorance and craving for existence are given up  
(M.III,289;	S.V,52;	A.II,247). This realization of the Buddha was a result  
of his awakening to Conditional Causality, which focusses upon  
the	processes	creating	existence:	
‘Kaccāna, the world usually depends upon the duality of “existence” and 
“non- existence”. But for those who see the truth of the arising  
of the world as it really is with right wisdom, there is not for them  
any “non-existence” in the world. And for those who see the truth  
of the passing away of the world as it really is with right wisdom,  
there is not for them any “existence” in the world.
“All exists” is one extreme; “All does not exist” is the second extreme. 
Not going to either extreme, the Tathāgata expounds a teaching in  
the middle: With ignorance as condition, willing and habiting come  
to be; with willing and habiting as condition, consciousness ... Such  
is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.’ S.II,17	abridged.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

270
BEYOND I-MAKING
Understanding Conditional Causality results in the realization that all 
states of existence are merely continuously conditioned processes, and 
not permanent abidings. Existence	is	like	the	flame	of	a	candle	which	
only continues to exist as long as the melting wax and oxygen keep 
feeding	it,	even	though	the	flame	appears	as	its	own	unique	entity.	
Cessation of Craving for Non-existence
As	we	read	in	the	chapter	on	Identification,	craving	for	non-existence	 
is based upon the (wrong) view that there is some permanent self  
which can be annihilated. However, with the realization that there is 
ultimately no permanent self to be annihilated, the craving for  
non-existence ceases.
Cessation of Supports for Craving
We read in the chapter on Identity that craving has a number of causes 
and supports. The cessation of craving can thus be assisted through 
relinquishing its causes and/or supports.
The primary cause of craving is feeling, as presented in Conditional 
Causality. Craving arises for the ordinary person, still regarding any  
of the Five Groups of Grasping as self, when ‘contacted by a feeling born 
of ignorance-contact’ (S.III,99). However, when feeling is fully understood 
as ‘impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to decay, 
vanishing, waning, ceasing’ (S.IV,211), then that feeling-conditionedcraving	ceases:
‘With the cessation of feeling there is cessation of craving.’ M.I,51.

271
 
‘But, Phagguna, with the complete waning away and cessation  
of the six bases of contact comes cessation of contact; with cessation  
of contact comes cessation of feeling; with cessation of feeling  
comes cessation of craving … grasping … becoming … cessation  
of this entire heap of unsatisfactoriness.’ S.II,14.
 
Craving is also ‘connected to delight (nandi) and passion (rāga)’ (D.II,308), 
is grouped with other similar or associated factors such as ‘passion, 
desire (chanda), affection (sneha), thirst (pipāsā), and fever (pariḷāha)’ 
(M.I,101f) or ‘passion, delight, affection, infatuation (mucchā), thirst, 
fever, attachment (ajjhosāna)’ (A.II,10), and is included in the ‘supports 
for existence’ (bhavanetti):	‘desire, passion, delight, craving, taking up 
and grasping (upayupādānā), resolutions (adhiṭṭhāna), adherences 
(abhinivesa) and underlying dispositions’ regarding the Five Groups of 
Grasping (S.III,191).
The main factors in these groups are desire, passion and delight,  
the cessation of which will be explained below.
Cessation of Desire (chanda)
In this context desire is meant in its ‘negative’ meaning as in the  
phrase ‘desire for sensual pleasure’. 
‘Here, bhikkhus, one abides contemplating the body as body, 
earnestly, clearly comprehending and mindful, having put away 
covetousness and distress concerning the world. As one abides 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

272
BEYOND I-MAKING
contemplating the body as body, whatever desire (chanda) he  
has for the body passes away. With the wasting away of desire,  
the Deathless (amata) is realized.
Here, bhikkhus, one abides contemplating feeling as feeling, …  
states of mind as states of mind, … phenomena as phenomena, 
earnestly, clearly comprehending and mindful, having put away 
covetousness and distress concerning the world. As one abides 
contemplating phenomena as phenomena, whatever desire he  
has for phenomena passes away. With the wasting away of desire  
for phenomena, the Deathless (amata) is realized.’ S.V,181f.
‘How, bhikkhus, does desire not arise concerning things in the past … 
future … present that are the basis for desire and passion? One clearly 
knows the future result of things in the past … future … present that are 
the basis for desire and passion. Having understood the future result, 
one avoids it. Having avoided it, one becomes dispassionate  
in mind1, having seen through with wisdom. In this way, bhikkhus, desire 
does not arise concerning things in the past … future …  
present that are the basis for desire and passion.’ A.I,265.
‘The beautiful things remain as is in the world,
But the wise remove desire for them.’ S.I,22.
1	 For	the	last	two	phrases	I	have	followed	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	(CDB.	p.345).

273
Cessation of Passion (rāga)
Rāga is sometimes used in place of greed (loba) as one of the three 
primary	defilements	(A.I,216), and is generally applied to sensuality  
and existence. The main meditation for dealing with sensual passion  
is the unattractive perception of the body (asubha). In the Pali Canon, 
this is given as meditation on the thirty-one parts of the body2, while in 
the	commentarial	traditions	this	is	defined	as	the	ten	contemplations	of	
a decaying corpse. 
‘Rahula, develop meditation on the unattractive (asubha). When you 
develop meditation on the unattractive, passion will pass away.’ M.I,424.
‘Here one clearly knows as they really are the origin and passing away, 
and the gratification, disadvantage and escape, regarding sensual 
pleasures. When one clearly knows in this way then sensual passion, 
sensual delight, sensual affection (sneha), sensual infatuation (mucchā), 
sensual thirst (pipāsā), sensual fever (pariḷāha), sensual attachment 
(ajjhosāna) and sensual craving do not lie within (nānuseti) regarding 
sensual pleasures. This is called the severance of the bond of sensuality.
Here one clearly knows as they really are the origin and passing away, 
and the gratification, disadvantage and escape, regarding states 
of existence. When one clearly knows in this way, then passion for 
existence, delight in existence, affection for existence, infatuation 
with existence, thirst for existence, fever for existence, attachment to 
existence and craving for existence do not lie within regarding states of 
existence. This is called the severance of the bond of existence.
2 See A.V,109f for a list of the thirty-one parts (with the addition of ‘brain’, this was increased to thirty-two 
parts in later works).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

274
BEYOND I-MAKING
Here one clearly knows as they really are the origin and passing away, 
and the gratification, disadvantage and escape, regarding views. When 
one clearly knows in this way, then passion for views, delight in views, 
affection for views, infatuation with views, thirst for views, fever for 
views, attachment to views and craving for views do not lie within 
re-garding views. This is called the severance of the bond of views.’ A.II,11f.
‘Bhikkhus, give up desire and passion for Embodying … Feeling … 
Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing. Thus this 
Embodying … Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare 
Knowing will be given up, destroyed at the root, made like a palm stump, 
utterly finished so that Embodying … Feeling … Recognizing … Willing 
and Habiting … Bare Knowing will not arise in future.’ S.III,27.
‘Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu has given up passion for the Embodying element, 
with the giving up of passion the basis (ārammaṇa) is cut off, there 
is no support for bare knowing. If a bhikkhu has given up passion for 
the Feeling element … Recognizing element … Willing and Habiting 
element … Bare Knowing element, with the giving up of passion the 
basis is cut off, there is no support for bare knowing.
When that bare knowing is unsupported, not coming to growth, 
nongenerative (anabhisaṅkhacca), it is liberated. By being liberated,  
it is steady; steady it is content; content it is untroubled; untroubled  
he realizes Nibbāna himself …. ’ S.III,53.

275
In a related context3
 
the Buddha gave the simile of a house with windows 
on the east, north and south. When the sun rose the sunbeam settled on 
the west wall. If there was no west wall it settled on the ground; if there 
was no ground it settled on water; and if there was no water it would not 
settle anywhere. Thus, if bare knowing (the sunbeam) has nowhere to 
settle, it is not established anywhere.
Cessation of Delight (nandi)
Delight,	finding	pleasure	in,	is	sometimes	contrasted	with	
disillusionment. 
‘Bhikkhus, attend appropriately (yoniso manasikarotha) to Embodying … 
Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing. Perceive 
the impermanence of Embodying … Feeling … Recognizing … Willing 
and Habiting … Bare Knowing as it really is. When a bhikkhu attends 
appropriately and perceives the impermanence of Embodying … Feeling 
… Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing as it really is, he 
is disillusioned (nibbindati) with Embodying … Feeling … Recognizing … 
Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing. With the wasting of delight is the 
wasting of passion; with the wasting of passion is the wasting of delight. 
With the wasting of delight and passion the mind is liberated and is 
called thoroughly liberated.’ S.III,52.
At S.IV,142-3 the same is repeated for the six internal and six external 
sense bases.
3 S.II,103; the context is there being no lust for the Four Nutriments of material food, contact, volition or Bare 
Knowing/consciousness.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

276
BEYOND I-MAKING
Venerable Punna requests the Buddha to teach him Dhamma in brief. 
The	Buddha	responds:	
‘Punna, there are physical forms which the eye knows … sounds … 
smells … tastes … touches … mental phenomena which are pleasing, 
lovely, charming, pleasant, sensually enticing, arousing. If a bhikkhu 
does not seek delight, welcome and remain holding to them, delight 
ceases in him. Punna, with the ceasing of delight there is the ceasing  
of unsatisfactoriness, I say.’ S.IV,60f.
‘Here, bhikkhus, one does not seek delight, welcome or remain 
holding. And what does one not seek delight in, welcome, not remain 
holding? One does not seek delight in Embodying, welcome it and 
remain holding to it. Due to not seeking delight in Embodying, not 
welcoming it and not remaining holding to it, delight ceases. With the 
cessation of delight is the cessation of grasping; with the cessation of 
grasping, cessation of becoming … birth … ageing-and-death … this 
entire heap of unsatisfactoriness. 
One does not seek delight in Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and 
Habiting … Bare Knowing, does not welcome it, does not remain holding  
to it … cessation of this entire heap of unsatisfactoriness.’ S.III,14-15.

277
‘On seeing a visible object with the eye, … sound with the ear … smell  
with the nose … taste with the tongue … touch with the body …mental  
phenomena with the mind, he is not pleased with it if it is enticing;  
he is not averse to it if it is disagreeable. … Having given up compliance 
and opposition, whatever feeling he feels, whether pleasant, unpleasant  
or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant, he does not seek delight in that 
feeling, does not welcome it, does not remain holding to it. As he does 
not seek delight in that feeling, does not welcome it, does not remain 
holding to it, delight in feeling ceases. With the cessation of delight, 
there is cessation of grasping … cessation of becoming … cessation  
of this entire heap of unsatisfactoriness.’ M.I,270.
‘Do not welcome the past, nor long for the future;
The past has been left behind, and the future not arrived.
The presently arisen state, see it here with insight,
Irrefutable, unshakeable – knowing it with surety.
How, bhikkhus, does one not welcome the past? One does not bring  
up delight thinking, “I had such Embodying in the past.” … “I had  
such Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing  
in the past.” That is how one does not welcome the past.
How, bhikkhus, does one not long for the future? One does not bring  
up delight thinking, “May I have such Embodying in the future.” …  
“May I have such Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting …  
Bare Knowing in the future.” That is how one does not long for the 
future.’ M.III,187ff.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

278
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Way of Development
As mentioned above, besides the Way of Relinquishment, there is also 
a Way of Development where the development of certain qualities, 
reflections	or	spiritual	qualities	also	leads	to	the	cessation	of	craving.
In one discourse of the Pali Canon (A.II,145), Venerable Ananda states 
that craving is overcome through the craving for full awakening which, 
paradoxically, is only attained when craving ceases. This is similar to 
replacing worldly pleasure with spiritual pleasure. Of course, this is only 
effective	if	one	is	able	to	realize	full	awakening,	otherwise	one’s	craving	is	
simply compounded – material craving plus spiritual craving! 
While	there	may	be	benefit	in	nourishing	this	‘spiritual	craving’,	 
a	natural	effect	of	developing	skilful	reflections	or	spiritual	faculties	leads	
to reduction and elimination of craving. 
‘Bhikkhus, when one abides contemplating the danger in things  
that can be grasped, … the danger in things connected with the  
fetters, craving ceases.’ S.II,85-6.
‘When one abides unenamoured, unbound, uninfatuated, 
contemplating danger, then the Five Groups of Grasping incline to 
decrease in future, and craving – which gives renewed becoming, is 
connected with delight and passion, finding its delight in this and that – 
passes away. One’s bodily and mental distresses pass away; one’s bodily 
and mental torments pass away, one’s bodily and mental fevers pass 
away. One experiences bodily and mental well-being.’ M.III,288f.

279
‘Here, Udayi, a bhikkhu develops the Awakening Factor of mindfulness 
… investigation of phenomena … energy … joy … tranquillity … 
collectedness … equanimity, based upon seclusion, dispassion, 
cessation and maturing in relinquishment – which is abundant, made 
great, boundless and free of ill-will. As one cultivates the Awakening 
Factor of mindfulness … equanimity in this way, craving is given up;  
with the giving up of craving, intentional actions (kamma) are given up; 
with the giving up of intentional actions, unsatisfactoriness is given up.
Thus, Udayi, with the wasting of craving comes the wasting of 
intentional actions, with the wasting of intentional actions comes  
the wasting of unsatisfactoriness.’ S.V,86.
‘These four Attendings with Mindfulness (satipaṭṭhānā), when developed 
and cultivated, lead to the wasting away of craving. Here one abides 
contemplating the body in the body, … feelings in feelings … mind in 
mind … phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, 
mindful, having removed covetousness and displeasure regarding the 
world.’ S.V,300 summarised.
‘The Eightfold Path is to be developed, which is supported by  
seclusion, dispassion, cessation, maturing in relinquishment,  
for the higher knowledge of the three kinds of craving, for the  
thorough understanding of them, for the complete exhaustion  
and giving up of them.’ S.V,58	summarised.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

280
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘ … (those) fully understanding craving, without outflows,
I say, have crossed the flood.’ Sn	1082.
‘“The stream”, Venerable, is a designation for craving …  
the bhikkhu who is free of the outflows is called “one with  
the stream cut”.’ S.IV,292.
Cessation of Grasping
This chapter has focussed on the cessation of craving, however,  
on some occasions, work on the cessation of other factors which support 
the continuity of the cycles of renewed existence can lead  
to direct realization, and thus undermine the basis of craving. One  
such factor which is given particular attention is that of grasping. 
Craving may be the primary cause of identity, however, in order for  
identity to manifest, Grasping (upādāna) must occur, in any of its four  
forms:	sensual	pleasures	(kāma); views (diṭṭhi); rules and observances 
(sīlabbata); or doctrine of self (attavāda) (M.I,51;I,66; S.II,3). Whenever 
a sense object is perceived, a presumed subject is also perceived. 
Therefore, Grasping a pleasurable sense object results in grasping  
the	presumed	subject	which	serves	to	verify	and	confirm	a	stable	 
self	subject.	Views	are	created	by	self	so	are	invariably	self-affirming.	
Grasping them serves to consolidate this process. Rules and observances 
mainly refer to spiritual practices, however, in general, they imply 
habitual	activities	which	are	affirming	self	activities.	Doctrines	of	self	are,	
of course, self-reinforcing beliefs.

281
As we may recall from Chapter 9 on Conditional Causality, Grasping  
is conditioned by Craving, which is in turn conditioned by Feeling,  
which is conditioned by Contact. Thus if the factors of the initial 
conditioning process cease, then Grasping will cease.
‘Now what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for the full understanding of  
all grasping? In dependence upon the eye and visible objects,  
eye-knowing arises. The union of the three is contact. With contact 
as condition there is feeling. Thus seeing the learned noble disciple 
is disillusioned with the eye, with visible objects, with eye-knowing, 
with eye-contact, with feeling. Disillusioned, he is dispassionate; 
dispassionate he is liberated; with release he clearly knows:   
“Grasping has been fully understood by me.”
In dependence upon the ear and sounds, … mind and mental 
phenomena, mind-knowing arises. The union of the three is contact.  
With contact as condition there is feeling. Thus seeing the learned noble 
disciple is disillusioned with the ear, with sounds, … with  
mind-knowing, with mind-contact, with feeling. Disillusioned,  
he is dispassionate; dispassionate he is liberated; with release he clearly 
knows: “Grasping has been fully understood by me.”’ S.IV,32f.
‘Now what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma for the exhaustion  
of all grasping? 
What do you think, bhikkhus, is the eye permanent or impermanent? 
Impermanent, Venerable.
Whatever is impermanent, is it unpleasant or pleasant?
Unpleasant, Venerable.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

282
BEYOND I-MAKING
Whatever is impermanent, unpleasant and subject to change,  
is it fit to be regarded as: “This is mine, this I am, this is my self?”
No, Venerable.
Are visible objects … eye-knowing … eye-contact … and whatever 
feeling arises with eye-contact as condition – whether pleasant, 
unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant ... the ear … nose 
… tongue … body … mind … mental phenomena … mind-knowing 
… mind-contact … feeling arises with mind-contact as condition – 
whether pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant  
… permanent or impermanent? … fit to be regarded as:  
“This is mine, this I am, this is my self?”
No, Venerable. 
‘Realizing thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disillusioned  
with the eye … visible objects … eye-knowing … eye-contact …  
and whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition –  
whether pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant 
... the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … mental phenomena … 
mind-knowing … mind-contact … feeling arises with mind-contact  
as condition – whether pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasantnor-pleasant. Disillusioned, he is dispassionate; dispassionate he  
is liberated; with liberation comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”.  
He knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled,  
what had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’  
S.IV,34f	[same	as	at	S.IV,24f].

283
‘Bhikkhus, that is the incomparable state of excellent peace and 
highest wisdom realised by the Tathagata, that is, liberation through 
not grasping, through understanding as they really are the origination, 
passing away, gratification, disadvantage and escape regarding  
the six bases of contact.’ M.II,238.
‘He does not make arrangements nor create any volition regarding either 
existence or non-existence. Since he does not make arrangements nor 
create any volition regarding either existence or non-existence, he 
does not grasp anything in the world. Not grasping, he is not excited. 
Not being excited, he personally [reaches] Nibbāna. He knows clearly: 
“Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled, what had to be done is 
done, this life is not to be in future.’ M.III,244.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION  |  CRAVING

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Close your eyes gently and bring attention  
to the breathing.
•  Bring up the thought ‘I am’ and notice  
how you sense your ‘I am-ness’ –  
as physical sensation, or feeling,  
or mental/emotional condition.
•  Is ‘I am’ always present, or is  
it sometimes not present?
•  Can you observe when and how  
the sense of ‘I am’ arises?
•  Can you observe when ‘I am’ is not present?
•  What is that experience like?
•  When suitable, bring your attention  
back to the breathing. 
•  Relax your posture and open your eyes.

285
The conceit ‘I am’ is one of the last of the fetters to be eliminated  
before the realization of liberation or arahantship. It is thus quite  
a subtle aspect of the I-making process. The following excerpt from  
the	Pali	Canon	illustrates	this	subtlety:
The gravely ill bhikkhu Khemaka is questioned by some colleagues who  
conclude that he is an arahant. However, bhikkhu	Khemaka	responds:	
‘I surely, friend, do not regard these Five Groups of Grasping as self  
or as belonging to self, but I am not an arahant, without outflows.  
To me, friends, the Five Groups of Grasping are still in possession  
of “I am”, but I do not regard them as “This I am”.
...
However much, friends, the noble disciple has given up the five  
lower fetters, still, in regard to the Five Groups of Grasping, there 
remains not uprooted a residue of conceit “I am”, of desire “I am”,  
of underlying disposition “I am”. 
In the course of time, he abides contemplating the rise and fall of the  
Five Groups of Grasping: “Thus is Embodying, thus its arising, thus  
its setting; thus is Feeling … thus is Recognizing … thus is Willing  
and Habiting … thus is Bare Knowing, thus its arising, thus its setting.” 
NINETEEN
The Conceit ‘I Am’
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’

286
BEYOND I-MAKING
As he thus abides contemplating the rise and fall of the Five Groups of 
Grasping the residue conceit “I am”, of desire “I am”, of underlying 
disposition “I am” not uprooted, comes to be uprooted.’ S.III,128f.
The meaning of this passage is that Bhikkhu Khemaka is at the third 
stage of awakening, since he has ‘given up the five lower fetters’, one 
of which is the identity view ‘This I am’. However he has not completely 
uprooted the conceit ‘I am’, which is a more subtle level of identity,  
only uprooted at the last stage of awakening, that of arahant.1
Cessation of Conceiving
As we read in Chapter 6, ‘I am’ is a ‘conceiving’ (maññita), or  
self-referencing, which primarily arises in the perceptual process. 
The	Buddha	stated	that:	
‘Self-referencing is a disease, self-referencing is an abscess, selfreferencing is a dart. By overcoming all self-referencing, one is called  
a sage at peace. The sage at peace is not born, does not age, does not die; 
he is not agitated and does not desire. He has nothing of which  
to be born. Not being born, how could he age? Not ageing, how could  
he die? Not dying, how could he be excited? Not being excited, how could 
he desire?’ M.III,246.
The way to uproot all ‘I am’ self-referencing (conceivings) is to not allow 
self-referencing to impinge upon the perceptual process, which includes 
the six internal sense bases, the six external sense bases, sense knowing, 
sense contact and the feeling arising from sense contact (S.IV,22). This 
means that one just stays present with the bare knowing of sense 
1	 See	 CDB	1082,	n.176	and	NDB	1816,	n.1822:	‘The	conceit	“I	am”	(asmimāna) is more subtle than 
personal-existence view (sakkāya diṭṭhi)… It seems that personal-existence view has a stronger conceptual 
underpinning than the conceit “I am”, which is more closely connected to existential need and therefore can 
be eliminated only at arahantship.’

287
contact without the addition of the conceit ‘I am’ impinging on sense 
contact – rather than ‘I am seeing’ there is just ‘seeing’. 
This requires, of course, that one is fully aware of the entire perceptual 
process and has clearly seen how self-referencing manifests. This  
is accomplished through diligent development of mindfulness of  
the Six Sense Bases as outlined in the Discourse on the Foundations  
of Mindfulness (MN.10; DN.22).
‘And what, bhikkhus, is the way appropriate for uprooting all selfreferencing? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu does not self-reference the eye, 
does not self-reference in the eye, does not self-reference from the eye, 
does not self-reference that the eye is mine. He does not self-reference 
visible objects … eye-knowing … eye-contact … and, regarding 
whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition – whether 
pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant, he does 
not self-reference that, does not self-reference in that, does not selfreference from that, does not self-reference that is mine.
He does not self-reference the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind …  
mental phenomena … mind-knowing … mind-contact … feeling …  
he does not self-reference that, does not self-reference in that, does not 
self-reference from that, does not self-reference that is mine.  
He does not self-reference all, does not self-reference in all, does not 
self-reference from all, does not self-reference all is mine.
He, not conceiving in this way, does not grasp anything in the world. Not 
grasping, he is not excited2. Not being excited, he personally [reaches] 
Nibbāna. He knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is 
fulfilled, what had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ 
S.IV,22; 65f.
2	 Following	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	(CDB	765,	n.137).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’

288
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
exercise
•  Pause your reading and bring your awareness to the body. Be aware  
of the condition of body at this time, then settle attention on breathing.
•  When the mind is calm enough, move your eyes around observing  
the sights that contact the eye.
•  Can you see without any self-referencing?
•  Are there certain sights which do elicit self-referencing?
•  Can you notice a difference in your mental state when  
there is or isn’t self-referencing?
•  If suitable, try this procedure with sounds, smells, tastes and touch.
• Return attention to the body, and resume reading.

289
Perception of Impermanence
The most direct way to not revert to conceiving is to contemplate 
impermanence in regard to the perceptual process. When 
impermanence is clearly seen then it is possible to abide with the 
impersonal sense perceptions without personalizing them with ‘I’. 
Instead of ‘I am seeing a particular sight’, we understand that there are 
merely	changing	images,	which	are	then	filtered	through	Recognizing,  
and acted upon through Willing and Habiting.
‘And what, bhikkhus, is the way appropriate for uprooting  
all conceivings? 
What do you think, bhikkhus, is the eye permanent or impermanent? 
Impermanent, Venerable.
Whatever is impermanent, is it unpleasant or pleasant?
Unpleasant, Venerable.
Whatever is impermanent, unpleasant and subject to change,  
is it fit to be regarded as: “This is mine, this I am, this is my self?”
No, Venerable.
Are visible objects … eye-knowing … eye-contact … and whatever 
feeling arises with eye-contact as condition – whether pleasant, 
unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant ... the ear … nose 
… tongue … body … mind … mental phenomena … mind-knowing 
… mind-contact … feeling arises with mind-contact as condition – 
whether pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant  
… permanent or impermanent … fit to be regarded as: “This is mine, 
this I am, this is my self?”
No, Venerable. 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’

290
BEYOND I-MAKING
Realizing thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disillusioned with  
the eye … visible objects … eye-knowing … eye-contact … and 
whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition – whether 
pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant ... the  
ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … mental phenomena …  
mind-knowing … mind-contact … feeling arises with mind-contact  
as condition – whether pleasant, unpleasant or neither-unpleasantnor-pleasant. Disillusioned, he becomes dispassionate; dispassionate 
he is liberated; with liberation comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”. He 
knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled,  
what had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ S.IV,24f. 
‘The perception of impermanence should be developed for the 
uprooting of the “I am” conceit. Perceiving impermanence, bhikkhus, 
the perception of not a permanent self is established. Perceiving  
not a permanent self one uproots the “I am” conceit and arrives  
at Nibbāna in this very life.’ A.IV,353.
Through the insight into impermanence one understands that what  
we took to be permanent objects (the Five Groups of Grasping) are 
actually impermanent processes and thus not a permanent self. This 
insight then uproots the idea that ‘I am’ something – if all I identify with 
is changing processes, then where ‘am I’?

291
Two	other	contemplations	specifically	mentioned	as	leading	to	the 
uprooting of the ‘I am’ conceit are mindfulness directed to the body 
(A.I,44) and the various stages of the decaying corpse (asubha) (A.III,323-5). 
	Upon	birth,	the	sensations	of	body	are	the	first	and	most	immediate	
experience we have, so conceit regarding the body – ‘This is my body’  
– is deeply ingrained in our being. These two contemplations help  
to uproot this primal bodily conceit and associated conceits. 
True Knowledge (vijjā)
The arising of True Knowledge is equivalent to realizing the stage  
of arahant and thus the complete cessation of conceit.
‘ … the instructed noble disciple abandons ignorance (avijjā) and  
gives rise to true knowledge (vijjā). With the waning of ignorance  
and the arising of true knowledge, ‘I am’ does not come to be …’.	S.III,47.
A king hears the sound of a lute for the first time and is enthralled  
with it. He asks to have the lute brought to him and, when it is, he says 
that he only wants the sound not the lute. The messenger explains that 
the combined components of the lute make the sound. The king then 
breaks the lute into pieces and destroys it without finding its sound, 
bemoaning how people have been deceived by it.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’

292
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Even so, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu searches Embodying as far as the range of 
Embodying, he searches Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting 
… Bare Knowing as far as the range of Bare Knowing.’
When he does so, ‘… whatever of “I” or “mine” or “I am” had occurred 
before, no longer occurs.’ S.IV,196f.
Right Penetration of Conceit (sammā mānābhisamaya)
Realizing the stage of arahant, when all the Outflows	have	been	
removed, is sometimes expressed with the phrase ‘cut off craving, 
turned away from the fetters, and, through right penetration of conceit, 
has made an end of suffering’ (M.I,12). Right penetration of conceit 
(sammā mānābhisamaya3) means that the arahant has completely seen 
through the illusion of ‘I am’ conceit and no longer grasps it. 
‘Bhikkhus, there are these three feelings. What three? There is pleasant 
feeling, unpleasant feeling and neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant 
feeling. Pleasant feeling should be regarded as suffering, unpleasant 
feeling should be regarded as a dart, neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant 
feeling should be regarded as impermanent.’ 
Thus regarding, ‘he is called a bhikkhu who sees rightly, has cut off 
craving, turned away from the fetters, and, through right penetration of 
conceit, has made an end of suffering.’ S.IV,207.
3	 Mānābhisamaya	refers	to	the	Arahant,	while	Dhammābhisamaya,	the	penetration	of	Dhamma,	refers	to	
the	stream	enterer.	cf.	S.II,133f;	CDB.p.787,	n.219.

293

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to the breathing.
•  When the mind is somewhat settled, observe  
if there is a particular physical sensation, feeling 
or mental state which you experience as your 
familiar sense of self.
•  How prominent or intense, or light and spacious 
is that experience of your self?
•  Or, can you experience physical sensation, 
feeling or mental state without the sense  
of self arising?
•  What is that like?
•  Bring your attention back to the breathing.
•  When it seems suitable, open your eyes  
and resume your activity.

295
The most comprehensive explanation of the various means leading 
to the cessation of the underlying dispositions is given by Venerable 
Sariputta in the Discourse on Right View (MN.9/M.I,46-55). He explains the 
various ways in which a ‘noble disciple’ is of ‘right view1, whose  
view is straight, who is possessed of perfect confidence in the  
Dhamma and has arrived at this true Dhamma.’ Once any of these 
various aspects of the teachings have been understood, they ‘entirely 
forsake the underlying disposition to passion, they dispel the underlying 
disposition to aversion, uproot the view and conceit “I am”, and by the 
forsaking of ignorance and the arising of true knowledge, in this very life 
make an end of suffering.’
The	various	ways	of	understanding	are	enumerated	as	follows:2
1 | 	Understanding	the	unskilful	(akusala)	and	its	roots:	greed	(lobha), 
hatred (dosa), delusion (moha); and the skilful (kusala)	and	its	roots:	 
non-greed, non-hatred, non-delusion; 
2 | 	 	Understanding	any	of	the	following	factors,	its	origin,	its	cessation	
and	the	path	to	its	cessation:	
a.	 	Four	nutriments:	physical	food,	contact,	volition,	bare	knowing;	
craving is their origin, cessation of craving is their cessation;  
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
1	 See	MN.117/M.III,71f	on	mundane	and	supramundane	right	view.
2 Factors ‘c to n’ are the twelve factors of Dependent Origination. 
TWENTY
Underlying Disposition
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  UNDERLYING DISPOSITION

296
BEYOND I-MAKING
b.	 	Four	Noble	Truths:	dukkha, origin in craving, cessation of craving  
is cessation,The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
c.	 	Ageing-and-death:	origin	in	birth,	cessation	of	birth	is	cessation,	 
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
d.	 	Birth:	origin	in	becoming,	cessation	of	becoming	is	cessation,	 
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
e.	 	Becoming:	origin	in	grasping,	cessation	of	grasping	is	cessation,	 
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
f.  Grasping:	origin	in	craving,	cessation	of	craving	is	cessation,	 
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
g.  Craving:	origin	in	feeling,	cessation	of	feeling	is	cessation,	 
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
h.  Feeling:	origin	in	contact,	cessation	of	contact	is	cessation,	 
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
i.  Contact:	origin	in	sixfold	sense	base,	cessation	of	sixfold	sense	 
base is cessation, The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
j.	 	Sixfold	sense	base:	origin	in	mentality-materiality, cessation  
of mentality-materiality is cessation, The Eightfold Path is  
the path to cessation;
k.	 	Mentality-materiality:	origin	in	bare	knowing,	cessation	of	bare	
knowing is cessation, The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
l.	 	Bare	knowing:	origin	in	Willing and Habiting, cessation of Willing  
and Habiting is cessation, The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
m. Willing	and	Habiting:	origin	in	ignorance,	cessation	of	ignorance	 
 is cessation, The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;

297
n. Ignorance:	origin	in	Outflows	(āsava), cessation of Outflows	 
is cessation, The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation;
o.  Outflows:	three	Outflows	=	sensuality,	becoming,	ignorance;	 
origin in ignorance3, cessation of ignorance is cessation,  
The Eightfold Path is the path to cessation.
Other means to the cessation of the underlying dispositions  
are	also	mentioned	in	the	Pali	Canon:
‘From what cause the perceptions and concepts from elaborations4  
assail a man; if there is nothing there to delight in, welcome or hold 
to, this is the end of the underlying disposition to passion, underlying 
disposition to aversion, underlying disposition to views, underlying 
disposition to doubt, underlying disposition to conceit, underlying 
disposition to passion for existence, underlying disposition to ignorance. 
This is the end of taking up the stick or sword, of quarrels, disputes, 
contention, strife, slander and wrong speech; here these evil unskilful 
states cease without remainder.’ M.I,109f.
‘Bhikkhus, there are these three feelings. What three? There is  
pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling and neither-unpleasant- 
nor-pleasant feeling. The underlying disposition to passion for  
pleasant feeling should be given up. The underlying disposition  
to aversion for unpleasant feeling should be given up. The  
underlying disposition to ignorance for neither-unpleasant- 
nor-pleasant feeling should be given up. 
3 Ignorance is conditioned by the Outflows	[which	include	ignorance]	and	the	Outflows	are	conditioned	by	
ignorance;	with	this	feedback	loop	there	is	thus	no	‘first	beginning’	to	the	cycle	of	Conditional	Causality.
4	 See	 Chapter	8,	note	1.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  UNDERLYING DISPOSITION

298
BEYOND I-MAKING
When, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu has given up (pahīna) the underlying 
disposition to passion for pleasant feeling, the underlying disposition 
to aversion for unpleasant feeling and the underlying disposition to 
ignorance for neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling, he is called  
“a bhikkhu without underlying dispositions, who sees rightly, has  
cut off craving, severed the fetters, and by thoroughly penetrating 
conceit, has made an end to dukkha.”’ S.IV,205.
‘Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and increased, the underlying 
dispositions are uprooted. What is that one thing? Mindfulness directed 
to the body.’ A.I,44.
‘For thorough knowing, full understanding, exhaustion and giving  
up of the seven underlying dispositions, the Noble Eightfold Path  
is to be developed.’ S.V,60.

299
The complete cessation of the underlying dispositions is the equivalent 
of realizing the stage of arahant – the ending of the seven underlying 
dispositions corresponding closely to the ending of the ten Fetters.  
The	difference	is	the	addition	of	adherence	to	rules	and	observances	and	
restlessness, and passion for existence divided into passion for material 
existence and passion for immaterial existence for the Fetters. This 
means that insight into impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not a 
permanent self has penetrated to the most basic level of identity and has 
uprooted all potential for I-making, as there is no longer any underlying 
disposition to ‘I am’ conceit.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  UNDERLYING DISPOSITION

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to breathing.
•  When the mind seems to be reasonably calm, 
bring up the perception of impermanence.
•  Is this perception primarily a conceptual 
experience, or can you experience it at  
a deeper level?
•  Are there any associations arising from  
the deep experience of impermanence?
•  Can you touch into the unsatisfactoriness  
of impermanence, the uncertainty and  
insecurity of it?
•  And, if this impermanence is insecure,  
what can you do about it, what control  
do you have over it?
•  When suitable, bring your attention back  
to the breathing.
• Open your eyes and resume your activity.

301
‘Embodying, bhikkhus, is impermanent; Feelings … Recognizing … 
Willing and Habiting … Bare Knowing is impermanent …  
unsatisfactory … not a permanent self. Seeing thus, bhikkhus,  
the instructed noble disciple experiences disillusionment (nibbidā) 
towards Embodying … Feelings … Recognizing … Willing and  
Habiting … Bare Knowing. Experiencing disillusionment, he  
becomes dispassionate (virāga). Through dispassion he is liberated. 
With liberation (vimutta) comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”.  
He clearly knows: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled,  
what had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ S.III,21.
Liberation is the cessation of the ‘I-making’ processes, which is  
also complete freedom from unsatisfactoriness (dukkha) and the  
fetters which bind one to the cycles of birth and death. Liberation  
comes about as a result of a penetrating insight following any of the 
three prinicple modes of contemplation to develop true knowledge  
(see Chapter 16). This insight radically alters our understanding  
of reality and how we relate to it.
Contemplation of impermanence is the most frequently mentioned 
contemplation in the Pali Canon. If the contemplation of impermanence 
is followed to a deeper level, there arises the realization that what is 
impermanent is very unreliable and insecure, and thus unsatisfactory. 
TWENTY ONE
Liberation
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  LIBERATION

302
BEYOND I-MAKING
We direct our will, we plan, organise and try to manage our life in order to 
be happy and comfortable, but the universal law of impermanence can 
suddenly sweep everything away like a merciless tsunami.
When we truly understand the all-pervading unsatisfactoriness of no 
permanent security, the realization of just how little control we have over 
our life situation suddenly dawns upon us. We clearly see that what we 
previously believed to be a permanent, stable and reliable self is, in fact, 
a complete illusion. This deep realization of no permanent self gives rise 
to an experience of disillusionment (nibbidā). However, since this insight 
arose from clearly seeing ‘the way things really are’, the only solution 
is to surrender to this truth with dispassion (virāga). One’s grasping at 
and craving for anything as a permanent self fall away, and a liberating 
release is realized. 
Nibbidā: Disillusionment 
Nibbidā is an experience which is hard to explain to most people. It can  
be translated as disillusionment, disenchantment, or world weariness.1  
It	is	an	experience	of	being	put	off	by	or	fed	up	with	the	phenomenal	
world, much like what happens when you suddenly see someone as they 
really are after being fooled by their charm for so long.
Nibbidā	is	not	simply	depression	or	despair	from	facing	hardship	 
or loss, but rather a deep disappointment that one has been deluded  
for so long. It arises from a deep insight into the true nature of life.2 
1 Bhikkhu Bodhi translates nibbidā as ‘disenchantment’ in MLDB and NDB, while in CDB he translates it as 
‘revulsion’, noting, ‘What is intended by this is not a reaction of emotional disgust, accompanied by horror and 
aversion, but a calm inward turning away from all conditioned existence ….’ (CDB. p.53).
2	 At	M.I,511	the	Buddha	says	to	the	wanderer	Magandiya	that	when	he	has	seen	Nibbāna	he	might	think,	 
‘For a long time, indeed, I have been cheated, deceived and seduced by this mind.’

303
Even though we know that everything is impermanent on a conceptual 
level, this insight shakes the very fabric of our view of life, much like  
the	realization	that	the	love	affair	is	really	over.
The arising of nibbidā	is	facilitated	through:
•  contemplating the rising and passing of the six senses (S.IV,140),
•  contemplating the impermanence of feelings (M.I,500),
•  seeing no permanent self in the six internal and external sense bases, 
sense knowing, sense contact, and any Feeling, Recognizing, Willing 
and Habiting and Bare Knowing arising from sense contact (M.III,279f), 
•  seeing no permanent self through the parts of the body representing 
five	of	the	six	elements	(M.I,422f;	M.III,240f),
•  knowing the disadvantage in the four elements (S.II,172f).
Nibbidā regarding the Five Groups of Grasping is what ‘accords with 
Dhamma’ (S.III,40)	and	is	supported	by:
•  developing The Eightfold Path	(M.II,82f),
•  developing The Seven Factors of Awakening	(S.V,82),
•  developing The Four Foundations of Mindfulness (S.V,179)	and
•	 	thinking	and	reflecting	upon	The	Four	Noble	Truths	(S.V,418f).
Its cause is knowledge and vision of the way things really are  
(yathābhūta ñāṇadassana) (S.II,30).
Nibbidā, although having a type of fear connected to it, also brings a  
relief that all the details have fallen into place. There are no longer 
any	doubts	or	alternatives	–	this	is	it,	no	use	fighting	against	it.	Our	
enthusiasm and passion for the way things used to be is exhausted –  
we surrender dispassionately.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  LIBERATION

304
BEYOND I-MAKING
Virāga: Dispassion 
Virāga literally means dispassion. As insight into impermanence, 
unsatisfactoriness and no permanent self deepens, the passions of anger 
and	greed	increasingly	fade	away.	At	the	first	level	of	awakening,	anger	
and greed are reduced; at the second level they are attenuated; and at 
the third level they completely fade away. When one truly realizes that 
there is nothing substantial to be angry at or lust after, what is the point 
of anger and greed?
‘As far as conditioned or unconditioned phenomena, dispassion is the 
foremost, that is, the subduing of pride, the removal of longing (pipāsa), 
the uprooting of attachment (ālaya), the termination of the round (of 
rebirth), the wasting of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna.’ A.II,34.
‘Bhikkhus, by thoroughly knowing (abhijāna) and fully understanding 
(parijāna) … [the Five Groups], by becoming dispassionate towards 
them and giving them up, one is able to experience the waning of 
dukkha.’ S.III,27.
Liberation (vimutti)
Liberation is often mentioned in the Pali Canon as consisting of two 
kinds:	liberation	of	mind	(cetovimutti) and liberation by wisdom 
(paññāvimutti). They express the two forms of realization of ultimate 
liberation accomplished through developing Calm and Insight 
meditation respectively.

305
‘Bhikkhus, these two things are conducive to true knowledge (vijjā). 
What two? Calm (samatha) and Insight (vipassanā). When Calm is 
developed, what is the benefit? The mind is developed. When the mind 
is developed, what is the benefit? Passion is abandoned. When Insight is 
developed, what is the benefit? Wisdom is developed. When wisdom is 
developed, what is the benefit? Ignorance is abandoned.
A mind defiled by passion is not liberated and wisdom defiled by 
ignorance is not developed. Thus, bhikkhus, through the passing  
away of passion there is liberation of mind (cetovimutti), and 
through the passing away of ignorance there is liberation by wisdom 
(paññāvimutti).’ A.I,61.
Venerable Ananda states that there are three ways for Calm and  
Insight	to	be	practised	for	liberation:	developing	Calm	meditation,	 
then developing Insight Meditation; developing Insight meditation, and 
then developing Calm meditation, or developing Calm and  
Insight meditation together	(A.II,157).
Five things conducive to liberation of mind are having good friends, 
virtue, appropriate teaching, energy and wisdom (A.IV,357). Right View, 
when assisted by virtue, learning, discussion, Calm and Insight, has 
liberation of mind and liberation by wisdom as its fruit (A.III,21;	M.I,294). 
Five meditation subjects, if developed and increased, are mentioned 
as	specifically	leading	to	liberation	of	mind	and	liberation	by	wisdom:	
contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, the perception of  
the repulsiveness of food, the perceiving of not taking delight in all  
the world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned things,  
and having the perception of death internally well established (A.III,84).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  LIBERATION

306
BEYOND I-MAKING
Four Stages of Awakening
For most people, Liberation occurs in stages. The Pali Canon designates 
four	distinct	stages:	Stream-entry,	Once-return,	Non-return	and	
Arahant. These are distinguished by the type of Fetter which is 
attenuated or abandoned. 
Stream-Entry
The	first	stage	of	awakening	is	referred	to	as	stream-entry	(sotāpanna). 
This is characterized as a major insight into the impermanent and 
conditioned	nature	of	phenomena,	as	exemplified	in	the	teaching	 
on The Four Noble Truths.
The	first	stage	of	awakening	causes	a	major	shift	in	one’s	understanding of reality and results in a radical change in consciousness. The insight  
into impermanence and causal conditioning reveals impersonality, 
or the no permanent self characteristic of phenomena, such that the 
fetter of identity view (sakkāya diṭṭhi) is relinquished. Having realized the 
conditioned nature of all phenomena, the fetter of holding to rules and 
observances (sīlabbata-parāmāsa) is abandoned. And through directly 
experiencing the truth of the Buddha’s teaching, the fetter/hindrance 
of	doubt	is	abandoned	and	one	gains	complete	confidence	in	the	
Buddha,	Dhamma	and	Sangha.	This	is	a	very	significant	and	important	
breakthrough in understanding the Buddha’s teaching. 
The	term	‘stream-entry’	means	that	one	is	now	in	the	stream	flowing	
to	Nibbāna,	as	one’s	understanding	is	such	that	there	is	no	longer	any	
going back to states of serious ignorance which would cause rebirth 
in the ‘states of woe’, which are the hell realm, the animal realm, and 
the hungry ghost realm	(A.II,238). Three kinds of stream-enterer are 
mentioned:	one	is	reborn	among	humans	or	celestials	(deva) up to seven

307
more times; one is reborn among humans of ‘good family’ two  
or three times; one is reborn only once more among humans (A.I,233).
The	four	results	of	stream-entry	are	complete	confidence	in	the	Buddha,	 
in	the	Dhamma	and	in	the	Sangha,	and	maintaining	the	Five	Precepts:
‘Endowed with morality which is agreeable to the noble ones, unbroken, 
flawless, spotless, freeing, praised by the wise, untarnished, conducive 
to concentration.’ A.V,183f.
On several occasions the Buddha substituted generosity for the 
Precepts.	On	those	occasions	he	was	addressing	specific	individuals3  
who	he	perhaps	knew	could	benefit	from	developing	generosity	but	were	
already	well-established	in	the	Precepts.	In	the	case	of	Anāthapiṇḍika,	
the Buddha added an extra factor, the ‘noble method’, which is 
explained as ‘clearly seeing and thoroughly understanding with wisdom’ 
Dependent Origination (A.V,184).	This	may	have	been	a	specific	teaching	
for the already devoted, virtuous and generous lay supporter whose 
progress	on	the	path	could	benefit	from	deeper	insight	into	this	topic.
The	six	benefits	of	realizing	stream-entry	are:	1)	one	is	certain	in	 
true	Dhamma,	2)	one	does	not	decline,	3)	one’s	suffering	is	limited,	 
4)	one	possesses	uncommon	knowledge,	5)	one	has	clearly	seen	cause,	
and 6) one has clearly seen things arising from cause (A.III,441).
Sceptical doubt as a hindrance is overcome at stream-entry. With  
the profound insight of the vision of Dhamma or opening of the 
Dhamma eye (or sometimes called the ‘breakthrough to Dhamma 
[dhammābisamaya]’,	S.II,133f), the stream-enterer has gone beyond doubt 
about	the	teaching	(Dhamma),	and	also	gains	complete	confidence	in	
the Buddha and the Sangha. There is, however, still ignorance until the 
stage of arahantship, and there may be a residue of other forms of doubt. 
One	passage	in	fact	says	that	the	final	escape	from	the	dart	of	doubt	
3	 Isidatta	and	Purana	at	S.V,348f	and	Kaligodha	at	S.V,398f.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  LIBERATION

308
BEYOND I-MAKING
and uncertainty is uprooting the conceit ‘I am’ (A.III,292). Since conceit is 
only fully transcended at arahantship, this would imply that some doubt 
and	uncertainty	are	still	present	until	final	liberation.	Elsewhere	it	is	also	
implied	that	only	the	arahant	has	arrived	at	complete	confidence	in	the	
Triple Gem (M.I,184), and thus totally transcended doubt.
Once-Return 
The next stage of the awakening process is called ‘once-return’ 
(sakadāgāmi). While the realization resulting in stream-entry is 
dramatic,	the	transition	to	this	next	stage	is	more	subtle.	It	differs	from	
stream-entry only as having diminished passion, aversion and delusion 
(rāga-dosa-moha). 
‘With the exhaustion of the three fetters [same as stream-enterer]  
and the diminishing of passion, aversion and delusion, they are a oncereturner, coming back to this world only once before making an end  
of suffering.’ A.I,233. 
Exactly how this is accomplished is not explained further. As with 
the	stream-enterer,	once-returners	fulfil	morality,	but	only	develop	
concentration and wisdom to a moderate degree (A.I,233). 
Non-Return
In the third stage, called ‘non-return’ (anāgāmi),	the	‘five	lower	fetters’	
are exhausted; that is, the same three as for the stream-enterer, plus 
sensual passion and aversion/repulsion are transcended. Five gradations 
of	non-returner	are	distinguished	(A.IV,70f).4 They are referred to as 
being ‘spontaneously reborn’ (in one of the higher heavens) and, without 
returning	(to	human	birth),	attaining	final	awakening	(D.I,156). 
4	 For	further	details	see	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	note	in	CDB,	1902	n.65.

309
Arahant 
The last stage of awakening is called the arahant, literally, ‘the worthy 
one’.
‘With the destruction of the outflows, he realizes for himself with  
special knowledge, in this life, the liberation of mind and liberation  
by wisdom which is without the outflows, and thus he abides  
calmed.’ A.I,234.
With the realization of this state, all ten of the fetters are destroyed and 
the Hindrances of lethargy and drowsiness, and restlessness eliminated. 
This realization is mostly described with reference to the ‘destruction of 
the	outflows’	of	sensuality5, existence, views and ignorance, which have a 
correlation	with	the	fetters	(see	Table	below).	An	arahant	is	also	defined	
as ‘free of the outflows, having completed the holy life, done what had 
to be done, laid down the burden, attained his own welfare, completely 
exhausted the fetters of existence, having perfectly understood 
liberation’ (A.IV,369f).	At	this	stage,	with	all	defilements	of	the	mind	
totally eliminated, arahants are referred to as ‘beyond training’ (asekha), 
as they have completed the training in morality, meditation and wisdom 
(A.I,234).
‘Then the Venerable Anuruddha, dwelling alone, withdrawn, vigilant, 
ardent, resolute, in no long time understood Dhamma for himself  
with direct knowledge, and knowing for himself, entered on and abode 
in that unsurpassed culmination of the religious life for which a man  
of good family rightly goes forth from home life to homelessness. And 
he knew: ‘Exhausted is birth, fulfilled is the religious life, what had to be 
done is done, this life is not to be in future.’ And Venerable Anuruddha 
became one of the arahants.’ A.I,282.
5	 While	 passion	for	sensuality	of	the	sense	realm	is	exhausted	by	the	non-returner,	two	of	the	last	five	fetters	
exhausted	by	the	arahant	are	passion	for	the	fine	material	realm	(rūpa-rāga) and passion for the immaterial 
realm (arūpa-rāga).
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  LIBERATION

310
BEYOND I-MAKING
The arahant is incapable of killing, stealing, sexual intercourse, lying, 
storing things for enjoyment, disavowing the Buddha, the Dhamma, the 
Sangha and the training, and following a wrong course through desire, 
aversion, delusion or fear (A.IV,370f). At least four types of arahant are 
designated:	those	who	possess	the	triple	knowledge	(te-vijjā), those 
who possess the six kinds of psychic powers (abhiññā), those who are 
‘liberated-both-ways’ and those who are liberated by wisdom (S.I,191). 
The one liberated-both-ways is said to be able to ‘attain with the body 
and abide in those liberations6 which are peaceful, beyond forms, 
immaterial, and his outflows are exhausted through seeing  
with wisdom’ (M.I,477). ‘Liberated by wisdom’ means that they are 
not	able	to	attain	the	‘immaterial	liberations’,	but	the	outflows	are	
exhausted. This would include the so-called ‘dry vision’ or ‘dry insight’ 
(sukkha-vipassaka) arahant, whom the commentarial tradition 
interprets as not having attained the absorptions.7	It seems that  
the majority of arahants were of the ‘liberated by wisdom’ type, as  
one discourse mentions that of 500 arahants present there were sixty 
each	of	the	first	three	types	and	thus	320	liberated	by	wisdom	(S.I,191).
6 This would imply that they are at least able to access the formless absorptions (arūpa-jhāna),  
four	absorptions	using	a	‘formless’	object	for	concentration:	boundless	space,	boundless	consciousness,	
sphere of nothingness, sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
7	 However,	see	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	note	in	CDB,	p.785,	note	210,	and	Analayo	(2015)	pp.252f.

311
Comparing the Factors of the Outflows, Graspings,  
Hindrances, Dispositions and Fetters
OUTFLOWS GRASPING HINDRANCES DISPOSITIONS FETTERS
Sensuality Sensuality Sensual desire Sensual passion + Sensual passion
Ill-will Repulsion + Ill-will
View View View +Identity view
Doubt Doubt +Doubt
Rules & Rituals +Holding to Rites
Existence Passion for 
Existence
Passion for 
Fine-Material Realm
*Lethargy Passion for  
Immaterial Realm
Self view Conceit Conceit
Restlessness Restlessness
Ignorance Ignorance Ignorance
*No	correlation +Five	Lower	Fetters
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  LIBERATION

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to breathing.
•  When the mind seems to be reasonably calm, 
turn your attention to how you experience your 
self right now.
•  Is this experience primarily physical sensation, 
feeling, mental/emotional mood, or is it 
primarily conceptual?
•  Try to see this experience as temporarily 
conditioned without self references – just 
embodying, just feeling, just thinking.
•  Do you notice any changes in the experience 
when seen this way?
•  How would you summarize those changes?
•  When suitable, bring your attention back to the 
breathing.
•  Open your eyes and resume your activity.

313
This contemplative enquiry began as an investigation of the phrase 
‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit’  
as it is occasionally referenced in the Pali Canon. Most of these references 
were made in the context of an enquiry as to how ‘I-making, minemaking and the underlying disposition to conceit’ could cease, to which 
the Buddha replies using specialized terms, since he was responding to 
questions from advanced disciples.
To better understand the meaning of these questions and their  
answers, it was necessary to study various aspects of the Buddha’s 
spiritual discoveries and the concepts he used. Now that we have covered 
a	significant	amount	of	background	material,	we	can	return	 
to our initial investigation of the phrase ‘I-making, mine-making  
and the underlying disposition to conceit’ in order to explain it  
and the equally cryptic responses about its ceasing.
As explained in the Introduction on the various contexts in which  
this	phrase	was	used,	while	there	are	seven	specific	types	of	inquiry,	 
the Buddha directly gave only four unique answers. Several of the 
dialogues include further details of the process of liberation and other 
references may help to further elaborate the process of liberation.
TWENTY TWO
Ending I-Making
. . . . . . . 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

314
BEYOND I-MAKING
Methods for the Cessation of ‘I-Making, Mine-Making  
and the Underlying Disposition to Conceit’, Liberation,  
and the Realization of Nibbāna
A. Seeing as it really is (yathābhūta) with right wisdom 
(sammappaññāya) thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not,  
this is not my self’
The most common types of inquiry regarding the cessation of I-making, 
mine-making, and the underlying disposition to conceit occur in two 
particular	forms:	
a. ‘Venerable, how should one know, how should one see in regard  
to this body with consciousness and in regard to all external signs,  
so that I-making, mine-making, and the underlying disposition  
to conceit no longer occur?’ S.II,252;III,79f;103;135f;169;	M.III,18f. 
b. ‘Venerable, how should one know, how should one see in regard  
to this body with consciousness and in regard to all external signs,  
so that the mind is free of I-making, mine-making, and conceit,  
has gone beyond all subjective distinctions, and is peaceful and  
well-liberated?’ S.II,253;III,80f;136f;170.
The	Buddha’s	responses	are	similar	in	both	cases:	
‘Whatsoever kind of Embodying, Feeling, Recognizing, Willing  
and Habiting, Bare Knowing, whether past, future or present,  
internal or external, coarse or subtle, inferior or superior, far or  
near – one sees (passati) all Embodying, Feeling, Recognizing,  
Willing and Habiting, Bare Knowing as it really is (yathābhūta)  
with right wisdom (sammappaññāya) thus: “This is not mine,  
this I am not, this is not my self.”’ S.II,252;III,801;103;135f;169. 
1	 Venerable	Radha	(S.III,80)	and	Venerable	Suradha	(S.III,80f)	become	arahants.

315
The	second	response	concludes:	‘ … – having seen all Embodying, 
Feeling, Recognizing, Willing and Habiting, Bare Knowing as it really  
is with right wisdom thus: “This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my 
self”, one is liberated by non-grasping.’ S.II,253;III,80f;136f;170.
The Buddha’s responses epitomize the ultimate realization of the 
Buddha’s teaching – the truth of no permanent self. Of course, this 
realization is only complete if it has penetrated into all levels of selfidentity,	as	emphasized	by	the	phrase:	‘whether past, future or present, 
internal or external, coarse or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near’.
As we have seen from the previous material, this insight is usually 
facilitated through the contemplation and deep realization of 
impermanence, which may then expose the imperfection (dukkha)  
and impersonality (anattā) of reality. Once such insight occurs,  
further practice serves to deepen and broaden this realization until  
it permeates our entire being. The result is that we dis-identify  
from	all	five	of	the	factors	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping (rather than 
simply disassociate from them) such that one is completely liberated 
through no longer grasping any of these unsubstantial processes  
as a permanent self.
The three phrases in the Buddha’s response, ‘this is not mine  
(netaṃ mama), this I am not (nesohamasmi), this is not my self  
(na meso attā)’,	directly	counter	the	three	forms	of	identification	 
(in the order) mine-making (mamaṅkāra), I-making (ahaṅkāra)  
and the underlying disposition to conceit (mānānusaya).
In two places in the Pali Canon (S.III,103f; M.III,19f) the discourse with  
the Buddha’s response continues with ‘a certain bhikkhu’	reflecting,	 
‘If the Five Groups of Grasping are all not a permanent self, what manner 
of self will the kamma done by the no permanent self touch?’ 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

316
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Buddha, knowing this thought in that bhikkhu’s mind, proceeds  
to give the familiar question and answer format about whether  
each of the Five Groups of Grasping is permanent or impermanent, 
unpleasant or pleasant, and whether what is impermanent, unpleasant 
and subject to change is suitable to be regarded as, ‘This is mine, this  
I am, this is my self’?
The	discourses	then	finish	with	the	refrain:	
‘Realizing thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disillusioned with 
Embodying … Feeling ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare 
Knowing. Disillusioned, he becomes dispassionate; dispassionate  
he is liberated; with liberation comes the knowledge: “It is liberated”.  
He knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled, what 
had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ S.III,103f; M.III,19f.
‘What is the purpose, venerable sir, of seeing rightly (sammā dassanaṃ)?
The purpose of seeing rightly, Radha, is disillusionment (nibbidā).
What is the purpose, venerable sir, of disillusionment? 
The purpose of disillusionment is dispassion.
What is the purpose, venerable sir, of dispassion?
The purpose of dispassion is liberation.
What is the purpose, venerable sir, of liberation? 
The purpose of liberation is Nibbāna. 
What is the purpose, venerable sir, of Nibbāna?
You have come to the end of questioning, Radha. You were not  
able to know the limit to questioning. The religious life, Radha,  
is lived immersed in Nibbāna, with Nibbāna as its destination,  
with Nibbāna as its conclusion.’ S.III,189.

317
B. Destruction of the Outflows (āsava)
In the Discourse on the Sixfold Purity (MN.112), the Buddha explains  
that when a bhikkhu declares that he is an Arahant, he should  
be questioned in regard to various aspects of the teaching with  
the	last	question	being:
‘How does the Venerable one know, how does he see in regard  
to this body with consciousness and in regard to all external signs,  
so that I-making, mine-making, and the underlying disposition  
to conceit are uprooted?’
The bhikkhu’s response is the outline of the Progressive Path to Practice 
(see	Chapter	14	for	details),	which	concludes:
‘When my collected mind was thus purified, cleansed, passionless, 
without defilements, supple, workable, steady, imperturbable’, I 
directed it to the destruction of the outflows (āsava). I knew completely 
(abbhaññāsi) as it really is: “This is dukkha” … “This is the cause of 
dukkha” … “This is the cessation of dukkha” ... “This is the path to the 
cessation of dukkha”. I knew completely as it really is: “These are the 
outflows” ... “This is the cause of the outflows” … “This is the cessation 
of the outflows” ... “This is the path to the cessation of the outflows”. 
When I knew and saw thus, the mind was liberated from the outflow  
of sensual desire, the outflow of existence, and the outflow of ignorance. 
With liberation came the knowledge: “It is liberated. Exhausted is birth, 
the religious life is fulfilled, what had to be done is done, this life is not to 
be in future.”’ M.III,33ff. 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

318
BEYOND I-MAKING
Relevant to our inquiry are the four other responses given by bhikkhus to 
confirm	that	they	are	an	Arahant:
a. ‘Indeed, friends, with the seen … the heard … the sensed … the 
cognized (viññāta) I abide not attracted, not repelled, not dependent, 
not bound, released, unyoked, with an unrestricted mind. It is by 
knowing thus and seeing thus … through not grasping, my mind  
is liberated from the Outflows.’ M.III,29f.
The seen, the heard, the sensed and the cognized are, of course, all sense 
contact (the sensed representing smell, taste and touch). Thus, the 
bhikkhu is saying that he is completely released from grasping  
a self in any sense contact.2
b. ‘Friends, having known Embodying … Feelings ... Recognizing 
... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing to be weak, fading away, 
without comfort – with the decay, waning, cessation, giving up and 
relinquishment of taking up and grasping ... of mental resolution, 
inclination and underlying dispositions regarding Embodying … 
Feelings ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing,  
I have clearly known that the mind is liberated.’ M.III,30f.
You may recall from Chapter 12 that ‘taking up and grasping ... of mental 
resolution, inclination and underlying dispositions’ are factors of the 
‘supports for existence’ which are particular aspects of craving. This 
bhikkhu is thus saying that he has relinquished all craving regarding the 
Five Groups of Grasping, similarly as the two bhikkhus quoted below 
regarding the six elements and the Sense Bases respectively.
2	 See	the	teaching	to	Bahiya	towards	the	end	of	Chapter	17.

319
c. ‘Friends, I have approached the earth element as not a permanent  
self and with no permanent self dependent upon the earth element … 
water element … fire element … air element … space element …  
Bare Knowing element. And with the decay, waning, cessation, giving up 
and relinquishment of taking up and grasping ... of mental resolution, 
inclination and underlying dispositions regarding earth element … 
water element … fire element … air element … space element …  
Bare Knowing element, I have clearly known that the mind is liberated.’ 
M.III,31.
 
d. ‘Friends, with the decay, waning, cessation, giving up and 
relinquishment of desire, passion, enjoyment and craving, taking up 
and grasping, and of mental resolution, inclination and underlying 
dispositions with the eye, visible objects, eye-knowing and things 
cognizable through eye-knowing … ear-knowing … nose-knowing … 
tongue-knowing … body-knowing … mind-knowing, I have clearly 
known that the mind is liberated.’ M.III,32.
C. ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities 
(saṅkhārā), the relinquishing of all supports (upadhi), the wasting 
away of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbāna.’ 
Venerable	Ananda	asks	the	Buddha:
‘Venerable, could a bhikkhu obtain such collectedness that he would 
have no I-making, mine-making, and underlying disposition to conceit 
in regard to this conscious body, that he would have no I-making, 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

320
BEYOND I-MAKING
mine-making, and underlying disposition to conceit in regard to all 
external signs; and he would acquire and abide in that liberation of 
mind, liberation by wisdom, which has no I-making, mine-making, 
and underlying disposition to conceit for one who acquires and abides 
therein?’
The	Buddha	responds:
‘Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu thinks thus: “This is peaceful, this is  
sublime, that is, the stilling of all saṅkhārā, the relinquishing of  
all supports (upadhi), the wasting away of craving, dispassion,  
cessation, Nibbāna.”’3 A.I,132f; cf. S.V,226.
When a bhikkhu has realized this goal, he is called a bhikkhu	who:
‘ … has cut off craving, turned away from the fetters, and, through right 
penetration of conceit, has made an end of suffering.’ A.I,133ff. 
This answer from the Buddha is the most comprehensive description 
of the experience of liberation, and covers some of the more technical 
concepts used in the teachings, for example, saṅkhārā, and upadhi 
(supports).	We	learned	from	Chapter	7	that	the	term	saṅkhārā has several 
different	meanings.	In	regard	to	human	beings,	it	means	Willing and 
Habiting, as one of the Five Groups of Grasping. Willing is the source of 
kamma in order to continue the processes of I-making which, over time, 
become self-preserving Habiting. However, once we have realized the 
truth of no permanent self, we see through the illusion of making ‘I’, and 
thus the Willing of kamma is stilled.
3	 At	A.V,110	(The	Girimānanda	Discourse)	this	reflection	is	called	the	perception	of	dispassion	(virāgasaññā) 
and perception of cessation (nirodhasaññā).	At	A.IV,423	this	reflection	is	referred	to	as	the	Deathless	Element	
(amata dhātu).

321
‘… with the fading away of ignorance and the arising of true knowledge, 
they do not generate (abhisamkharoti) a meritorious saṅkhārā, a 
demeritorious saṅkhārā or an imperturbable saṅkhārā … they do not 
grasp anything in the world … not excited … personally realizes Nibbāna. 
He knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, the religious life is fulfilled, what 
had to be done is done, this life is not to be in future.”’ S.II,82.
Upadhi	is	defined	in	PED	as	‘putting	down	or	under,	foundation,	basis,	
ground, substratum (of rebirth). Bhikkhu Bodhi (CDB	348,	n.21) translates 
it as ‘acquisitions’, and says that it means, literally, ‘that upon which 
something rests’. He adds, ‘The word has both objective and subjective 
extensions. Objectively, it refers to the things acquired, i.e., one’s assets 
and possessions; subjectively, to the act of appropriation rooted in 
craving. In many instances the two senses merge, and often both are 
intended.’ In some contexts in the Pali Canon, the term ‘upadhi’ is used in 
place of craving and grasping (S.II,108). It is thus the support for continuity 
in the rounds of renewed existences.
‘Bhikkhus, whatever samana-brahmana in the past … future …  
at present, regard whatever in the world is agreeable and pleasurable as 
impermanent, as unsatisfactory, as not a permanent self, as a disease, 
as fearful – they abandon craving. In abandoning craving, they abandon 
upadhi. In abandoning upadhi they abandon dukkha. In abandoning 
dukkha, they are released from birth, ageing and death, released from 
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness and distress, I say.’ S.II,110f.
The most familiar explanation of the process of cessation (nirodha) is 
presented in the teaching on Conditional Causality (see Chapter 9) – 
with cessation of Ignorance, there is the cessation of (ignorance-based) 
saṅkhārā; with cessation of saṅkhārā, there is cessation of (ignorancebased) bare knowing; ... 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

322
BEYOND I-MAKING
D. Seeing the Arising and Disappearance of the Five Groups  
of Grasping  
‘Speculative views (diṭṭhigata), Vaccha, have been put away by the 
Tathāgata. The Tathāgata, Vaccha, has seen (diṭṭha) this: thus is 
Embodying, thus is Embodying’s arising, thus is Embodying’s passing 
away; thus is Feeling ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare 
Knowing, thus is Bare Knowing’s arising, thus is Bare Knowing’s passing 
away. 
Therefore, I say with the decay, waning, cessation, giving up, 
relinquishing of all conceivings, all mental disturbances (mathita),  
all I-making, mine-making and underlying dispositions to conceit,  
the Tathagata is liberated without grasping.’ M.I,486.
Vacchagotta further questions the Buddha where one so liberated arises 
after death, or do they not arise after death. The Buddha answers that 
such	terms	as	‘arise’	or	‘not	arise’	do	not	apply	and	clarifies	this	by	giving	
the	example	of	when	a	fire	is	extinguished,	can	you	say	in	which	direction	
it has gone? Vacchagotta responds that such a query would not apply, 
since	the	fire	burns	dependent	upon	fuel	and,	when	the	fuel	is	used	up,	it	
is simply considered extinguished.
‘So too, Vaccha, the Tathagata has given up (pahīnaṃ) that Embodying 
… Feeling ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing by 
which a Tathagatha may be described, he has destroyed it at the root 
(ucchinnamūlaṃ), made it like a palm stump (tālāvatthukataṃ), made 
it to utterly cease so that it does not arise in future (anabhāvaṅkataṃ). 
Vaccha, the Tathagatha is liberated through the ending of Embodying … 
Feeling ... Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting ... Bare Knowing, he  
is deep, immeasurable, fathomless – like the great ocean.’ M.I,487.

323
The Buddha is saying that he has given up the ‘fuel’ which keeps the Five 
Groups of Grasping of the ordinary person continuing, therefore, since 
the ‘fuel’ is gone, he is ‘extinguished’ (nibbuta).
Some Other References to the Cessation of I-Making,  
Mine-Making, and Underlying Tendency to Conceit
E. Cut Off Craving
The Buddha tells Sariputta to train himself to have no I-making, 
mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to this 
conscious body, in regard to all external signs and to acquire and abide 
in that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, through which there 
is no I-making, mine-making, and underlying disposition to conceit. 
Sariputta is then called a bhikkhu:
‘ … who has cut off craving, turned away from the fetters, and, through 
right penetration of conceit, has made an end of suffering.’ A.I,133f. 
The Buddha adds that this experience is what he refers to in his teaching 
to	Udaya:
‘Abandoning both sensual desire and distress (domanassa),
The dispelling of lethargy and warding off of remorse,
Equanimity and mindfulness purified, preceded by Dhamma reflection,
This, I say, is deliverance by final knowledge (aññā vimokkha)  
– the breaking up of ignorance.’	Sn	1106-7.
The reader will perhaps recognize that this teaching to Udaya  
involves the removal of the Hindrances – four of which are mentioned – 
and the development of the Factors of Awakening – three of which  
are mentioned. 
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

324
BEYOND I-MAKING
F. Liberated 
Several other references mention the phrase on the cessation of 
I-making	as	a	way	of	indicating	that	the	speaker	is	liberated	and	thus:	 
‘It must be that I-making …. have been uprooted …’; 
a. Venerable Sariputta states that even if the Buddha were to ‘undergo 
change and alteration’, sorrow and despair would not arise in him 
(S.II,275). Venerable Sariputta is thus saying that he has transcended all  
sorrow and despair (two of the forms of dukkha), which can only mean 
that he is an arahant, with all I-making uprooted.
b. Venerable Sariputta explains that as he enters and abides in each of 
the nine absorptions he has no thoughts of ‘I’ in doing so (S.III,235-238). 
Having no thoughts of ‘I’ implies the uprooting of all I-making. 
c. When Venerable Upasena is fatally bitten by a poisonous snake he 
shows	no	ill	effects,	yet	communicates	that	he	is	about	to	die.	When	
asked	why	he	shows	no	ill	effects	he	explains	that	it	is	because	he	 
does not identify with any of the six senses (S.IV,41):
‘On a certain occasion the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable 
Upasena were staying at Rājagaha in the Cool Grove at the Snake’s Hood 
Cave. Now a viper had fallen onto Venerable Upasena’s body. Then 
Venerable Upasena addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Come, friends, place 
my body on a bed and take it outside, before it is scattered here just like a 
handful of chaff.” 
Then the Venerable Sāriputta said to the Venerable Upasena,  
“But we do not see any alteration in the Venerable Upasena’s body  
or any deterioration in his senses. How is it that the Venerable  
Upasena says, “Come, friends, place my body on a bed and take  
it outside, before it is scattered here just like a handful of chaff?”

325
“Indeed, friend Sāriputta, for one who thinks, ‘I am the eye’ or  
‘The eye is mine ... ‘I am the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind’ 
or ‘The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is mine’, there might 
be alteration of the body or deterioration in the senses. But, friend 
Sāriputta, it exists not for me that ‘I am the eye’ or ‘The eye is mine’  
... ‘I am the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind’ or ‘The ear …  
nose … tongue … body … mind is mine’, thus why would there  
be alteration of the body or deterioration in the senses?”
“Thus it must be for a long time for the Venerable Upasena that 
I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit have 
been thoroughly uprooted, that it no longer exists for him that  
‘I am the eye’ or ‘The eye is mine ... ‘I am the ear … nose … tongue … 
body … mind’ or ‘The ear … nose … tongue … body … mind is mine’.”
Then those bhikkhus placed Venerable Upasena’s body on a bed  
and took it outside. And then and there the Venerable Upasena’s  
body was scattered just like a handful of chaff.’ S.IV,	40f.
Venerable	Upasena	had	relinquished	all	identification	with	the	senses	
and the body. Thus his senses and body did not respond in the same 
way	as	someone	who	still	identifies	with	them.	And	although	this	is	the	
response of a fully awakened being, each one of us can respond in new 
ways	to	the	body	when	we	reduce	our	identification	with	it.	Because	of	
our	identification	with	body	and	the	senses	we	usually	react	in	habitual	
ways, which express our self-identity. How often do we and others 
ramble on about our personal ailment as if we could not exist without it?
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING

326
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
exercise
•  Rather than deliberately directing the body, just observe the various  
sensations which it receives (rather than react to them). 
•  See if you can allow the body to just receive these sensations. 
•  How does the body respond? 
•  If you notice some noteworthy sensation, see if you can observe  
what aspect of your self it is expressing.
 
The realization of the cessation of I-making, mine-making, and 
underlying disposition to conceit is the ultimate purpose of the  
Buddha’s teaching. With this realization the nature of our being  
changes from self-centredness to reality-centredness.4 This comes 
about through the realization that what we previously took to be  
solid objects are in fact constantly-changing processes, including  
what we thought was an objective self.
Thus, our sense of self (as self-process) does not automatically 
disappear, rather we let go of the compulsive grasping at anything  
to support the delusion of having an enduring, permanent self.  
We are liberated from the oppressive burden of trying to maintain  
a false view of reality, allowing a peaceful abiding in the way things  
really are. Our senses and the Five Groups continue to function, but 
without grasping. We now abide in harmony with reality, free  
from self-centered greed, aversion and delusion.
4	 Buddhists	would	perhaps	say	‘Dhamma-centredness’	and	theists	say	‘God-centredness’.

327
‘If you let go a little, you will have a little peace.
If you let go a lot, you will have a lot of peace. 
If you let go completely, you will know complete peace and freedom. 
Your struggles with the world will have come to an end.’5
- Ajahn Chah
5	 Quoted	on	page	73	of	Still	Forest	Pool	by	Jack	Kornfield	and	Paul	Brieter,	The	Theosophical	Publishing	
House,	306	West	Geneva	Road,	Wheatron,	Illinois	60187.
PART THREE  |  THE CESSATION OF I-MAKING  |  ENDING I-MAKING
