# introduction

1
While researching the Pali Canon for my previous book, Working with 
the Five Hindrances, I occasionally came across an intriguingly cryptic 
phrase:	‘I-making,	mine-making	and	the	underlying	disposition	
to conceit’ (ahaṅkāra-mamaṅkāra-mānānusaya). This phrase was 
intriguing because it suggests a completely new perspective to the 
universal	inquiry	into	self	and	selflessness,	and	provides	a	glimpse	into	
the unique realization which the Buddha was awakened. He designated 
this realization with the Pali term ‘anattā’, which is usually translated as 
‘non-self’, ‘not-self’ or ‘no-self’. While the translation is literally correct, 
it unfortunately fails to convey the correct meaning of what the Buddha 
is saying. The Buddha did not deny self. What he denied was that self has 
any permanent, imperishable essence. The Buddha realized that self is 
essentially	a	constantly	changing	process,	artificially	created	through	
the interaction of craving and ignorance. And, since it is ‘made-up’ by 
activities	which	we	have	some	influence	over,	craving	and	ignorance	
can	also	be	‘unmade’	so	that	the	deleterious	effects	of	grasping	self	as	
permanent can come to cessation.
Where the phrase ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying 
disposition to conceit’ is mentioned, the emphasis is upon its cessation in 
the context of full awakening. The Buddha awoke to the realization that 
the cessation of ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition 
to conceit’ is ultimate well-being through complete liberation from 
the	suffering	which	‘I-making’	entails.	All	the	Buddha’s	teachings	
facilitate this realization, some indirectly (for example the practice of 
‘selfless’	generosity)	and	some	directly	(for	example,	meditations	on	
introduction
. . . . . . .

2
BEYOND I-MAKING
impermanence). This is, of course, exactly what the Buddha’s teaching 
excels in, giving us an extremely wide range of perspectives applicable 
to a variety of temperaments. The Buddha’s teaching guides us from 
the delusion of self-centredness to a liberating reality-centredness, and 
thus Buddhist spiritual practice is ultimately directed to liberation from 
the insidious ‘I-making’ process. 
In order for this experience to be realized, the Buddha provided many 
approaches. Therefore, through investigating the various contexts in 
which this phrase is used in the Pali Canon, it is possible to understand 
the processes leading to the cessation of I-making, mine-making  
and the underlying disposition to conceit, and the means to arrive  
at liberation.
The	first	challenge	is	that,	in	the	particular	contexts	in	which	this	phrase	
is mentioned, the Buddha mostly responds with either terse stock 
formula or formal technical language. However, it is possible, with some 
patience and contemplative investigation, guided by various relevant 
teachings in the Pali Canon, to unravel these responses for  
the ultimate reward of realizing penetrating insight into some of the 
most profound aspects of the Buddha’s teachings.
To	accomplish	this,	it	is	necessary	firstly	to	look	closely	at	the	processes	
contributing to ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition 
to conceit’ to obtain some clearer understanding of what we are dealing 
with. For most people, ‘I’ is an unquestioned reality which gains strength 
and comprehensiveness, complexity and sophistication, over an entire 
lifetime.	‘I’,	and	its	developing	maturity	and	refinement,	is	assumed	to	
be the normal, natural process of living, and the resulting happiness 
and	suffering	is	life’s	usual	drama.	If	the	process	of	I-making	were	not	
pointed out to us by someone like the Buddha, most people would never 
notice this insidious enterprise unfolding nor the serious impact it has

3
on their lives. Otherwise, very simply, we are subversively co-opted 
into supporting this I-making process, what I commonly refer to as the 
‘I-making Project’, even against our best interests. And this I-making 
Project has been exceedingly successful in fooling the vast majority of 
human beings throughout history. We are therefore fortunate to be 
able to obtain some insight into this deeply entrenched, insidious and 
seriously deluding process.
Being thus drawn to investigate this intriguing and immensely valuable 
theme of I-making and its cessation, little did I anticipate how my 
investigation would open up doors into some of the most profound,  
and	in	some	cases,	obscure	and	rarefied	aspects	of	the	Buddha’s	
teaching. Not only that, it also revealed some quite startling and 
disturbing aspects of the human mind, particularly its incredible 
propensity for deception and distortion. 
Since the Pali Canon provides little explanation about the process of 
‘I-making’ (the Buddha being more interested in its cessation), I thought 
that a study of contemporary neuroscience and psychology would 
supplement my investigation. Neuroscience has made rapid advances in 
recent years and much of what has been discovered supports Buddhist 
principles1. Moreover, detailed psychological studies have uncovered 
some of the more unsavoury aspects of the human mind2.
The Buddha, of course, outlined some of the delusive aspects of the 
mind, for example, the ‘distortions of perception’, the underlying 
dispositions to sensuality, aversion and ignorance, and the power of 
craving and grasping. However, the Buddha’s special contribution in this 
regard was to delineate a clear path of spiritual development which leads 
us beyond delusion to complete liberation.
1	 Of	note	is	Prof.	Davidson’s	research	into	the	effects	of	meditation	on	brain	activity.	See	Davidson	2013.
2 For a general overview see Fine; also Goleman, Kahneman and Harari. 
INTRODUCTION

4
BEYOND I-MAKING
I	personally	find	it	very	beneficial	to	orient	to	a	particular	theme	from	the	
Buddha’s teaching to fertilize meditative insight. If I could organize and 
explain	the	results	of	my	research	and	provide	some	of	my	reflections	in	
an	accessible	format,	would	other	people	find	it	useful?	I	hope	so.	
As you may observe from the Contents page, the topics cover a wide 
range of the Buddha’s core teachings. The Buddha had a unique outlook 
on reality and came from a cultural context unfamiliar to most of us, so 
this	may	require	some	flexibility	to	appreciate.	For	example,	one	of	his	
teachings	which	can	be	difficult	for	many	people	to	grasp	is	the	funda-	
mental unsatisfactoriness of human existence (dukkha). The Buddha is 
not being a pessimist, but rather is pointing out a basic characteristic of 
human existence which few people would voluntarily acknowledge. Once 
acknowledged, however, it can be the basis for a thorough and vigorous 
investigation into the true meaning of life. It was this fundamental 
existential unsatisfactoriness of human existence – youth becoming old 
age, health becoming illness and life ending in death – which incited the 
Buddha on his spiritual quest and resulted in him discovering a path to 
the complete liberation from unsatisfactoriness.
The	Buddha	taught	the	path	to	liberation	for	forty-five	years,	often	
re-visiting and cross-referencing familiar themes from various angles, 
while sometimes adding new perspectives as the occasion called for. 
What we are then given is a multi-dimensional approach to spiritual 
practice, the usefulness of which depends upon each individual’s 
interest, dedication and diligence to apply the teachings to their  
own life situation.
To experience the deepest levels of wisdom requires a contemplative 
meditation practice, as a mere intellectual understanding is not 
sufficient	for	liberation.	Hence,	while	it	is	possible	to	gain	some	increased	
knowledge of the Buddha’s teaching through reading most of this book,

5
I have provided meditation exercises to help facilitate contemplative 
wisdom. For myself, this book began as a meditative inquiry into the 
process of I-making and, as I delved deeper into the various aspects of 
the process, meditation practice continued to be a source of valuable 
insight and increased understanding.
The following material, as with my previous book Working with the Five 
Hindrances, is simply a ‘workbook’ giving information and relevant 
themes	for	contemplation.	It	is	by	no	means	a	definitive	exposition	 
of the topics covered! I have relied, as much as possible, on the Buddha’s  
own words as recorded in the Pali Canon, giving my own explanations 
only as I felt it necessary.
I have also attempted to make this ‘workbook’ accessible to as 
many people as possible. Thus, the early parts of some chapters 
are introductory, with later sections becoming more detailed 
and specialized. I suggest initially reading only as far as seems 
understandable, rather than becoming too overwhelmed with details. 
I have also added exercises to assist direct experience of some of the 
concepts, as well as personal examples.
The material is presented in three main parts. Part 1 gives an overview  
of some relevant background and theoretical information to help 
provide the context for this particular Buddhist teaching, Part 2 explains 
the causes or processes involved in ‘I-making’, and Part 3 outlines the 
various means and practices to engage in for the cessation of I-making. 
For those familiar with Buddhist practice, Part 1 could be skipped 
over or lightly read (although I do have some useful contributions to 
understanding the Buddha’s unique awakening insight and explanation 
of anattā). For those who know about the Underlying Dispositions, the 
Five Groups of Grasping and Dependent Origination, Part 2 could also  
be	lightly	read,	in	order	to	focus	meaningfully	on	Part	3:	Cessation.	 
May	you	also	find	this	material	beneficial	for	your	progress	on	the	path.
INTRODUCTION

6
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Contexts of the Phrase ‘I-Making, Mine-Making  
and the Underlying Disposition to Conceit’
Of the many discourses of the Buddha recorded in the Pali Canon,  
only	about	twenty-five	make	reference	to	the	phrase	‘I-making,	minemaking and the underlying disposition to conceit’, or to a similar phrase 
‘I-making, mine-making and conceit’. It is thus not an overly daunting 
task to undertake a study of these references. However, even though 
they are small in number, we immediately encounter some challenges. 
Firstly, ‘I-making’ and ‘mine-making’ (ahaṅkāra-mamaṅkāra) are not  
explained in detail anywhere in the Pali Canon. Similarly, while ‘I’ is 
referred to fairly often, ‘mine’, as in ‘what belongs to self’ (attaniya),  
is mentioned rarely. More broadly, ‘mine-making’ refers to one of  
the	forms	of	identification,	for	example,	the	body	as	being	‘mine’,	 
‘my’ possessions or what belongs to ‘me’.
The term ‘underlying disposition to conceit’ (mānānusaya) is one  
of the seven underlying dispositions (anusaya), and ‘conceit’ is the  
last of the ten fetters (saṃyojana) to be relinquished by the fullyawakened arahant. 
Thus to explain the meaning of ‘I-making’ and ‘mine-making’ we 
need to reference some other concepts including the phrase ‘I am’ (ahaṃ 
asmi) and ‘the conceit “I am”’. Often, reference is also made to ‘self’ 
(attā) or the ‘doctrine of self’ (attavāda), as well as ‘individual existence’ 
(attabhāva).	And,	of	course,	there	is	the	very	specific	Buddhist	teaching	
on ‘anattā’ or not a permanent self. Further references are ‘identity’ 
(sakkāya) and ‘identity view’ (sakkāya diṭṭhi).

7
The Contexts
Of	the	twenty-five	discourses	which	mention	the	phrase	‘I-making,	
mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit’ or ‘I-making, 
mine-making and conceit’, many are repetitions. We are then reduced to 
the following seven unique contexts in which these phrases are used. 
1 | No Longer Exists
The most common context in which the phrase ‘I-making, minemaking and the underlying disposition to conceit’ is used is repeated in 
six	discourses.	Various	bhikkhus	ask	the	Buddha:	‘Venerable, how should 
one know and see so that, in regard to this body with consciousness 
and all external signs, I-making, mine-making and the underlying 
disposition to conceit no longer exists?’ S.II,252;III,79f;103;135f;169;	M.III,18f.
2 | Uprooted
The same phrasing as 1, except the ending is ‘… I-making,  
mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit  
have been uprooted (samūhata).’ M.III,32ff.
3 | Free Of
The similar phrase ‘I-making, mine-making and conceit’ is repeated in 
four discourses. ‘Venerable, how should one know and see so that, in 
regard to this body with consciousness and all external signs, the mind 
is free of (apagata) I-making, mine-making and conceit, has gone 
beyond distinctions (vidhā samatikkanta) and is peaceful and thoroughly 
liberated.’	S.II,253;III,80f;136f;170.
INTRODUCTION

8
BEYOND I-MAKING
In all of these enquiries there is reference to knowing and seeing  
‘in regard to this body with consciousness (saviññāṇake kāye)  
and all external signs (bahiddhā ca sabbanimittesu)’. ‘This body with 
consciousness’ refers to one’s own body and mind, while ‘all external 
signs’ are all external objects, all other sentient and insentient objects. 
These two categories cover all the possible objects which can become 
the subject of I-making. The third context adds the phrase ‘gone 
beyond distinctions and is peaceful and thoroughly liberated’ which 
the commentary says means that one has gone beyond all distinctions 
of conceit3, and is peaceful and liberated through the ending of 
defilements4. 
4 | I-Making and Collectedness (samādhi)5
Venerable	Ananda	asks	the	Buddha:	‘Venerable, could a bhikkhu obtain 
such collectedness that he would have no I-making, mine-making, 
and underlying disposition to conceit in regard to this body with 
consciousness, that he would have no I-making, mine-making, and 
underlying disposition to conceit in regard to all external signs; and he 
would acquire and abide in that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, 
which has no I-making, mine-making, and underlying disposition to 
conceit for one who acquires and abides therein?’ A.I,132f.
‘Liberation of mind’ refers to the fruit of arahantship by way of 
development of the meditative absorptions, while ‘liberation by  
wisdom’ is the fruit of arahantship developed through wisdom. 
3	 The	threefold	conceit	of	superiority,	inferiority	and	equality	(cf.	S.IV,88).
4	 cf.	 CDB.	p.814,	n.342.
5 I use ‘collectedness’ as a translation of samādhi	as	‘concentration’,	its	usual	translation,	is	only	one	factor	
in samādhi.	For	example,	in	the	threefold	expression	of	the	Eightfold	Path,	the	samādhi	section	represents	
Right	Effort,	Right	Concentration	(samādhi)	and	Right	Mindfulness.	At	the	level	of	the	first	absorption,	
samādhi	has	five	factors:	initial	and	sustained	thought,	rapture,	well-being	and	one-pointedness	of	mind,	
i.e.,	concentration	(see	Chapter	14).

9
5 | I-Making and Views
The	Buddha	responds	to	questions	from	the	Wanderer	Vacchagotta:	 
‘Therefore, I say, with the wasting, waning, cessation, giving up, 
relinquishing of all conceivings, all mental disturbances (mathita), 
all I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition to 
conceit, the Tathāgata6 is liberated without grasping.’	M.I,486.
6 | I-Making and the End of Craving
Sariputta is told by the Buddha to train himself to have no I-making, 
mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to this 
conscious body, in regard to all external signs and to acquire and abide in 
that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, through which there  
is no I-making, mine-making, and underlying disposition to conceit. He 
is then called a bhikkhu ‘who has cut off craving, turned away from the 
fetters, and, through right penetration of conceit, has made an  
end of suffering.’ A.I,133f. 
The Buddha adds that this experience is what he refers to in his teaching 
to	Udaya:
‘Abandoning both sensual desire and distress (domanassa), 
The dispelling of lethargy and warding off of remorse, 
Equanimity and mindfulness purified, preceded by Dhamma reflection, 
This, I say, is deliverance by final knowledge (aññā vimokkha) 
– the breaking up of ignorance.’ Sn.	1106-7
6	 ‘Tathāgata’,	lit.	‘the	thus	gone	one’,	is	the	name	the	Buddha	used	when	referring	to	himself.
INTRODUCTION

10
BEYOND I-MAKING
7 | Liberated
Several other references mention the phrase as a way of indicating  
that	the	speaker	is	liberated,	and	thus:	 
‘It must be that I-making … have been uprooted…’ 
a.  Venerable Sariputta states that even if the Buddha were to ‘undergo 
change and alteration’, sorrow and despair would not arise in him 
(S.II,275); 
b.  Venerable Sariputta explains that as he enters and abides  
in	each	of	the	nine	different	absorptions,	he	has	no	thoughts	 
of ‘I’ doing so (S.III,235-238); 
c.  When Venerable Upasena is fatally bitten by a poisonous snake, he 
shows	no	ill	effects	yet	communicates	that	he	is	about	to	die.	When	
asked	why	he	shows	no	ill	effects	he	explains	that	it	is	because	he	does	
not identify with any of the six senses (S.IV,41).
In none of these seven contexts are we given any detailed explanation of 
the	process	of	I-making.	Instead,	the	Buddha	gives	different	means	 
to realize the cessation of I-making, mine-making and the underlying 
disposition to conceit that provide a rich treasure trove of skilful means 
to realize liberation without grasping.

11
. . . . . . . 
note on translation
The role of a translator is to translate the text accurately to the best of their  
ability. While the aim is accuracy, the result can often be overly literal. My 
experience with translators translating from Thai to English is that there are  
two main schools. There are those who translate literally what was said and  
there are those who translate more the meaning of what was said. That is, there  
is translation of the ‘letter’ and translation of the ‘spirit’. While it is best to try  
to marry the two as much as possible, sometimes one must make a choice.
In this work, I have inclined toward translating more the meaning or spirit  
rather than being literally accurate. My intention is to try to make some of the  
more specialized aspects of the Buddha’s teaching more accessible to the 
interested general reader, particularly in regard to the teaching on no permanent 
self and the Five Groups of Grasping. To do this, I have used my own translations  
of Pali words, with the Pali in italics and references for those wishing to  
investigate in more detail or consult more literal translations7.
My translations of Pali passages are quoted in bold script, while summaries or 
precis are quoted in regular type. I have tried as much as possible to maintain  
a consistency in the translation, although some variations do exist. Some of  
the	Pali	has	been	simplified	and	I	have	left	out	diacriticals	for	personal	names.
. . . . . . . 
7	 For	more	detailed	explanation	of	key	terms	see	Analayo	(2015).
INTRODUCTION

PART ONE
Background
