# PART ONE | BACKGROUND

13
PART ONE
Background

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position and focus 
attention on the breathing.
•  When suitable, try to observe nonjudgementally the sensations you 
experience in the body, i.e., the posture of 
sitting, the back upright, feet touching the 
floor,	any	tightness	in	the	neck,	shoulders	or	
back, etc.
•  What is the feeling associated with these 
sensations? Is it pleasant, unpleasant or 
neutral?
•  When it seems suitable, observe the general 
condition of the mind at this time, i.e., alert 
or dull; energized or fatigued; calm or busy; 
etc.
•  What is the feeling associated with this 
mental condition?
•  Is this mental condition and/or feeling 
familiar to you, or is it something new?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the 
breathing, then resume your usual activity.

15
A thorough and meaningful contemplative investigation of the process 
of ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit’ 
and its cessation, requires a delving into and unpacking of almost all  
of the unique aspects of the Buddha’s teaching. It is helpful to start  
with some historical and theoretical information. Historically, it is useful 
to know something of the background and context to the Buddha’s 
Teaching, for example, his unique experience of awakening and the 
cultural context in which the teachings were given.
Theoretically, it is useful to know of the religious concepts the Buddha  
dealt	with	and	the	definition	of	terms	he	used	in	his	approach	to	 
teaching. Part 2 also gives detailed knowledge of the various 
conditioning processes of ‘I-making’, which are explained in the teaching  
on Conditional Causality, or Dependent Origination, and the Perceptual 
Process. Also important to know is that the processes of ‘I-making’  
are directed at the Five Groups of Grasping and the Six Internal and  
Six External Sense Bases. To gain this knowledge requires a degree  
of study and, of course, no small amount of thorough contemplation.
A useful point to begin is the Pali Canon, the scriptural collection of  
the Buddha’s teachings. 
ONE
Historical and Theoretical 
Background
. . . . . . . 
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

16
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Pali Canon
The Pali Canon is the body of scripture preserved in the Pali language 
of the Theravada or Southern School of Buddhism. Shortly after the 
Buddha’s passing, the senior members of the monastic order (Sangha) 
convened a council to review the large body of the Buddha’s orallypreserved teachings, called the ‘Dhamma-Vinaya’. With the addition 
of	a	third	collection	this	was	codified	into	Three	Baskets	(Tipiṭaka), 
commonly referred to as the Pali Canon.1 The Three Baskets are  
the	‘Vinaya	Piṭaka’	(Basket	of	Monastic	Discipline),	five	collections	 
of	discourses	called	the	‘Sutta	Piṭaka’	(Basket	of	Discourses)	and	
the	later-compiled	‘Abhidhamma	Piṭaka’	(Basket	of	Systematized	
Teachings).	The	five	collections	of	the	‘Sutta	Piṭaka’	consist	of:	
1 | Dīgha	Nikāya	(Long	Discourses),	
2 | Majjhima	Nikāya	(Middle	Length	Discourses),	
3 | Saṁyutta	Nikāya	(Connected	[by	theme]	Discourses),	
4 | Aṅguttara	Nikāya	(Numerical	Discourses)	and	
5 | 	Nikāya,	the	‘Minor	Collection’	of	various	texts,	including	the	
Dhammapada,	Udāna,	Itivuttaka,	Sutta	Nipāta,	Theragāthā,	
Therīgāthā,	etc.
My	main	reference	has	been	the	first	two	‘Baskets’	of	the	Pali	Canon,	with	
only passing reference to the third ‘Basket’. Most of the material  
in	the	first	two	‘Baskets’	of	the	Pali	Canon	is	in	narrative	style	because	 
it is a record of the Buddha’s teachings remembered and recited by two of 
the Buddha’s foremost disciples at the convening of the First Council. 
1 Following the custom of India at that time, the Pali Canon extant at the Buddha’s death  
was	preserved	orally	and	passed	down	from	teacher	to	disciple.	Some	400	years	later	 
it was committed to writing in Sri Lanka.

17
The only way to communicate in the Buddha’s time was directly through 
speech or physical demonstration, there being no writing material 
available. The particular style of the Pali Canon, with its repetitions, 
stock phrases, formal lists and recurring templates, is the product of 
this oral tradition. The Buddha gave teachings and engaged in dialogue 
with a wide range of people, including his own disciples, followers of 
other beliefs, learned brahmins, political leaders and the general public. 
We thus not only learn about the Buddha’s teachings, but gain an 
understanding of the political, social, religious and cosmological world of 
6th century BCE India. 
The Buddha was intimately interacting with his immediate audience and 
so provided a variety of teachings suited to the temperament  
of the audience and the content of that teaching. A skilled teacher knows 
that students can not hold too much information in their mind at any 
time.2	Therefore	we	find	that	the	teachings	were	preserved	 
in	different	‘formats’.	Some	formats	are	short,	succinct	notations	 
(for easy remembering), often merely lists. For more advanced or 
interested students there are detailed explanations, as well as lengthy 
dialogues,	sometimes	covering	a	range	of	topics.	This	specific	contextual	
aspect	of	the	teachings	was	significant	and	explains	the	exceptional	
diversity of the teachings as they expand, cross-reference, interweave 
and overlap in an astounding variety of ways. For the rationalist, this 
can appear convoluted or even confusing, not to mention sometimes 
apparently	contradictory;	however,	a	reflective	meditator	will	find	a	
nutritious feast for insightful contemplation.
2	 Gilovich	2016,	loc.	2180,	quotes	Miller,	G.	A.	who	suggests	that	we	can	only	hold	in	mind	between	5	and	9	
pieces of information.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

18
BEYOND I-MAKING
The	Buddha	taught	for	forty-five	years,	so	it	is	not	uncommon	to	find 
his early teachings overlapped by later, more developed teachings. A 
possible example of this is the teachings on the Underlying Dispositions.  
Initially, they are mentioned in a general sense as being predisposed 
towards something (S.III,35).	Later,	they	are	referred	to	more	specifically,	
as, for example, passion, aversion and ignorance (M.III,285-6)	and 
eventually they are formalized into a standard list of seven underlying 
dispositions (S.V,60). 
Failing to take into account the narrative style, the context and the 
Buddha’s special methods of teaching has led to some idiosyncratic 
interpretations of the teachings, usually based on overly literal 
interpretations, or out-of-context and/or selective representation of 
certain aspects of the teachings while ignoring others. In this way, some 
people have come up with their own categorical interpretations of what 
the Buddha taught, and even founded their own school of Buddhism 
based on this limited perspective. The classic example is the ‘Personalist 
School’ which is based on a single discourse that mentions a ‘person’ 
(as taking up the burden S.III,25) as proof that a real entity exists that is 
neither	identical	to	nor	different	from	the	Five	Groups	of	Grasping3.
Another important element consistently missed by many translators 
is the amount of humour, word play and irony which threads its way 
through many of the narratives4. Humour, of course, takes many forms.  
One form the Buddha applied was a light-hearted or indirect criticism of 
some of the dominant Brahmanical practices and beliefs. For example, 
the	Kūṭadanta	Sutta	(DN.5)	records	the	Brahmin	Kūṭadanta	absurdly	
asking the Buddha (a non-Brahmin ascetic) about how to conduct a  
proper	Brahmin	sacrifice	which	involves	the	slaughter	of	many	hundreds 
of animals. This situation then provides the Buddha the opportunity to 
3	 cf.	 CDB.	p.1051,	n.37	for	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	notes.
4	 cf.	Walpola	Rahula,	JPTS	Vol.	IX,	1981,	p.156f.

19
explain	his	‘more	profitable’	method	of	spiritual	practice	which	results	in	
Brahmin	Kūṭadanta	realizing	the	‘eye	of	Dhamma’	and	becoming	a	 
follower. In a following discourse (DN.11), in a not-so-subtle parody,  
a bhikkhu travels to the various heavenly realms through his psychic 
abilities and questions the highest Brahma god, who is forced to admit 
that he does not know the answer, and then directs the bhikkhu to 
consult the Buddha, who of course provides the wise answer. 
‘Interpreters both ancient and modern have taken little account  
of the historical context of the Buddha’s teachings, but relating them to 
early brahmanical texts, and also to ancient Jainism, gives a much richer 
picture of his meaning, especially when his satire and irony  
are appreciated.’ (Gombrich 2013, vii).
The Buddha’s Special Approach to Spiritual Investigation
The investigation into the ultimate essence of a human being –  
an intrinsic self or soul – has confounded spiritual seekers since  
before the Buddha’s time. For some people, the Buddha’s unique 
contribution to this investigation adds more to their confusion than  
to clarity. Partly this is due to the limitations inherent in translating  
the teachings into other languages and cultures. I would suggest that 
this is also partly due to a failure to correctly explain the Buddha’s  
special approach to spiritual investigation and the resulting 
extraordinary insight that arose from his deep, contemplative enquiry.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

20
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Pali Canon records the Buddha-to-be leaving the home life  
on a spiritual quest modelled on that of the dominant brahmanical 
religious values in 6th century BCE India5. This was an era of rapid  
social change and religious ferment. The emergence of the samana,  
or wandering ascetic traditions, challenged the dominant orthodoxy  
of Brahmanism, and thus new philosophies and beliefs arose which 
centred	around	four	fundamental	principles:	
1 | 	each	individual	has	an	intrinsic,	permanently-abiding	 
essence	(Skt:	ātman;	Pali:	attā); 
2 | 	this essence transmigrates through continuous cycles of death and 
rebirth (samsāra, lit. ‘wandering on’); 
3 | it is action (kamma) which conditions future rebirth; and 
4 | 	one can be liberated (vimutti) from the round of rebirth through 
spiritual	exercises,	resulting	in	the	experience	of	nirvāna	(Skt.)	or	
nibbāna	(Pali).	
Of course, there was a great variety of interpretations and on-going 
debate regarding these principles. The view which emerged from  
the Upanishads, the late Vedic literature, was that the goal of spiritual 
practice was the union of the individual essence (ātman) with the 
universal essence (Brahman) achieved through various practices,  
e.g. spiritual study, austerities, yoga, etc. 
5	 cf.	MN.	26:	The	Discourse	on	the	Noble	Search	and	MN.	36:	The	Greater	Discourse	to	Saccaka.

21
Most spiritual seekers in 6th century BCE India were on a quest to  
directly experience the supreme individual essence of ‘ātman’. The 
Buddha-to-be himself ardently sought to achieve this through the 
established spiritual exercises of concentration meditation and then 
austerities	for	six	long	years.	However,	he	was	dissatisfied	with	the	
results, despite being recognized by his teachers as an exceptional 
student. He then decided to try another approach, and returned to his 
initial	spiritual	enquiry	of	investigating	the	cause	of	human	suffering,	
which	was,	in	fact,	a	radical	and	significantly	new	approach.	
The new approach was not to seek what the true nature of a human 
being is, but rather to investigate how a human being experiences reality, 
starting from the universal experience of unsatisfactoriness (dukkha) as 
expressed through old age, sickness and death. These were the shocking 
realities which had initially shaken the wealthy, pampered young man 
out of his complacency to seek a spiritual solution. That is, rather than 
look for some intrinsic essence within a human being, he sought the 
causes of the imperfection of human existence6. 
6 ‘For the Buddha, the important thing is to understand the nature of the human condition  
and	we	see	that	he	emphasises	not	what	things	are	but	how	they	operate.	…	So	he	does	not	give	us	a	different	
answer to the same question “what	is	man?”	but	asks	an	altogether	more	sophisticated	question:	“how is 
man?” And he sustains this approach systematically throughout his teachings. The Buddha thus substitutes 
processes for objects. 
Perhaps because our everyday commonsense world consists very much of what we think of as objects, and our 
tendency to want to know what things are, this important point has frequently been missed even within the 
Buddhist tradition itself.’ Hamilton, xxiv.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

22
BEYOND I-MAKING
An	effect	of	this	particular	approach	to	spiritual	practice,	possibly	
unexpected, was a diminishing of self-referencing and increase in 
humility. The traditional spiritual path, looking for one’s ultimately  
‘true’ and ‘pure’ self, is based on self-referencing and fused with  
self-affirmation,	which	could	lead	to	self-inflation,	since	that	ultimate,	
eternal self (ātman) is equated with the essence of the universe 
(Brahman). (Of course, for the rare few who followed this path to  
its end, the self dissolved in the universal essence.)
The Buddha’s quest focussed on the imperfections of human existence 
which	lead	to	everything	human	beings	identified	with	as	‘self’	being	
destroyed by old age, sickness and death. It also led to a diminishing of 
self-affirmation	as	the	self	was	depersonalized	and	de-constructed	into	
constituent	processes:	grasping,	craving,	ignorance,	etc.
In the Pali Canon (S.II,72f) the Buddha explains that both dukkha and ‘the 
world (loka)’ arise from sense-knowing, which includes contact, and can 
lead on to feeling, craving, grasping, etc. In other words, the world to the 
Buddha is the world of subjective experience.
‘Rather, it is in this fathom-long body, endowed with perception 
and mind, that I make known the world, the arising of the world, the 
cessation of the world and the way to the cessation of the world.’ S.I,62.
With his new approach to spiritual practice, the Buddha-to-be  
recalled an occasion in his childhood when his mind innocently settled 
into absorption concentration. Recognizing that he had chanced 
upon an exalted state which was not involved with sensual pleasures 
or unwholesome states7, he used this as a basis for a contemplative 
investigation of the causes of existential unsatisfactoriness. 
7	 M.I,246f;	also	see	M.III,233.

23
‘Indeed, this world has fallen into difficulty, in that it is born, ages,  
dies, passes on and re-arises, yet it does not understand the escape from 
this suffering of ageing-and-death. When, for sure, will an escape from 
this suffering of ageing-and-death be evident?
Then, bhikkhus, it occurred to me: “When what exists does ageing-anddeath come to be? By what is ageing-and-death conditioned?” Then, 
bhikkhus, through appropriate attention, in me there was a realization 
by wisdom: “When there is birth, ageing-and-death comes to be; 
ageing-and-death has birth as its condition …”’ S.II,10f.
The Buddha’s innovative approach to spiritual practice – a penetrating 
investigation supported by a calm and focused mind – became the key  
to his breakthrough to Awakening, revealing an extraordinary insight 
into reality.
The Insight of Awakening: Causally-Conditioned Processes
The second challenge to understanding the Buddha’s teaching is his 
unique insight into the universal principle of causally-conditioned 
processes, formally called Dependent Origination. Rather than 
discovering a permanent, intrinsic ‘ātman’ at the source of human life, 
the Buddha awoke to the liberating insight that what appears to be 
permanent is in fact a series of causally-conditioned processes. This 
is the liberating truth of anattā:	nothing	has	any	ultimate,	permanent	
essence. Included in this profound insight was the realization that 
the fundamental cause of human dukkha is ignorance. Therefore the 
cessation of ageing-and-death and this ‘whole mass of dukkha’ could be 
realized by the ending of ignorance through the development of wisdom 
culminating	in	the	realization	of	unconditioned	Nibbāna.		
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

24
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Buddha’s experience of awakening was an unimaginably 
extraordinary and exceptional experience transcending time, space 
and self-imposed limitations on reality. What this awakening produced 
was	a	significant	shift	in	human	consciousness	–	from	object-oriented	
consciousness to process-oriented consciousness. For people whose 
minds	are	rigidly	object-oriented	there	are	only	two	options	available:	
something either exists or it does not exist8. The principle of causal 
conditioning provides another option, what the Buddha called the 
‘Middle Way’. That is, when we see that what appears as ‘things’ are 
actually dynamic, causally-conditioned processes, we understand that 
they do not have any ‘existence in themselves’ or ‘non-existence in 
themselves’. When all there is is continuously unfolding processes, at 
what point can one say that anything actually ‘exists’, or ‘doesn’t exist’?
‘Kaccāna, the world usually depends upon the duality of “existence” 
(atthi) and “non-existence”. But for those who see as it really is with 
right wisdom, the truth of the arising of the world, there is not for them 
any “non-existence” in the world. And for those who see as it really  
is with right wisdom, the truth of the passing away of the world, there is 
not for them any “existence” in the world. 
Kaccāna, this world is mostly bound by taking up, grasping and 
adherence. But this one [of right view] does not obtain or take hold 
of that attachment and grasping, that resolution, adherence and 
underlying disposition, does not take a stand upon “my self”.9   
They have no doubt or uncertainty that what arises is only dukkha 
arising, what ceases is only dukkha ceasing, and their knowledge  
is independent of others. In this way, Kaccāna, there is right view.
8	 In	the	Indian	system	of	logic	two	more	options	were	given:	something	both	exists	and	not	exists,	or	neither	
exists nor not exists. Since these are rarely referred to in western thinking they will be excluded from the 
discussion.
9	 I	have	been	guided	in	this	translation	by	Bhikkhu	Bodhi,	CDB	p.736,	note	32.	 
See	also	his	note	29,	page	734	regarding	‘existence’	and	‘non-existence’.

25
“All exists” is one extreme; “All does not exist” is the second extreme. 
Not going to either extreme, the Tathāgata expounds a teaching in  
the middle: With ignorance as condition, willing and habiting come  
to be; with willing and habiting as condition, consciousness ... Such  
is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.’ S.II,17.
This was an entirely new insight into the nature of reality and one not 
easy to comprehend, especially by those still seeking ultimate essences. 
Quite understandably, the Buddha was initially reluctant to announce 
this reality-altering insight to the world. 
‘It occurred to me, bhikkhus: “This Dhamma which I have found  
is profound, difficult to see, difficult to understand, peaceful,  
excellent, beyond logic, subtle, comprehensible only to the wise.”’ 
M.I,167f;	Vin.I,4f;	S.I,136f;	cf.	D.II,36f.
However, the highest brahmanical god10, Brahma Sahampati,  
convinced	him	that	his	teaching	would	be	of	benefit	for	‘those  
with little dust in their eyes’.
Teaching Challenges 
A	significant	challenge	the	Buddha	faced	was	the	need	to	express	his	
unique insights within a culture steeped in traditional religious concepts. 
The template which he thus developed over his many years of teaching 
is based upon the world-view prevalent in 6th century BCE India, but 
adapted to his own strategy for awakening. 
Some of the concepts the Buddha used were well-understood by his 
audience, although they may appear unfamiliar to us in the present 
10 In Buddhist cosmology the celestial ‘gods’ are beings who are born into higher planes of existence 
(levels of consciousness) through development of skilful kamma, the lower gods through exalted virtues 
such as generosity and morality, the higher gods through advanced degrees of collectedness meditation. 
Metaphorically, then, the Buddha was invited to teach through the prompting of higher spiritual values.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

26
BEYOND I-MAKING
era.	An	example	is	the	definition	of	physicality	into	the	four	elemental	
qualities	of	solidity	(earth),	heat	(fire),	fluidity	(water)	and	motion	(air),	
whereas today we would tend to think in terms of ‘material substances’ 
such as molecules and atoms. 
When the Buddha gave more detailed explanations of certain themes 
he often introduced a number of technical terms, many of which have 
become the topic of lengthy discussion up to the present time. Some of 
these terms can be better understood if reference is made to their use in 
the other religious traditions present at the Buddha’s time, since some 
of the Buddha’s main teachings were formulated as direct challenges or 
indirect refutations to certain of the, principally brahmanical, teachings. 
For example, on the night of his awakening, the Buddha experienced 
through his meditative abilities what he called the Three Knowledges 
(tevijjā). These are obviously a challenge to the brahmanical view of the 
Three Knowledges as referring to the learning of the three Vedas, the 
brahmanical scriptures.
The Buddha was obviously an exceptionally gifted teacher, able to 
communicate his uniquely original message to a wide range of people 
(of course, the records mention only a few of the people who did not 
comprehend!). One of his special methods, very likely learned from 
spending many hours with his tribal chief father adjudicating disputes, 
was what in English is called the ‘Socratic method’ of encouraging people 
to present their particular view, and then drawing them, in  
a non-confrontational way, into a dialogue while picking apart their 
reasoning. A classic example of this, recalled in the Buddhist tradition as 
a verse in the Chant on the Eight Verses of Auspicious Victory  
(Jaya-mangala-aṭṭha-gāthā),	is	the	Buddha’s	refuting	of	‘the	 
debater and clever speaker, Saccaka’ (MN.35 and 36).

27
It has been noted11 that some of the Buddha’s teachings were formulated 
in such a way as to refute followers of other beliefs through giving their 
terms his own meaning. However, if one doesn’t know what that original 
meaning was, then confusion is likely to follow. For example, he often 
used the term ‘brahman’ to refer to someone who is spiritually evolved 
rather than as a member of the brahman caste. 
Also, while trying to explain the experience of the unconditioned, 
ineffable	reality,	he	resorted	to	the	use	of	metaphor,	allegory	and	
similes. Of course, these can only be fully appreciated and understood 
by	knowing	their	significance	within	the	culture	of	ancient	India	of	the	
time.	One	of	the	most	significant	examples	is	the	use	of	fire	imagery,	
which	takes	its	lead	from	the	literal	meaning	of	Nibbāna	as	‘going	out’,	
as	a	flame	‘goes	out’	through	lack	of	fuel.	In	one	of	the	Buddha’s	early	
teachings12,	to	a	group	of	former	fire-worshipping	ascetics,	he	gave	 
the suitably dramatic image that the sensory world was burning with the 
three	fires	of	greed,	hatred	and	delusion.	This	was	an	allusion	to	 
the practice of the brahman layman who was obliged to attend to  
three	sacrificial	fires	in	the	home13. The Buddha was thus pointing to 
the	importance	of	attending	to	the	internal	fires	which	‘burn	up’	human	
life. Also, the Pali word ‘upādāna’ has two meanings. The main one is 
‘grasping’, however, it also literally means ‘fuel’. This implies, of course, 
that ‘grasping’ is also the ‘fuel’ for sustaining the cycles of existence.14 
11	 Gombrich,	2013,	p.7
12	 The	‘Fire	Sermon’	(Āditta	Pariyāya	Sutta:	S.IV,19-20).
13 Gombrich, 2013, p.112
14 ‘In my opinion the term khandha	too	was	a	part	of	the	fire	metaphor.	The	word	upadana  
has both a concrete and an abstract meaning. In the abstract it means attachment,  
grasping:	in	this	sense	it	is	much	used	in	Buddhist	dogmatics.	Concretely,	it	means	that	 
which	fuels	this	process	…	So	when	the	context	deals	with	fire	is	simply	means	fuel.
Pali	has	a	common	expression	for	a	blazing	fire,	aggi-kkhandha. In the compound upadana-kkhandha  
I	believe	the	word	for	fire,	aggi, has been dropped … I therefore translate upadana-kkhandha as  
‘blazing masses of fuel’, and consider it to be a coherent part of the same metaphor as the word nibbana.’  
(Gombrich	2013,	p.114).
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

28
BEYOND I-MAKING
When the Buddha proceeded to teach, he did so in a way which was 
consistent with his new approach to spiritual practice and his profound 
new insights, yet he had to take into account his audience who were 
cultured in the beliefs of the time. As the Buddha commenced his fortyfive	year	teaching	career	he	had	to	explain	to	his	listeners	his	unique	
understanding regarding three of the principal beliefs dominant in India 
at the time. These are the belief in the principle of kamma,  
the	eternal	ātman	and	the	liberation	of	Nibbāna.	We	will	thus	cover	these	
in the three following chapters.

29
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and settle your attention on the 
breathing process.
•  As you continue to direct attention to the 
breath, do you notice the mind calming 
down, or do you notice more distractions?
• 	Can	you	observe	any	cause	and	effect	
relationship between the action of 
meditation and any result?
•  Are there various conditions which need to 
come together in order for a result to 
manifest?
• Return your attention to the breathing.
•  When suitable, see if you can discern the 
intention which motivates your doing 
meditation. There may be a number of 
different	intentions;	just	observe	whatever	
is present at the time. If it is hard to discern 
intention, just return to the breathing and 
try another time.
•  When suitable, open your eyes and resume 
your activity.

31
‘Beings are the owners of their kamma, the heirs of their kamma;  
they have kamma as their origin, kamma as their relative, kamma  
as their resort; whatever kamma they do, whether good or evil,  
they will inherit (its results).’ A.V,288.
The term ‘kamma’ (‘karma’ in Sanskrit) literally means action,  
and its associated result is vipāka. The principle of kamma is the  
principle of moral causality, which, in some form, is acknowledged  
by all major religions. The simplest expression of this principle  
is that good actions give pleasant or positive results, while bad actions 
give unpleasant results. 
‘Mind precedes all things, mind is foremost,
produced by mind are they.
If one should speak or act with corrupted mind,
Then suffering follows, as a cart follows the hoof of the drawing ox. 
Mind precedes all things, mind is foremost,
produced by mind are they.
If one should speak or act with a pure mind,
Then well-being follows, like a never-departing shadow.’ 
Dhp. 1-2.
TWO
Kamma
. . . . . . . 
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  KAMMA

32
BEYOND I-MAKING
In the Buddha’s time, the dynamics of this principle were interpreted 
in a wide range of ways, as is the case today. Theistic religions interpret 
it is a punishment-reward system, overseen by an all-powerful deity. 
In the Buddha’s teaching, the principle of kamma is a natural universal 
principle, like the laws of physics. The Buddha gave prime importance to 
the	efficacy	of	action:	‘ … I teach a doctrine of kamma, a doctrine of doing 
(kiriya), a doctrine of energy’1 (A.I,287). Of course, when this principle is 
applied to complex human beings, the causal relationship is usually far 
from clear and simple. Hence Buddhists refer to conditional causality – 
the results of action being conditional upon various factors.
In contrast to the Buddha’s knowledge of kamma, there are doctrines 
that lead to inaction (akiriya:	lit.	‘non-doing),	three	of	which	are:	 
1) the view that all we experience is due to what has been done in  
the past; 2) the view that all we experience is due to God’s creation;  
or, 3) the view that all we experience is without cause (hetu) or condition 
(paccaya). Holding any of these beliefs undermine any initiative for 
action, since we see ourselves as the prisoners of past action, the will of 
God or non-causal events. Thus people who adhere to these doctrines 
‘have no desire and make no effort regarding what should be done or 
what should not be done’ (A.I,173f). 
The	most	significant	teaching	on	kamma	initiated	by	the	Buddha,	 
as a meditator devoted to the development of the mind, was to  
radically	redefine	kamma	to	be	intentional	or	willed	actions:
‘It is intention (will, volition) that I call kamma. Having willed,  
one produces kamma through body, speech and mind.’ A.III,415. 
1	 In	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	analysis	of	the	37	Aids	to	Enlightenment	(CDB.	p.1489),	energy	is	the	most	common	
factor,	mainly	because	of	the	emphasis	on	the	right	form	of	energy	as	exemplified	in	the	Four	Right	Efforts.

33
That is, our volitional actions give results dependent upon the 
particular conditions of the action and the characteristics of those 
conditions2. As perhaps you can appreciate, this conditional actionresult process can be quite intricate and complex, since conditioning 
factors, particularly the moral quality and the intensity/continuity  
of	a	particular	volition,	exert	a	wide	range	of	influences.	This	actiongiving-result principle also means that the result is neither a simple 
random occurrence, since particular actions give particular results,  
nor is it rigidly determined, since the result is dependent upon the quality 
and intensity of the intentional action.
Intention, Will, Volition 
Intentional actions are initiated by our will or volition, which is a primary 
aspect of the sense of a self. Most people believe they have complete 
free will and control over their lives, and can do whatever they intend 
or	direct	their	will	to	do.	The	Cambridge	Dictionary	defines	will	as	‘The	
mental power used to control and direct your thought and action’. This is 
commonly referred to as ‘will power’. Whether we are aware of it or not, 
will is functioning in the background throughout  
our life, mostly in subtle, and often devious, ways. If you have tried  
the second part of the meditation exercise above, you may be familiar 
with some of the characteristics of intention. Are your intentions  
clear to you? Are they steady and enduring?
2	 And	there	may	be	a	great	variety	of	them,	for	example,	very	personal:	‘I	enjoy	it’;	seemingly	impersonal:	
‘It	seems	like	a	good	thing	to	do’;	or	altruistic:	‘Meditation	helps	me	be	kinder	to	people.’	Investigation	of	
intention is particularly helpful for activities we do regularly and/or habitually, since habitual activity can 
easily become automatic, without awareness of the purpose. However, be warned that you might discover 
some surprising aspects about your behaviour.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  KAMMA

34
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
personal story
In hindsight, I received a very valuable lesson about intention during my 
early years in Thailand. After an initial retreat in Sri Lanka, a year later 
I travelled to Thailand intending to do a similar intensive meditation 
retreat, and then continue travelling on to Malaysia, Indonesia and 
Australia, before returning to university in Canada for the Fall term. 
My	plans	began	to	fall	apart	when	it	took	me	three	weeks	to	find	a	
meditation monastery and I then had to apply for another one-month 
visa to attend the month-long retreat in the northern city of Chiang 
Mai.	The	government	officials	had	to	send	the	visa	application	to	
Bangkok for authorization and told me to return in two weeks. 
To	make	a	long	story	short,	this	‘return	to	the	visa	office	in	two	weeks’	
went on for seven months! Every two weeks I had to ask myself,  
‘What am I going to do?’. In other words, what was my intention –  
to continue my travels, or stay and meditate? Each time I inquired, the 
answer changed! Sometimes, when my meditation was going well,  
I	was	inspired:	‘My	mind	is	so	peaceful	and	clear,	another	two	weeks	
and I will be enlightened’. At other times, my intention was more 
practical:	‘Here	I	am	halfway	around	the	world,	in	a	Buddhist	country,	
in a Buddhist monastery with many supportive conditions. Who knows 
where I will be in future? Better to stay here and make use of these 
beneficial	conditions’.	
Eventually, I stayed in Thailand for nine years, and didn’t get to Australia 
until 2001, after a sabbatical in Wellington, New Zealand.

35
By	defining	kamma	as	intention,	the	Buddha	is	pointing	to	the	power	 
of intentionality. Many people have heard the saying, ‘Where there 
is a will there is a way.’ Combining this with an understanding of the 
liberating potential of skilful actions and the dangers of unskilful actions 
gives us the power to ‘control’ our lives. Through training our will to 
engage with skilful action it is possible to free ourselves from unskilful 
habits and realize liberation.
I put ‘control’ in quotes because we rarely have complete control or free 
will.	The	Cambridge	Dictionary	defines	free	will	as	‘The	ability	to	decide	
what	to	do	independently	of	any	outside	influences.’	While	we	may	
be	‘independent	of	any	outside	influences’,	we	are	unfortunately	not	
independent	of	‘inside	influences’,	that	is,	our	will	is	not	entirely	free	of	
our self-preserving baggage, habit tendencies, and social conditioning. 
According to the Buddha, our intentional actions are conditioned by 
ignorance (see chapter on Conditional Causality). We may think we are 
making free choices, but we mostly just follow our old habitual ways 
of reacting. Ever notice how often our ‘free choices’ are so familiar and 
repetitive?	Habits	are	energy-efficient	because	we	don’t	waste	time	 
or energy thinking about an action or an alternative, and neuroscience is 
finding	out	how	much	these	habits	are	‘hard-wired’	into	the	brain,	not	to	
mention	the	influences	of	priming,	biases,	etc3.
We do, however, have the ability of ‘instigation’4 (ārambha), which is the 
ability to initiate action towards selected goals (cf.	A.III,337f). We could say 
then that we have ‘limited free will’ in the sense that we have a degree 
of freedom to direct our will, while still taking into account conditioning 
influences.	Thus,	while	we	do	not	have	complete	free	will,	nor	are	our	
3	 ‘Studies	of	priming	effects	have	yielded	discoveries	that	threaten	our	self	image	as	conscious	and	
autonomous	authors	of	our	judgments	and	our	choices...	We	now	know	that	the	effects	of	priming	can	reach	
into	every	corner	of	our	lives.’	Kahneman,	2012,	p.55.	For	a	short	summary	on	‘free	will’	see	Harari,	Ch.8.
4	 Bhikkhu	Bodhi	translation,	NDB.	p.1756,	n.1309.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  KAMMA

36
BEYOND I-MAKING
actions completely pre-determined, we have some degree of choice 
whether to continue following old habits or try to break new ground.
Through understanding the causally-conditioned nature of actionresult, we gain more ‘control’ through wisdom, and come to know  
what we can change easily, what may take more persistence, and what 
we must endure. For example, while we cannot change the fact that  
the body ages, we may be able to change our attitude to ageing such that 
it is not seen so negatively.
Rather than ‘I’ maintaining the illusion of control over ‘my’ life, we 
acknowledge the pre-eminence of causality and humbly accept to work 
harmoniously with it. Causality controls our life, but through knowing 
cause-effect	processes,	we	can	be	the	skilful	director	of	it,	and	this	is	
really the true purpose of spiritual practice.
In the present day, it is most important to keep this aspect of kamma in 
mind since many people have mistakenly taken kamma to mean ‘fate’5. 
For example, one continues to hear people (including Buddhists) say 
(usually by way of excuse), ‘It’s just my kamma’. What they really mean 
is, ‘This is the result of my previous action (kamma).’ (Even though they 
are	the	one	who	did	it,	so	even	this	is	not	an	effective	excuse!)	Kamma	
means ‘action’ but if we do not carefully distinguish between the action 
and	its	result,	they	become	fused,	and	thus	fixed	or	‘fated’.	This	becomes	
Fatalism, not Buddhism. In Buddhism the action and result are separate 
but causally associated. Thus we have the possibility to change the result 
by further appropriate action. We can choose to act in a new way to 
alleviate the potential result. The choice is ours, not fate’s.
5 One problem with the Buddha appropriating brahmanical (Hindu) terminology and giving it new meaning, 
is	that	on	cursory	glance	it	can	be	hard	to	tell	the	difference	between	the	old	and	the	new.	The	Buddha	himself	
was obviously very successful with this method, as he convinced many people to follow his path, however, 
later followers, without his skill and unfamiliar with the relevant context, have frequently not been as 
successful	in	presenting	the	fundamental	difference	between	karma	as	understood	in	Hinduism	and	that	in	
Buddhism.

37
We do not need to experience the results of all previous kamma (A.I,249f), 
and not every experience we have is the result of previous kamma 
(S.IV,230). Moreover, since kamma depends upon the type and quality 
of intention, strong skilful kamma can alleviate the results of previous 
unskilful kamma.
The Ethical Quality of Intention
The most important aspect of intentional action is its ethical quality, 
which is presented in the suttas in various forms, most commonly as 
skilful (kusala) or unskilful (akusala), but also as meritorious (puñña)  
or unmeritorious, and through the lens of such themes as purities 
(soceyya:	A.I,271f) or failures/accomplishments (vipatti/sampadā:	A.I,268f). 
This intentional action is enacted through body, speech and mind.
‘There are three sources for the origin of kamma. What three?  
Greed, aversion and delusion are the sources of the origin of kamma.  
An action done in greed, aversion or delusion — born of, originating  
in or arising out of greed, aversion or delusion — is unskilful, 
blameworthy and its result is suffering. It leads to the arising  
of [further] kamma, not to the cessation of kamma.
That action done in non-greed, non-aversion or non-delusion  
— born of, originating in or arising out of non-greed, non-aversion  
or non-delusion — is skilful, not blameworthy and its result is pleasant. 
It leads to the cessation of kamma, not to the arising of [further] 
kamma.’6 A.I,2637; cf. A.I,215f.
6	 Another	six	causes	for	the	origination	of	kamma	are	given	at	A.I,264f:	Desire	(chanda) arises regarding 
things in the past, future or present that are the bases of desire and lust, and desire does not arise regarding 
things	in	the	past,	future	or	present	that	are	the	bases	of	desire	and	lust.	At	A.V,86f	two	more	causes	of	bad	
(pāpa)	kamma	are	mentioned:	inappropriate	attention	(ayoniso manasikāra) and a wrongly directed mind 
(micchāpaṇihita citta). Their opposites are causes for good (kalyāṇa) kamma.
7	 See	A.I,215f,	Venerable	Ananda’s	answer	to	the	wanderer	Channa	on	the	disadvantages	of	greed,	aversion	
and delusion.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  KAMMA

38
BEYOND I-MAKING
Actions motivated by greed, aversion or delusion are the unskilful origins 
of kamma, not only because they are socially disruptive, but because, at 
their	root,	they	are	self-centred,	self-affirming	actions:	greed	is	‘I	want’;	
aversion is ‘I don’t want’; and delusion is ‘I don’t know’. In general, all 
unethical, immoral action is fundamentally self-centred and supports 
self-affirmation.	
Actions performed in non-greed, non-aversion and non-delusion, 
even	though	initiated	by	will,	are	self-surrendering,	self-sacrificing	
actions. These self-surrendering actions at least do not compound our 
sense of self, and often provide a loosening and lightening up of our 
sense of self. Investigating the cause of greed, aversion or delusion can 
lead us back to intention, and an investigation of intention may lead 
us back to the sense of an ‘I’ and the process of ‘I-making’. Ultimately, 
this understanding can help to free us from the deluded habit of 
self-affirmation.	
One expression of skilful intentional action is the ten kinds of conduct in 
accordance with Dhamma or upright conduct8, given in detail at MN.41. 
These	are:	three	kinds	of	skilful	bodily	conduct	–	refraining	from	killing	
living beings, stealing and sexual misconduct; four kinds of skilful verbal 
conduct – refraining from lying, malicious speech, harsh speech and 
frivolous speech; and three kinds of mental conduct – refraining from 
covetousness, ill will and wrong view (M.I,47;287f).	Adhering	to	a	refined	
standard	of	morality,	rather	than	following	our	selfish	compulsions,	
often requires no small degree of self-surrender.
In many Buddhist countries, kamma is popularly referred to as either 
meritorious (puñña; ‘boon’ in Thai ) or unmeritorious. In the Pali 
Canon,	meritorious	kamma	has	three	bases:	generosity,	morality	
and meditation (A.IV,241). Increasingly meritorious designations are 
8	 Many	other	designations	are	given	for	these	ten	skilful	actions	at	A.V,273ff.

39
mentioned such that generosity proceeds from feeding one person 
‘endowed with right view’ (i.e., a stream-enterer) to feeding individuals 
at	different	levels	of	awakening,	through	to	feeding	the	Buddha,	then	
the	Sangha	headed	by	the	Buddha	and	finally	to	building	a	dwelling	for	
the Sangha. The gradations of morality proceed from going for refuge 
to	Buddha,	Dhamma,	Sangha,	to	practising	the	five	precepts,	while	
elsewhere, practising the eight precepts is seen to be of exceptional 
benefit	(A.IV,248ff). The two gradations of meditation mentioned are  
to practice friendliness meditation (metta-bhāvanā) ‘for the time it takes 
to milk a cow’ and to develop the perception of impermanence ‘for the 
time of a finger snap’ (A.IV,394f).
The	quality	of	giving	is	also	significant	–	the	good	person	gives	
respectfully and beautifully, gives with their own hand, gives what is 
not discarded and gives with a view to the outcome (A.III,172). Another 
series of types of proper giving is to give a gift out of faith, give a gift 
respectfully, give a timely gift, give a gift out of consideration and  
give a gift without hurting oneself or another (A.III,172f). 
Results of Kamma (vipāka)
Intentional actions yield associated, causally-conditioned results.  
In this way a sense of moral justice is maintained. In ordinary language we 
might say, ‘You reap what you sow’ or ‘What goes around, comes around’. 
We must be careful, however, not to oversimplify this situation. We must 
keep in mind that, while the principle is simple, it is enacted by complex 
human beings with quickly changing minds and intentions which they 
are mostly unaware of. Thus, due to the uncertainty of conditioning 
factors,	it	is	uncertain	exactly	when	‘justice’	will	be	delivered:
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  KAMMA

40
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Bhikkhus, any kamma made, born, caused, arising through greed … 
hatred … delusion ripens wherever the individual (attabhāva) comes 
into being. Wherever that kamma ripens, there it is experienced,  
either in this life, the next or a subsequent one.’ A.I,134f. 
The coming into being of the individual is explained as happening 
according	to	the	principle	that,	if	one	does	‘afflictive’9 (sabyābajjha) 
kamma, one is reborn or ‘arises’ (upapajjati)	in	an	afflictive	world	(loka) 
where extremely unpleasant feelings are experienced, as in the ‘hell 
realm’.	Whereas	non-afflictive	kamma	results	in	rebirth	in	a	nonafflictive	realm	of	extremely	pleasant	feelings,	such	as	in	a	‘heavenly	
realm’,	and	a	combination	of	afflictive	and	non-afflictive	kamma	leads	
to a realm with both pleasant and unpleasant feelings, such as the 
human realm (A.II,231f).	In	total	there	are	five	basic	‘realms’	(extended	 
to many in detail)10:	
‘Bhikkhus, there is kamma which is to be experienced in the ‘hellish’ 
realm, in the ‘animal’ realm, in the ‘ghost’ realm, in the ‘human’ realm, in 
the ‘heavenly’ realm. This is called kamma’s distinction.’ A.III,415.
These realms of existence were directly perceived by the Buddha and 
some of his disciples. In the Buddha’s teaching materiality and mentality 
are	inter-related,	so	it	can	sometimes	be	difficult	to	determine	if	a	
‘realm’ refers to a material place or a mental space (or a combination).  
It	might	be	more	helpful	to	reflect	upon	the	experience	you	associate	
with being in a hellish or other realm. When our emotions are very 
strong, it can sometimes seem as if we have been transported to  
either a heavenly or hellish realm.
9 Bhikkhu Bodhi translation.
10	For	a	list	of	the	‘thirty-one	planes	of	existence’	see	CDB.	p.70-71	or	LDB.	p.38-39.

41
If you have tried the exercises on investigating intention you may 
appreciate how hard it is to determine precisely your motivating 
intentions. How much more so to determine the results of those 
intentions? In fact, it is rarely possible to know conclusively the  
action-result	relationship:
‘The results of kamma cannot be known by thought, and so should  
not be speculated about. Thinking thus, one would come to distraction 
and distress.’ A.II,80.
Most people are curious to know why certain things happen to them, 
and usually look for a simple, logical answer. However, since we are 
generating kamma continuously throughout life, most of the time 
without clear awareness, it is virtually impossible to trace a particular 
result	back	to	a	specific	action.	However,	it	is	possible	to	know	the	
general pattern of action-result through some continuity of selfawareness	and	reflection.	The	best	we	can	do	is	consider	possibilities	
rather	than	actualities.	Trying	to	discover	specific	reasons	for	particular	
results only distracts us with useless speculations, and often leads to 
false assumptions about ourselves and other people.
Kamma and No Permanent Self
Understanding the principle of kamma is an important foundation  
for understanding the teaching on no permanent self. People who do not 
understand the Buddha’s teaching focus attention on the person who 
they presume does the action and receives the associated result. For the 
Buddha, however, it is the action which creates the presumed ‘person’. 
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  KAMMA

42
BEYOND I-MAKING
Actions	are	generated	by	a	self-affirming	self-structure	called	‘a	
person’,	the	results	then	re-generate	a	similar	self-affirming	selfstructure,	slightly	modified	by	the	action.	‘A	person’	acting	in	anger	
results in ‘an angry person’. 
In the Pali phrases for ‘I-making’ and ‘mine-making’ (ahaṅ-kāramamaṅ-kāra),	the	word	for	‘making’,	‘kāra’,	has	the	same	root	as	
kamma. The ‘I-making’ process is one of ‘making’ or ‘doing’. 
In other words it is kamma which is the generator of the ‘I-making, 
mine-making’	processes.	The	will	of	‘I’	generates	self-affirming	
action	which	produces	self-affirming	results.	If	self-affirming	
actions	are	not	generated,	then	the	results	are	selfless.	There	are	just	
non-personal actions giving non-personal results, and ‘I-making’ 
comes to an end.

43

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
lightly and bring attention to breathing.
•  Sense breathing in and breathing out.
•  What is doing the breathing? Are you 
breathing, is the body doing the breathing, 
or is breathing just happening?
•  Bring attention to the body sitting.
•  Be aware of any tense muscles in the body. 
Are you tensing those muscles? Can you 
relax them?
•  Do you sense any discomfort anywhere in 
the body? Can you relieve it?
•  Turn your attention to your condition of 
mind.
•  Is the mind quiet or busy, clear or dull?
•  Can you quieten the busy mind or make the 
dull mind clearer?
•  Can you stop memories from arising or stop 
the elaborating on the memories?
• Bring attention back to the breathing.
•  When suitable, open your eyes and resume 
your reading.

45
Anattā is one of the three universal characteristics of existence 
(tilakkhaṇa), together with impermanence and unsatisfactoriness, 
which are present whether Buddhas appear or not (A.I,286). While 
impermanence and unsatisfactoriness are reasonably easy to understand, at least intellectually, the teaching on anattā is the most profound, 
and also the most misunderstood aspect of the Buddha’s teaching.
The root term of anattā, attā (in Pali, and ‘ātman’	in	Sanskrit),	is	difficult	
to	translate	into	a	succinct	English	word	since	it	has	two	different	
connotations. Literally, attā means the personal self, as in ‘my self’, 
or ‘your self’. But, it also means some permanent, inherent entity or 
essence that survives death and continues into the future in some form, 
close to what, in an English-speaking, Christian-cultural context, is 
often referred to as ‘soul’. At the time of the Buddha, the word ‘attā’ was 
understood to hold both connotations, the personal self is merely a 
fleeting	manifestation	of	the	ultimate,	permanent,	soul-like	self	or	‘Self’.
Most translators of Buddhist teachings have simply translated attā quite 
literally as ‘self’ and the negative, anattā as ‘non-self’ or ‘not-self’. While 
technically correct, unfortunately, the translation ‘non-self’ or ‘not-self’ 
results in losing the connotation of the eternal ‘soul’, and thus causing no 
end of confusion. 
THREE
Anattā
. . . . . . . 
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  ANATTĀ

46
BEYOND I-MAKING
Non-self or not-self implies a denial of the personal or relative self,  
and yet everyone can directly experience a sense of their self – ‘What  
do you mean there’s no self, here I am’. At the worst, this interpretation 
can even be quite disturbing. Most of us take our ‘self’ very personally 
and	definitively,	since	we	have	invested	so	much	time	and	effort	looking	 
after our ‘self’, constantly trying to keep it happy and comfortable as 
our main goal in life. Then to have it denied is quite an insult. Even many 
Buddhists are confused by ‘not-self’, drawing the conclusion  
that they have to get rid of their personal ‘self’ to be enlightened! 
What	the	Buddha	said	was:	Sabbe dhammā anattā. According to 
Gombrich1, former Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford University, this literally 
means:	‘All	things	are	not	attā’, that is, from the Buddha’s point of view, 
all things are not a permanently-abiding self. The Buddha was therefore 
not denying a self, but rather denying that this self is a constant, stable, 
permanent, soul-like thing. 
To tackle this confusion Gombrich2 suggests simply inserting 
‘unchanging’ to the usual translation of ‘no self’ to have ‘no unchanging 
self’.3 Harvey	(2017), in a clear and detailed article, suggests using the 
translation ‘non Self’, with a capital ‘S’. While this may be useful for 
people familiar with Indian religious culture, unfortunately it introduces 
yet another unfamiliar concept to the general public – how does ‘Self’ 
differ	from	‘self’?	
1	 2013,	p.70
2 2013, p.9
3 “… all the fuss and misunderstanding can be avoided if one inserts the word ‘unchanging’, so that the twoword English phrases become ‘no unchanging self’ and ‘no unchanging soul’. … for the Buddha’s audience by 
definition	the	word	anatta/anattā referred to something unchanging; in that linguistic environment, to add a 
word meaning ‘unchanging’ would have been redundant.
…	it	applies	to	everything	within	our	normal	experience.	…	So	the	cardinal	teaching	becomes:	‘Nothing	in	the	
world has an unchanging essence,’ or ‘There is nothing in our normal experience that never changes.’”

47
Today, when people hear the word ‘self’ they most likely reference their 
personal self the majority of the time. This constant self-referencing 
gives the impression that this self is stable and permanent, since it 
seems to keep referring to the same thing. However, if we investigate 
more carefully, we may observe that this self actually changes over the 
course of our life, through, for example, education and life experience. 
And, although the word ‘soul’ is rarely mentioned in modern, secular 
society, many people still (unconsciously) presume that some aspect of 
their ‘self’ has some soul-like continuity or persistence after the death 
of the body. Emotionally, there is often still some lurking residual ‘soul 
theory’. This is a belief, hope or wish that some part of ‘I’ persists in some 
way, shape or form. We might even say that this belief is instinctual since, 
if I did not believe that ‘I’ persist, then I would not worry about taking care 
of ‘I’ for the future, or be afraid of losing my self in death. Therefore, there 
is	usually	a	conflation	between	the	fluctuating	relative	self	and	a	belief	
in a more persistent soul-like self. (Just try to observe how you conceive 
your self.)
What the Buddha realized was that your experience of self is really a 
collection of ever-changing, causally-conditioned processes. Therefore, 
relating to this self as something permanent causes disharmony with 
reality,	and	suffering	follows	accordingly.	As	you	can	imagine,	in	the	
Buddha’s time (and also today) the teaching on ‘anattā’ was quite a 
radical insight; although these days an increasing number of people are 
beginning to see the truth of this insight.4
4	 Damasio,	p.165:	‘Self	…	is	not	a	thing;	it	is	a	dynamic	process.’	Hood,	2013,	p.ix:	‘This	daily	experience	of	our	
self is so familiar, and yet the brain science shows that this sense of our self is an illusion. … We all certainly 
experience some form of self, but what we experience is a powerful deception generated by our brains for our 
own	benefit.’
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  ANATTĀ

48
BEYOND I-MAKING
I am often confronted with these confusions on my teaching tours 
around the world. To help prevent these confusions I will thus use  
‘not a permanent self’ or ‘no permanent self’ as a new translation  
of ‘anattā’. Hopefully, this will help to make it clear that the Buddha’s 
teaching of ‘anattā’ is referring primarily to refuting the permanent, 
‘soul-like self’ rather than the relative, personal, ‘sense of your self’. 
A Causally Conditioned ‘Self’
In	the	first	two	chapters,	I	explained	that	the	Buddha’s	unique	insight	
into the nature of reality was the experience of causally-conditioned 
processes:	that	what	appears	as	‘things’	are	actually	dynamic,	causallyconditioned processes. Therefore, nothing has any ultimate existence 
in	itself;	everything	is	just	flowing	manifestations	of	continuouslychanging processes. Most importantly, this process of reality includes 
what we take to be our self. Therefore the Buddha found himself in  
the very exceptional position of seeing and understanding reality  
and	self	in	a	completely	different	way.	
The	Buddha	did	not	categorically	affirm	or	deny	that	a	self	exists	 
or	does	not	exist,	because	he	had	a	radically	different	understanding	 
of what ‘self’ is in comparison to the average person. The average person 
understood self to be a permanent entity, even after the  
death of the body, whereas the Buddha understood self to be constantly 
changing processes.
Observe how you mainly experience your ‘self’. Do you notice that 
sometimes your ‘self’ is predominantly a physical experience – ‘I ache’, 
‘I am tired’, etc. At other times your ‘self’ is mostly a mental experience 
–	‘I	feel’,	‘I	think’,	etc.	And	do	you	notice	how	this	is	changing,	a	flowing

49
variety of physical and mental experiences? So which of these on-going 
self-experiences is your real self?
One gets a sense of the Buddha’s challenging position in the following 
passage	where	the	wandering	ascetic	Vacchagotta	visited	him	and	asked:	
‘How is it, master Gotama, does a permanent self exist?’  
When this was said the Revered One was silent. ‘But then, master 
Gotama, does a permanent self not exist?’ For a second time the Revered 
One was silent. Then the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta  
got up from his seat and went away. Now, not long after he had  
gone, the Venerable Ānanda asked the Revered One, ‘How is it,  
sir, that when the Revered One was asked a question by the  
wandering ascetic Vacchagotta, he did not answer?’ 
‘If, Ānanda, when asked by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta,  
“Does a permanent self exist?”, I had replied, “a permanent self 
exists”, this would be agreeing with those samana-brahmana who 
are eternalists (sassatavāda). If, when asked by the wandering ascetic 
Vacchagotta, “Does a permanent self not exist?”, I had replied,  
“a permanent self does not exist”, then, Ānanda, this would be agreeing 
with those samana-brahmana who are annihilationists (ucchedavāda).
‘If, Ānanda, when asked by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta,  
“Does a permanent self exist?”, I had replied, “a permanent self exists”, 
would that have been in conformity with the understanding that all 
things are not a permanent self? If, when asked by the wandering 
ascetic Vacchagotta, “Does a permanent self not exist?”, I had replied, 
“a permanent self does not exist”, then, Ānanda, the bewildered 
Vacchagotta would be even more bewildered, thinking: “Formerly, 
surely I had a self, but now I have not!”’ S.IV,400ff.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  ANATTĀ

50
BEYOND I-MAKING
Can you recognize the inherent self-reference of the enquirer, 
summarized by the Buddha in the last line? Even though the enquirer 
framed the question objectively, ‘Does a permanent self exist?’,  
he was, in fact asking, ‘Do I have a permanent self?’. This is the same 
unconscious self-reference most of us bring to every situation.  
If you think otherwise, just try to recall some personal experience 
without mentioning yourself – try to explain the pure experience 
without self-reference.
The Buddha was well aware of this unconscious and deluded selfreferencing. He understood that even the thought ‘I am’ was a 
causally-conditioned process which, if believed in, became a blinding 
delusion. However, it is also an underlying disposition which we all inherit 
at birth. Thus we are pre-programmed to easily slip into I-making, 
unless we are exceptionally well-informed and vigilant. For people 
who have built their reality around ‘I am’, it is very hard to accept that 
this	fundamental	basis	of	their	reality	is	really	just	a	flow	of	ephemeral,	
tentative processes. Since a causally-conditioned process is continuously 
unfolding,	we	are	not	able	to	define	it	in	any	conclusive	way	(other	than	
as continuously unfolding).

51
Processes Rather Than Things: The How Rather Than the What
From the realization that every ‘thing’ is actually process, the nature of 
those processes became the Buddha’s main focus. How a human being 
is took precedence over what a human being is. In philosophical terms, 
epistemology was more important than ontology. Therefore, most of the 
Buddha’s teachings on more advanced or technical aspects of spiritual 
development emphasize the causally-conditioned factors which make 
up the experience of reality, rather than referencing the self as the 
experiencer5. 
Unfortunately, this particular non-personal or objective teaching can 
appear quite mechanical, abstract or heartless. Where we might expect 
a teaching to be more personal or heartfelt we receive a list of spiritual 
factors or a stock technical phrase. 
‘Venerable sir, who then grasps?’
‘Not a proper question’, the Revered One replied. ‘I do not say  
“One grasps”. ... Since I do not speak thus, you should ask, “Venerable 
sir, what is the cause of grasping?”, this is a proper question. For this the 
proper explanation is: “With craving as cause, grasping arises;  
with grasping as cause, coming-into-existence arises... Such is the 
origin of this whole mass of suffering.”’ S.II,14	abridged.
This mode of presentation is partly due to the fact that the Buddha 
emphasized the non-personal processes of how a human being 
functions in life. It also indicates a carefully-crafted teaching skill  
to continuously direct students away from any attempt at slipping  
into I-making or self-referencing, as evidenced by the questioner  
in the above passage.
5	 This	tendency	has	been	noted	by	Collins	(p.77	and	78).
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  ANATTĀ

52
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Conventional Self
When referring to the teaching on anattā, it can sometimes be helpful 
to refer to two kinds of truth, what became known in the Commentarial 
tradition as conventional or relative truth (sammuti-sacca) and ultimate 
truth (paramattha-sacca). That is, sometimes the Buddha used the 
conventional or commonly understood ways of expression to convey his 
meaning. For example, one chapter of the Dhammapada, the Att Vagga, 
is devoted to a collection of verses relating to the conventional self. 
‘Oneself, indeed, is one’s own protector; what further protector  
would there be? With oneself well-tamed, one obtains a protector 
difficult to obtain.’ Dhp.160.
At other times, particularly for more spiritually-mature persons,  
he resorted to using expressions conveying ultimate truths6.  
However, the Buddha and his disciples, even though beyond  
conceit, still had to make references in the conventional sense.
‘With conceit given up no ties remain,
All ties of conceit are scattered.
The wise, having overcome the conceived,
(Still) might say ‘I speak’,
Or say, ‘They speak to me’.
Skilfully knowing the world’s designation,
He uses them as mere expressions.’ S.I,14.
6	 One	of	the	most	confusing	situations	is	when	people	flip	back	and	forth	between	anattā in its ultimate 
sense and its relative sense. That is, in the ultimate sense everything is not a permanent self, however, until 
one	has	fully	realized	this	truth,	there	is	still	a	definite	relative	‘self-ness’	acting	out	its	self-confirmation.	
Especially annoying are those who engage in what I call the ‘anattā shuffle’	which	occurs	when,	discussing	
practical	issues	that	involve	them	personally,	they	‘shuffle’	the	issues	off	with	‘It’s	all	not-self	anyway’,	and	
then become stubbornly self-defensive!

53
The Great Self (mahattā)
A rare but notable addition to the two commonly mentioned forms  
of self, the conventional self (attā) and not a permanent self (anattā),  
is the ‘great self’ (mahattā). This is mentioned in the context of 
explaining	the	(subtle)	difference	in	two	views	regarding	kamma	and	 
its result. That is, if someone has the view that a person experiences  
the result of kamma exactly as they created it, then there cannot  
be any possibility of liberation, since one is held prisoner to kamma  
and cannot develop a liberated state of mind. However, if one has  
the view that the results of kamma one creates will be experienced in 
terms of the general principle, then there is the possibility of liberation, 
since the experience of results depends upon the state of mind of  
the experiencer, which can be developed to more exalted levels.
The Buddha then gives the example of two persons who create  
a small amount of bad kamma (pāpakamma). For one person, this 
action leads them to the hell realm, whereas for another person, they 
experience the result in this life without any residue. The result is 
different	for	the	second	person	because	of	their	spiritual	development.
‘Here, bhikkhus, some person is developed in body, developed in 
morality, developed in mind and developed in wisdom. They are 
unlimited, are a great self (mahattā) and abide immeasureable.’ A.I,249f.
In contrasting the two types of person, the Buddha gives the simile  
of	comparing	a	lump	of	salt	being	dropped	first	in	a	small	bowl	of	water.	
He inquires if this would make the small amount of water in the bowl 
salty. He then contrasts this with dropping a lump of salt in the Ganges 
River. Would this make the large volume of water in the river salty?
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  ANATTĀ

54
BEYOND I-MAKING
The implication seems to be that someone who is spiritually  
developed has such a ‘great self’7 that small amounts of bad actions  
are experienced within ‘a greater context of being’ such that the  
results	are	not	significant.	This	should	not	be	taken	as	any	form	 
of antinomian context, since the results of kamma are still received. 
However, the receiving context of the ‘great self’ is so large (like  
water	in	the	Ganges	River)	that	the	results	merely	seem	insignificant.
A possible example is, if someone with a large amount of unprocessed 
anger encounters an irritating situation, they very likely will have  
a strong reaction. Whereas, if someone who has done much work  
on their anger, for example, developed the meditation on friendliness, 
were to encounter an irritating situation, they would likely not be inclined 
to react as severely. Although both individuals encounter irritation, they 
each	react	differently.	
This ‘great self’ is therefore a spiritually developed form of the conventional self, resulting in a more attenuated or unlimited sense of a self, 
or	paradoxically,	a	more	selfless	self	(although	not	fully	liberated).
7	 Bhikkhu	Bodhi	translates	as	‘lofty	character’	NDB	p.332.
. . . . . . .

55

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, allow your eyes to close lightly and settle 
attention on the breathing.
•  When suitable, bring attention to the sensations of the body – the 
sensation of sitting, the sensation of the hands touching, the 
sensation	of	the	feet	touching	the	floor,	or	some	other	sensation.
•  Is the feeling of these sensations pleasant or unpleasant?
•  Adjust the posture, relax and try to release any discomfort, allow the 
body to feel comfortable.
•  Abide for some time in the comfortable, pleasant feeling.
•  Then when suitable, bring your attention to the condition of the mind.
•  Is this condition of mind pleasant and comfortable?  
Or not so comfortable?
•  Try to relax the mind; release, put down, let go of disturbing thoughts 
or emotions. Try to abide with a peaceful, relaxed, spacious mind.
•  Is it possible to be in a comfortable state of body  
and/or a peaceful state of mind?
•  Can you observe some general process that could induce  
that comfort or peace?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the breathing.  
Then open the eyes and resume your activity.

57
Nibbāna	is	the	Pali	equivalent	of	the	Sanskrit	‘nirvāna’.	The	
commentaries on the Pali Canon derive the word from nir + vana,  
which	means	‘to	go	out’	or	‘extinguish’.	Nibbāna	is	the	complete	
cessation of ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition 
to conceit’ and is realized by the ‘going out’ of the various forms of 
‘fuel’ which keep the ‘I-making’ process going	(S.II,85;	M.I,487). It is this 
‘I-making’ process which keeps human beings tied to the inherent 
unsatisfactoriness/imperfection (dukkha) of human existence, in the 
present, and through the cycles of endless renewed existences (saṁsāra, 
literally	the	‘perpetual	wandering’).	It	is	personified	as	the	realm	of	Māra,	
(lit. ‘death’) the Evil One, the Tempter.
As	explained	in	the	chapter	on	Anattā,	when	referencing	the	refined	
aspects of spiritual practice, the Buddha refrained from any mention  
of ‘self’, referring instead to impersonal processes. He also refused  
to engage in metaphysical speculations and focussed instead on  
direct	human	experience,	specifically	that	of	dukkha.
FOUR
Nibbāna
. . . . . . . 
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  NIBBĀNA

58
BEYOND I-MAKING
Dukkha
Dukkha is one of the universal characteristics of all conditioned things, 
specifically	human	existence.	The	word	has	a	variety	of	meanings	
depending on the context, and is hard to translate into a single word  
in English. Its meaning as a feeling (dukkha vedanā),	i.e.,	pain,	suffering,	
discomfort, dis-ease, etc., is a symptomatic expression of its universal 
meaning, i.e., unsatisfactoriness, incompleteness, imperfection, etc.
Succinctly, the practice of the Buddha’s teaching is to fully realize  
the nature of dukkha and its cause, in order to experience its cessation 
in	Nibbāna.	Sometimes	this	aspect	of	the	Buddha’s	teaching,	formally	
called the Four Noble Truths, is expressed in the form of a doctor’s 
diagnosis:	observing	the	symptoms	of	dukkha, determining its cause, 
indicating its cure by removal of the cause, and prescribing a method  
of treatment as the remedy. Thus, we need to recognize the real nature 
of dukkha clearly and comprehensively in order to determine its  
cause (craving), and then undertake a course of spiritual treatment  
(the Eightfold Path1) in order to facilitate the removal of the cause.  
In this way we can arrive at the cure, which is the ultimate well-being  
of	Nibbāna.
‘Nibbāna is the ultimate well-being.’ Dhp.	204.
‘Nibbāna, as taught by the Fully Awakened One, is indeed  
the highest happiness: the sorrowless, stainless peace,  
wherein dukkha is dissolved.’ Theragāthā	227.
1 See Chapter 12 on the Progressive Path for details.

59
The Fuel
It is because human beings are ‘hindered by ignorance and fettered 
by craving’ that they face continual unsatisfactoriness and countless 
renewed existences (punabbhava:	lit.	‘again-becomings’)	(S.II,178ff). The 
active	‘fuel’	for	unsatisfactoriness,	which	goes	out	in	Nibbāna,	is	craving,	
although	the	spectre	of	ignorance	filters	through	in	a	variety	of	forms.	
Since	the	experience	of	Nibbāna	is	a	complete	and	ultimate	experience,	
it involves the fullest extent of humanness in all its aspects – physically, 
emotionally and intellectually. Most commonly, this is expressed 
through the cessation of the three roots of unskilful kamma, which are 
the	defilements	(kilesa)	or	‘fires’	of	greed	(lobha), aversion (dosa) and 
delusion (moha).
Sāriputta: ‘The ending of greed, aversion and delusion,  
friend, is called Nibbāna.’ S.IV,251.
Elsewhere,	Nibbāna	is	described	as	the	ending	of	the	active	factors	
conditioning dukkha,	which	are	ignorance,	craving	and	grasping:
‘But with the complete, dispassionate cessation of ignorance comes 
cessation of Willing and Habiting ... cessation of Knowing … cessation of 
craving … cessation of grasping … cessation of ageing-and-death. Such 
is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering (dukkha).’ S.II,1-2.
‘Radha, the end of craving is Nibbāna.’ S.III,190.
‘Ananda, one without grasping realizes Nibbāna.’ M.II,265.
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  NIBBĀNA

60
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘Bhikkhus, when ignorance (avijjā) is eliminated and true knowledge 
(vijjā) has arisen in a bhikkhu, with the fading away of ignorance and 
the arising of true knowledge he no longer grasps sensuality, no longer 
grasps views, no longer grasps rules and observances, no longer grasps a 
doctrine of self. Not grasping, he is not excited. Not being excited,  
he personally [reaches] Nibbāna. He knows clearly: “Exhausted is birth, 
the religious life is fulfilled, what had to be done is done, this life is  
not to be in future.”’ M.I,67.
Other forms of ‘fuel’ are collected into various groupings. The most 
succinct of these groupings is called āsava,	literally	‘flowing’,	thus	
‘outflows’,	a	word	borrowed	from	the	Jain	tradition.	I	translate	āsava	 
as	‘outflows’,	as	I	understand	them	as	the	primary	‘outflows	of	selfhood’. These āsava are most often mentioned as sensuality, existence 
and ignorance	(D.III,216;	A.III,414), although sometimes a fourth, views, 
is mentioned	(D.II,81). These four āsava	are	also	listed	under	the	Floods	
(ogha) and Bonds (yoga) (S.V,59).
A more complete grouping of ‘fuel’ are the Ten Fetters (saṃyojana), 
which	are	gradually	eliminated	at	different	stages	of	awakening.	These	
are:	1.	identity	view	(sakkāya diṭṭhi), 2. doubt (vicikicchā), 3. adherence  
to rules and observances (sīlabbata-parāmāsa),	4.	sensual	lust	
(kāmarāga), 5. ill-will (vyāpāda),	6.	lust	for	fine-material	existence	
(rūparāga),	7.	lust	for	immaterial	existence	(arūparāga),	8.	conceit	
(māna), 9. restlessness (uddhacca), 10. ignorance (avijjā) (S.V,61).

61
While the Buddha primarily directed people’s attention to the path of 
practice, he also pointed to where the path leads. For people immersed 
in	‘I-making’,	it	is	difficult	to	comprehend	the	complete	cessation	of	
‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying disposition to conceit’ 
or	Nibbāna.	However,	to	give	some	idea	of	it	the	Buddha	used	many	
epithets	of	Nibbāna,	the	most	common	being	‘the	unconditioned’	
(asaṅkhata) (S.IV,359f), but also ‘the deathless’, ‘the undecaying’,  
‘the unageing’, ‘the unailing’ (S.IV,368ff). However, it is also expressed  
in	positive	form:	‘the	truth’,	‘the	far	shore’,	‘the	subtle’,	‘the	stable’,	 
‘the peaceful’, ‘the exalted’, ‘the fortunate’, ‘the secure’, ‘the marvelous’,  
‘the	extraordinary’,	‘the	untroubled’,	as	well	as:	‘dispassion’,	‘purity’,	
‘release’, ‘the lamp’, ‘the shelter’, ‘the protection’, ‘the refuge’,  
‘the goal’ (S.IV,368ff)2.
‘There is, bhikkhus, a not-born, a not-become, a not-made,  
a not-constructed ... Since there is a not-born, a not-become,  
a not-made, a not-constructed, thus there is a leaving behind  
of the born, become, made, constructed.
There is the escape, the peaceful,
The beyond-conceptual-thought, the stable,
The not-born, the unproduced, 
The sorrowless, stainless state:
The end of painful things, 
The calming of conditions — bliss.’
It. 2.16, abridged.
2	 For	a	more	extensive	review	of	Nibbāna	see	The Island by Ajahns Pasanno and Amaro, abhayagiri.org/books
PART ONE  |  BACKGROUND  |  NIBBĀNA

62
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘There is, bhikkhus, that sphere where there is neither earth element, 
water element, fire element nor air element; nor the spheres  
of infinite space, of infinite consciousness, of nothingness, nor  
of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; neither this world nor 
another world, nor both; nor sun and moon. There, bhikkhus, I say there 
is no coming, no going, no abiding, no passing away, no arising; that is 
not-established, non-functioning, without foundation.  
Just this is the end of dukkha.’ Ud.	8.1.

63

PART TWO  
The Process of I-Making
