# acknowledgements

This work is the result of the collaboration of many persons. Firstly,  
my sincerest appreciation to my dedicated editor, Marie Delaney,  
who stuck with the project for several years. Appreciation also to  
Ajahn Chandapalo and Ajahn Karuniko who read through the complete 
text	and	offered	many	helpful	corrections.	Ajahn	Gavesako	generously	
provided corrections to the Pali; Yuliana carefully proofread the text  
and then meticulously re-checked all the references, while Theresa, 
Grant	and	Russ	went	through	the	layout	files	for	the	last-minute	
corrections.	Numerous	other	people,	too	many	to	mention,	have	offered	
feedback on various occasions over the years.
Special thanks to Sharon (belangerdesign.com) for patient work  
on the complex layout, and to Melinda (melindaholmedesign.com)  
for creating the ebook version.
The	printing	costs	for	this	book	have	been	offered	by	a	generous	 
donor who wishes only to be known as ‘Anonymous, in gratitude for  
the Dhamma & the Ajahn Chah lineage of The Thai Forest Tradition’. 
I would also like to acknowledge the persistent encouragement  
I received from Ajahn Munindo, without which this book would still be 
just	a	large	file	on	my	computer.	And	a	word	of	appreciation	to	Venerable	
Yuttadhammo-Sirimangalo	for	all	his	efforts	to	produce	 
the Digital Pali Reader, which made quick and easy reference to  
Pali texts possible.
acknowledgements
. . . . . . . 
vi

Permission	to	reprint	extracts	has	been	generously	given	by:
The Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy, Sri Lanka for the use  
of quotations from The Udana and Itivuttaka by John D. Ireland  
(1997),	The	Great	Discourse	on	Causation	by	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	
(2000) and Concept and Reality in Early Buddhist Thought  
by	Bhikkhu	Ñāṇananda	(1986);
Wisdom	Publications,	199	Elm	Street,	Somerville,	MA	02144	USA.	 
(www.wisdompubs.org) to reproduce extracts from Bhikkhu Bodhi’s 
notes in The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha (MLDB),  
The Connected Discourses of the Buddha (CDB), and The Numerical 
Discourses of the Buddha (NDB);
Equinox	Press,	Sheffield,	UK	to	reprint	extracts	from	‘What	the	Buddha	
Thought’ by Richard Gombrich (2013). 
All other quotations have been used under the guidelines for ‘fair use’.
Ajahn Thiradhammo
Wat Buddha Dhamma,
Wisemans Ferry, Australia
vii
