# PART TWO | The Process of I-Making

PART TWO  
The Process of I-Making

66
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Process of I-Making
The Pali Canon does not give a detailed or comprehensive explanation 
of the process of ‘I-making, mine-making and the underlying 
disposition	to	conceit’	as	you	would	expect	to	find	in	a	modern	book	on	
developmental psychology. I think, primarily, because the Buddha was 
more concerned with explaining the various means to the cessation of 
I-making. However, scattered throughout the Pali Canon various aspects 
of the process are outlined, mentioned or alluded to. Thus, by gathering 
them together, a fairly clear overview of the on-going processes begins 
to	emerge.	While,	of	course,	these	are	dynamic	flowing	processes	
without distinct boundaries, for the sake of easy explanation, I have 
distinguished four progressive stages. 
1 | 	The	first	stage	of	‘I-making’	(and	also	‘mine-making’)	 
is the ‘underlying disposition to conceit’ (mānānusaya)  
which we inherit upon being born;
2 | 	The	second	stage	is	the	arising	of	(the	idea)	‘I	am’,	 
the emerging of a subjective ‘I’;
3 | 	The	next	stage	is	that	of	‘I’	identifying	–	the	subject	 
‘I’ relating to an object. There are three main types  
of	‘objects’	which	‘I’	identifies	with:	the	Five	Groups	 
of Grasping, the Six Sense Bases and the Elements (S.IV,24);

67
4 | 	The	establishing	of	an	identity	results	in	some	sense	of	a	self.	 
This is then supported and reinforced by a range of various  
‘self	views’.	Most	specifically	this	is	‘identity	view’	(sakkāya diṭṭhi),  
or ‘view of self’ (attānudiṭṭhi), or the ‘doctrine of self’ (attavāda). 
There is usually also a wider range of philosophical views which 
directly involve a belief in a permanent self, the most prominent 
being	those	of	eternalism:	‘I	will	continue	after	death’,	and	
annihilationism:	‘I	will	be	extinguished	at	death’.	Following	on	from	
these views is a range of attendant mental turmoil	(S.III,5f;18f).
We see then that the processes of I-making progresses from a subtle, 
‘pre-conscious’ level as an underlying disposition, through increasingly 
more	developed	stages	of	ideas	of	‘I’	to	various	types	of	identification,	
culminating in self views, which are often unconsciously grasped 
and aggressively defended. In order to engage in a contemplative 
investigation of these processes, it may be useful to proceed step  
by step through these developmental stages.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to the breathing.
•  When the mind is somewhat settled, observe 
if there is some particular physical sensation, 
feeling or mental/emotional state which you 
experience as your familiar sense of self.
•  Is that physical sensation, feeling or mental/
emotional state pleasant and comfortable, 
or not so pleasant or comfortable?
•  Do you notice a thought of ‘I’, ‘me’ or ‘mine’ 
associated with that experience?
•  Is that sense of ‘me’ immediately present, or 
do you need to search for it?
•  Are you able to just observe that experience 
as it is?
•  When it seems appropriate, bring attention 
back to the breathing.
•  Open your eyes and slowly resume your 
activities.

69
The term ‘underlying disposition’ (anusaya) is referred to in several 
different	contexts	throughout	the	Pali	Canon.	In	general	it	implies	a	
latent or dormant predisposition towards something, as at S.III,35 
where the Buddha explains to a bhikkhu that if one has an underlying 
disposition (anuseti)	towards	something,	then	one	is	defined	in	terms	
of it. The bhikkhu then explains his understanding that if one has an 
underlying disposition towards any of the Five Groups of Grasping,  
one	is	defined	in	terms	of	them1. 
Perhaps	the	most	significant	reference	to	the	underlying	dispositions	
is	to	the	‘five	lower	fetters’	(M.64/I,432f) where the Buddha is quoted as 
saying that a young infant, even though they as yet do not have a notion 
of identity (sakkāya), still has an underlying disposition to identity view 
(sakkāyadiṭṭhānusaya) that lies within. When someone uneducated in 
the noble one’s teaching ‘lives with a mind pervaded and overcome with 
identity view and does not clearly know as it really is the escape from 
identity view; when identity view has become steadfast and has not 
been dispelled in them, it is a lower fetter.’ 
A similar argument is made regarding the other four ‘lower fetters’  
in	terms	of:	
• not having a notion of Dhamma, still having an underlying disposition 
to doubt; 
1	 cf.	 CDB.1053n.47:	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	gives	an	interesting	interpretation	of	the	kind	of	person	one	would	be	due	
to	identifying	with	a	particular	member	of	the	five	groups,	i.e,	a	‘”physical”	person’	through	identifying	with	
physical processes, a ‘hedonist’ through feeling, an ‘aesthete’ through apperceiving, a ‘man of action’ through 
mental	processes	[dominated	by	will],	a	‘thinker’	through	bare	knowing.
FIVE
Underlying Dispositions
. . . . . . . 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  UNDERLYING DISPOSITIONS

70
BEYOND I-MAKING
• not having a notion of rules (sīla), still having an underlying disposition 
to adherence to rules and observances; 
• not having a notion of sensuality, still having an underlying disposition 
to sensual desire, and 
• not having a notion of ‘beings’, still having an underlying  
disposition to ill-will towards beings. 
Thus we are all naturally predisposed towards these unskilful qualities, 
and the frightening aspect is, that if we do nothing about them, they 
will	tend	to	increase,	particularly	under	the	influence	of	inappropriate	
attention. These ‘fetters’ then become increasingly ingrained and 
habituated as fundamental modes of being.
The most basic of the underlying dispositions are passion (rāgānusaya), 
aversion (paṭighānusaya) and ignorance (avijjānusaya) (M.III,285-6;	
M.I,303). Another designation is mentioned as passion, aversion, and 
the conceited view ‘I am’ (asmī’ti diṭṭhimāna), the last one (possibly) 
representing the most basic form of ignorance (M.9/I,47). In another 
discourse, the underlying dispositions are referred to as delight in sense 
pleasures, delight in ill-will, delight in harming, delight in embodiment, 
and delight in identity	(A.III,246). Eventually they were formalized into the 
definitive	seven	underlying	dispositions	as:	
1. sensual passion (kāmarāga), 2. aversion (paṭigha), 3. views (diṭṭhi),	4.	
doubt (vicikicchā), 5. conceit (māna), 6. passion for existence (bhavarāga), 
7.	ignorance	(avijjā) (S.V,60;	A.IV,9;	D.III,254).
The Ten Fetters (‘fettering’ one to existence) are similar to the 
Underlying Dispositions with #6, passion for existence, divided into  
passion for material existence and passion for immaterial existence, and  
the addition of adherence to rules and observances and restlessness.

71
The third Underlying	Disposition	is	defined	as	identity	view	 
(sakkāya diṭṭhi). The Ten Fetters gain strength when the Underlying 
Dispositions, which are initially only latent, are not attended to  
with appropriate attention and wisdom.
The Commentary to MN2	explains	that	defiling	tendencies	occur	 
at	three	levels:	a)	anusaya level, where they are latent or dormant,  
b) pariyuṭṭhāna (‘possessed’) level, where they obsess the mind,  
and c) vītikkama level, ‘where they motivate unwholesome bodily  
and verbal action’.
Conceit (māna)
Conceit	is	used	in	several	related	contexts	in	the	Pali	Canon,	firstly,	 
as pride or arrogance (S.I,177f;187f;	A.III,445), and secondly as selfreference, as in the three conceits or discriminations of being superior, 
inferior, or equal to others (S.III,48-9;	V,56;	cf.	CDB.355	n.37), which occur 
through clinging to, or adhering to the six internal sense bases (S.IV,88). 
The third and most important context is the conceit ‘I am’ (asmimāna). 
The underlying disposition to conceit (mānānusaya) means that we 
have an inherent predisposition to conceive in terms of ‘I am’, which, 
if not acknowledged and dealt with, continues to feed the process of 
‘I-making’. In concise terms, we are predisposed to self-reference 
everything we experience.
Most of the time, this self-referencing predisposition occurs automatically and unconsciously in the background of virtually all of  
our perceptions and conceptions. Now that the Buddha has pointed this 
out to us, it is possible to bring awareness to the process itself  
and	release	its	influence.
2 Quoted by Bhikkhu Bodhi at MLDB. n.651.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  UNDERLYING DISPOSITIONS

72
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
exercise
Although it is not possible to be directly aware of the underlying disposition 
to	conceit,	since	it	is	‘underlying’,	it	is	possible	to	be	aware	of	its	effects	as	
self-referencing. As an exercise, see if you can observe this self-referencing 
occurring. This exercise is quite subtle and generally requires the ability to  
quiet the mind. It is a very valuable practice so I include it here for those  
who are interested. 
Self-referencing, or subjectivity, occurs in reference to sense objects –  
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches and mental phenomena. Sense  
objects which are familiar to us rarely elicit strong self-referencing,  
since the self-referencing has been cocooned within familiar habits  
that require no special attention. Self-referencing is more prominently 
displayed by new, unfamiliar sense objects, as they need a special degree  
of attention and thus give rise to a new sense of self. Sense objects which 
appear threatening give rise to the strongest self-referencing, however  
often attention is so focused on that powerful experience that there  
is little attention available for self observation. 
Self-referencing is an experience of some sense object, feeling or impression 
by a perceiver or knower of the sense object. At its most rudimentary it  
is non-conceptual, merely a vague sense of something. This can perhaps  
be most easily experienced in regard to the body.

73
•  In a quiet place stand comfortably in your most familiar posture. This will usually 
be with arms loosely at the sides and your head up. Place your feet about 
shoulder width apart and relax the knees. Gently close the eyes and observe the 
sensation of standing. As you are aware of the body standing can you also 
observe a sense of self present? Sense this presence of ‘self’ . How does it 
manifest?
•  Once you have contacted this self-referencing, slowly raise your arms (either to 
the sides or in front), keeping awareness on the sensations of the movement, and 
how they affect the sense of your self. Do you notice differences in your sense of 
self as the arms move? 
•  When suitable slowly lower your arms observing the changing sensations and 
any associated change in your sense of self. 
•  Can you also notice associated feeling tones of pleasant and unpleasant related 
to the changing sensations?
•  Return the arms to your sides, resume your familiar posture and relax.
You can, of course, follow the same principle with any change in posture. 
Especially interesting is moving the body into unusual postures or through 
uncomfortable postures – just be careful not to overexert the body.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  UNDERLYING DISPOSITIONS

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sitting in a comfortable posture, close your 
eyes gently and bring attention to the 
breathing.
•  When the mind is reasonably calm, bring up 
the thought ‘I’, or ‘me’, or think your name, 
observing any associations that arise.
•  Bring up the thought ‘I am’ and observe what 
the response is.
•  Is this sense of ‘I am’ primarily physical 
sensation, or feeling, or a mental/emotional 
state?
•  See if you can bring attention to each of the 
six senses as they contact their objects – 
sight, sound, smell, taste, touch and 
thought.
•  As you bring awareness to each of the sense 
contacts, observe if and when the sense of ‘I 
am’ arises.
•  Is the thought ‘I’ or ‘me’ or ‘I am’ always 
present, or is it sometimes not present?
•  When suitable, bring your attention back to 
the breathing.
• Open your eyes and resume your activity.

75
Initially, the conceit ‘I am’ is a latent or underlying disposition which 
has the potential to arise at any time. However, there needs to be some 
‘trigger’ for it to manifest. One of the sources is the perceptual process.
The Discourse on the Root of All Things (MN 1) presents various scenarios 
relating	to	the	perceptual	processes	of	four	types	of	people:	the	ordinary	
person; the person in training; an arahant; and the Buddha.  
All	four	types	perceive	similar	things	but	in	significantly	different	ways.	
When an ordinary person perceives (sañña), they then conceive (maññati) 
the object of perception and delight in it (abhinandati), because ‘they 
have not fully understood it (apariññāta)’(M.I,1f). 
‘Having perceived earth as earth, he conceives as earth, conceives in 
earth, conceives from earth, he conceives earth to be ‘mine’, he delights 
in earth’ M.I,1. 
The person in training perceives, but is instructed not to conceive or 
delight in the object of perception; while neither the arahant nor the 
Buddha conceive or delight in, because the arahant ‘has fully understood 
it’, and the Buddha ‘has fully understood it to the end’. 
This process of four-fold conceiving is explained as including the Four 
Elements, beings, various grades of celestial beings, the four immaterial 
SIX
The Conceit ‘I Am’
. . . . . . . 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’

76
BEYOND I-MAKING
absorptions, what is seen, heard, sensed or cognized, unity, diversity, ‘all’ 
and	Nibbāna.	In	other	discourses,	the	four-fold	conceiving	is	similarly	
applied to the six internal and external sense bases, to sense-knowing, 
to contact, to feeling (S.IV,22ff); and to the Five Groups of Grasping and the 
elements (S.IV,24).	In	effect,	this	covers	all	of	human	experience.
Bhikkhu Bodhi notes1 that the Pali phrases used in the four-fold 
conceiving suggest that conceiving covers a wide range of ‘subjectively 
tinged cognition’ from before identity coalesces to complex intellectual 
exercises. 
Grasping or adhering to any of the six internal sense bases, or ‘not seeing 
things as they really are’ (S.III,48) are causes of the three forms  
of comparison as ‘I am superior’, ‘I am equal’ or ‘I am inferior’ (S.IV,88). 
Conceiving (maññati)
Maññati, from the root ‘to think’, is a form of ‘thinking’, ‘imagining’, 
‘conceiving’. In the discourses, it refers to distorted thinking dominated 
by self reference.2
‘I am’ is merely a thought, concept, or mental construct, which then 
seeks	for	verification	and	affirmation.	This	initially	occurs	as	various	
perceptual ‘conceivings’, which can lead to ‘delight’ (nandi), and then  
to	further	elaborations	of	what	‘I	am’	actually	is:
‘‘I am’ is a conceiving; ‘I am this’ is a conceiving; ‘I will be’ … ‘I will  
not be’ … ‘I will be physical’ … ‘I will be without physical processes’ … 
‘I will be percipient’ … ‘I will be non-percipient’ … ‘I shall be neitherpercipient-nor-non-percipient’ is a conceiving.’ M.III,246.
1 MLDB, p.1163
2	 MLDB.	n.6;	 CDB.	1401,n.15-16;	1431	n.224

77
Since the idea ‘I am’ is merely an unsubstantiated thought, once  
it gains momentum it leads to further ideas about the nature of what 
‘I am’ is. The Pali Canon outlines the eighteen ideas about the nature 
of ‘I’ concerning the internal, and the external, which extend over the 
past,	the	future	and	the	present,	amounting	to	108	‘wanderings	of	
craving’ (A.II,212f). Or there are the sixteen forms of self-doubt caused by 
inappropriate attention, which are similar speculations of what  
‘I’	is:	‘Was	I	in	the	past?’,	etc.	(M.I,8). As will be explained in the next 
chapter, this can then lead on to grasping at aspects of experience  
to	provide	confirmation	of	its	existence.
. . . . . . . 
exercise
Since the arising of the thought ‘I am’ is so habitual and automatic, it can be a 
very useful exercise to try to be more aware of it in the course of everyday life.
In this exercise we will investigate the activity of conceiving from the emerging 
self-reference of the thought ‘I am’. This does not require the mind to be so 
quiet as in the previous chapter’s exercise, just quiet enough that you can 
observe any thoughts that arise.
•  Sitting comfortably in a quiet place, bring attention to the act of seeing.  
Do you notice any reference to ‘I’ – ‘I am seeing’ , ‘I am looking’ …?
•  As you look at various objects, observe if there are any references  
to ‘I’ – ‘I see a book’ , etc. 
•  Do you notice any further references to ‘I’ associated with what you see –  
‘I see that same book about meditation’?
•  Can you observe the feeling about those references – ‘Seeing that is pleasant’?
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’

78
BEYOND I-MAKING
•  Are there any related emotions or trains of thought – ‘I am interested … 
uninterested … irritated … bored with what I see’ , ‘What I see reminds me of … ’ ?
•  Does the thought ‘I am’ bring up other thoughts such as – ‘what am I?’ ,  
‘what will I be?’ and so on …?
•  If suitable, observe self-referencing arising with any of the other sense  
objects – sounds, smells, tastes, touches and mental phenomena. With a quiet 
mind, slowly go through the various objects of each of the senses.
•  With eyes closed, bring attention to sounds. Do you have a sense of something or 
someone hearing? Is this familiar?
•  Now bring attention to smelling. Any obvious odours and someone smelling? 
•  How about tastes? Who or what is tasting?  
[Maybe better to try this when eating to observe tastes more clearly.]
•  How is the sensation of your body at this time? Can you observe a self-reference?
•  As your attention moves from sense to sense, do you notice a corresponding 
change in the sense of self-reference?
•  Does some sense trigger a stronger sense of self-reference than others?
•  When suitable, you can open the eyes and resume your normal activity.
As a follow up, see if you can be more attentive to thoughts of ‘I am’ in the 
course of normal activity. Perhaps you can detect some common patterns? Are 
these	patterns	skilful	and	beneficial	or	not	so	skilful?

79
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE CONCEIT ‘I AM’
From the various forms of conceiving ‘I am’, the next stage of the 
‘I-making’ process is the ‘I am’ identifying with some object. Since 
conceiving takes place in reference to three particular ‘objects’ –  
the Five Groups of Grasping, the Six Internal and Six External Sense Bases 
(with associated bare knowing, contact, and feeling (S.IV,22ff)),  
and the Elements (S.IV,24)	–	these	are	what	‘I	am’	identifies	with.	
In order to understand the further development of the I-making process, 
it is necessary to become familiar with several other  
significant	themes	in	the	Buddha’s	teachings,	that	is,	the	Five Groups 
of Grasping, the Perceptual Process and Dependent Origination, which 
explains the interrelationship of ‘grasping’ with other factors. Therefore, 
before we continue explaining the next two stages of I-making, we will 
make a slight digression into these themes.

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
lightly and bring attention to the sensation 
of breathing.
•  When suitable, try to be aware of any 
sensation in the body – the sensation of 
sitting, the sensation of the hands touching, 
the	sensation	of	the	feet	touching	the	floor,	
or any other sensation.
•  Do you observe any feeling associated with 
what you are sensing?
• 	Do	you	recognise	what	you	are	sensing:	 
‘The body seems tense … relaxed … tired …’?
•  Do related thoughts or memories arise,  
or is the mind able to abide with just sensing 
the body?
•  At the present moment, what are you 
conscious of?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the 
sensation of breathing, open your eyes and 
return to normal activity.

81
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS
The Five Groups of Grasping (pañcupādānakkhandhā)
The	Buddha	recognized	that	there	are	five	primary	life	functions	 
which people identify as their self (S.III,44).	These	five	functions	are	 
the body, and the four mental functions of feeling, recognizing, willing 
and habiting, and bare knowing. The Buddha called these the Five Groups 
of Grasping,	that	is,	the	five	groups	or	collections	(khandhā)1 of life 
functions which are grasped as self. They are called ‘groups’ because each 
factor	includes	a	number	of	different	aspects	and	includes	their	whole	
range:	‘whatever	kind:	past,	future	or	present,	internal	or	external,	gross	
or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near.’ (S.III,47).
Since these Five Groups of Grasping are fundamental life functions, 
and thus ever-present, it is very easy to be drawn into self-referencing 
them as some aspect of self, especially under the dominance of the 
underlying dispositions of ignorance and conceit. However, if we increase 
our awareness of these Five Groups of Grasping through studying the 
Buddha’s teaching on them, we could short-circuit insidious  
self-referencing and, through understanding the processes  
involved, realize liberation. 
1 Khandha,	lit.	‘mass,	body	of,	collection	of’.	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	uses	‘aggregate’,	i.e.,	CDB.	p.871;	p.2011.
SEVEN
The Five Groups
. . . . . . .

82
BEYOND I-MAKING
Interestingly, even though these Five Groups of Grasping are mentioned 
quite often in the Pali Canon, they are not elaborated on  
at any great length, possibly because they were commonly recognized 
categories of experience in the Buddha’s time. However, in the present 
time these Five Groups of Grasping are not commonly recognized or 
referenced, and have taken on the aura of Buddhist technical jargon. 
Also, over the years, the various translations of the Five Groups  
of Grasping have often not contributed to making them easily understood. This is unfortunate, since the Five Groups of Grasping have a 
very	significant	role	in	the	Buddha’s	outline	of	the	path	to	liberation.	
True knowledge (vijjā),	the	opposite	of	ignorance,	is	defined	as	clearly	
knowing (pajānāti) the Five Groups of Grasping, their origin, their 
cessation and the path to their cessation (S.III,163).
It is very important to understand these Five Groups of Grasping as 
dynamic, impersonal processes, rather than concrete entities. They  
are actually how a human being experiences reality and not what  
a human being is. The Buddha frequently stated that these Five  
Groups of Grasping are all impermanent, conditioned, dependently 
arisen, subject to wasting, to waning, to fading away, to cessation 
(S.III,24f); and that they are impermanent, unsatisfactory and not  
a permanent self (S.III,45).

83
Explanation of the Five Groups of Grasping
The Pali Canon does not give a detailed explanation of the Five Groups of 
Grasping. Two discourses (SN	22:56	&	57)	give	a	definition	of	‘body’	 
and then merely list the six types of each of the mental groups based 
upon the six senses, i.e., feeling born of eye-contact, etc. One discourse 
(SN	22:79)	gives an explanation of why they are called by their particular 
name (see below for details). 
Several of the Five Groups of Grasping have not been well translated into 
English. This is partly due to the ambiguity of some English terms (i.e., 
feeling, perception, consciousness), and partly due to an attempt to 
maintain technical rigour and consistency of the translations. Therefore, 
I give my own renderings which I hope may help some people understand 
them more clearly. 
As mentioned above, due to the insidious nature of self-referencing, it 
is exceptionally easy to lapse into identifying any of the Five Groups of 
Grasping as some form of self. Since these Five Groups of Grasping are 
dynamic	processes	and	not	‘things’,	I	will	define	them	in	verb	form	(even	
though this may be forcing the English language). Thus we don’t ‘have a 
body’, but rather there is the experiencing of the four elemental qualities 
of	earth,	fire,	water	and	air	temporarily	‘embodying’.	Similarly,	 
we	don’t	really	‘have	a	mind’,	but	there	is	experiencing	of	a	flow	of	 
mental processes as feeling, recognizing, mental activities and knowing. 
In Pali, the Five Groups of Grasping	are:	rūpa, vedanā, saññā, saṅkhārā, 
viññāṇa. My new translation of the Five Groups of Grasping	is:	
Embodying, Feeling, Recognizing, Willing and Habiting, and Bare 
Knowing, explained in detail below. 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

84
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Five Groups of Grasping in Detail
I	have	put	alternative	translations	in	square	brackets	[	].
Rūpa: Embodying,	[Physical	Processes,	Form]	
Rūpa	is	defined	as	the	four	‘great	elemental	qualities’	(mahābhūtā),  
of	earth	(solidity),	fire	(heat),	water	(fluidity)	and	air	(motion),	 
and the physicality derived from them (S.III,59).
It should be noted that this is not solid ‘materiality’ as is commonly 
understood, but rather the way in which physicality is experienced,  
or embodied, through the functioning of these ‘elemental qualities’.  
For all intents and purposes, as one of the Five Groups of Grasping,  
we can say that this is the physical body embodying the four elements.  
In the discourse giving an explanation of the individual terms (SN.22:79) 
the	examples	given	apply	to	the	body:	embodying	is	called	rūpa because  
it is ruppati, literally ‘oppressed, hurt, molested’ by ‘cold, heat, hunger, 
thirst, by contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun and reptiles’.  
At M.III,240f the internal four elements are explained in terms of the 
various parts or aspects of the body. Its root cause is food (āhāra) (S.III,62)2.
2	 See	stock	definition	of	body	at	S.IV,83;194;292.

85
. . . . . . . 
experiencing body
•  Sit in a comfortable posture and bring attention to breathing.
•  Can you sense the touch of the breath on the nostrils as it goes in and out?
•  Is that touch of the breath strong or weak? Does it last long or short?
•  To expand your experience of body, try to slowly move the attention to different 
parts of the body, for example, from the nostrils to the area around the eyes. Do 
you observe any particular sensation there? Observe the sensation when you 
move your eyelids.
•  Moving attention to the centre of the forehead, is there any obvious sensation 
there? Is it cool or warm? Anything else?
•  Moving attention to the top of the head, observe if there is any kind of sensation. 
If no sensation is observed, observe that.
•  If you are able to continue moving attention to different parts of the body 
without getting too distracted, you can continue to move attention down the 
back of the body, stopping briefly at particular places to try to observe directly 
the type of sensation there. Then from the bottom of the feet you can similarly 
move attention up the front of the body back to the nostrils. If this seems like a 
useful exercise, you can continue either moving slowly or more quickly to 
different parts, or you can focus more on the parts of the body which have 
stronger sensations. If at any time you get distracted from the exercise, return to 
the familiar sensation of breathing at the nostrils, and begin again.
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the sensation of breathing, open your eyes 
and return to normal activity.
The main point of the exercise is not the movement of attention but 
awareness of the various types of sensation which comprise our direct 
experience of body.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

86
BEYOND I-MAKING
Vedanā: Feeling
Vedanā is ‘feeling’, with connotations of ‘knowing, experiencing’.  
I usually translate vedanā as ‘feeling tone’ to distinguish it from  
emotion, which is often seen as synonymous with the word ‘feeling’. 
However, vedanā	is	only	the	affective	or	hedonic	‘tone’	of	our	emotion	 
or mood. In keeping with the verb form in this context, I will refer to 
‘feeling tone’ simply as ‘feeling’, leaving it to the reader to keep the 
specific	definition	in	mind.
Vedanā	is	mostly	defined	as	either	dukkha (unpleasant), sukha  
(pleasant), or neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant (i.e., neutral) feeling 
(S.III,86-7;	IV,204ff).3 In the Discourse on Mindfulness (MN.10; DN.22),  
six	kinds	of	feelings	are	mentioned:	pleasant,	unpleasant	or	neitherunpleasant-nor-pleasant, either of a ‘worldly’ (sāmisa, lit. carnal)  
or ‘spiritual’ (nirāmisa, lit. non-carnal) nature (M.I,59). As one of the  
Five Groups of Grasping, feeling is distinguished into six types, born  
of:	eye-contact;	ear-contact;	nose-contact;	tongue-contact;	 
body-contact; and mind-contact.
Feeling is the second most important constituent of the Five Groups 
because feeling is present whenever there is Knowing (see the  
discussion	in	Chapter	8	on	the	perceptual	process).	Feeling is so 
important because it is the condition for craving (the root cause  
of dukkha) and is thus the link wherein liberation (from craving) can  
be realized. Feeling also activates the three Underlying Dispositions  
of	aversion,	passion	and	ignorance:	
3	 However,	depending	upon	the	context,	feelings	can	also	be	distinguished	as:	a)	bodily	or	mental	(S.IV,208;	
231);	b)	pleasant	or	unpleasant	(S.IV,223f);	c)	the	five	feelings	(‘faculties’)	of	bodily	pleasant,	bodily	
unpleasant, mental well-being (somanassa), mental ill-being (domanassa) and bodily and mental neithercomfortable-nor-uncomfortable (upekkhā, lit. ‘equanimity’) (S.V,209); d) six kinds of feeling from contact 
with the six senses of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body (kāya) and mind (mano). These can be further distinguished 
into feelings from the six sense-objects giving rise to either well-being, ill-being or equanimity (eighteen 
kinds); the eighteen kinds of feeling for either the household life or renunciation (thirty-six kinds); and the 
thirty-six	kinds	of	feelings	in	the	past,	the	future	or	the	present	(108	kinds)	(S.IV,231f).

87
‘When the uninstructed average person experiences a painful feeling 
they become distraught and thus experience two kinds of feelings – 
a bodily one and a mental one; just as a man struck by an arrow would 
experience a painful feeling and then, when struck a second time, would 
experience a second painful feeling. Experiencing a painful feeling they 
have aversion/repugnance (paṭigha) towards it, which is based upon 
the underlying disposition to aversion to painful feeling. Experiencing 
a painful feeling they then seek enjoyment in sensuality, since that is 
their only escape from painful feeling. Seeking enjoyment in sensuality 
is based on the underlying disposition to lust for pleasant feeling. 
Not	clearly	understanding	the	origin	and	passing	away,	gratification,	
disadvantage and escape from these feelings is based upon the 
underlying disposition to ignorance of neither-painful-nor-pleasant 
feeling’. S.IV,207f (summarized).
The Pali Canon states that all phenomena (A.IV,339;	V,107), aspirations 
(saṅkappa) and thoughts (vitakka), (A.IV,385) ‘converge upon feeling’. 
Feeling was one of the themes of the Buddha’s Awakening (S.IV,233f),  
and is one of the four principle themes for developing Mindfulness.
Feeling is ‘born of contact (phassa), rooted (mūlaka) in contact,  
has contact as its cause (nidāna) and condition (paccaya)’ (S.IV,215).
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

88
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
experiencing feeling
•  Sit in a comfortable posture and bring attention to breathing.
•  As you sense the touch of breath at the nostrils, can you observe the feeling of it? 
Is it pleasant? Is it unpleasant? Or is it neutral – neither pleasant nor unpleasant?
•  Bring attention to the body sitting. What is the general feeling of the body 
– pleasant, unpleasant or neutral?
•  Bring attention to the state of mind at present. Can you observe the general 
feeling related to that state?
•  Do you notice any reaction when you know the feeling of body or mind?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to breathing, open your eyes and resume 
your activity.

89
Saññā: Recognizing, [Associative	Knowing,	Apperceiving,	Perception]	
Saññā is from the root saṃ = ‘together’ + ñā = ‘knowing’4. Thus, it is 
associative knowing, which involves memory to provide a reference  
for knowledge to associate or recognize the sense contact, of which there 
are	six	kinds:	visible	objects;	sounds;	smells;	tastes;	touches	and	mental	
phenomena; all arising from contact (phassa). In the Thai language, 
saññā is usually translated as ‘memory’. In English, saññā  
is more correctly translated as ‘apperceiving’, the labelling of that which 
we have become conscious of. Unfortunately, it has commonly been 
translated as ‘perception’, which is too much like the meaning  
of viññāṇa. If ‘apperceiving’ is too unfamiliar a word, then one could 
define	saññā simply as ‘recognizing’ a sense contact.
Saññā is associated with memory, which provides an encyclopedia  
of past knowledge to reference, although limited to our own narrow 
range of experience. On the negative side, memory is old history, 
which, while there may be similarities, is not the same as the present. 
If we identify with memory then we are shackled to old and limited 
perceptions. Thus, for the unawakened person, saññā is subject  
to	distortion,	most	specifically	the	four	perversions	of	perception	
(saññā-vipallāsa),	which	also	affect	the	mind	(citta) and views.  
These	are	taking:	the	impermanent	to	be	permanent;	unsatisfactoriness	
to be satisfactory; not a permanent self to be self; and the unattractive  
to be attractive (A.II,52).
Saññā is used in other contexts in the Pali Canon. The second most 
common	use	is	in	the	context	of	an	‘idea’,	‘concept’,	‘reflection’	or	
‘perception’, most particularly in the lists of various ‘perceptions’ to 
contemplate which ‘merge in the deathless’. A.V,105-6 has two lists of 
these	perceptions	which	overlap.	They	consist	of	the	perceptions	of:	
unattractiveness (asubha); death; repulsiveness of food; non-delight in 
4	 The	two	 Vedic	roots	for	knowing,	jān and jñā become jān and ñā in Pali.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

90
BEYOND I-MAKING
the whole world; impermanence; unsatisfactoriness in impermanence; 
not a permanent self in unsatisfactoriness; giving up; dispassion; 
cessation; a skeleton and four kinds of decaying corpses. A somewhat 
similar set of ‘perceptions’ was given to the sick bhikkhu Girimananda 
in the hope that they might arouse enough sense of urgency for him to 
recover5.
The point of developing these contemplations is to change one’s 
unawakened and distorted saññā to that in conformity with the  
‘way things really are’.
 ‘… from the arising of recognition comes the arising  
of knowledge (ñāṇa).’ D.I,185.
. . . . . . . 
experiencing recognizing
• Sit in a comfortable posture and bring attention to breathing.
•  When the mind seems calm, open your eyes and slowly look around. As you see 
various objects can you observe a sense of recognizing happening?
•  Sometimes this may be with a mental label, sometimes maybe just an 
acknowledgement that it is familiar.
• Are there some things you see and are not able to recognize?
• Can you observe when memories arise?
• Are they mostly pleasant or unpleasant? 
• How do you respond to memories?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the sensation of breathing,  
open your eyes and return to normal activity.
5	 A.V,108f;	he	did	recover.	See	Bhante	Gunaratana	2014	for	a	detailed	explanation	of	these	perceptions.

91
Saṅkhārā: Willing and Habiting, [Mental	Processes	 
(dominated	by	volition),	Volitional	Formations]
The Pali word saṅkhārā, from the root saṃ = ‘together’ + the verb kṛ   
=	‘to	make’,	is	difficult	to	translate,	primarily	because	it	has	different	
meanings	in	different	contexts6. It is both that which puts together, 
constructs or compounds, and what is put together, constructed or 
compounded. As one of the Five Groups of Grasping, saṅkhārā is all 
mental activity except Feeling, Recognizing and Bare Knowing. While 
many mental activites contribute to ‘putting together’, the most 
dominant one is will, volition or intention. What is ‘put together’ is 
similarly many-faceted, but can be generalized as mental habit patterns, 
which are also expressed physically. When we volitionally act in a 
particular way, it is energetically easier to keep acting the same way, and 
thus habit patterns or character traits are formed7. I use the awkward 
verb form ‘habiting’ (Yes, I do hear the squeals of anguish from the 
literalists!), to emphasize that even habits are impermanent.
‘Saṅkhārā are so called because they (volitionally) construct conditioned 
phenomena. What conditioned phenomena do they (volitionally) 
construct? They (volitionally) construct the conditioned phenomena of 
Embodying as Embodying ... Feeling as Feeling ... Recognizing  
as Recognizing ... Willing and Habiting as Willing and Habiting.  
They (volitionally) construct the conditioned phenomena of Bare 
Knowing as Bare Knowing.’ S.III,	87	(cf.	CDB	p.1071,	n.112).
Saṅkhārā as the active mental process of ‘willing’ takes numerous 
forms, most prominently craving and grasping, and the volitions of 
greed, aversion and delusion. Saṅkhārā as the mental processes which 
have been previously constructed are ignorance, predisposed mental 
6	 Bhikkhu	Bodhi	distinguishes	five	meanings	for	saṅkhārā	at	CDB.	pp.44-47.
7	 A 	relevant	saying,	of	which	I	have	not	found	the	author	is:	‘Sow	a	thought,	reap	a	habit;	sow	a	habit,	 
reap a personality; sow a personality, reap a destiny.’
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

92
BEYOND I-MAKING
functions (i.e., name-and-form), and other processes of ‘habiting’, such 
as behavioural patterns, personality traits, etc.
Saṅkhārā shares the same root as kamma,	which	the	Buddha	defined	as	
intention. Saṅkhārā as one of the Five Groups of Grasping	is	defined	as	
the six types of intention (sañcetanā)	regarding:	sights;	sounds;	smells;	
tastes; touches; and mental phenomena. It arises from contact (phassa) 
(S.III,60). In the formula for Dependent Origination (see Chapter 9), 
saṅkhārā is represented by the mental functions of ‘willing (cetanā), 
contact (phassa) and attention (manasikāra)’.8
Gombrich (2013,	pp.11;	140-1) suggests that saṅkhārā may be the closest 
term the Buddha had for ‘process’. Bhikkhu Bodhi translates saṅkhārā as 
‘volitional formations’9. My ‘willing’ corresponds to ‘volitional’ and my 
‘habiting’ (is an attempt to) correspond to ‘formations’.
. . . . . . . 
experiencing saṅkhārā
•  Sit in a comfortable posture and bring attention to breathing.
•  When you are reasonably settled, try to observe the condition of the mind.
•  What kind of mental activity do you observe? Is it fantasy or day dream, 
conceptual thinking over some issue, or perhaps, planning the future?
•  Can you observe what is driving those activities, what is the intention  
behind them?
•  Can you observe what patterns those activities follow? Are they familiar?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the sensation of breathing,  
open your eyes and return to normal activity.
8	 In	the	third	‘basket’	of	the	Pali	Canon,	the	later-compiled	Abhidhamma	Piṭaka,	saṅkhārā designates a 
collection	of	fifty	of	the	fifty-two	mental	processes	(cetasika). Some of these are skilful such as collectedness, 
mindfulness, energy, etc., and some are unskilful such as greed, aversion, delusion, lethargy and sleepiness, 
etc. See the fold-out sheet at the back of the Buddhist Dictionary	for	specifics.
9	 CDB.	pp.44-5.

93
Viññāṇa: Bare Knowing,	[Consciousness]		
Viññāṇa is from the root ‘vi + ñā. The word ‘ñā’ means ‘knowing’  
and ‘vi’	denotes	duality,	separation,	differentiation.	Thus	viññāṇa is 
a	separating,	differentiating	or	distinguishing	knowing.	It	is	the	bare	
knowing that a sense contact exists, that is, distinguishing a particular 
sense	contact	from	the	chaotic	flood	of	sense	impressions.		
At its elemental level viññāṇa	is	the	first	and	foremost	form	of	knowing.	
First, because without viññāṇa	there	could	be	no	differentiating	of	
something from nothing. It is foremost because viññāṇa is the primal 
element of human existence – without viññāṇa we would not know 
subjective life.
Unfortunately, viññāṇa is commonly translated as ‘consciousness’.  
This translation, however, while general enough for most purposes, 
fails to capture the precise meaning of viññāṇā. The Oxford English 
Dictionary	defines	consciousness	as:	‘a	person’s	awareness	or	perception	
of something’. Viññāṇa, however, is simply the ‘bare knowing’ that a 
sense contact has occurred, without knowing about that contact, that is, 
it is without any discriminatory capacity. In the perceptual process, saññā 
is the initial discriminatory knowledge. However, there is then the bare 
knowing of saññā,	thus	making	it	difficult	to	separate	viññāṇa and saññā.
A	second	difference	between	viññāṇa and consciousness is that viññāṇa 
is the primal element in a human life. Therefore, as long as life exists, 
there is viññāṇa, even when we are asleep or ‘unconscious’ by normal 
standards. In Buddhist psychology viññāṇa is what initiates life10. 
10 At D.II,63 there is mention of viññāṇa ‘entering’ the mother’s womb for nāma-rūpa (i.e., body-mind)  
to develop. In later works this is referred to as paṭisandhi. Since this event is hard to determine,  
Buddhists generally accept that life begins at conception.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

94
BEYOND I-MAKING
This should not be taken to imply that viññāṇa is the ‘soul’ of human life, 
rather, it is the inherent mental function which carries the imprint  
of whatever it knows. Thus, when self-preserving habits (saṅkhārā)  
are grasped, they are known by viññāṇa which then ‘enlivens’ the other 
four Groups of Grasping to create a new self existence (see Chapter  
9 for details). 
‘Bhikkhus, what one intends (ceteti), arranges (pakkapeti) and has  
a disposition towards becomes the foundation for the persistence  
of Knowing.’ S.II,65.
The other four groups are the ‘home’ (oka) of viññāṇa (S.III,9f), and  
apart from them there can be no knowing of the ‘coming and going, 
passing away and birth, growth, increase and abundance’ of viññāṇa 
(S.III,53) – since viññāṇa is how we know the other four groups. While 
each of the other four of the Five Groups have their own ‘domain’ (i.e., 
their sense object) (M.I,295), viññāṇa is present with all of them. The 
other four groups are referred to as the ‘four stations of viññāṇa’ (catasso 
viññāṇaṭṭhitiyo) (S.III,54f).
Viññāṇa has a number of unique aspects and is thus hard to translate 
in a single word. It is the most basic form of knowing – before 
awareness, perception or discrimination – thus a ‘primal’ knowing 
or a ‘bare’ knowing. I will translate it as ‘Bare Knowing’ (or Knowing) 
and	hope	the	reader	will	keep	its	specific	meaning	in	mind.	It	is	very	
important to remember this because Bare Knowing and (basic) 
Feeling are the two mental functions that remain uncorrupted by selfreferencing. Remaining focused on Bare Knowing prevents ‘I-making’ 
and	is	instrumental	in	developing	the	more	refined	forms	of	viññāṇa 
mentioned below.

95
Impermanence of Viññāṇa
In the Buddha’s time, the brahmanical tradition and other religious 
groups regarded viññāṇa as permanent, a view also taken up by some  
of the Buddha’s own disciples (M.I,258). Although the process of knowing 
appears to be continuous, it is actually constantly arising and passing, 
dependent upon what it is knowing. The Buddha reminds us that what 
we take as ‘mind’ (mano), ‘mentality’ (citta) or ‘Bare Knowing’ ‘arises as 
one thing and ceases as another, by day and by night’, just as a monkey 
moving	through	the	forest	grabs	first	one	branch,	lets	it	go,	and	grabs	
another branch (S.II,95). Of course, this often happens so quickly that 
there is the appearance of constancy of Bare Knowing, where in fact  
it is just a consistency of Bare Knowing.
The Buddha frequently reminded his students that Bare Knowing  
is an impermanent, causally-conditioned process of mind, which  
arises dependent upon an object. 
‘In various ways, bhikkhus, have I stated that Bare Knowing  
is dependently arisen, for without condition, Knowing does  
not originate. …
Upon whatsoever condition Bare Knowing arises dependent upon, thus 
it is defined. When Bare Knowing arises dependent upon eye and visible 
object, it is defined as eye-Knowing … ear-Knowing … nose-Knowing 
… tongue-Knowing … body-Knowing … mind-Knowing.
Just as whatsoever condition a fire burns dependent upon it is thus 
defined. When a fire burns dependent upon wood, it is defined as  
a wood fire; when it burns dependent upon kindling, it is defined  
as a kindling fire … a grass fire … a cow-dung fire … a chaff fire …  
a rubbish fire.’ M.I,259f.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

96
BEYOND I-MAKING
The most common types of viññāṇa	are	distinguished	by	the	sense	base:	
sight	(lit.:	eye-Knowing);	sounds	(ear-Knowing);	smell	(nose-Knowing);	
taste (tongue-Knowing); touch (body-Knowing) and mentation  
(mind-Knowing). Mind-Knowing is diverse since it knows whatever 
‘enters’ the mind, which includes the typical mental sense contacts such 
as thoughts, ideas and plans, and it also knows what the other senses 
sense, plus the feelings, perceptions and thoughts they trigger.
In the Dependent Origination formula (Chapter 9) Bare Knowing is 
(mainly) conditioned by saṅkhārā, which are the ignorance-conditioned, 
I-making habits. The second conditioning source is Name-and-form, 
which is the other four Groups of Grasping.
‘When Bare Knowing stands attached (upaya), founded upon 
(ārammaṇa), supported by (patiṭṭhā) the Five Groups of Grasping,  
‘with a sprinkling of delight it might come to increase, growth  
and abundance.’ S.III.53f.
‘ … when one abides contemplating gratification in things  
that can fetter, there is arising of Bare Knowing.’ S.II,91.
‘If there is passion, delight, craving, for the nutriment of edible  
food … nutriment of contact … nutriment of intention …  
nutriment of Bare Knowing, Bare Knowing becomes established  
and comes to growth …’ S.II,101.
There are sense objects ‘which are pleasing, lovely, charming,  
pleasant, sensually enticing, arousing. If a bhikkhu seeks delight,

97
welcomes and remains holding to them, Bare Knowing becomes 
dependent upon and grasps them.’ S.IV,101f.
Viññāṇa can also be highly developed. For example, there is reference 
to	‘infinite	Knowing’	(viññanañcāyatana), ‘unlimited or unmanifested 
Knowing’ (anidassana ...) (D.I,223;M,I,329), ‘unestablished Knowing’  
(appatiṭṭhita …) (S.II,66), and Knowing which is ‘not growing,  
ungenerative’ (avirūḷhaṃ anabhisaṅkhacca) (S.III,53f). Bare Knowing  
is one of the six elements11 (S.III,227), and the most important  
factor at the beginning of a new life (D.II,63).
. . . . . . . 
experiencing bare knowing
• Sit in a comfortable posture and bring attention to the breathing.
• Do you know you are breathing?
• Do you know the sensation of breath entering and leaving the nostrils?
• Do you know that you know the sensation of breathing?
• Know the present feeling – pleasant, unpleasant or neutral.
• Can you observe the quality of this knowing?
• How clearly can you know the condition of the mind?
• Can you increase the quality of knowing? 
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the sensation of breathing,  
open your eyes and return to normal activity.
11	 The	four	elements	of	earth,	fire,	water	and	air,	plus	space	and	Bare	Knowing	(M.III,240ff).
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE FIVE GROUPS

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a reasonably comfortable position, close your eyes 
lightly and settle attention on the breathing.
•  Can you sense the sensation of breathing in and breathing 
out?
•  Are any other bodily sensations obvious?
•  When suitable, bring attention to the most obvious sound at 
this moment. Is there one prominent sound, or a mixture of 
sounds, or perhaps you can ‘hear’ the silence?
•  Bring attention to the sense of smell. Are you able to detect 
any particular smell?
•  Bring attention to the sense of taste. Can you observe any 
particular taste at present?
•  See if you can observe what the content of the mind is right 
now – thoughts, memories, sense impressions ….
•  Try to be non-judgementally aware of what is occurring in 
the mind.
•  Open your eyes for a moment and notice the act of seeing.  
•  Do you notice any associated mental activity – feelings, 
recognition, thinking …?
•  When suitable, bring attention back to the breathing.  
Then open the eyes and resume your activity.

99
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESS
In the Buddha’s teaching, the Six Internal Sense Bases are called  
‘the world’, because it is through them that we are able to perceive and 
conceive of a (subjective) ‘world’ (S.IV,95), how we experience, interpret 
and create our life. Developing an awareness of the Six Internal and  
Six	External	Sense	Bases	(see	definitions	below)	and	understanding	the	
dynamics of sense perception is one of the themes in the development 
of mindfulness (D.II,302f; M.I,61), which can lead to the experience of 
liberation, primarily through not identifying with the senses as self.
There are three main explanations of the perceptual process  
(for the unawakened person) in the Pali Canon. The most common, 
though less detailed, is the Conditional Causality formula (see next 
chapter) where Name and Form conditions the Six Sense Bases, which 
conditions Contact, which conditions Feeling, etc. The second main 
explanation of the perceptual process is given in The Discourse on  
the Root of All Things (MN 1) where it describes perception as giving rise to 
conceiving (maññati, from the root ‘to think’), which is thinking distorted 
by self-referencing (see Chapter 6 on the arising of ‘I am’). 
EIGHT
The Perceptual Process
. . . . . . .

100
BEYOND I-MAKING
A more detailed explanation, relating to the arising of elaboration 
(papañca),	is:
‘Friends, in dependence upon the eye and visible objects, there is the 
arising of eye-Knowing (sight), the meeting of the three is contact.  
With contact as condition there is feeling; what one feels, that one 
perceives; what one perceives, that one thinks about; what one thinks 
about, that one elaborates (papañceti). With what one elaborates about 
as source, perceptions and concepts from elaborations1 assail a person 
with regard to past, present and future objects made known through the 
eye ... [and the other senses].’ M.I,111f.
From this passage we can distinguish the various stages in the perceptual 
process:	1)	sense	organ	and	sense	object,	2)	sense-Knowing,	3)	contact,	
4)	feeling,	5)	recognizing,	6)	thinking,	7)	elaboration,	8)	perceptions	and	
concepts from elaboration.
At S.II,146 another perceptual causal sequence proceeds from the six 
external sense elements (dhātu) to perceptions, thoughts (saṅkappa), 
desires (chanda), fever (of passions) (pariḷāha), and search (pariyesanā)2.  
A similar passage at	D.III,289 ends with ‘acquisition’ (lābha). 
1 ‘papañcasaññāsankhā’;	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	(MLDB	n.229)	translates	as:	‘perceptions	and	notions	(born	of)	
mental proliferation.’ For more on the perceptual and conceptual processes, see Bhikkhu Bodhi’s brilliant 
introduction to the Discourse on the Root of Existence.
2	 A 	Discourse	following	this	(S.II,146)	gives	an	unusual	sequence	by	inserting	‘contacts’	and	‘feelings’	
between ‘intentions’ and ‘desires’. For a plausible explanation see Bhikkhu Bodhi’s note 230 on  
page	791	of	CDB.

101
The Sense Bases
The	Buddha	makes	reference	to	the	Six	Internal	Sense	Bases	of:	 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and the mind, and the Six External  
Sense	Bases,	or	Sense	Objects	of:	sights,	sounds,	smells,	tastes,	 
bodily sensations or ‘touches’ (through the skin and also within  
the body) and mental phenomena (thoughts, ideas, images, etc.). 
The Six Internal Sense Bases are not referred to as sense ‘organs’ as  
we understand them but rather as ‘āyatana’ (base), ‘indriya’ (faculty),  
or ‘dhātu’ (element), which, as Hamilton (p.14f) points out, ‘might refer to 
something other than the physical organs themselves’.3 
Nonetheless, it is through the Six Internal Sense Bases that cognition of 
the external world takes place, beginning with sense knowing.
The Sense Bases occupy a primary position in the functioning of the  
Five Groups of Grasping and in the explanation of Conditional Causality. 
The four mental factors of the Five Groups of Grasping	and	five	of	the	
twelve	links	of	Conditional	Causality	are	all	classified	according	to	either	
the Internal or External Sense Bases.
The mind as a Sense Base (manas or manodhātu)	is	unique.	It	is	defined	
in	terms	of	sensing	‘mental	phenomena’,	much	as	the	other	five	senses	
contact their own particular sense objects. Thus it also ‘senses’ the sense 
contact, feeling, recognizing and thinking which are stimulated by the 
other	five	sense	objects,	since	these	are	mental	phenomena	 
‘sensed’ by the mind4.
3 ‘From all these meanings of āyatana, indriya and dhātu, as well as from the position of āyatana in the 
paṭiccasamuppāda formula, one might suggest that what is referred to by the terms cakkhu, sota, ghāna and so 
on	is	not	primarily	the	sense	organs	eye,	ear,	nose,	etc.,	but	that	the	terms	are	to	be	interpreted	figuratively	as	
the faculties of vision, hearing, smell and so on. … Each sense faculty is a sphere or locus (in an abstract sense) 
for	a	potentiality:	the	potential	to	see	or	hear.’	Hamilton,	p.18	
4	 cf.	Hamilton,	p.34
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESS

102
BEYOND I-MAKING
Contact (phassa)
The third element in the perceptual process (after Internal and  
External Sense Base) is Contact (phassa). In formal Buddhist terminology, 
Contact	is	defined	as	the	coming	together	of	sense	base,	sense	object	
and sense-Knowing. That is, when an Internal Sense Base contacts an 
External Sense Base, there is sense-Knowing. When there is  
sense-Knowing, Contact has occurred. 
While	this	may	seem	like	a	subtle	distinction,	in	fact	it	is	very	significant	
both psychologically and for the practice of mental development or 
meditation.	Psychologically,	whatever	sense	objects	are	contacted	affect	
our feelings of well-being or ill-being, which nourish our outlook on 
life.	In	a	similar	way,	in	meditation,	different	sense	contacts	condition	
skilful	or	unskilful	states	of	mind.	Knowing	the	conditioning	influence	of	
various sense contacts is fundamental to mental development.
Contact is necessary for the perceptual process because, without 
Contact, there is no perception. The importance of Contact is outlined in 
the	following	passages	from	the	Pali	Canon:	
‘There is no other means of experiencing (paṭisaṃvedī) other than 
through contact.’ S.II,35f (at S.II,37f a similar discussion involves the 
feelings of pleasure and pain (sukha-dukkha)).
Dukkha (S.II,35) and views	(D.I,43) are dependent upon contact. Contact  
is the ‘source (nidāna) and origin (sambhava)’ of sense pleasures (kāmā),  
feelings, perceptions and kamma	(A.III,411f), and the cessation of Contact 
is their cessation. In the wider context, the Internal Sense Bases are 
referred to as ‘the six bases of contact’.

103
Viññāṇa (Bare Knowing)
Bare Knowing is explained in detail in the chapter on the Five Groups 
of Grasping, but it is useful to summarize its key aspects here. In the 
Buddha’s teaching, viññāṇa is just the bare knowing that there is a sense 
contact. This on-going process of Bare Knowing arises uniquely and 
distinctly, and is dependent upon the particular sense contact occurring 
at any moment. Because it happens so quickly, the process  
of Bare Knowing appears to be continuous, but it is constantly arising and 
passing away with just a consistency of Bare Knowing.
Feeling (vedanā)
Bare Knowing triggers feeling, which registers as either approachable 
(pleasant), threatening (unpleasant), or okay (neutral). And, of course, 
there is Bare Knowing of that feeling. 
In many explanations of the Sense Bases, the perceptual process extends 
only as far as Feeling – ‘whether pleasant (sukha), unpleasant (dukkha) 
or neither unpleasant-nor-pleasant (adukkha-m-asukha)’, (i.e., 
S.IV,204ff). The perceptual process up to this stage is merely functional 
or	instinctual,	with	little	subjective	influence.	It	is	at	the	next	stage,	
that	of	recognizing,	where	subjectivity	begins	to	gain	influence	and	
importance.5
5	 Bhikkhu	Nyanananda	(1986,	pp.5-6)	remarks	on	this	change	in	the	quoted	passage:	 
“The impersonal note is sustained only up to the point of ‘vedana’. The formula now takes a personal ending 
suggestive of deliberate activity...
The deliberate activity implied by the third person verb is seen to stop at ‘papañceti’. Now comes the most 
interesting	stage	of	the	process	of	cognition.	…	At	this	final	stage	of	sense-perception,	he	who	has	hitherto	
been the subject now becomes the hapless object....
Like the legendary resurrected tiger which devours the magician who restores it to life out of skeletal  
bones, the concepts and linguistic conventions overwhelm the worldling who evolved them. … 
The vicious proliferating tendency of the worldling’s consciousness weaves for him a labyrinthine  
network of concepts connecting the three periods of time through processes of recognition,  
retrospection and speculation. The tangled maze with its apparent objectivity entices the worldling and 
ultimately obsesses and overwhelm him.”
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESS

104
BEYOND I-MAKING
Apperceiving, Recognizing (saññā)
Saññā is also explained in detail in the chapter of the Five Groups of 
Grasping. It is the associative knowledge of ‘apperceiving’ or ‘recognizing’ 
which involves memory to provide the associations to recognize what 
the Sense Base has contacted. Since memory for the average person 
is an unreliable and ignorance-based subjective record, it is the cause 
of recognition being distorted. The four dominant ‘distortions of 
saññā’ (saññā-vipallāsa)	are:	recognizing	in	terms	of	permanence,	
happiness, self and attractiveness, rather than the way of Dhamma 
which is recognizing impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, impersonality 
and unattractiveness. Since recognition leads on to ideation, these 
distortions pervade two other areas of experience besides recognition, 
that is thought or cogitation (citta); and, views (diṭṭhi) (A.II,52).
As	mentioned	in	the	first	quotation	above:	‘ ... what one feels, that  
one perceives/recognizes …’. This implies that feeling is the ‘trigger’  
or initiator of recognizing. Venerable Sariputta is quoted (M.I,293)  
as saying that Knowing, feeling and recognizing are all conjoined.

105
Thinking (vitakka)
Saññā can lead on to vitakka, or thinking about what we have perceived, 
which	can	lead	to	uncontrolled	continuity	of	thinking,	and	set	off	an	
avalanche of conceptual elaborations. While the Buddha-to-be was 
struggling towards awakening, he designated his thoughts into two 
classes:	thoughts	of	sensuality,	ill-will	and	cruelty	into	one	class;	and,	
thoughts of renunciation, benevolence and harmlessness into another. 
He understood that thoughts of sensuality, ill-will and cruelty ‘lead to 
one’s own affliction, others’ affliction and the affliction of both. They 
obstruct wisdom, cause vexation and lead away from Nibbāna.’ The 
second	class	of	thoughts	have	the	opposite	effect	(M.I,114f). The person 
in training is thus encouraged to ‘not tolerate, to eliminate, remove, 
eradicate, abolish’	the	first	class	of	thoughts	(M.I,11). After awakening, 
the Buddha designated the second class of thoughts as Right Aspiration 
(sammāsaṅkappa), which is one of the factors of the Eightfold Path. The 
psychological principle here is ‘whatever a bhikkhu frequently thinks 
about and ponders, that will become the inclination of his mind’ (M.I,115). 
Excessive thinking and pondering can tire the body and disturb the mind. 
Therefore, the Buddha ‘internally steadied the mind, settled  
it, brought it to singleness and concentrated it’ (M.I,116). One discourse  
(MN.20)	gives	five	guidelines	for	dealing	with	distracting	thoughts	 
in order to experience collectedness.
Vitakka, in its positive sense as initial thought on the meditation 
subject,	is	one	of	the	factors	of	the	first	absorption,	together	with	vicāra, 
‘sustained thought’ or continued thinking around the topic, examining.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESS

106
BEYOND I-MAKING
Elaboration (papañca)
Papañca	in	Sanskrit	means	‘expansion,	diffuseness,	manifoldness’.	 
It implies an ‘expansion of thinking’ or an ‘elaboration of thinking’, which 
can	lead	to	an	flood	of	thinking	or	being	assailed	by	‘perceptions	and	
concepts from elaboration’.
It is due to the grasping of the sense bases as a self that elaboration 
arises. Therefore, elaboration only ends with the ending of the ‘I am’ 
conceit.
‘One should end all thoughts of ‘I am’, the root of all elaborating 
concepts (papañca-saṅkhā).’ Sn 916.
‘Friend, with the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six 
bases for contact there is the cessation and allaying of elaboration.’ 
A.II,162
The ‘cessation of the six bases for contact’ means, of course, the 
cessation of the ignorant view of grasping the six sense bases as self, not 
the ending of the sense bases themselves.

107
The Emotional Side of the Perceptual Process
The above is one explanation of the perceptual process. In another 
context, that of Conditional Causality (see next chapter), feeling  
is followed by craving, which we might refer to as the emotional  
side of perception. Combining the previous explanation with that  
of Conditional Causality, we can say that, for the unawakened person,  
the perception, thinking and elaboration which follows from feeling  
is infused with some form of craving, which further generates  
grasping, and the other factors of Conditional Causality. 
Inappropriate Attention
One of the practices for dealing with sense contact is to ‘guard the doors 
of the senses’ (indriya guttadvāra) so that one does not take  
up the ‘signs and attributes’ of sense contacts. Elsewhere (A.I,3) the 
Buddha is quoted as saying that ‘inappropriate attention’ to the ‘sign  
of the beautiful’ (subhanimitta) causes the arising and increase of 
sensual desire, and ‘inappropriate attention’ to the ‘sign of the repulsive’ 
(paṭighanimitta) causes the arising and increase of aversion.
As explained above, feeling comes before perception/recognition.  
Thus, generally speaking, whatever gives us pleasant feeling we perceive 
as attractive, and whatever produces unpleasant feeling we perceive as 
unattractive. In fact, reality is neither attractive nor unattractive, but we 
subjectively divide it into what we conceive as beautiful/attractive and 
repulsive/unattractive, with various gradations in between. This is one of 
the subjective distortions of recognition. 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESS

108
BEYOND I-MAKING
Since the mind functions very quickly, the simple version of perception is 
not easy to observe directly. The intensity of the sense stimulation  
is	most	significant,	as	well	as	the	importance	it	represents	to	us,	that	 
is, the mind is selective in what it attends to depending upon our 
previous experiences, intention, interests, etc.
Moreover, the process is complex, so while you may become aware  
of a feeling conditioned by a particular sense impression, before 
perception occurs, there is a feeling about the feeling. For example, 
you may be conscious of being unhappy about a loud noise, and then 
be unhappy about being unhappy. Then, if you perceive that the noise 
was caused by someone dropping something, because you are doubly 
unhappy, there may be a surprisingly strong reaction. These are just 
some of the functional reactions. Add to this the various complications 
the brain can contribute, and we have quite a volatile combination 
of factors, which perhaps only the development of Calm and Insight 
meditation can help us to understand.
Hence, while we depend on the process of sense perception to perceive 
reality, we should be cautious of the veracity of that perception. Not only 
are the Six Internal and External Sense Bases impermanent and subject 
to distortion, the Internal Sense Bases are also extremely limited in 
the range of data they can receive. Sight is limited to a small fraction of 
the	electromagnetic	spectrum.	Normal	human	hearing	is	confined	to	
a narrow range of vibrational frequencies, and likewise with the other 
Sense	Bases.	Of	particular	concern	is	the	effectiveness	of	the	mind	as	a	
Sense Base.

109
“You might think that, if there is one thing in the world you can trust,  
it’s your own brain. But the truth of the matter ... is that your 
unscrupulous	brain	is	entirely	undeserving	of	your	confidence.	It	has	
some shifty habits that leave the truth distorted and disguised. Your 
brain is vainglorious. It’s emotional and immoral. It deludes you. It is pigheaded, secretive and weak-willed. Oh, and it’s also a bigot. This is more 
than	a	minor	inconvenience.	That	fleshy	walnut	inside	your	skull	is	all	you	
have in order to know yourself and to know the world. Yet, thanks to the 
masquerading of an untrustworthy brain with a mind of its own, much of 
what you think you know is not quite as it seems.” Fine, p.1-2.

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes and settle 
attention on the breathing.
•  As you become aware of the breathing process, notice its 
characteristics. Is the breathing relaxed or constrained, 
long or short, deep or shallow, or something else?
• 	Can	you	observe	any	particular	cause	of	this	specific	type	
of breathing, or is it unclear or uncertain?
•  Can you observe any feeling associated with what you are 
aware of?
•  Is that feeling directly linked to the object of awareness, or 
is it more loosely associated?
•  Now bring your awareness to the condition of the mind. Do 
you notice any obvious mental condition – dullness, 
clarity, quietness, busyness?
•  Try to expand your awareness to include the possible 
causes of this condition. Can you discern some distinctive 
cause, or is it unclear or uncertain?
•  When suitable bring attention back to the breathing.  
Then open the eyes and resume your activity.

111
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY
The principle of Conditional Causality is that all conditioned things  
arise from a cause (or causes) and, with the cessation of that cause  
(or causes), they also cease.
The Buddha’s profound insight into this principle, as expressed  
in the arising and ceasing of unsatisfactoriness, was instrumental  
in his awakening, and therefore claims a pre-eminent position within 
the	Buddha’s	dispensation.	With	a	few	significant	exceptions1, the arising 
and ceasing of unsatisfactoriness is given in a standardized twelvelink formula which is referred to as Dependent Origination. The general 
principle of conditional causality also occurs in a number of the Buddha’s 
other teachings, as the causally-conditional nature of phenomena was a 
key element in the Buddha’s unique insight into the nature of reality.
At	its	simplest,	the	principle	of	conditional	causality	is: 
‘When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that  
arises. When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with  
the cessation of this, that ceases.’ S.II,28;78;95.
This principle of Conditional Causality is an eternal and universal 
principle. The Buddha awakens to the highest knowledge and realization 
of it, and then ‘explains it, teaches it, declares it, establishes it, reveals 
1 Most notable is the Great Discourse on Causality (DN 15) which has only nine factors leaving out Ignorance, 
saṅkhārā and Six Sense Bases, with Bare Knowing and mentality-materiality mutually conditioning each 
other.	Another	notable	exception	is	the	Upanisā	Sutta	(SN	12:23)	where	suffering	becomes	the	‘proximate	
cause’ of faith, leading on to liberation. 
NINE
Conditional Causality
. . . . . . .

112
BEYOND I-MAKING
it, analyses it, makes it clear.’ (S.II,25). Understanding the principle of 
Conditional Causality enabled the Buddha to penetrate to the processoriented	nature	of	reality,	and	once	the	process	of	conditioned	suffering	
was understood, the path to liberation became clear.
The	significance	of	Conditional	Causality	is	that	it	shows	that	everything	
(except	Nibbāna)	is	essentially	the	product	of	an	interdependent	
matrix of dependently-arisen phenomena without any unique or 
autonomous ‘thing-ness’. While our ignorance-conditioned, objectoriented knowing focusses upon the ‘things’ of reality, in truth, this is a 
false perspective, which gives rise to distorted perceptions and deluded 
views of reality. Thus, we are unable to ‘see things as they really are’. 
To free us from this delusion, the Buddha explains a ‘process-oriented 
view’ of reality in contrast to our usual ‘object-oriented view’ of reality. 
When we see things as they really are, there are no ‘solid objects’ (only 
flowing	processes),	and	thus,	ultimately,	no	longer	any	stable	ground	for	
subjective	self-affirmation.
Most importantly, from a practical point of view, Dependent  
Origination	specifically	describes	the	processes	of	how	the	suffering	 
of human existence is conditionally created, how it persists and how 
it can cease. In its essence, it is the second and third of the Four Noble 
Truths – the arising of dukkha and the cessation of dukkha. 
The Buddha stated that the teaching on Dependent Origination 
is profound and not easily understood (S.II,92), and likens the 
comprehending of it to the realization of the Dhamma, which  
is	equivalent	to	realizing	full	awakening:
‘He who sees dependent arising sees the Dhamma; he who sees  
the Dhamma sees dependent arising.’2 
2	 M.I,191:	This	statement	is	quoted	by	Venerable	Sariputta	as	being	said	by	the	Buddha,	however,	it	is	not	
found in the Pali Canon as a direct statement by the Buddha himself.

113
Dependent Origination
The formal twelve-link presentation of Conditional Causality is called 
Dependent Origination or Dependent Arising (paṭicca-samuppāda), 
from ‘paṭicca’, which literally means ‘grounded on, on account of, 
because of, dependent on’, and ‘samuppāda’, ‘origin, arising, coming 
to be’. The Buddha traced the fundamental cause of ‘this whole mass 
of dukkha’ to ignorance. He therefore had the key to resolving dukkha 
through eliminating its cause – with the ‘remainderless fading away and 
cessation of ignorance’, through the development of true knowledge, 
dukkha ceases.
‘“Cessation, cessation”’; thus, bhikkhus, in regard to things unheard 
before there arose in me vision, knowledge, wisdom, higher knowledge 
and light.’ S.II,11. 
The twelve-link, linear formula for Dependent Origination is a mere 
skeleton compared to the full experience of it, similar to a line drawing 
used to illustrate a multidimensional universe. We know that human 
existence cannot be narrowed down to a simple formula. Bhikkhu Bodhi 
suggests	that	“the	[dependent	origination]	selection	of	factors	and	
their sequential arrangement are made from the instructional point of 
view” and that, “by resorting to abstraction, each phrase in the formula 
treats as a one-to-one bond what is in actuality a situation of immense 
complexity involving a multitude of conditions arousing and sustaining a 
multitude of dependent phenomena.”3 
Unfortunately, most of us are still bound to linear, object-oriented 
modes	of	thinking	and	so	find	it	hard	to	penetrate	the	interdependent,	
process-oriented reality of Dependent Origination. Nonetheless, as with 
other aspects of the Buddha’s teaching, the usefulness of Dependent 
Origination	is	for	reflective	meditative	enquiry.	Looked	at	in	this	way,	
3 GDC p.10
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

114
BEYOND I-MAKING
the	twelve-linked	skeleton	provides	an	immensely	rich	field	of	enquiry	
with	multiple	themes	that	branch	off,	intertwine	and	feed	back	into	
one	another.	It	then	becomes	possible	to	fill	out	this	skeleton	with	the	
healthy tissue of wisdom, relevant to immediate human existence.
This being so, it is more useful to study the various themes and their 
interrelationships within the context of our own experience. For 
example,	we	have	the	Buddha’s	definition	of	‘ignorance’	as	not	knowing	
the Four Noble Truths. How do we ourselves experience ‘ignorance’? 
What	are	the	effects	of	‘not	knowing’	on	our	life,	on	our	view	of	life,	 
on our understanding of what life is? We can take our example from the 
Buddha,	who	was	an	earnest	spiritual	seeker	trying	to	find	the	solution	to	
human	suffering.	His	explorations	proceeded	along	the	lines	of	 
a	profound	existential	inquiry:
‘Indeed, this world has fallen into difficulty, in that it is born, ages,  
dies, passes on and re-arises, yet it does not understand the escape from 
this suffering of ageing-and-death. When, for sure, will an escape from 
this suffering of ageing-and-death be evident?
Then, bhikkhus, it occurred to me: “When what exists does ageingand-death come to be? By what is ageing-and-death conditioned?” 
Then, bhikkhus, through appropriate attention, in me there was a 
realization by wisdom: “When there is birth, ageing-and-death comes 
to be; ageing-and-death has birth as its condition … birth has becoming 
as its condition … grasping … craving … feeling … contact … six sense 
bases … mentality-materiality … viññāṇa … saṅkhārā … ignorance as its 
condition.”’ S.II,5-11.

115
‘But with the complete, dispassionate cessation of ignorance comes 
cessation of saṅkhārā; with the cessation of saṅkhārā, cessation  
of viññāṇa ... cessation of mentality-materiality … six sense bases … 
contact … feeling … craving … grasping … becoming … birth … ageingand-death. Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’ S.II,1-2. 
The Dependent Origination formula, at its fullest, gives the following 
sequence:
Ignorance conditions saṅkhārā; 
saṅkhārā conditions viññāṇa;
viññāṇa conditions mentality-materiality;
mentality-materiality conditions the six sense bases;
the six sense bases condition contact;
contact conditions feeling;
feeling conditions craving;
craving conditions grasping;
grasping conditions becoming;
becoming conditions birth;
birth conditions ageing-and-death, this whole mass of suffering.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

116
BEYOND I-MAKING
Explanation of the Process of Dependent Origination 
As stated by the Buddha, Dependent Origination is incredibly profound. 
However,	a	simplified	version	may	be:	Conditioned	by	Ignorance,  
that is, not knowing about dukkha and how it is caused, a wilful action 
is generated, through body, speech or mind, and of a meritorious, 
demeritorious or imperturbable ethical quality (saṅkhārā). This 
ignorance-conditioned, wilful action is habitually self-referencing, 
which conditions an associated self-referencing viññāṇa. Viññāṇa then 
‘enlivens’ a psycho-physical foundation in mentality-materiality to 
fulfill	the	will	to	selfhood.	Materiality	contains	the	Six	Sense	Spheres	
which are the condition for Contact. With Contact as condition there is 
Feeling which (still primarily conditioned by Ignorance) leads to Craving, 
Grasping, Becoming and Birth, that is, birth of a self-identity, or the 
compounding of ‘I-making’. Birth ends in Ageing-and-death, since this 
‘making - I’ is, in actuality, a constructed phenomenon that decays and 
dies, with the attendant sorrow, lamentation, pain, etc. Sometimes the 
formula ends with ‘this whole mass of dukkha/suffering.’	
Although the origination sequence ends on this negative note, the 
important point is that once the process is understood, we then have 
the knowledge to uproot it through the arising of wisdom in place of 
ignorance, or to release it through seeing the danger in craving and 
grasping. Therefore the entire sequence can come to cessation, the 
ending	of	the	‘whole	mass	of	suffering’,	which	is	the	cessation	 
of ‘I-making’. 
While	presented	as	a	twelve-link,	linear	sequence	it	is	in	effect	cyclical.	 
There	is	no	‘first	cause’	to	the	process,	as	the	ignorance	that	accompanies	
death is a condition for further ignorance-conditioned wilful actions, 
which	further	impel	the	process	(until	final	awakening).4
4	 For	an	interesting	perspective	see	Gombrich	(WBT,	134f)	on	The	Bramanical	Creation	Myth.

117
Overview of the Factors of Dependent Origination
The terms, saṅkhārā, viññāṇa, Form (Embodying), Six Sense Bases,  
and Feeling, are explained in previous chapters, and other terms,  
such as Ignorance and Craving, are elaborated on in the next chapter  
as	sources	of	identification.
Avijjā: Ignorance
Avijjā is Ignorance,	specifically	defined	as	not	knowing	(aññāṇa) the 
Four	Noble	Truths:	dukkha; origin; cessation; and the path of practice to 
realise cessation (S.II,4)5. This amounts to saying that avijjā is not knowing 
Dependent Origination, since Dependent Origination gives details of the 
second and third Noble Truths. Elsewhere in the Pali Canon, Ignorance is 
defined	as	not	clearly	knowing	the	Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,162-174). 
More details on Ignorance are in the next chapter. 
Saṅkhārā 
Saṅkhārā	has	different	connotations	depending	upon	the	context.	 
In	the	context	of	Dependent	Origination,	no	specific	definition	of	
saṅkhārā is given in the Pali Canon other than mentioning its three 
modes of expression as bodily, verbal, and mental (S.II,4), and its three 
ethical expressions as meritorious (puñña), demeritorious (apuñña), and 
imperturbable (āneñja) (S.II,82), which are all types of kamma. 
In the context of the Five Groups of Grasping, saṅkhārā is translated  
as ‘Willing and Habiting’. In the context of Dependent Origination,  
the ‘habiting’ aspect is more predominant, and thus saṅkhārā becomes 
‘habitual willing’, as it is conditioned by the ‘habit’ of ignorance, 
5	 In	one	explanation	of	the	Four	Noble	Truths	(A.I,177)	ignorance	is	mentioned	as	the	cause	of	
unsatisfactoriness (rather than craving), leading then into the Conditional Causality formula. 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

118
BEYOND I-MAKING
and (volitionally) conditions an associated habitual viññāṇa. Due to being 
‘hindered by ignorance’, these wilful actions are enacted unknowingly 
and are pre-conscious. That is, ignorance-conditioned saṅkhārā 
conditions an ignorance-conditioned (type of) viññāṇa or Bare Knowing.
‘Bhikkhus, what one intends (ceteti), arranges (pakkapeti) and has  
a disposition towards becomes the foundation for the persistence  
of viññāṇa.’ S.II,65.
Viññāṇa: (Bare) Knowing
See	definition	in	the	chapter	on	The	Five Groups of Grasping.
Nāma-Rūpa: Mentality-Materiality
The term nāma-rūpa is from the Brahmanical tradition where  
it	meant	the	differentiation	of	the	world	into	names	or	concepts,	 
and appearances or forms6.	The	Buddha	redefined	the	term	nāma  
to mean feeling (vedanā), recognizing (saññā), volition (cetanā),  
contact (phassa), and attention (manasikāra), that is, various types  
of ‘mentality’ (S.II,3).	He	redefined	rūpa to mean the same as in the  
Five Groups of Grasping,	that	is:	the	four	great	element	qualities	 
and the form derived therefrom. In this context, it can refer to various 
kinds of materiality other than simply the physical body. I therefore 
translate nāma-rūpa as mentality-materiality.
Vedanā:	see	the	definition	in	Chapter	7;
Saññā:	see	the	definition	in	Chapter	7;	
Cetanā:	Intention,	purpose,	will,	volition;	
Phassa:	see	definition	below;
6 See Hamilton, p.135.

119
Manasikāra:	literally	means	‘fixed	mind’	or	‘attention’,	and	is	one	of	the	
primary functional aspects of mental activity. A special mention is made 
of yoniso-manasikāra, literally ‘attention to the source’ or ‘appropriate 
attention’ as an extremely important function to cultivate for the 
increase of wisdom.
Rūpa:	see	the	definition	in	Chapter	7.
In the important discourse ‘The Great Discourse on Causation’, the 
Mahānidāna	Sutta,	the	fifteenth	discourse	of	the	DN,	nāma-rūpa is given 
special emphasis. In this presentation, just nine of the usual twelve links 
are given, with an extensive digression outlining the causal conditions 
arising	from	craving,	as	well	as	various	self	views.	The	main	difference	
between this discourse and the usual twelve-link formulation is that it 
presents the mutual conditionality of viññāṇa and mentality-materiality 
– rather than viññāṇa being conditioned by saṅkhārā – with the Six Sense 
Bases being omitted (perhaps since they could be included under rūpa).
‘It is to this extent, Ananda, that one can be born, age and die, pass away 
and re-arise, to this extent that there is a pathway for designation, 
to this extent that there is a pathway for language, to this extent that 
there is a pathway for description, to this extent that there is a sphere 
for wisdom, to this extent that the round turns for describing this state 
of being, that is, when there is mentality-materiality together with 
viññāṇa.’ D.II,63-4.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

120
BEYOND I-MAKING
In this presentation, mentality-materiality is what provides viññāṇa 
(Bare Knowing) with ‘a pathway for designation, for language, for 
description,	and	a	sphere	for	wisdom’.	As	mentioned	in	Chapter	7,	
viññāṇa is ‘knowing distinction’. Thus mentality-materiality allows  
Bare Knowing to be extended into the realm of reference, expression and 
presentation, which then allows the development of abstract thought, 
communication and representation of subjective reality.
This emphasis upon the mutual conditioning of mentality-materiality 
and Bare Knowing also explains an important psychological insight.  
That is, Bare Knowing is dependently conditioned by what we feel, 
cognize, intend, contact and give attention to, the factors of nāma.  
This insight then provides an opening for the ‘sphere of wisdom’ – if 
we can skilfully guide what we feel, cognize, intend, contact and give 
attention to, Bare Knowing is likewise skilfully developed, Also note that 
Bare Knowing together with mentality-materiality is equivalent to the 
Five Groups of Grasping.
Saḷ-āyatana: Six Sense Bases
This is the six sense bases of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Their 
cause is mentality-materiality. 
See	more	detail	in	Chapter	8	on	The	Perceptual	Process.
Phassa: Contact
Contact	is	defined	as	the	coming	together	of	sense,	sense	object	 
and Bare Knowing (M.I,111f).	See	Chapter	8	on	The	Perceptual	Process	 
for detail. 
The	Mahānidāna	Discourse	contains	another	interesting	point	 
in regard to mentality-materiality	conditioning	contact:

121
‘If, Ananda, those qualities, attributes, signs and indicators through 
which there is a description of the name-body and the form-body  
were absent, would either designation-contact (adhivacanasamphassa)  
or impingement-contact (paṭighasamphassa) be evident?’ D.II,62.
The two types of contact are interdependent in that the name-body 
needs the form-body for impingement-contact, and the form-body 
needs the name-body to be validated through designation-contact.
Vedanā: Feeling
See	Chapter	7	on	The	Five Groups of Grasping.
Taṇhā: Craving 
Taṇhā, literally ‘thirst’, is often translated as ‘craving’, the PED adding 
‘hunger	for,	excitement,	the	fever	of	unsatisfied	longing’.	Taṇhā has 
three	forms:	sense	pleasures;	existence;	and	non-existence.	Taṇhā is a 
deeply motivated, exceptionally strong form of desire, close to what we 
call an instinct. (More details on Craving are given in the next chapter.) 
Upādāna: Grasping
Upādāna generally means ‘grasping, clinging, holding, or attachment’ 
and it is also that ‘fuel’ which keeps the process of grasping going. The 
PED	defines	upādāna as ‘that (material) substratum by means of which 
an active process is kept alive or going, fuel, supply, provision’. When 
references	are	made	to	fire,	the	usual	translation	would	be	‘fuel’.
There are four kinds of Grasping:	sensual	pleasures	(kāma); views 
(diṭṭhi); rules and observances (sīlabbata); and doctrine of self (attavāda) 
(M.I,51;I,66; S.II,3).
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

122
BEYOND I-MAKING
Bhava: Becoming, Existence
Bhava is from the root ‘bhū’, meaning ‘to become, to be, to exist’.  
In some contexts it means ‘becoming’ or ‘coming-into-existence’, while 
in other contexts it refers to some form of ‘existence’. Three kinds of 
Existence	are	identified:	existence	in	the	sense	realm	(kāma),	in	the	finematerial realm (rūpa) and in the immaterial realm (arūpa) (A.I,223f). These 
relate to Buddhist cosmology. The Sense Realm is the lower realms of hell 
(niraya), animals (tiracchāna), hungry ghosts (pettivisaya), the human 
realm and the six lower celestial realms. The Fine-material Realm is the 
‘heavenly’ realms experienced through the four material absorptions 
and the Immaterial Realm is the ‘higher heavenly’ realms experienced 
through the immaterial absorptions7. 
Bhava is the drive to live, become or exist, and is thus a key factor in  
a number of the categories of the Buddha’s teaching. We have already 
come across it as one of the kinds of Craving, and it is also one of 
the Outflows,	one	of	the	Underlying	Dispositions,	one	of	the	Floods	
(ogha), and one of the Bonds (yoga). It is considered to be Right View 
to understand existence, its origin, its cessation and the path to its 
cessation (M.I,50).
‘For beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, renewed 
existence (puna-bhava) in the future is established through delight  
in this and that.’ M.I,294.
7	 See	LDB	p.38f	for	information	on	the	thirty-one	realms	of	existence.

123
‘Thus, Ananda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, 
intentional action (kamma) is the field, Bare Knowing is  
the seed, and craving the moisture for Bare Knowing … volition  
and wish (patthanā) to be established in an inferior … middling … 
superior realm8; thus there is renewed existence in the future.’ A.I,223.
Jāti: Birth  
‘… the birth of the various beings into the various groups of beings,  
their being born, coming to be, birth, becoming, the manifestation  
of the groups, the acquisition of the sense bases.’ S.II,3.
Jarā: Ageing
‘… the ageing of the various beings in the various groups of beings, their 
decrepitude, brokenness of teeth, greyness of hair, wrinkling  
of skin, dwindling of vitality, collapse of the faculties.’ S.II,2.
Maraṇa: Death
‘… the passing away of various beings from the various groups of beings,  
their removal, breakup, disappearance, mortality, death, fulfilment  
of time, the breakup of the groups, the casting off of the body.’ S.II,3. 
8	 Inferior,	middling,	superior	correspond	to	the	three	types	of	existence:	sensual	realm,	form	realm	and	
formless realm A.I,223f.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

124
BEYOND I-MAKING
The Two Facets of Dependent Origination
The	Dependent	Origination	formula	has	two	facets:	the	‘origination’	
formula	shows	how	suffering	originates,	and	the	‘cessation’	formula	
shows	how	suffering	ceases.	The	Pali	term	translated	as	‘cessation’,	
‘nirodha’, has two meanings. Most commonly it means the ending 
of something which already exists, for example, with regard to the 
impermanence of conditioned phenomena. Its second meaning,  
which is particularly relevant for understanding Dependent Origination 
and the Third Noble Truth, is ‘non-arising’. Phra Payutto (2021,	p.371) 
defines	‘nirodha’ as ‘something does not arise because no causes  
exist for it to arise.’
What this means, in terms of Dependent Origination, is that the  
formula,	usually	translated	as:	‘With	cessation	of	ignorance,	there	 
is cessation of saṅkhārā,	…’,	is	more	correctly	translated	as:	‘With	 
the non-arising of ignorance, there is non-arising of saṅkhārā, …’.  
Phra Payutto (p.372) also points out limitations in the translation  
of	the	‘origination’	formula	as	well	because:	‘The	Pali	terms	cover	a	 
wider range of meaning than can be captured by single English 
counterparts.’	He	translates	the	formula	as:	‘Because	ignorance	 
exists in this way, saṅkhārā exists in this way, …’. This point is especially 
helpful	in	understanding	Dependent	Origination	as	relating	to	specific	
aspects of the factors. For example, it is only ignorance-conditioned 
feeling which conditions craving. Not all feeling conditions craving,  
since the fully-awakened arahant still has feeling, just not ignoranceconditioned feeling.

125
Conditional Causality in Other Contexts
This	insight	into	Conditional	Causality	was	a	profoundly	significant	
experience for the Buddha, and is expressed in various forms throughout 
his teachings, from the core teaching on the Four Noble Truths – dukkha, 
cause, cessation and path – to the more sophisticated aspects of his 
teachings about the path to liberation. An important addition to the 
standard twelve-link formula of Dependent Origination is one which 
demonstrates	directly	the	causally-conditioned	way	out	of	suffering.	It	
begins with the Dependent Origination formula, then, following ‘birth’, 
is	‘suffering’.	This	leads	on	to	the	sequence	of	suffering	conditioning	
faith … gladness (pāmojja) … joy (pīti) … tranquillity … well-being 
(sukha) … collectedness … knowledge and vision of the way things are … 
disillusionment (nibbidā) … dispassion (virāga) … liberation … knowledge 
of	the	wasting	of	the	outflows	(S.II,29f).	This	explains	how	suffering	can	be	
the cause of faith to pursue a spiritual solution.
A similar sequence begins with skilful conduct conditioning freedom 
from remorse, conditioning gladness … as above … dispassion 
conditioning knowledge and vision of liberation (A.V,311ff;	cf.	A.V,1-2),  
while another sequence begins with appropriate attention  
(yoniso manasikāra) conditioning gladness … as above … dispassion 
conditions liberation (D.III,288).
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CONDITIONAL CAUSALITY

126
BEYOND I-MAKING
There is also a shortened version, with virtuous conduct being the  
cause (upanisā) of collectedness, collectedness being the cause of 
knowledge and vision of the way things are … disillusionment and 
dispassion … knowledge and vision of liberation. This sequence  
is compared to a tree with branches and foliage where its shoots,  
bark, softwood and heartwood all grow to fullness (A.III,20). 
A causal sequence is given for Ignorance, which is caused by the  
Five Hindrances, which are caused by the three ways of wrong conduct, 
which are caused by lack of sense restraint, … lack of mindfulness  
and clear comprehension … inappropriate attention … lack of faith … 
not listening to the true teachings … associating with unworthy  
people (A.V,113f).
There are also several causal sequences dealing with the evolution  
of social situations. The main one follows the sequence from Dependent 
Origination to craving, then proceeds to seeking … acquisition … 
distinction (vinicchaya) … desire and passion (chandarāga) … attachment 
(ajjhosāna) … appropriation (pariggaha) … avarice/stinginess 
(macchariya) … protectiveness (ārakkha) … the taking up of stick and 
sword, quarrels, disputes, arguments, strife, abuse, lying and other evil, 
unskilful states (D.II,59).
Another causal sequence is mentioned regarding the ‘elements’.  
Thus from ‘various elements’ there arises ‘various contacts’, from 
‘various contacts’ arise various feelings … perceptions … thoughts 
(saṅkappa)… desires (chanda) …fever (of passions) (pariḷāha) …  
search (pariyesanā) … acquisition (lābha) (D.III,289).9
9	 There	are	a	number	of	different	sequences.	At	S.II,143f	the	sequence	is	elements,	perceptions,	intentions,	
desires,	fevers,	search;	at	S.II,146	the	sequence	is	elements,	perceptions,	intentions,	contacts,	feelings,	
desires, fevers, search, acquisition.

127
The Four Nutriments
The Conditional Causality chapter of the Samyutta Nikaya (S.II,11f;	98f)  
includes a special category of factors called the Four Nutriments (āhāra). 
These	are:	material	food;	contact;	mental	volition	(mano-sañcetanā); and 
Bare Knowing. They are caused by craving.
These	four	nutriments	are	especially	significant	for	(unawakened)
human existence and are central to many aspects of the teaching. 
Material food nourishes Embodying, Contact nourishes Feeling,  
mental volition (Willing or kamma) nourishes the three types  
of Craving and Bare Knowing nourishes mentality-materiality. 
When these are used for contemplation on the path to liberation,  
then, when material food is fully understood (parijānāti), passion  
for	the	five	strands	of	sensual	pleasure	is	fully	understood.	When	 
that is fully understood then ‘there is no fetter bound by which  
a noble disciple would come again to this world.’ When contact  
is fully understood, the three feelings are fully understood; when  
mental volition is fully understood, then the three kinds of craving 
are fully understood; when Bare Knowing is fully understood, then 
mentality-materiality is fully understood. When any of these  
are fully understood, then ‘there is nothing further that a noble  
disciple needs to do’	(S.II,98f).10 A series of vivid similes is given  
at S.II,98f on how to skilfully regard these Nutriments.
10 The results of fully understanding material food only reach as far as the third level of Awakening, while the 
results of fully understanding the other three nutriments reaches to the fourth stage of arahantship.

128
BEYOND I-MAKING
Dependent Origination Sequence 
and Associated Causal Processes
Wasting of Outflows
~
Liberation
~
Dispassion
~
Disillusionment
~
Knowledge and Vision  
of things as they really are
~
Collectedness
~
Well-being
~
Tranquillity 
~
Joy
~
Gladness
~
Faith 
seeking   }
acquisition   }                                            
distinction   }
passion and desire   }
attachment   }
appropriation   }
avarice/stinginess   }                                   
protectiveness   }
the taking up of stick and sword,  
quarrels, disputes, arguments, 
strife, abuse, lying and other  
evil, unskilful states
perceptions   }       
aspirations (saṅkappa)   }           
thoughts (vitakka)   }
desires   }                                   
elaborations   }                                                                                                                                           
fever (of passions)   }        
search   }
acquisition
perceptions   }       
thoughts (vitakka)   }
elaborations   }                                                                                                                                           
perceptions and concepts  
from elaboration
1 | Outflows of sensuality, existence and ignorance
2 | Associating with unworthy people   } 
  not listening to the true teachings   } 
  lack of faith   } 
  inappropriate attention   } 
  lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension   } 
  lack of sense restraint   }
  the three ways of wrong conduct   }
  Five Hindrances   }
 IGNORANCE
SUFFERING
AGEING-AND-DEATH
HABITUAL WILLING
BIRTH BARE KNOWING
BECOMING MENTALITY-MATERIALITY
GRASPING SIX SENSE BASES
CRAVING CONTACT
FEELING
T
T
T
T
T
TT
T
T
T
T
T

129

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes gently  
and bring attention to the breathing.
•  When the mind seems reasonably calm, bring up the 
enquiry:	‘How	do	I	acknowledge	my	own	identity?’
•  Do you identify mostly with physicality, with feelings,  
or with emotional/mental activity? Or maybe a 
combination of these?
• 	How	do	you	express	identification,	for	example,	 
‘I sense …’ or, ‘I feel …’ or, ‘I think …’?
• 	What	is	the	predominant	quality	of	identification?	 
Is	it	heavy,	light,	compacted,	or	diffuse,	etc.?
•  Observe if there is an obvious emotion associated with this 
identification	–	happiness,	comfort,	security,	or	anxiety,	
uncertainty, confusion?
•  See if you can sustain the awareness of this experience.
•  When suitable, bring your attention back to the body 
sitting, then to the breathing.
•  Open your eyes and resume your activity.

131
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION
Identification
Identification	is	the	stage	of	the	I-making	process	where	the	conceiving	
of a subjective ‘I’ (from Chapter 6) reaches out for an ‘object’ to give itself 
reference,	affirmation,	support,	as	well	as	substantiality.	It	is	the	stage	
where I-making is most active and complex as it seeks out ways and 
means of establishing and consolidating an identity.
The	process	of	identification	involves	two	factors;	the	objects of identity 
and the activities engendering identity. The most important of these 
are the activities engendering identity, as they are the root cause of 
unsatisfactoriness.	Most	specifically,	these	are	ignorance	and	craving,	
which manifest in various forms and have various associated factors. 
The	three	main	objects	which	‘I’	identifies	with	are	the	Five Groups 
of Grasping; the Six Internal and Six External Sense Bases; and, the 
Elements (S.IV,24). While the objects of identity are still present in the 
awakened being, they no longer harbour the activities engendering 
identity, and thus are liberated from grasping any form of identity.
While	some	degree	of	identification	is	necessary	for	us	to	establish	 
a point of reference with which to relate to reality, most people take this 
too	far,	believing	that	identity	is	the	only	true	purpose	of	life:
TEN
Identification
. . . . . . .

132
BEYOND I-MAKING
‘The unlearned person regards any of the Five Groups of Grasping 
as self in any of the four modes (see below). Such a person becomes 
obsessed (pariyuṭṭhaṭṭhāyino) with ideas of “I am the body, the body 
is mine, etc.”. Then, when one or more of the Five Groups of Grasping 
change,	they	suffer	sorrow,	lamentation,	pain,	grief	and	despair	(S.III,3), 
or their consciousness becomes occupied with the change. Excitement 
(paritassana) and other mental states then take hold of the mind. With 
an overpowered mind the person is ‘frightened, vexed, full of longing 
and excited due to grasping’ (S.III,16f;	M.III,227).
Identity (sakkāya)
Identity (sakkāya)	is	defined	as	the	Five Groups of Grasping  
(M.I,299;	S.III,158-9;	S.IV,259-60). The origin of identity, or the process  
of	identification,	is	explained	in	three	different	ways:	
1	 | 	 regarding	(samanupassati) any of the Five Groups of Grasping as self 
in	any	of	four	modes:	a)	any	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping  
as self; b) self as possessing any of the Five Groups of Grasping;  
c) any of the Five Groups of Grasping as in self; d) self as in any  
of the Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,46); 
2	 | 	regarding	the	senses,	sense-objects,	sense-knowing,	sensecontact, and the feeling and craving that arise therefrom as  
‘This is mine, this I am, this is myself’ (M.III,284)1;
3	 | 	as	due	to	craving,	presented	in	a	form	similar	to	the	Noble	Truths, 
with ‘identity’ in place of ‘dukkha’,	as	in:
1 Although it is not explicitly stated in the Pali Canon, a similar way of regarding applies to the Five Groups of 
Grasping since it is frequently explicitly stated that one should not regard them in that way (see Ch.22). This 
series of factors includes four of the Five Groups of Grasping – the Six Internal and External Sense Bases are 
included under Embodying, and contact and craving are included in Willing and Habiting.

133
‘What, bhikkhus, is the origin (samudaya) of identity? It is this craving 
which brings renewed existence, is connected with delight and passion 
(nandi-rāga), ever seeking fresh delight, now here, now there; namely: 
craving for sensual pleasure, craving for existence, craving for nonexistence.’ S.III,159; M.I,299.
Identity is therefore caused by either regarding the Five Groups of 
Grasping or the Six Sense Bases the wrong way, which is ignorance, or 
through the action of craving and its associated supports. This succinct 
expression of the cause of identity is reinforced by the often repeated 
refrain that, because human beings are ‘hindered by ignorance and 
fettered by craving’, they continue to experience dukkha and ‘wander on’ 
through countless ‘renewed existences’ (punabbhava) (S.II,178ff).
It is therefore helpful to make a thorough investigation of both  
the	activities	and	the	objects	of	identification,	in	order	to	clearly	
understand	how	identification	comes	about.	This	is	a	very	important	
theme to understand and involves a fair amount of information.  
Thus,	I	have	divided	this	theme	of	Identification	into	three	chapters.	
This	chapter	will	cover	the	objects	of	identification	which	have	already	
been	introduced	in	chapters	7	and	8.	The	following	two	chapters,	
Chapter 11 and Chapter 12, will elaborate on the two principal activities of 
identification,	Ignorance and Craving.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION

134
BEYOND I-MAKING
The ‘Objects’ of Identification
At	various	places	in	the	Pali	Canon,	identification	is	expressed	with	
regard	to	three	different	themes.	These	are	the	Five Groups of Grasping, 
the Six Internal and Six External Sense Bases, and the Elements.
The	Buddha	stated	that	there	are	five	aspects	of	body-mind	which	
people identify with as a self. These are called the Five Groups of Grasping 
(S.III,46)	(see	Chapter	7	for	details).	It	is	these	Five	Groups	which	anyone	
grasps (S.III,94), anyone who remembers their past abidings recollects 
(S.III,86), and any unawakened person produces or brings into existence 
(abhinibbatteti) (S.III,152).
Elsewhere (S.IV,15)	in	the	Pali	Canon,	the	Buddha	defines	‘the	All’	(sabbe), 
the whole, entirety of reality, as the Six Internal and Six External Sense 
Bases, that is, the six sense ‘organs’ and their six ‘objects’. These twelve 
sense bases are contained within the Five Groups of Grasping in that the 
physical sense organs and their objects are aspects of body, and  
the mind and mind objects are one of the mental factors. One discourse 
(SN.35:93	=	S.IV,67f) connects the Five Groups to the Sense Bases, because 
it is through contact of the sense organ and sense object that Bare 
Knowing (viññāṇa) comes to be; and from that contact arises the other 
three	mental	Groups:	Feeling, Recognizing and Willing and Habiting 
(vedanā, saññā and saṅkhārā).
The	third	‘object’	of	identification	is	the	Elements.	These	are	defined	
as either the four elemental qualities of body (rūpa), or the Eighteen 
Elements, which are the Six Internal and Six External Sense Spheres, 
together with the six associated types of Bare Knowing (S.II,140). Thus 
the Elements are included in either the Sense Bases or the Five Groups of 
Grasping, and therefore do not need to be explained separately.  
In	summary,	the	main	objects	of	identification	are	either	the	Five Groups 
of Grasping or the Six Internal and Six External Sense Bases.

135
Identifying with the Five Groups of Grasping  
There	are	various	ways	in	which	identification	with	the	Five	Groups	 
of Grasping happens. Sometimes it is as simple as ‘regarding things  
as “This is mine, this I am, this is my self.”’2 However, a most 
comprehensive	form	of	identification	is:	‘An uneducated person, 
who disregards the noble ones, and is ignorant and untrained in their 
noble teaching, who disregards righteous persons and is ignorant 
and untrained in their righteous teaching’ regards, sees or perceives 
(samanupassati) any of the Five Groups of Grasping	in	one	of	four	modes:	
a. 	any	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping as a permanent self, 
b. 	the	self	as	possessing	any	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping, 
c. 	any	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping as in self, or
d. 	a	permanent	self	as	in	any	of	the	Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,1ff).
The process of self-making begins very early, at the pre-conceptual 
stage of life, with the Underlying Dispositions. As such, the process 
usually lies hidden beneath our unconscious habit patterns and our 
fundamental	assumptions.	However,	it	can	be	beneficial	to	engage	 
the	conceptual	mind	to	initiate	an	inquiry	into	the	different	types	 
of	identification	processes	described	by	the	Buddha.
2	 Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	note	at	CBD,1050,	n.34	mentions	the	three	‘grips’	(gāha):	‘this	is	mine’	is	the	grip	of	
craving; ‘this I am’ is the grip of conceit; ‘this is my self’ is the grip of views.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION

136
BEYOND I-MAKING
Contemplating the Four Modes of Identification 
It can be a useful exercise to contemplate these four modes of 
identification	in	order	to	better	understand	just	how	we	imagine	 
our permanent self to be, most of the time quite unconsciously.  
Below I will give my own interpretation.
a. Perceiving Any of the Five Groups of Grasping as a Permanent Self:
In this mode, your self is one of the Five Groups of Grasping, ‘just as  
the	flame	of	an	oil	lamp	and	its	colour	are	indistinguishable’.3
This	is	the	most	basic	mode	of	identification,	the	most	primal	mode	 
in the development of a sense of self. Since the Five Groups of Grasping 
are the fundamental way in which we function in the world, it is easy  
to identify with them as our everyday self, and maybe even take one  
or more of them as our essential self. For example, many people  
identify with feelings as their essential self and then organize their entire 
life around satisfying feelings. Others identify with Bare Knowing or 
consciousness, since they observe that whenever there is a sense of self, 
there is (some form of) knowing.
b. The Self as Possessing Any of the Five Groups of Grasping:
In this mode, your self possesses one of the Five Groups of Grasping  
as its primary mode of being, ‘in the way a tree possesses a shadow’.
3	 The	quotations	in	this	section	are	from	Bhikkhu	Bodhi’s	translation	of	the	Commentary	to	the	Saṃyutta	
Nikāya,	CDB,	p.	1044,	n.5.

137
A	common	form	of	identification	in	this	mode	is	that	of	an	‘abstract	 
or greater self’ – we are not one of the Five Groups of Grasping, but  
we are what possesses the Five Groups of Grasping, or has them as  
its means of expression or its shadow. For example, you know that  
you are not the body, since it keeps ageing, but you possess a body in 
order to interact with the world with your ‘real’ self as something greater. 
This mode is most evident when people talk about their ‘higher self’,  
‘big self’, ‘ultimate self’, etc. 
c. Any of the Five Groups of Grasping as in Self: 
In this mode, any one of the Five Groups of Grasping are within the self, 
‘as	the	scent	is	in	a	flower’.
This	mode	of	identification,	while	similar	to	the	second	mode,	is	more	
subtle. This is expressed by belief in an amorphous cosmic self in which 
the Five Groups of Grasping operate as an adjunct. For example, your 
fragile body is only a coarse expression of a more ethereal presence.
d. Self as in Any of the Five Groups of Grasping: 
In the fourth mode, your self is contained within any of the Five Groups of 
Grasping, ‘as a jewel is in a casket’. 
In	this	mode,	identification	is	with	a	hidden	self,	buried	in	one	of	the	Five 
Groups of Grasping.	Presumably,	the	identification	is	of	an	exceptional	
nature,	for	example,	ecstatic	feelings.	This	mode	of	identification	is	
common to many religions, where a subtle soul or intrinsic essence 
dwells deep within a person and continues on after death. 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION

138
BEYOND I-MAKING
Any of these conceptions, assumptions or presumptions of self are  
a mental activity (saṅkhārā:	Willing and Habiting) (S.III,96), which is also 
one of the Five Groups of Grasping. These Five Groups of Grasping are 
thus all-encompassing and self-supporting. Just as an artist produces 
a detailed image of a person, so to, if an uninstructed person produces 
anything, it is only the Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,152).4
The Six Internal Sense Bases and the Six External Sense Bases
Unlike the Five Groups of Grasping,	the	process	of	identification	with	the	
Six Internal and the Six External Sense Bases is not in terms of regarding 
them as self in any of the four modes (referred to as ‘identity view’ at 
M.I,300), but by way of the four-fold ‘conceiving’, or self-referencing, 
resulting in the Sense Bases being conceived as ‘mine’5 (S.IV,22f). 
However, as with the Five Groups of Grasping, there are similar activities 
of	identification:	craving	(S.IV,36f), grasping (S.IV,32f), delight (S.IV,13f; 35f), 
desire and passion	(S.IV,	89),	gratification	(S.IV,7f), conceiving (S.IV,21ff;	64ff), 
Māra	(S.IV,38f;	91).
In	fact,	in	the	Saṃyutta	Nikāya,	some	of	the	discourses	in	the	chapter	 
on the Sense Bases (Chapter 35) parallel those in the chapter on the  
4	 It	is	interesting	that	there	is	no	mention	in	the	Pali	Canon	of	a	permanent	self	which	identifies	with	a	
combination of, or all of, the Five Groups. For example, some people may identify themselves with the mind 
in general, that is, all four mental factors of the Five Groups. Others could identify with the body and the mind 
since they recognize that they need both to function in life.
Two	of	the	Five	Groups	are	given	special	mention	in	the	Pali	Canon:	the	Four	Elements,	(as	a	group	in	
themselves	(S.II,169ff)	or	as	the	main	constituents	of	rūpa	(S.III,59)),	and	Feelings.	In	the	Discourse	on	
Establishing of Mindfulness (MN 10; DN 22), contemplation of the Four Elements is one of the exercises, while 
Feelings are one of the four main themes for developing mindfulness. Discourses on Feelings comprise one 
chapter	in	the	Saṃyutta	Nikāya	(SN.36),	while	discourses	on	the	Four	Elements	are	included	in	their	own	subchapter	(SN.14:30-39).
5 That is, conceiving in terms of the Sense Bases, conceiving in the Sense Bases, conceiving from the Sense 
Bases, conceiving the Sense Bases to be ‘mine’. This pattern also includes bare knowing, contact and feeling 
for each of the Sense Bases.

139
Five Groups of Grasping (Chapter 22)6. The emphasis, in regard  
to the Sense Bases, is their role in the perceptual process, which is  
the basis for the functioning of the Five Groups of Grasping. As the reader 
may recall from previous chapters, the Six Internal Sense Bases are called 
‘the world’ in the Buddha’s Teaching, since it is through them that we are 
able to perceive and ‘conceive’ of ‘a world’ (S.IV,95). That is, the ‘world’ to 
the Buddha is what human beings experience. This ‘world’ exists through 
the internal and external sense bases, the associated Bare Knowing, 
and the things to be cognized by Bare Knowing (the other three mental 
Groups) (S.IV,39f), and is equated with a living being (satta), dukkha and 
Māra	(S.IV,38).
In the presentation of the Sense Bases, the corresponding  
sense-knowing, sense-contact and feelings arising from sense  
contact are also often mentioned.7 Sometimes, the Six Internal Sense 
Bases are called the six bases for contact (cha phassāyatanā S.IV,70).  
This, of course, leads to the complications that can arise from the  
Sense Bases – the mental disturbances (S.IV,78), the ‘evil, unwholesome 
states’ (S.IV,76)	and	defilements	of	passion,	aversion	and	delusion	
(S.IV,139). These are triggered by sense contact, and are the source  
of self-reinforcing activities.
‘Bhikkhus, these six bases for contact, if untamed, unguarded, 
unprotected, unrestrained, are bringers of dukkha.’	S.IV,70.
6	 For	details	see	the	Template	Parallels,	re:	22	and	35,	pp.	1986-88	in	CDB.
7	 The	expansion	from	Bare Knowing to Contact and to Feeling is similar to the presentation of the perceptual 
process, unlike that of Dependent Origination, where mentality-materiality and the Six Sense Bases occur 
between Bare Knowing and Contact.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IDENTIFICATION

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to the breathing.
•  When the mind seems reasonably calm, 
observe the degree of clarity of mind.
•  Is the mind very clear, moderately clear, dull, 
or what?
•  Do you know what the cause is of this 
condition? Exhaustion? Physical discomfort? 
Distractedness? Something else?
•  Is it possible to change this mental 
condition?
• Bring attention back to the breathing.
•  When suitable, see if you can recall basic 
meditation instructions.
•  Can you recollect them clearly or partially? 
Do you struggle with recollecting them or are 
they immediately recollected.
•  Bring your attention back to the body sitting, 
then to the breathing. 
•  When suitable, open your eyes and resume 
your activity.

141
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IGNORANCE
The Activities of Identification: Ignorance and Craving
The	most	important	factors	in	the	process	of	identification	are	the  
activities of identifying, primarily Ignorance and Craving, which manifest 
in diverse and multifaceted ways. They are, of course, interrelated. 
Ignorance is the root of Craving and, when Craving is functioning, 
Ignorance is compounded. We could say that Ignorance represents the 
rational	or	cognitive	supports	for	identification	and	Craving represents 
the emotional aspects. While Ignorance can be very enervating and 
darkening, Craving can be very energizing and brightening.
Ignorance
You may recall from the chapter on Conditional Causality that Ignorance 
(avijjā) is the primal condition for the causal sequence resulting in 
Existence,	Birth	and	culminating	in	‘this	whole	mass	of	suffering’.	
Ignorance is said to be the nutriment of craving for existence (A.V,116).
Ignorance	is	specifically	defined	as	not	knowing	the	Four	Noble	Truths	 
of:	dukkha; origin; cessation; and the path of practice to realize cessation 
(S.II,4), which is all we really need to know for liberation (S.V,438). 
Elsewhere in the Pali Canon, Ignorance	is	defined	as:
TEN
Ignorance
. . . . . . .

142
BEYOND I-MAKING
1 | 	not	understanding	(pajānāti) the Five Groups of Grasping, their 
origin, their cessation, and the path to realise their cessation 
(S.III,162); 
2 | 	not	understanding	as	it	really	is	the	Five Groups of Grasping  
as subject to arising and vanishing (S.III,171); 
3 | 	not	understanding	as	it	really	is	the	gratification,	disadvantage	 
and escape from the Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,173);
4 | 	not	understanding	as	it	really	is	the	origin	and	passing	away,	
gratification,	disadvantage	and	escape	from	the	Five	Groups	 
of Grasping (S.III,174). 
The well-being and ease (sukha somanassa) that arise in dependence on 
the Five Groups of Grasping	is	the	gratification	(assāda) in them; that the 
Five Groups of Grasping are impermanent, dukkha and subject to change 
is the disadvantage (ādīnava) in them; and the removal and giving up of 
desire and passion (chandarāga) for the Five Groups of Grasping is the 
escape (nissaraṇa) from them (S.III,102f).
Ignorance is the forerunner of entering upon unwholesome states  
(S.V,1f;	A.V,214), for ‘affected by ignorance, wrong view originates’.  
Wrong view then conditions the wrong factors of the Eightfold Path, 
that is Wrong View, Wrong Aspiration, etc. Ignorance is the source of the 
Outflows	(āsava),	and	‘affected	by	ignorance	one	produces	a	 
“self existence” (attabhāva)’1 (A.III,414).
1 A ‘self existence’ is also produced by ‘whatever sense pleasures drive one’, and whatever feelings one 
experiences	(A.III,411f).

143
There	is	no	first	point	of	ignorance,	it	is	simply	part-and-parcel	 
of being born with Underlying Dispositions, ignorance being one  
of them. In another passage of the Pali Canon (M.I,54f), ignorance  
is mentioned as caused by the three Outflows	of	sensuality,	existence	
and ignorance, the Outflows	being	contained	within	the	Underlying	
Dispositions.2 In another passage (A.V,116), ignorance is mentioned as 
nourished by the Five Hindrances. The Five Hindrances are nourished 
by	the	causal	sequence	of	unawakened	living,	which	is:	the	three	ways	
of wrong conduct3; lack of sense restraint; lack of mindfulness and clear 
comprehension; inappropriate attention; lack of faith; not listening  
to the true teachings; and associating with unworthy people (A.V,113f).
One of the nourishments of ignorance given particular emphasis  
is inappropriate attention (ayoniso manasikāra). Bhikkhu Analayo  
(2012:	pp	193-205)	has made a thorough study of the term ‘yoniso 
manasikāra’ as it is used in the Pali Canon. He has distinguished three 
aspects of the qualifying term ‘yoniso’:	thorough,	appropriate	and	 
wise.	Thus	it	has	a	range	of	nuances	in	different	contexts.	Although	 
any of the three nuances may apply, I have chosen to use ‘appropriate’ to 
translate ‘yoniso’, and ‘inappropriate’ to translate ‘ayoniso’.
2	 The	 Outflow	of	ignorance	(avijjāsava)	is	the	cause	of	ignorance;	ignorance	is	the	cause	of	the	Outflow	of	
ignorance (avijjāsava) – therefore, without wisdom, ignorance is self-perpetuating!
3 Wrong conduct through body, speech and mind. In detail these are the Tenfold Ways of Unwholesome 
Action (akusala kamma patha):	bodily	–	killing,	stealing,	inappropriate	sexual	behavior;	speech	–	lying,	
slander, harsh, frivolous; mind – covetousness, ill-will, wrong view. The nutriment for individual hindrances 
are	given	at	S.V,64f;	103.	At	S.V,84	special	mention	is	giving	to	wrong	attention.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IGNORANCE

144
BEYOND I-MAKING
Attention (manasikāra) is a mental function which is present in any act of 
knowing, since all phenomena come into being from attention (A.IV,339; 
V,107), originate from attention (S.V,184). The Commentaries to the Pali 
Canon describe inappropriate attention as similar to the ‘distortions’ 
(vipallāsa), that is, seeing the impermanent (anicca) as permanent, 
unsatisfactoriness (dukkha) as pleasant, non-self (anattā) as self and the 
unattractive (asubha) as attractive.4 This is, of course, the usual way in 
which unawakened beings view reality. 
Inappropriate attention is the nutriment for the Five Hindrances 
(S.V,102f). For example, sensual desire is nourished through frequently 
giving inappropriate attention to the attractive aspect of an object 
(subha nimitta:	literally,	the	‘image	of	the	attractive’);	ill-will	is	
nourished through frequently giving inappropriate attention to 
the repulsive aspect (paṭigha nimitta); lethargy and drowsiness is 
nourished through frequently giving inappropriate attention to 
‘discontent (arati), weariness (tandī), laziness (vijambhitā), drowsiness 
after meals (bhattasammada) and sluggishness of mind (cetaso ca 
līnattaṃ)’; restlessness and remorse is nourished through frequently 
giving inappropriate attention to unsettledness of mind; and doubt 
is nourished through frequently giving inappropriate attention to 
whatever is the basis of doubt.
‘Bhikkhus, when one gives attention inappropriately, unarisen Outflows 
arise and arisen Outflows increase.’ M.I,7.
4	 CDB,	p.	1900,	note	54;	NDB,	p.	1593,	note	23.

145
As well as giving inappropriate attention to things which give rise to 
the three Outflows	of	sensuality,	existence	and	ignorance,	there	are	
other themes that are inappropriate to give attention to, including 
speculations about oneself in the present, past or future which give  
rise to self views	(M.I,8).
The ‘yoke of ignorance’ (avijjā-yoga) is due to ‘not understanding as it 
really is (yathābūtaṃ nappajānāti) the origin, passing away, gratification, 
disadvantage and escape regarding the six bases for contact’ (A.II,11).
As mentioned above, the most common form of Ignorance and one  
of	the	key	factors	in	identification	is	the	wrong	way	of	‘regarding, seeing 
or perceiving’ (samanupassati). In particular, this is regarding any of the 
Five Groups of Grasping as a permanent self in any of the four modes 
(S.III,16) or any of the Five Groups of Grasping as ‘This is mine, this I am, 
this is my self’ (S.III,18). 
The kind of Ignorance the Buddha is most concerned with is ‘not fully 
understanding as it really is’ (yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti) (S.III,81) or ‘not  
knowing and seeing as it really is’ (ajānaṃ apassaṃ yathābhūtaṃ) 
(M.III,287).

146
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
personal story
One of my earliest encounters with ignorance was in the form of 
confusion, or the hindrance of doubt. In the year prior to my trip to 
Thailand, I was at university, and one of the elective courses I chose was 
Comparative Religion. I had previously visited many countries that had 
different	religious	traditions,	but	having	only	seen	the	cultural	trappings	
of these religions, I thought it would be useful to study the tenets of 
these religions. One religion I studied was Buddhism, through which I 
was introduced to the basic concepts  
of The Four Noble Truths and The Eightfold Path. When I then  
travelled to the Buddhist country of Thailand, I thought I knew quite a 
bit about Buddhism. However, when I began meditating I soon realized 
that I really didn’t know much at all about the Buddha’s teaching – what 
really is ‘Dukkha’?	What	really	is	Right	Effort?
The result was that I became very confused about Buddhism, about 
meditation and especially about myself. After weeks of struggle 
however,	it	finally	dawned	on	me	that	the	reason	I	was	confused	 
was	because	I	was	measuring	my	experience	through	fixed	concepts!	In	
this journey, I learnt that Dukkha is not merely a six-letter word,  
but a painfully poignant, personal and multifarious experience  
(if	one	dares	to	look	at	it).	I	also	learnt	that	Right	Effort	is	not	just	 
one thing, but manifests in various intensities and variations. Basically, I 
saw that the reason I was confused was because I thought I had to know 
my	experience	according	to	some	fixed	theoretical	concepts,	whereas	
my	experiential	knowing	rarely	fit	these	nice,	 
neat categories, and therefore was not ‘correct’. 
A major insight into the nature of this confusion, was that confusion,  
a form of ignorance, was not ‘wrong’ or ‘bad’, but merely another  
state of mind to know. I could then more readily accept the experience of 
not knowing, which in turn, became the motivation for trying  
to know, which included knowing confusion.

147
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IGNORANCE
. . . . . . . 
exercise
Experiencing Ignorance
It can be a useful exercise to try to experientially investigate Ignorance, or not 
knowing,	in	order	to	gain	some	first	hand	understanding	of	it,	rather	than	
merely conceptual knowledge.
Ignorance is, of course, an extremely deep and diverse condition and can 
therefore appear quite intimidating, perhaps to the point of giving rise to 
feelings of helplessness or fear. However, the very act of acknowledging 
ignorance is the seed of wisdom, since we are becoming wise about ignorance, 
rather than being ignorant of ignorance.
In order to function in life, we need to know, to some degree. However, most 
of the time, this knowing is just arrogant pretension – do we really know 
what is going to happen the next moment? Are we really certain that we fully 
understand what is going on? At most we can say that our knowing is limited 
and temporary. And then we can observe just how limited and situational that 
knowing is, rather than ignorantly presuming we know it all.
The most common characteristic of ignorance is simply ‘not knowing’. 
However, this can be so blinding that we do not even know that we do not 
know – we are ignorant of the full extent of our ignorance. An image which 
encapsulates this for me is staring into a fully darkened room unable to  
make out any of the forms inside.

148
BEYOND I-MAKING
A second, and more insidious, aspect of ignorance is incomplete 
knowing, that is, not knowing the full story or not fully knowing.  
This aspect of Ignorance is more dangerous and deluding because  
we only partially know, but believe we have the complete picture.  
This gives us a pretence of knowing, although we still do not ‘see things 
as they really are’ or ‘fully understand’. An image for me is staring into  
a partially darkened room where we can see a few indistinct forms,  
then presuming we know what they are, when, in fact, we really don’t 
know what they are.
Incomplete knowing, and its legions of distortions, is unlimited, and the 
mind has developed many clever ways to continue its distortions.5 In a 
Buddhist context, distortions (vipallāsa) are inherent in unawakened 
beings who perceive, think and hold views in terms of permanence, 
happiness, self and attractiveness (A.II,52). (In contrast, the way of 
Dhamma is perceiving impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, impersonality 
and unattractiveness.) In a more immediate sense, ignorance is 
conditioned by the Five Hindrances and their conditions (see above), which 
conduce to the corruption of clearly knowing.
5	 For	a	well-written	overview	see	Gilovich	and	Ross	2016.	For	more	dramatic	detail	see	Fine,	2007.

149
. . . . . . . 
contemplations
A contemplation which may help to give an impression of the blindness  
of ignorance is to contemplate the theme of ‘Don’t know’. 
•  When the mind is somewhat calm, bring up the theme of ‘Don’t know’ or ‘I don’t 
know’ , and observe what response this generates – Relief? Fear? Confusion?
If it seems appropriate, during a period of meditation it can be helpful 
to occasionally include a contemplation to assist in obtaining more 
understanding	of	the	effects	of	the	various	forms	of	ignorance.	
A	few	suggestions	are:
•  Can you observe what happens to a calm, clear understanding when the mind 
is under the influence of any of the Five Hindrances – sensual desire, ill-will, 
sleepiness and lethargy, restlessness and remorse, or doubt?
•  Can you observe what happens to a calm, clear understanding  
when the mind is engaged in:  
a. the three ways of wrong conduct;  
b. lack of sense restraint;  
c. lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension;  
d. inappropriate attention?
•  Can you observe what happens to a calm, clear understanding when  
the mind is lacking faith or trust; has not heard any edifying teachings;  
or is influenced by uninspiring people?
•  Can you observe any changes in your clarity of mind, your mood  
or your outlook on life through any of the above influences?
. . . . . . . 
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  IGNORANCE

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close your eyes 
gently and bring attention to the breathing.
•  When the mind seems reasonably calm, 
observe the principal feeling at this time.
•  Is it mainly pleasant, unpleasant or neutral?
•  As you observe the feeling, can you also 
observe some response to that feeling?
•  Is there liking or disliking, attraction or 
rejection, or nothing observable?
•  Where does that liking or disliking  
express itself; in the body or is it more 
mental/emotional?
•  Can you clearly observe this response?  
Is it strong or weak?
•  Bring your attention back to the body  
sitting, then to the breathing.
•  When suitable, open your eyes and resume  
your activity.

151
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING
Craving (taṇhā)
Craving is the usual translation of taṇhā (literally ‘thirst’). This is an 
extreme form of desire bordering on a drive or instinct, as implied by 
its literal translation. Craving is considered the active origin of identity 
(S.III,159; M.I,299), which is the taking up of an existence (bhava). It is also 
the cause of dukkha, therefore, having an identity is equivalent to dukkha. 
The All-Encompassing Nature of Craving
Craving is fundamental to and encompasses all aspects of human 
experience,	and	occurs	in	many	different	contexts	in	the	scriptures.	 
As well as being the cause of identity, craving’s most prominent position 
is as the cause of dukkha	and	rebirth:
‘What, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the Origin of Dukkha?  
It is craving which gives rise to renewed existences, connected  
with delight and passion, finding delight here and there, that  
is, craving for sense pleasures, craving for existence and craving  
for non-existence.’ D.II,308f.
TWELVE
Craving
. . . . . . .

152
BEYOND I-MAKING
Craving	is	also	the	origin	of	the	‘supports’	(for	existence)	[upadhi]	
(S.II,108), produces a person (purisa),	(S.I,37f) and is the ‘seamstress’ which 
‘sews one to production of existence’ (A.III,400f). It is so fundamental to 
human life that one can regard craving as self (M.III,283). Craving is ‘taking 
up the burden’ of the Five Groups of Grasping (S.III,26), and is said to be 
bondage (S.I,8), with associated images of a frightened, trapped hare (Dhp. 
342)	or	a	fish	in	a	trap	(Ud.	7.4).
A number of similes express the insidious, persistent and powerful 
influence	of	craving.	One	of	the	four	‘expositions	of	Dhamma’	which	 
the	Buddha	pointed	out	is:	
‘[Life in] the world is deficient, dissatisfied, a slave to craving.’ (M.II,68).
‘Craving has been called a dart by the ascetic (Buddha). The poisonous 
blight of ignorance is inflicted by desire, passion and ill-will.’ M.II,256ff. 
In contrast, the Buddha is called ‘the destroyer of the dart of craving.’ 
(S.I,192).
‘ … there is no river like craving.’ Dh. 251 (cf. A.II,6). 
This	simile	is	elaborated	at	It.	4.10	describing	a	man	carried	along	a	
pleasant stream (craving) who is warned by a ‘keen-sighted man’ on the 
bank (the Buddha) about the dangers lurking downstream where he will 
‘incur death, or suffering close to death’.

153
‘For the person of negligent living, craving grows like a creeper.’ Dhp.	334.
‘Just as a cut down tree, with roots undamaged and firm, continues  
to grow, even so, if underlying craving is not rooted out, dukkha  
arises again and again.’ Dhp.	338.
When	the	Buddha	refutes	the	view	of	Sati,	the	fisherman’s	son,	 
that it is the same consciousness that is reborn, he concludes by  
saying that Sati is ‘caught in the great net of craving, the tangle  
of craving’ (M.I,271).	From	the	idea	‘I	am’	there	arises	the	108	‘haunts’	 
of craving ‘the ensnarer, flowing, diffused and adhering’ by which  
the world has become ‘smothered and enveloped’ (A.II,212f).  
In	the	Mahānidāna	Discourse	(D.II,58ff), craving is not only the  
cause	of	individual	suffering,	but	also	gives	rise	to	a	sequence	 
of nine causal factors leading to social disruption.1 
Forms of Craving
Taṇhā	has	three	forms:	craving	for	sense	pleasures	(kāma-taṇhā); craving 
for existence (bhava-taṇhā); and craving for non-existence (vibhavataṇhā). These three forms represent the fundamental human drives for 
stimulation through the senses, for continuity of (any type of) existence, 
and for the cessation of (any type of) existence. 
1	 Also	at	A.IV,400;	cf.	 GDC	p.17f.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING

154
BEYOND I-MAKING
Craving for Sense Pleasures
Sense pleasure (kāma)	is	mentioned	in	many	different	contexts	in	 
the Buddha’s teaching.2	The	five	physical	sense	objects	are	called	 
the	five	‘strands	of	sensuality’	(kāma-guṇā), and the well-being  
and ease (sukha somanassa)	that	arises	dependent	upon	these	five	
strands is called the ‘pleasure of sensuality’ (kāma-sukha) (S.IV,225).  
While sense pleasure refers to any form of pleasure, pleasure from  
sexual intercourse is always implied. For example, the third of the  
Five Precepts is translated as refraining from sexual misconduct  
(kāmesu micchācāra3), which is usually explained as refraining  
from inappropriate sexual intercourse (e.g. at M.I,286;	III,46).
It is also possible to experience sensual pleasure through the mind 
sense. At several places in the Pali Canon (e.g., M.I,181;274;347), 
covetousness (abhijjhā) is used in place of sensual desire in reference 
to the Five Hindrances. Covetousness, synonymous with greed (lobha), 
implies a broadening of the term to include mental phenomena. This 
encompasses greed for ideas, concepts, and self-images (fame, wealth, 
health, etc.), which gives rise to views and opinions about self (‘ego 
pleasure’), which are a serious hindrance for some people (cf.	S.IV,21;	64f). 
The key element of sensual pleasure is the pleasant feeling, the  
‘well-being and ease’ (sukha somanassa), it induces. Pleasant feeling 
allows a relaxing and even the melting away of self-reference with its 
associated stress and anxiety – people ‘lose themselves’ in pleasant 
feelings. In contrast to this, unpleasant feeling puts pressure on the  
self	to	find	relief	from	the	perceived	threat	to	its	own	existence	
2 It is one of the four objects of grasping (upādāna), the three ‘cravings’ (taṇhā),	the	four	‘floods’	(ogha), the 
four	‘outflows’	(āsava), the four ‘bonds’ (yoga), and the three ‘longings’ (esanā). It is one of the three wrong 
thoughts (micchā vitakka), and as a practice it is one of the extremes to be avoided in following the Middle 
Way.
3 kāmesu micchācāra literally means ‘wrong (micchā) behaviour (cāra) regarding sensuality’  
 which technically applies to all sense pleasures.

155
– just listen how loudly the self screams when it is in pain. Craving is 
conditioned by Feeling. A general tendency for many of us is that when 
we experience a painful feeling we seek delight in sensuality as our 
only escape. Seeking delight in sensuality is based on the Underlying 
Disposition to passion for pleasant feeling (S.IV,208). 
‘The beautiful things of the world are not sensual pleasure,
A person’s sensual pleasure is passionate intention;
Beautiful things remain just so in the world,
Here the wise remove desire for them.’ A.III,411.
Passionate intention is craving. Craving for sensual pleasure through 
any of the senses is the one most often mentioned because it is the most 
obvious disturbance of the mind and creates a ‘bond’ to the sensory 
world. However, at a more subtle level, there is a craving for any form of 
sense stimulation, since, when there is reference to a sense object, there 
is	reference	to	a	subject.	This	is	in	effect	craving	for	existence.
At its most subtle, craving for sense pleasure is a means to reassert 
subjectivity through relationship to objectivity – when we have a strong 
object to relate to, we have a strong sense of a self experiencing it. An 
extreme example of this is someone who self-mutilates in order to feel 
that they are alive.
‘Because the Five Groups of Grasping are ‘pleasurable (sukha), affected 
with pleasure, overwhelmed with pleasure’, beings become impassioned 
(sārajjati)	with	them,	captivated	by	them,	and	are	therefore	defiled	
(saṃkilissanti).	This	is	a	cause	and	condition	for	the	defilement	of	beings;	
thus	are	beings	defiled	by	cause	and	condition.’	S.III,69f.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING

156
BEYOND I-MAKING
Craving for Existence
While craving for sense pleasures is the most obvious form of craving, the 
most basic form of craving is actually craving for existence. The other two 
forms	can	be	subsumed	into	it:	craving	for	sense	pleasures	is	craving	for	
a particular type of existence, and craving for non-existence (see below) 
is craving for the existence of non-existence. Craving for existence is 
thus	presented	in	many	contexts	in	the	Buddha’s	teaching:	passion	for	
existence (bhava-rāga) is one of the Underlying Dispositions, two of its 
forms	–	passion	for	fine-material	existence	(rūparāga), and passion 
for immaterial existence (arūparāga) – are included in the Ten Fetters 
(saṃyojana), and existence is one of the ‘Outflows’	(āsava). 
Since Craving is considered the primary origin of identity (S.III,159; 
M.I,299), which is the taking up of an existence (bhava), it is included in 
the ‘supports for existence’ (bhavanetti, lit. ‘what leads to existence’), 
these	are:	‘desire, passion, delight, craving, taking up and grasping 
(upay-upādānā), resolutions, adherences and underlying dispositions 
(adhiṭṭhān-ābhinives-ānusayā)’ (S.III,190f). This description is 
comprehensive	because	it	includes	emotional	aspects	(the	first	six	
factors), intellectual aspects (the next two factors), and the underlying 
dispositions, which is the closest the Buddha comes to what we  
would call instincts.
Craving for existence is a fundamental human drive, our drive to 
continue to exist, or drive to survive. In the wider sense, craving for 
existence is the craving for the continuity of any (usually positive) state 
of	being	or	experience.	It	is	specifically	mentioned	that	‘craving	for	
existence’	has	no	‘first	point’	and	has	ignorance	as	its	nutriment	(A.V,116).

157
Craving	for	existence	and	ignorance	are	the	two	specific	factors	to	be	
abandoned by direct knowledge (abhiññā) (S.V,52f). In the Pali Canon, 
craving for existence is mentioned in the context of the eternalist view 
because some celestials and humans ‘find pleasure in existence, are 
devoted to existence, delight in existence’. (It. 2.22) 
Craving for Non-Existence 
Craving for non-existence is associated with the annihilationist view, 
because some celestials and humans are ‘troubled by, depressed and 
disgusted by existence, they rejoice at (the idea of) non-existence.’ 
(It. 2.22) This is the attitude of wanting to get rid of or reject any form of 
existence, state of being or experience, in the present and the future. 
However, the irony is that this reinforces a someone trying to non-exist!
Objects of Craving
In	addition	to	these	three	forms	of	craving,	the	specific	types	of	craving	 
most	often	mentioned	are	the	six	classes	(or	objects)	of	craving:	for	
sights,	sounds,	odours,	flavours,	tangibles,	and	mental-phenomena	
(S.II,3;	248;	III,227;	230f;	234). In essence, the three kinds of craving are 
enacted through these six objects of the senses. It is these ‘objects’ 
which provide the support for grasping, leading to birth, etc.. Therefore, 
at a root level, craving for existence is craving for the existence of sense 
objects and craving for non-existence is craving for the annihilation of 
sense objects.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING

158
BEYOND I-MAKING
Sources of Craving
While craving is mentioned as one of the fundamental causes of 
identification	together	with	Ignorance, it is also supported by a number 
of other factors. First and foremost is feeling. In the Conditional Causality 
formula, feeling is the pre-condition for craving. 
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the reason (hetu), the cause (nidāna), the 
origin (samudaya), the condition (paccaya) for craving, that is, feeling.’ 
D.II.58.
All sentient beings experience feeling to the extent that we can say 
that	the	fundamental	motivating	influence	of	life	is	to	sustain	pleasant	
feeling and avoid unpleasant feeling.
‘And where does this craving arise and establish itself? Wherever  
in the world there is an endearing (piya) or agreeable (sāta) object,  
there this craving arises and establishes itself.
And what in the world is endearing and agreeable? The eye in the  
world is endearing and agreeable, there this craving arises and 
establishes itself. The ear … the nose … the tongue … the body … the 
mind in the world is endearing and agreeable, there this craving arises 
and establishes itself. Sights in the world … sounds … smells … tastes 
… tangibles … mental-phenomena in the world are endearing and 
agreeable, there this craving arises and establishes itself.

159
Eye-knowing … eye-contact … feeling born of eye-contact …  
the perception of sights … volition in regard to sights … the craving 
for sights … thinking (vitakka) of sights … reflection (vicāra) on sights 
… sounds … smells … tastes … tangibles … mental-phenomena in 
the world is agreeable and pleasurable, there this craving arises and 
establishes itself.’ D.II,308f.
‘… contemplating gratification in things that can be grasped, craving 
increases ... with craving as condition, grasping comes to be; with 
grasping as condition, existence comes to be...’ S.II,84;87;92f.
‘Bhikkhus, when one does not know and see as it really is the …  
six internal sense spheres, six external sense spheres, sense-knowing, 
sense-contact, feeling … then one is impassioned (sārajjati) by them. 
When one abides impassioned with, enamoured, bound, infatuated, 
observing gratification, then the Five Groups of Grasping go to 
accumulation in the future; and one’s craving … increases. One’s bodily 
and mental distress, torments and fevers increase, and one experiences 
bodily and mental suffering’ M.III,287.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING

160
BEYOND I-MAKING
Craving as Kamma
It may be worth noting at this point that, from the Conditional Causality 
formula, the creation of Kamma begins with craving. Feeling is one of 
the primal mental functions arising with Bare Knowing. It is our reaction 
to Feeling through craving that constitutes Kamma. Thus, we can say 
that all Kamma is based upon craving and, since craving is the cause of 
Identity, our Kamma is fundamentally directed towards I-making. 
Supports of Craving
One	of	the	most	influential	of	the	associated	supports	of	craving	 
is Grasping (upādāna), as in ‘the Five Groups of Grasping’. You may 
recall from Chapter 9 on Conditional Causality that craving conditions 
Grasping.	While	craving	is	the	active	factor	in	identification,	Grasping is 
the follow-through – craving is the reaching out towards something and 
Grasping is the taking hold of it. When this taking hold occurs, identity 
comes into existence (bhava).There are four kinds of Grasping:	sensual	
pleasures (kāma); views (diṭṭhi); rules and observances (sīlabbata); and 
doctrine of self (attavāda) (M.I,51;I,66; S.II,3).
The quotation on the cause of dukkha mentions that craving is 
‘connected to delight (nandi) and passion (rāga)’	(D.II,308). Nandi is 
defined	in	PED	as	‘joy,	enjoyment,	pleasure,	delight	in’,	and	is	often	
translated as ‘delight’, meaning ‘a cause or source of great pleasure’4. 
The term is rather unusual in that, while it recurs often in the scriptures, 
sometimes prominently, it is not mentioned in any of the formal 
categories of the Buddhist teachings. In some contexts in the scriptures 
it	is	associated	with	‘craving’,	as	in	the	definition	of	craving,	or	as	 
the cause of dukkha:	‘…	delight	is	the	root	of	dukkha … ’ (M.I,6).  
4	 Oxford	Dictionary	of	English.

161
At M.I,270 it is used in place of craving. In other contexts it relates to 
grasping:	‘delight in [any of the] Five Groups of Grasping is grasping’ 
(S.III,14); ‘ … delight in feelings is grasping … ’ (M.I.266).
Rāga is a particularly strong form of desire and is sometimes used  
in place of greed (loba)	as	one	of	the	three	primary	defilements	(A.I,216). 
When applied to sensual pleasures, it is best translated as lust.  
It features prominently in a number of the ‘negative’ categories. 
Craving is also grouped with other similar or associated factors such as 
‘passion, desire (chanda), affection (sneha), thirst (pipāsā), and fever 
(pariḷāha)’ (M.I,101f) or ‘passion, delight, affection, infatuation (mucchā), 
thirst, fever, attachment (ajjhosāna)’ (A.II,10). Since craving is considered 
the primary origin of identity (S.III,159; M.I,299), which is the taking up of 
an existence (bhava), it is included in a list of factors called the ‘supports 
for existence’ (bhavanetti):	‘desire, passion, delight, craving, taking up 
and grasping (upay-upādānā)5, resolutions (adhiṭṭhāna), adherences 
(abhinivesa)6 and underlying dispositions’ regarding the Five Groups of 
5 These factors are explained in detail below except for ‘upaya’, which means ‘approach, taking up, 
attachment’, so is closely associated with Grasping. Bhikkhu Bodhi translates upaya	as	‘engaged’	(CDB.	p.890	
= S.III,53).
‘Bhikkhus, one who is attached (upaya) is unliberated (avimutta), one who is unattached is liberated. 
Attached to Embodying, bhikkhus, Bare Knowing, while abiding, may abide attached to Embodying, 
based (ārammaṇa) upon Embodying, supported by Embodying, with a sprinkling of delight may come to 
growth, increase and abundance. Attached to Feeling … Recognizing … Willing and Habiting, bhikkhus, 
Bare Knowing, while abiding, may abide attached to Willing and Habiting, based upon Willing and 
Habiting, supported by Willing and Habiting, with a sprinkling of delight may come to growth, increase and 
abundance.’ S.III,53.
6  Adhiṭṭhāna means ‘resolutions’ but can also mean ‘decision, determination’, which implies having a certain 
direction	of	mind.	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	(CDB.	p.985)	translates	adhiṭṭhāna as ‘mental standpoints’. 
This would indicate holding a particular resolve regarding identity, for example, how I am, how I should be, 
how I shouldn’t be. Of course, this ‘identity resolve’ simply serves to reinforce identity along certain lines. 
A resolve common to religious persons, but criticised by the Buddha (i.e, M.I,102), is to be reborn in some 
particular place, similar to making ‘New Years resolutions’ with the hope of being ‘born into’ that resolved 
state. In its positive sense adhiṭṭhāna	is	one	of	ten	Pāramis.
Adherences, (abhinivesa, lit. ‘settling in’), is mentioned alongside Grasping in a number of discourses 
(S.III,181ff).	Bhikkhu	Bodhi	(CDB.	p.1092,	n.231)	offers	the	helpful	interpretation	that	it	‘suggests	the	
imposition	of	a	cognitive	interpretation	on	the	aggregates	[Five	Groups]’.	This	is	a	further	extension	of	the	
volitional action of grasping.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING

162
BEYOND I-MAKING
Grasping (S.III,191). 
Desire (chanda), in general, is an ethically neutral term meaning 
‘intention, resolve, desire, or wish’. However, it is coloured by the object 
it is focussed upon. When its focus is on an unskilful object it has the 
meaning of desire, as in the phrase kāma-chanda, (desire for sensual 
pleasure). The object can also be skilful as in the Four Right Strivings 
where a person is instructed to ‘generate resolve (chanda) for the  
non-arising of unarisen bad, unskilful states’ (A.II,15). In this context  
it is one of the ‘bases of spiritual power’ (iddhipāda, S.V,254ff). 
‘ … when a bhikkhu is not free from passion, desire, affection (pema), 
thirst, fever and craving for sense pleasures … for the body … for 
form (rūpa), and thus his mind does not incline to exertion (ātappa), 
application (anuyoga), perseverance (sātacca), effort (padhāna) …  
that is the first … second … third bondage (vinibandha) of the heart 
which is not severed.’ M.I,101f.

163
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  CRAVING
. . . . . . . 
exercise
Experiencing Craving
Since	craving	is	fundamental	to	identification,	it	can	be	helpful	to	
investigate the three forms of craving more thoroughly.
Craving can be quite energizing and volatile, therefore it is important 
to maintain a basis of calm through keeping a close connection to your 
main object of meditation, such as awareness of breathing. When the 
mind seems to be suitably calm, it may be appropriate to engage in the 
investigation of craving. However, if you notice an inordinate amount of 
energy arising, it is best to return attention to the breath.
If	trying	to	experience	craving	directly	is	too	difficult	or	too	energizing,	 
then it may be helpful to try experiencing the sources of craving, such  
as:	feeling,	what	is	endearing	and	agreeable,	or	seeking	gratification	 
(i.e., well-being and ease).

164
BEYOND I-MAKING
. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Sit in a comfortable position, close the eyes gently and settle 
attention on the breathing.
•  Two of the most primal forms of craving are thirst and hunger.  
See if you can experience either of these.
•  Can you sense the energy behind that experience?  
How does it manifest?
•  Can you observe a feeling associated with that experience?
Craving for sense pleasure
•  As you experience thirst or hunger, do you crave the pleasure of the 
taste of drink or food?
•  How do you experience that? What sort of energy is it?
Craving for existence
•  Bring attention to the body. Do you sense the body simply persisting, 
or do you sense some desire to keep it going, keep it comfortable, 
keep it well?
•  Bring up a feeling of well-being. Do you notice any response to this?
•  If it seems suitable, bring up an image of the body being sick. What is 
your response to this thought?
Craving for non-existence 
•  Bring attention to the body. Do you notice any discomfort?
•  What is your response to this discomfort?
•  Do you observe any unpleasant feeling in the mind?  
How do you respond to it?

165

. . . . . . . 
meditation
•  Close your eyes gently and settle your 
attention on the breath.
•  When suitable, see if you can observe a view 
you have about the nature of yourself.
•  Is this view quite personal – ‘I am a friendly 
person ….’? Or is it more abstract – ‘This 
body-mind is impermanent’?
•  How do you hold that view – rigidly, relaxed, 
anxiously … ?
•  Can you recognize the basis of this view? 
Were you taught it, or did you come to it 
yourself?
•  Bring your attention back to the breath.
•  When suitable, open your eyes and relax your 
posture.

167
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS
Views
In Pali, the word for ‘view’, diṭṭhi, is the same as the word for ‘seeing’,  
as it is in English – our view of reality is how we see reality. For example, 
if we have a distorted or wrong view, we see reality distortedly or 
incorrectly. Understanding this point is a foundation for spiritual  
practice because by changing our view through the wisdom that arises 
from spiritual development, we change how we see reality. Eventually, 
we let go of views and learn to see the way things really are through 
realizing liberation.
Our	five	physical	senses	and	the	mind	contact	and	interpret	stimuli	to	
arrive at a particular view or opinion of reality, which we tend to believe is 
correct and true. Little do we realize that this is just our view (and maybe 
ours	alone)	at	a	particular	moment	in	time,	and	that	it	is	filtered	through	
our education, beliefs, prejudices, and so forth. That is, our view and the 
way we see reality are subjective and limited. How many of us realize that 
how we see the world and our view of life are interdependent? A common 
saying is, ‘I’ll believe it when I see it’, but studies of human behaviour 
show that it is more often the case that, ‘I’ll see it when I believe it’. 
Generally, our views about ourselves are so intrinsic that we do not realize 
that we harbour views at all, until, perhaps, our views of ourselves clash 
with the views others hold of us. Therefore, it can be very helpful to have 
this theme pointed out to us.
THIRTEEN
Self Views
. . . . . . .

168
BEYOND I-MAKING
Identity View
Once a self identity becomes consolidated through grasping any  
of the Five Groups of Grasping or the Sense Bases as a self, we usually 
believe	it	to	be	a	permanent,	fixed	entity,	and	hold	this	as	our	identityview (sakkāya diṭṭhi). Without realizing it, we then only see a reality which 
supports this view. And then the stage is set for a wide range  
of speculations about the nature of this self identity, which tend  
to	re-cycle	back	into	affirming	identity	view.
In the Pali Canon, most reference is made to ‘identity view’ (sakkāya 
diṭṭhi), although occasionally ‘view of self’ (attānudiṭṭhi) is mentioned 
(S.III,185f). There is also the ‘doctrine of self’ (attavāda),	which	is	defined	in	
the	Dhammasaṅgaṇi	text	of	the	Abhidhamma	as	the	twenty	types	 
of identity view1. Identity	view	is	the	first	of	the	Ten	Fetters (A.V,17),  
while doctrine of self is one of the four types of Grasping (S.II,3).
Identity view (sakkāya diṭṭhi) and ‘view of self’ (attānudiṭṭhi) arise  
from grasping or adhering to any of the Five Groups of Grasping  
(S.III,185f). This also leads to the arising of the eternalist view; the 
annihilationist view; wrong view (micchā diṭṭhi); the fetters  
(saṃyojana), adherences (abhinivesa), and shackles (vinibandha);  
and, attachment (ajjhosāna) (S.III,182f;	cf.	S.III,258f;	S.IV,287), as well  
a range of deluded views of self (S.III,203ff).
Identity view, once established, tends to proliferate, without realizing 
that	it	is	actually	a	work	of	fiction.	And,	since	in	a	work	of	fiction	anything	
is possible, there is plenty of room for speculations about the nature of 
this presumed self. 
1	 CDB	p.726-7,	n.5.	The	twenty	types	of	identity	view	are	the	four	modes	applied	to	each	of	the	Five	Groups.

169
Views About the Nature of Self
In the Buddha’s time, just as today, there were many and varied 
views and opinions about the nature of self, the world, of ultimate 
reality, what happens after death, and so forth. There are various 
references throughout the Pali Canon on the views of the Six Leaders 
of the ‘heretical sects’2. One of the most detailed of these is the 
Sāmaññaphala	sutta	of	the	Dīgha-Nikāya	where	the	views	of	the	Six	
Leaders are presented (D.I,47ff). These views range from the materialist/
annihilationist view, to the determinist view, and the agnostic or ‘eelwrigglers’ view (D.I,24). The Buddha’s harshest criticism was of Makkhali 
Gosala, the Ajivaka, because of his especially pernicious view denying the 
effectiveness	of	action	(A.I,33f;	286f).
The two most common views about the nature of self, and which the 
Buddha most often criticised, were ‘eternalism’ (sassatavāda):	‘The self 
and the world are the same; after death I shall be permanent, stable 
(dhuva), eternal (sassata), not subject to change; I shall endure for ever 
and ever’, and ‘annihilationism’ (ucchedavāda):	‘ … the annihilation 
(uccheda), destruction (vināsa), extermination (vibhava) of an existing 
being (satta)’. Most religions promote the former – our soul or ultimate 
essence persists in either heaven or hell, or in endless reincarnations.
The Buddha was accused of being an annihilationist, and some  
of his teachings (S.III,55f) do resemble the annihilationist view given 
at S.III,993.	However,	the	fundamental	difference	between	the	
annihilationist view and the Buddha’s is that the Buddha speaks  
2 There is no record that the Buddha ever met any of these famous leaders, but he is recorded to have 
engaged in discussion with some of their followers, and their views are discussed or referred to in many places 
in the Pali Canon. One of the leaders mentioned, Nigantha Nataputta, is generally held to be Vardhamana 
Mahavira, the twenty-fourth ‘ford-maker’ of Jainism.
3	 The	fundamental	difference	is	that	the	Buddha	substituted	the	first	person	verbs	of	the	annihilationists	
for third person verbs, thereby shifting emphasis from the view of a permanent self of annihilationism to the 
impersonal	perspective	of	Buddhist	processes.	See	CDB.	p.1060f.	n.75	for	detailed	explanation.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

170
BEYOND I-MAKING
only of the annihilation of passion, aversion and delusion, and  
of	different	kinds	of	bad	and	unskilful	qualities	(A.IV,174;183).
The Buddha’s insight into Conditional Causality caused him to reject 
both of these views, since he understood that any identity is actually  
an impermanent, causally-conditioned process – there is no ultimate 
self or existing being to eternally persist or be annihilated.
Other Speculative Views
Views about the nature of self may proliferate into a range of speculative 
views, either about what form that self takes or its relationship with the 
external world. 
A set of views which the Buddha was often confronted with is the Ten 
Undeclared Views (M.I,483ff;	SN.44), a standard set of views which spiritual 
seekers	used	to	judge	someone’s	philosophy:
1. is the world eternal,
2. is the world not eternal,
3.	 is	the	world	finite, 	
4.	 is	the	world	infinite,
5. are the life force (jīva) and the body (sarīra) the same, 
6. is the life force one thing and the body another, 
7.	 after	death	does	a	Tathāgata	(Awakened	Being)	exist,	
8.	 after	death	does	a	Tathāgata	not	exist,	
9.	 after	death	does	a	Tathāgata	both	exist	and	not	exist,	
10.	after	death	does	a	Tathāgata	neither	exist	nor	not	exist.

171
Two discourses in the Pali Canon (DN.1; MN.102)	specifically	deal	with 
various	types	of	self	views.	The	most	well-known,	the	Brahmajāla	 
Sutta (DN.1), reviews sixty-two speculative views regarding the nature  
of	the	self	as	material	or	infinite,	percipient	or	non-percipient,	etc.
The diverse views that arise – the Ten Undeclared Views as well as  
the sixty-two speculative views – all arise from identity view (S.IV,287). 
How	often	do	we	find	ourselves	engaging	in	speculation	about	the	 
nature of our self rather than investigating what this self is which  
we speculate about?
While the Buddha had to respond to a great variety of views  
(i.e., DN.1; MN.102), his immediate concern was with the view of self, 
because this view is the source of all the various views that arise (S.IV,287).
‘I too do not see any doctrine of self that would not give rise to sorrow, 
lamentation, pain, grief and distress in one who grasps it.’ M.I,137.
PART TWO  |  THE PROCESS OF I-MAKING  |  SELF VIEWS

PART THREE
The Cessation of  
I-Making
