# Panyaprateep Foundation

Panyaprateep Foundation, as a non-profit organization, has been set up by the founders, administrators, teachers and friends of Thawsi Buddhist School community since early 2008. It is officially registered by the Ministry of Interior with Registration Number of Kor Thor 1405 since 1st April 2008. Panyaprateep Foundation will be tasked to help with fund-raising activities, and has helped set up Panyaprateep Boarding School since academic year starting in May 2009.

Objectives of Panyaprateep Foundation

1) To support the development of Buddhist education based on the Buddhist principle of the Three Fold Training of conduct, emotional intelligence and wisdom (sīla samādhi and paññā).

2) To propagate Buddhist wisdom and developmental principles through organization of retreat programs, training workshops and through the dissemination of Dhamma media such as books, CDs, DVDs etc.

3) To create understanding of humanity’s relationship to the natural world, to promote eco-friendly learning activities, and renewable energy for sustainable development, and a way of life based on His Majesty the King’s Philosophy of Sufficiency Economy.

Organizational Structure of Panyaprateep Foundation

Members of the Executive Committee

Phra Ajahn Jayasaro - Chairman of the Advisory Board

Assoc. Prof. Prida Tasanapradit, M.D. - Chairman of Committee

Dr.Witit Rachatatanun - Vice Chairman

Mrs.Srivara Issara - Member

Mrs.Busarin Ransewa - Member

Miss Patchana Mahapan - Member

Mrs.Apapatra Chaiprasit - Member

Mrs.Pakkawadee Svasti-Xuto - Member and Treasurer

Mrs.Bupaswat Rachatatanun - Member and Secretary-General

The Chief Spiritual Advisor of the Foundation is Venerable Ajahn Jayasaro, a monk disciple of Ajahn Chah of the Thai Forest Tradition, and leading figure in the Buddhist education movement. The Foundation is also honoured to have Assoc. Prof. Prida Tasanapradit, M.D. as Chairman of the Executive Committee. Furthermore, the Foundation has sought and received the kind blessing and pledges of support from a number of distinguished experts in diverse fields to help as advisors.

These include Professor Rapee Sakrig, Dr. Snoh Unakul, Ajahn Naowarat Pongpaiboon, Associate Professor Prapapatra Niyom, Assoc. Prof. Opas Panya, Mr. Suparb Vongkiatkachorn, Mr. Kanoksak Bhinsaeng, local community leaders in the field of sustainable agriculture, such as Por Khamduueng Phasi and Mr. Apichart Jaroenma from Buriram Province, and Mr. Varisorn Raksphan, a dedicated businessman determined to show concrete examples of a way of life based on the King’s Philosophy of Sufficiency Economy.