## Oracle Spring

His heart is open as the sky, the Master sees things as they are - wind sound and moonlight wear away - stop trying to control, the Master stays behind.

Express yourself completely - strange birds circling my eaves with twigs and grass - and everything will fall into place, everyone knows this is true; let them go their own way then trust your natural responses, allow things to come & go - the Valley Spirit never dies.

The Master views all parts with compassion - Yin & Yang have turned my mind to snow - empty yet inexhaustible, they give birth to infinite worlds in harmony with the Way; right and wrong don't enter the clouds, the soft overcomes the hard yet mystery and manifestation arise from the same source - it is named the Mysterious Feminine.

Content with the way things are the gentle overcomes the rigid, it is the base from which sprang earth & heaven, this source is called Darkness - being still.

The earth is solid and full - I've scanned the whole world & seen - divine and unifying, the sky is clear and spacious. Tree shadows drink in a stream, that is why she is one with them - the latent power of the Way. A pond in spring rippling green, water and earth in greeting. Late autumn rain drives down, things pass through. Nothing in the world is as soft and yielding as water: she is detached from all things because she has let go of herself.

His constant practice is humility - draw upon it as you will, free from desire you realise the mystery; he is perfectly fulfilled but lets himself be shaped by the Way. A hundred years slip by when you're free... therefore you keep quiet.

Without trying to control the world will govern itself. The gateway to all understanding never can be closed, open yourself to the Way but trust the inner vision - let go.

Nothing in mind, the moon through space - my door stays open when spring days get long - everything's growth depends on old roots, everything fades and resides at the centre of the circle.

Centred, the Master observes the world, she understands the whole - caught in desire you see only manifestations.

All creatures flourish together, the Master doesn't glitter like a jewel - head for the mountains and choose any tree, let go of fixed plans and concepts IT is there with us always. The Way is called the Great Mother, that is why she is ahead: Darkness within Darkness, yet for dissolving the hard and inflexible I sit by a window gazing at mountains.

One layer then another, as rugged and common as stone, nothing can surpass it: sea emptiness no mind anywhere - the wind through the trees - earth water fire and wind listen: the sound of spring...

Amaravati, February 1993; courtesy of Lao-Tzu & Stephen Mitchell, Stonehouse & Red Pine