## The Great Journey

Is there no journey without a return?

A journey that leaves no remainder?

Everywhere we go we seem to carry some trace of the place whence originally we came.

Is there no place where there lingers no shade of transition?

- the islet we must leave to find food and shelter; the family that waits for us at home; the legal impositions of boundary and time; the travel plan; expectations; the reasonable....

Is there no journey into the invisible, unnameable? Where no-one knows; where passports, money and minds don't apply; where there is nothing to fall back on?

Telephones, embassies, roads all chain us to the known, to the secure, to my world.

But the free fly, fly and don't look back - they disappear into uncharted, uncatalogued horizons.

Traceless they go into the endless tundra to commune with the musk-ox and the wolf; or over the last mountain range mounted on a buffalo, leaving scraps of wisdom with a lone douanier.

Is there no such journey?

Does every single one have return, limitation, compromise embedded inextricably within it?

"If only I could go, unbeknownst to anyone, and wander the Mongolian wilderness: swathed and nameless, just a face across the camp-fire - to disappear into the desert night

Or to the Andes or the New York underworld or some hidden corner of a Spanish forest..."

To get AWAY!

But the past haunts...

"Is there some place on this globe where nobody will mark me? Where I do not have to give my name and number!?"

"Perhaps it is a sign of the nature of this world."

"Well what of death then, is that not a pure and clean finality? Beyond the last breath there is no turning back."

"Maybe so, O nobly born, but they also say that whatsoever hope or fear upon which the mind fixates itself at the point of death will bring forth a new birth - a return.... "

These little circulations, across the world of birth and death, always echo with frustration - vortices trapped within a cage of time.

We're caught into their whirling disabled from discerning the power of the spirit to journey into Knowledge -

the great journey - and here there is true completion.

The Great Journey is itself 'return': the rediscovery of Eden with eyes grown wise - a return to primordial simplicity.

The mind of the sage is but the mind of the child which truly understands its own nature; innocent and wise, beyond sorrow, it is free

and the free fly -

the infinite their home, their food is faith their guide is peace.

Behind - no tracks, ahead - no road.

They have ceased to search for happiness in the labyrinth of time thus they wheel and float the skies at ease.

- F r e e -

The Great Journey is itself 'return', not to the binding but from bondage into freedom.

Chithurst, winter 1991