## The Flowering of the Golden Secret

An afterthought on enquiry and healing - this followed on from the previous talk.

IF WE TAKE THE TROUBLE to enquire and challenge our assumptions, if we let the mind open up and don't just operate from a blind habitual level, then we have a chance to let life truly blossom. Some time ago I was contemplating these themes and also thinking a lot about Ajahn Chah, our teacher. For nearly ten years now he has been in great sickness, his brain damaged with a stroke, paralysed and speechless. I had been thinking a lot about his condition and how strange and tragic it was that this extraordinary, mighty being, this person so wise and so loving was in such a state of terrible ill-health, unable to speak, unable to move. He is still a very lovely radiant presence even though he is largely inert, completely incapable of any voluntary action.

My first spiritual teacher, Trevor Ravenscroft, was a man who trained for many years in the esoteric knowledge of the Rudolf Steiner tradition; he was also an expert on the legends of the Holy Grail. One of the books he wrote was a commentary on a famous Grail romance called 'Parsival'. In this legend one of the main characters is the Grail King, Anfortas. In some ways he was in the same condition as Ajahn Chah; even though he was a powerful and great king, guardian of the Grail, he was sick and laid out. He had been dreadfully wounded by a lance, jousting in mortal combat with another knight. He had won the battle but for years he had been in a state of ghastly sickness. The similarity between these two situations caught my attention. Also because I learned that the Buddha's alms-bowl was one of the origins of the symbol of the Holy Grail.

In Christian tradition it is the cup that Christ and the disciples drank from at the Last Supper, and was also used by Joseph of Arimathaea to contain the blood running from the wound made by the centurion's spear. So, in certain Christian traditions, the Grail was seen physically and metaphorically as the fountainhead of spiritual power. I went back to look at the story of Parsival again and was very struck by its relevance and profundity - particularly since I had just been to Thailand and seen Ajahn Chah in this physically devastated state.

The other main protagonist in the story is the Grail Knight Parsival, who is the classic ingénue, incredibly naive; he is a great fighter but amazingly unworldly and innocent. He is also the archetypal seeker. 'Parsival' means something like, 'through the valley' or 'through the centre'. His coat of arms was a 'T' shape with a space down the middle like: ┐┌ which also has resonances of One who keeps to the middle way'.

He sets out in search of the Holy Grail and after some trials and tribulations, he finds the castle of King Anfortas. He comes into the castle and there is a splendid, fantastic ritual going on in the grand banqueting hall. Lines of stately beautiful maidens carrying flaming torches, noble knights standing in formation, a solemn, holy array of gentle beings. In the middle of the banquet, laid out on his couch is the wan and frail form of the wounded king. Parsival, being a bit of a bumpkin, is more than somewhat overawed by the whole thing and fails to take in what is happening. He doesn't ask the one obvious and crucial question, but just makes polite conversation instead. Everyone is waiting for him to pose the question and break the spell but he doesn't realise what he is supposed to do. He spends the night there and, when he wakes up in the morning he is all alone, there is no-one else around, the castle is empty.

So he leaves the castle and finds himself in a wasteland. (This is the same wasteland that is the substance of T.S. Eliot's famous poem.) Eventually after wandering there for five years Parsival manages to find his way back to the Grail Castle, by now he has realised what he has to ask - then the healing of King Anfortas occurs. I have tried to gather all of this together into a poem about the healing power of enquiry; it is called

The Flowering of the Golden Secret

It has been so long - the Master's body laid so low - like the wounded Anfortas, guardian of the Holy Grail, neither quite alive nor yet quite dead.

The wasted flesh shocks the eye, the straightest mind is turned; too awed and stunned by raw impact to ask the question, "Why?" - "What is it ails thee?"

Stopping at the senses' gate the seeker gets repelled - so, guileless and innocent, is left to wander wasted lands: brave, brave, brave but slowly wise.

The one of steadfast mind trends towards the bright, circling the holy place - the domain of the Lord of Light - but "Who seeks it will not find it"; so near, yet always out of sight.

Five circles of the sun: despair and hope pursue each other round - a sorry pair.

Whomsoever seeks the Grail must do so with a sword - hating God, defying Truth but determined to go on; for there's no fixed law, no formula of knowledge, that ever could withstand the power of revelation of one faithful to their own courageous truth.

Straight through the middle. The test is to forget yourself, and all your cherished goals, to partake of the anguish of another.

Straight through the middle comes at last once more to place himself before the wounded one; via painful passages, far beyond the bounds of space and time, causality, to reach the realm of vision: to reach the Master's hut, the Grail Castle.

"Oeheim, was wirret dier?" "Luang Por, what ails you?"

The question now illuminates presumptions we have made... "Do not weep for ME! It's you who are in trouble. You think this body's all there is to 'Ajahn Chah'!"

The veil is pierced -

revelation of the perfectly awake, radiant reality is here.

The wound is healed - transfiguration, peace - no-one whose beauty came from birth, ever equalled Anfortas emerging from his sickness - fleur - a golden lustre falls upon the scene.

No-one ever reached the Grail not named for it in heaven; the steadfast one who holds the middle now comes to the throne - thus here and there and you and i at last dissolve, are gone. ◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌ ◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌◌

Amaravati, 1990 - with many thanks to Wolfram von Eschenbach, Joseph Campbell and Trevor Ravenscroft.