## Beata Beatrix and the Proud Professor

(On a dream sequence and an Epstein)

Whose side are you on of the flower and the stone, or is some other angle yet unseen?

Jacob wrestles with his Angel: rock-carver battling raw crystal, white - pounding it with bolster soothing it with sand.

Rough chunks fly of Word made matter hewing raw matter shaping Mother stone. A man coaxes meaning from the fabric of the earth, releasing sense and sinew from syllables of stone.

Twin forms humanoid - winged/unwinged - locked onto each other at the moment of release. No spine cracking in an icy hawser hold but a softening embrace and the moment of relief.

- Surrender -

"Let me go for day breaketh" the eyes roll heavenward, the thrashing battle over: the moment of release from pounding, kniving, heaving against Nature, who now, as always, answers with silence and a smile.

- Release -

hands drop, the gasp of revelation face to face line for line grip for grip

"Here am I battling against Truth - indomitable, pure inviolable, whole -

but who is there to fight and what is there to fear?"

- Transformation -

Now the Beast - audacious, arrogant engorged, enraged and purple with affronted pride beats upon me painlessly and so away I slide...

For certain this one knows not why contention does not make us tree but, how humbling, there go I but for this shift in loyalty.

Those who lingered met disaster - the Beast has swallowed every bone, the house is void, the Beast is master - Wisdom says: Leave well alone.

Leaving: not through lovelessness, the looking-glass has been traversed, allegiances have simply switched and isolation's bubble burst;

thus alone into the world I go

- Unchained -

unburdened save by Beatrice - fragile blossom of the rock like the wild orchid, shy with loving, lovely blessedness;

like the golden-headed Spring leaning from her upper window showering her blessings down -

blameless beauty endless love

all is lost without your smiling light

*

Amaravati, Spring 1991