## The Long Road North Part 2

FROM THE LINCOLN WOLDS TO THE PENNINES

We have left the featureless levels and vast skies of the Fens far behind us and are now sitting on top of Hoe Hill, an old mound near the Bluestone Ridge. Around us the Lincoln Wolds lie folded in gentle green rumples, the barley is billowing in the wind and the sun is shining brightly. It is hard to imagine that the world could be any more beautiful than this. It was only a few hours ago, however, that we were chased from our campsite by hordes of hungry midges, the skies were lowering, the wind cold and rain was threatening to lash us. It was only a short while before that that the same valley seemed like paradise ... it only goes to show.

* * *

The last three days have been quite a mixture for us: sunny ambling, picnics, campfires, an irate farmer; rolling through gentle valleys, windy hills, meadow churches; fears and worries, warmth and light, peace and agitation; one and all in the sky together like the sun and clouds.

The afternoon that we left Hoe Hill we joined a path called 'The Viking Way', which wanders north-south through the Lincoln Wolds. We have stayed with or nearby it ever since then. Like the North Downs Way, it is an official long- distance path but, predictably, the marker for it is a little viking's head with a two-horned helmet thus:  . This fellow we have named 'Sven' and we have enjoyed his company for this part of the trip. As we have been aiming to reach Brigg on Thursday we have been able to go at a very gentle pace, often stopping to sit and meditate and take in the glory of our surroundings.

That first evening we found an abandoned farm near a small nature reserve called Red Hill; it was very broken down but the barn had a good roof so we decided to spend the night there. I am always a bit nervous of "appearance of irate farmer with shotgun" whenever we spend the night camping in the corner of some farm or in such places as this. Neither that night, however, nor the following morning did anyone appear, and after we had eaten we ambled on.

It was another hot day and the countryside was beautiful. As we approached Ludford Woods, where we had planned to stop, we could almost hear the Siren's song of the midges, calling out for us to join them amongst the trees; it was wet and humid with dense undergrowth and dark. We declined the invitation and carried on, finding a large barn off the road shortly before the village; it seemed a good place so we decided to stop there. We lit a fire under the huge lean-to as it had begun to rain and, despite ever more present fears of 'the farmer' and the sound of a shotgun nearby, no-one appeared. The next morning we were clearing up to go and, as I rounded the corner of the barn bearing two dead but smouldering logs from the fire, my eyes tell upon a small flock of sheep and a farm-lad, clad in a blue boiler-suit, hands in pockets, ambling along beside them. He did not see me and I quickly turned around; I scurried through the barn to see Nick (who was in the middle of his yoga routine), and told him what was up, my heart pounding furiously. I started to pack and suddenly realised that I was completely terrified. "This is ridiculous," I thought, so I paused for a few moments and stopped, slightly amazed at the intensity of my fear of 'being caught'. The lad looked like the most amiable fellow in the world and, as it turned out, a few minutes later he drove off and we never saw him again.

Later that morning, whilst Nick and I were sitting at a crossroads, a policeman pulled up in his car and said hello; he made conversation with us, asking our names and where we were from. Thinking that he was just curious about us, I was quite surprised when he asked for our dates of birth as well; as we were talking I felt quite at ease and we chatted happily away. Afterwards Nick told me that they would be checking up on us (having had some experience of his name being taken in the teenage days of his south coast jaunts with his young pals Tombstone and Weasel). They would look to see if we had a record or if anything suspicious had happened in the district - "like a barn burning down". "Oh dear," I thought, trying hard to convince myself that we had been really thorough in putting the fire out; imagining the Lincolnshire Constabulary appearing at Chithurst with a warrant, or arresting us in an ambush further up the Viking Way.

Later on we sat on a windy hilltop, with the trees and all the land around blown wildly and buffeted; we found a sheltered corner and I reflected on the doubt: you do not know exactly what is going on, as from whence the wind comes and where it will go you cannot say - all that is certain is that the wind is blowing, whatever will happen, will happen. What can you do but find a sheltered spot where there is some peace amidst the storms?

Bright and breezy the afternoon; we pressed on through Tealby and Walesby and stopped for a while in the old wayfarers church up on the hilltop. Silence hovered - greeting us as we walked in, blessing us as we sat, unmoved in parting as we left; it was still windy outside and heavier clouds were coming from the south-west. As we crossed over Lincoln's highest ridge we were rained upon but our path took us down into a sheltered valley and soon the weather cleared. We camped and, after making tea, sat until quite late. A crescent moon had appeared by then, together with a star. I watched as they sank behind the hill leaving the night alone to be lit by a few pale constellations. It was midnight and, feeling very clear and peaceful with the fading of the day's traumas, I went happily to sleep.

Curiously, it was the following morning, after all the doubts, fears and worries seemed to have vanished, that 'irate farmer' (but without shotgun), eventually appeared. For once we were camped right on a public footpath and were, I (incorrectly) thought, completely 'legal'. He came at about eight o'clock, pulling up in his Land-Rover in the field across the stream. Immediately he started shouting at us, bawling loud abuse and furiously brandishing his crook;

"Aha," I thought, "Buddha as wrathful deity." As I felt we were there quite rightfully it was not difficult to be calm with him. He came over to us very angry, but after talking for a while he saw that we had meant no harm and were very sorry to have caused offense. Nick spoke very kindly to him and I was amazed to see his mood dissolve as rapidly as it did; he even became quite calm and quiet as they talked about the land and the running of his farm.

"They're always like that," said Nick afterwards, "come on all irate but are really friendly underneath. Their farm is the dearest thing to them, it's their life, so it's understandable that they feel put out when someone just moves in - sets up like they own the place." The thing he was most upset about was the fire, which was embarrassingly and unnecessarily big; we explained that it was all dead wood we had picked up and that we had tried to do no damage to his farm. When we parted company he was quite friendly, but I still felt a bit guilty about the fire, having followed the Viking rather than the Buddha way in my wood-gathering exploits. I had not been very mindful of either what we really needed or the respect due to the land as someone's private property. I realised that we should be more sensitive and careful, especially about fires, and not to go about things in such a heedless way as we have done on occasion up to now.

It is good to see that when you wander off the track it only takes a while before the karma ripens and you get to taste the fruit. Guilt and remorse for being selfish, intrusive and clumsy; all the angst which comes from having lost your path. All this feeling is exactly what makes us resolve to do better in the future: to keep to tire path, since to struggle in the rough is both painful and exhausting. Hiriottappa, moral sensitivity, guardian and protector of the world.

* * *

From Brigg there were only two bridges over the River Trent within twenty miles of us and the closer of them was a motorway. Nick felt inclined to take this but, since a motorway is illegal for pedestrians, eventually I decided it would be wrong. This meant we had to walk a further four miles north and through the edges of Scunthorpe rather than through the open country. Nick bowed to this choice without a murmur and I was glad - the noble way may not always be the most direct but every step of it is in the peace of innocence.

* * *

Now that we are well into the journey I have found that I think very little in terms of getting anywhere: we have walked north, south, east and west; fast and slow; have had to rush, had to wait and have taken a host of small detours, often for very little reason. All of this combines together in the walk and helps dissolve any idea of progress or a goal. At any one time we are somewhere aiming to be somewhere else, but the very physical nature of our day's activities, the variety of places, moods and weathers we have been through, always return one to - "Well, here we are." The memory of our departure from Chithurst and the fantasy of our arrival at Harnham occasionally flicker by - remote mirages, unconvincing, with their irrelevance so clear they fade almost as soon as they arise.

* * *

As we walked along the pathway in the park at the edge of Sheffield, through the neat lawns and flowerbeds, we passed a young man with a burly dog straining on its lead. Nick stared down at the panting beast and his curiosity was aroused.

"What an incredibly ugly dog!" he proclaimed. "What is it?"

"It's a bull terrier," the young man replied. "They are supposed to look like this."

Conversation having begun, the two of them chatted on as we walked along. At some earlier point on the walk Nick and I had been talking about the different worlds we live in: how one can be skilled or expert or even famous in one field, yet unknowing or unknown outside of that. I mentioned how surprised we had all been in our family when we began to realise that my father had become an internationally famous journalist and judge of dog shows, and yet, within the home, he was just the same as when he had been a farmer. I suppose it must have sounded to Nick like a boast when I told him you could mention my father's name to any dog-breeder and they would know him. We sat down to rest on a park bench and he decided to put me to the test....

"Tan Amaro's father is a dog man. He says you are bound to have heard of him."

"Oh? What's his name?"

"Tom Horner."

"Tom Horner! The bull terrier man! Well, fancy that - of course I've heard of him. Fancy meeting Tom Horner's son in the local park."

I suspect Nick was considerably humbled by this response. It is true that most dog-breeders have heard of my father but to pick a bull terrier owner was unlucky. This is the breed in which my father is most expert; he has bred them, shown them and has written a well-respected book about them.

We sat and chatted together for a while and at last parted company, the young man still shaking his head with incredulity at our meeting.

"You were right, bhante," said Nick, "I am very impressed."

Smiling quietly, we carried on down the path out of the city.

* * *

It was quite late when we pitched the tents and we watched the sky as it cleared; by twilight there were no clouds and we looked forward to a fine day to cross the last of the big hills.

By the next morning things had changed and all my hopes of basking in sun- shine on top of Kinder Scout (whose continually foul weather is legendary) were dashed. The day broke with heavy cloud, which descended to meet us as we climbed the hill. Following the track called Jacob's Ladder we walked into the whiteness and soon were soaking wet. We decided to go straight over the pass and thus avoid the summit. We resolved that it was much wiser to be buddhas than world conquerors - it was very wet and windy, visibility was less than twenty yards and the top of the hill was a trackless plateau of peat-bog - the obvious thing was to go through it as directly as possible and take a path straight down the other side. As we crossed over the pass I suddenly realised that in a way I had got my wish after all, but the sunlight of wisdom does not need a cloudless day to shine.

* * *

Our walk through the city of Manchester was something I had slightly dreaded; I had prepared myself to be kicked to pieces and never leave the place alive, but after all the spreading of Dhamma, together with the mountain of good wishes and blessings we were carrying, in the end it all went very smoothly. Contained and keeping an even pace, I determined to hold wisdom as my refuge rather than the absence of any immediate threat. Our route took us through the inner city, a mass of broken and dismal streets, through Old Trafford and the docklands stuck between Salford and central Manchester. We crossed the black and bubbling ship canal, passed through the lanes of tower block estates and finally entered the genteel Jewish confines of the borough where Carol Batton lived. As we walked through the town you could see that people simply react to the sight of you out of their conditioning: little children go, "Wow"; slightly larger ones say, "What are you?" "Are you nuns?" "Are you Spanish?" "'Are you a Egypt man?"

"That skin'ead's wearing strange clothes."

"It's Jesus."

"Jesus."

Groups of teenage girls tend to laugh, giggling as you go by.

"Will you look at the state of that!"

Older boys bellow insults, incomprehensible, unfamiliar, from passing cars, across the street.

A pair of punks said, "Hi", and a couple of old men smiled warmly.

The pattern of all attention simply comes out of our conditioning; by being resolute in non-contention with the effects you have on people, you can walk through it quite untouched. It was all very peaceful, I could feel the habitual reaction of fear to threat and derision fading, evaporating as we walked; illuminated from the inside by offering peace.

Hot and sticky in the valley, although it was evening by now, we headed up into the hills again; tromping along through farm-tracks, out into the open. It was getting dark and we were beginning to notice more and more abandoned farm buildings around. As there was a lot more climbing to do before we would be able to find a good place to pitch the tent, we opted to spend the night in a derelict house. It was long since unoccupied and in use as a hay-barn. We clambered through the hay-bales to the first storey and sank, completely worn out, to the floor. How good to be stationary and cool. We remained immobile, slumped on our packs, until some energy arrived; we sat and meditated for a while and it was nearly midnight when finally we turned in.

A clear bright morning ran in through the empty window and shook me from my sleep. It was looking to be hot again so we decided, as before, to walk early and late, taking a long break at midday. We followed the Pennine Way up into the hills and found a good spot in the shade of a thorn tree by a reservoir. All through the afternoon a stream of walkers passed us by, maybe even a dozen every hour. I do not know what people think when they see us: we are obviously somewhat different from the crowd, travelling the same road but on another wavelength - treading to the beat of the Deathless Drum.

After six hours under the tree we decided it was time to move on. As we walked I found myself with a bad attack of the 'getting somewheres', which I had not seen since before we got to London. It was quite funny to see the mind figuring out what fraction of the journey we had done (eight-thirteenths), how much we had to go and all along knowing there is no-one going anywhere at all. Sunshine, cool breeze, good path, good boots, doing what you most want to in the world, but the untamed mind is always keen to be concerned with something, someone or somewhere else.

Through the lands of Wuthering Heights and down into the valley, we carried on up the next hill to camp in the breeze. Finding a midge-ridden marsh and no breeze on top, however, we kept going until we reached another abandoned farmhouse. We cleared ourselves a space amidst the rubble and broken glass and settled in, thankful to the farmer and the house-builders for the use of a shelter for the night.

* * *

Walking in the dales, on the Pennine Way and around has been good for meeting other travellers. Most of the time, conversation only begins when we ask for water or arrive at our destination; here, amongst so many other walkers, I am often taken to be simply strangely dressed and people talk to us quite freely. There is always a camaraderie between members of the same group and interest in how you are doing. Being so obviously hikers we are part of the family and people are very open with us.

As we followed a broad track between some reservoirs above Rochdale, we saw a man with a tripod photographing the valley; now brilliant and hazy in the afternoon heat. It was plain that he was keen to meet us and, as we went by, he introduced himself We stood together for a long while, listening to his gentle Orkney accent and telling him all about our walk. Before we parted he took some photographs and promised to send us copies. He was a truly gentle man and it had obviously meant a lot to him to meet us.

Another touching gesture made that day was the gift of some ice-cubes from a lady in Hebden Bridge: having just climbed a steep, long, cobbled lane, the two of us rested on a low stone wall, sitting there very hot and sweaty. After a while Nick went to ask for water at a house; the lady took the bottles in but was gone for a long time. When she returned, she explained that she had been trying to break up ice-cubes to put in the water.

"The big-necked one were quite easy but t'other one gave me a load of trouble."

Eventually she had given up, filled a margarine tub with ice and offered that to us instead. Very grateful, we drank many mugs of the delicious liquid - cool Yorkshire water like nectar in a hot and dusty throat.

It had been roasting all day and that evening, after long, hot and humid hours, the sun mellowed to a glimmering orange fire. It rested for a moment as a red balloon bulging on the hill-crest; lingering long before it disappeared, gently and as if for ever, beneath the blue slumber of the hills.