We had arranged to meet on the south slip-road, junction 22 of the M62 and, as we rounded the hill by the radio-mast, we could see her distinctive white car, a Mercedes-Benz estate, parked exactly where we expected. The day was brilliantly clear and sunny, it looked as though our meeting was not only at last going to happen but that it was also being smiled upon. After two attempts to join us had been stalled (in Lincolnshire and the Peak District), finally things had clicked for her.

As we came down the hill we saw Mudita emerge from her car and walk towards us. Suddenly there was a shout from our left and there was Abby, bounding through the heather, waving his arms and calling. Abraham is a London-born West-Indian and the star of Mudita’s Thai-boxing team. He had never been on fells before and was amazed when his feet would land in the little streamlets hidden underneath the heather.

“I got me feet wet!” He grinned, slightly out of breath but pleased after his search around the hill to find us. Delighted to meet up at last, they paid their respects, then we all bundled into the car and drove back up to the hill-top. There was much news from Chithurst and Harnham, we spent the whole time talking about the monasteries and her prospective trip to the States. She explained how the plans had fallen through before but insisted that this one meeting was making up for it; she had brought a vast quantity of food, all specially prepared, we had found each other with ease and the day was glorious. It was the fourth of July and up on the hill-top the air was clear for miles.

Mudita’s generosity is almost legendary: when she had been packing up to leave Harnham that morning someone had seen the piles of food containers – loaded with Thai cuisine – which she had been putting together for us.

“Is all that just for the two of them!?”

“They are walking – they need a lot of strength.”

“They couldn’t possibly eat that much! Why not leave some of it here for us?”

What she eventually brought was lavish enough, it was hard to believe there was still more she had left behind. A little later on, once Nick and I had left them, he told me she had offered us “a ridiculously large” amount of money.

“I took the liberty of only accepting enough to get us to Manjushri, bhante. Was that all right?”

“Fine by me,” I replied, smiling to myself – some people are just so incredibly good-hearted.

The place where we had chosen to eat was just beside the Pennine Way, which we planned to follow northwards for a day or two. We saw many hikers going by as we sat there so, after talk and much photographing, we joined the troop and set off. Even though the path has the reputation of being the toughest walk in England the going was very easy – lots of ups and downs but a well-worn track and very dry after all the summer heat. We were heading for Hebden Bridge where we had heard there was a place for monks from the Manjushri Institute to stay. The path took us to the brink of the valley and to the Stoodley Pike Peace Monument, a grey stone obelisk standing high and looking over the vast ranges of hill country. Built at the time of the Napoleonic wars as a celebration of peace when Paris fell, it continues now as a silent reminder for all of us who come after. When we reached it, we saw that somehow a sheep had found its way up onto the balcony around the pinnacle of the monument. As our mitzva for the day the two of us got up there and, after a little struggle, we managed to help it back to the ground again. It had been very frightened while it was trapped up there but as soon as it was free, it bleated, began to eat and its lamb (temporarily protected by another ewe) came running up to join it once again. When we were up on the balcony we saw, on the side of the spire, a large peace sign , which a graffito had painted. Underneath it was written ‘Trips not Cruises’, we were a mile down the hill and almost in town by the time I got the joke.

It turned out that the bhikkhu way-place in Hebden Bridge was a myth, there were some supporters of the Manjushri institute living there but no open invitation for monks. Hot and sticky in the valley, although it was evening by now, we headed up into the hills again; tromping along through farm-tracks, out into the open. It was getting dark and we were beginning to notice more and more abandoned farm buildings around. As there was a lot more climbing to do before we would be able to find a good place to pitch the tent, we opted to spend the night in an old farmhouse. It was long since unoccupied and in use as a hay-barn, half-way up the hill. We clambered through the hay-bales to the first storey and sank, completely worn out, to the floor. How good to be stationary, cool and midgeless. We remained immobile, slumped on our packs, until some energy arrived; we sat a while and it was nearly midnight when we turned in.

A clear bright morning ran in through the empty window and shook me from my sleep. It was looking to be hot again so we decided, as before, to walk early and late, taking a long break at midday. We followed the Pennine Way up into the hills and found a good spot, in the shade of a thorn tree by a reservoir. While we were eating, and all through the afternoon as I strove to bring the diary up to date, a stream of walkers passed us by, maybe even a dozen every hour. I do not know what people think when they see us: we are obviously somewhat different from the crowd, travelling the same road but on another wavelength – treading to the beat of the Deathless Drum. After six hours under the tree and with the diary still incomplete, we decided it was time to move on. As we walked I found myself with a bad attack of the ‘getting somewheres’, which I had not seen since before we got to London. It was quite funny to see the mind figuring out what fraction of the journey we had done (eight-thirteenths), how much we had to go and all along knowing there is no-one going anywhere at all. Sunshine, cool breeze, good path, good boots, doing what you most want to in the world, but the untamed mind is always keen to be concerned with something, someone or somewhere else.

Through the lands of Wuthering Heights and down into the valley, we carried on up the next hill to camp up in the breeze. Finding a midge-ridden marsh and no breeze on top, however, we kept going until we reached another abandoned farmhouse. We cleared ourselves a space amidst the rubble and broken glass and settled in, thankful to the farmer and the house-builders for the use of a shelter for the night.

It was not the dawn light which woke me today but the sound of a sheep, rubbing its horns on the doorway; being the vast majority of the locals that we meet, one becomes quite fond of them – it was good to be roused by such a homely sound. Hot again – we set out early and aimed for Lothersdale to buy food; off the Pennine Way the paths across this lumpy country are very steep and hummocked; we had a good tramp over the hills and were quite sticky by the time we reached the village. As we arrived, Lothersdale Post Office suddenly seemed to be the meeting place of a great assortment of beings: people and dogs, cars and trucks, comings and goings.

“Excuse me sir, why are you wearing that costume?” inquired a polite young Japanese man.

“Because I am a Buddhist monk.”

“Oh, so am I, I am a Buddhist.”

Another man pointed to some trout in the village stream, swimming lazily in the heat. “Lotta fish ’ere,” he said.

The local dogs introduced themselves, a little girl with an ice-lolly stared and Nick appeared with a huge box brimming with provisions.

“The lady in the shop just got back from Thailand, she recognized you at once. I had to tell her all about the walk.”

After the burst of activity was over we took the road to the farm half-way up the hill. In the fields we went a bit astray and were bellowed at by the young farmer as we crossed through his hay.

“OI! You bloody fools – can’t you see that’s a crop!” He had been turning a freshly-mown field nearby and was suddenly irate and stomping through the grass towards us. As he approached us I realized the only thing to do was to let my mind go empty – he stopped shouting, turned around and went back to his tractor. We saw him again later and we apologised to each other.

“Sorry I shouted like that, I just saw red.”

“Sorry we went through your crop, we should have known better.” We helped his tractor through the gate and parted happily.

Now we are sat beside this wall and, after a week or so behind, the diary is finally up to date. A sigh of relief; after being adrift, here we are at last.