It is Visākha day. The time we spent in Cambridge has left us very drained and we slept quite late this morning. We camped last night by Wicken Fen and have spent a couple of hours this morning pottering around, looking at the local inhabitants. It is one of the last patches of ‘natural’ fen-land in existence, most of the surrounding countryside having been drained for agriculture. In actual fact, although it is a fine example of the old fen eco-system, it is now so much higher than the fields round about that water has to be pumped in continually to keep it alive. We wandered around, looked at the information bills and kept our eyes open for rarities.

Tired, hungry and footsore; I hear my mind going, “But I don’t want to be bothered – it’s all so painful”. Soon the mood changes and life is cosy once again – sitting by the river with a full belly, “What a relief – it’s all perfect after all”. As soon as I find myself taking comfort to be dukkha-nirodha I know I am in for a rough ride: it becomes clear that to endure and cut through the obvious pains and pleasures of a trip like this is the only way to real freedom.

We met a lot of people in Cambridge: Daniel shares the house with a fellow called Dave (with whom he once comprised two-fifths of the ‘Pembroke Left’), and two women, one of whom works in a refuge for battered wives. The house was at the end of a terrace in the Kite, an old working-class area of town. I spent almost the whole two days that we were there sitting on the sofa of Daniel’s room mending my gear and talking to people. Jill Court came round on Tuesday morning and I also had a long talk with Dave. It was a peaceful afternoon also – Nick went out to do some shopping and bought another load of postcards; I looked at some of Daniel’s books, cleaned my boots and chatted with whoever came by. Carole Winter and Ollie Cooper dropped in and, after they left, another old university friend of Nick’s appeared. By this time it was getting late so he decided to take up the offer of a room at the house of his friend, in order to leave me in peace.

Daniel’s room was a well-ordered crowd of pictures, posters, books and assorted objects; he took great care of us and made sure we had all we needed; never having had any bhikkhus to stay before, he did a very good job. It has not rained for three days now and Wednesday morning found the sun shining brightly in a clear sky. As there were a lot of us we decided to eat on the lawn behind the house.

People at the ‘Co-op’ supermarket next door looked down periodically at the scene, faces would appear at the windows and then vanish as we looked up. A strange and magic ritual, a monk’s meal; sitting on the grass with freshly shaven head, a coven of friends and the faithful, gathered together for a day.

We left Cambridge following the river north-eastwards, most of the way our path ran along the top of the dyke through lush grass and cow-parsley; we stopped for frequent rests and the occasional chocolate bar. Nick had been up until about two thirty with his friends and we were both a bit weary; by the time we got to Wicken Fen the sun was falling behind the trees. We sat by the river for a while; eventually Nick decided to put the tent up before he dozed off and fell into the water. I agreed that it was a good idea. The martins were enjoying their evening feast of midges and an almost-full moon was hanging in the eastern sky. We said good-night to this great flat land and were soon asleep.