It had taken me a long time to write the diary that evening so I went up to the top of the pass above the tarn to stretch my legs. I stood watching the sunset and the rising of the half moon as the evening crept into the valley. I turned back and, as I strolled down the hill, I saw two men talking with Nick; my first thought was “bailiffs” but, deciding that they were more likely to be buddhas, I carried on down the hill and joined them. It turned out that they were both local people, metalworkers from around Barrow and Ulverston; good, straight-hearted men. They chatted about life in the area and asked us about our walk and the Buddhist religion. It is quite extraordinary the number of people we meet who say they have no particular faith, but follow the code of not doing to anyone anything they would not like to have done to themselves. A simple rule and, coming from the heart, easily enough to free us. It was dusk when our talk ended and, as they turned to leave, one of them stopped, reached into his shirt pocket and thrust a five pound note into my hand.

“Something to help you along with your journey.”

Turning again, they waved and walked off over the pass. I looked down at the piece of paper in my hand and then over to Nick.

“Amazing.”

As the evening closed in small drifts of mist skidded over the surface of the tarn, seemingly exhaled by the banks; silence fell and we left the night to the moon and the glistening stars.

I was still very tired from all the activity of the last few days and slept late; I was woken at last by the heat of the sun as it rose above the eastern ridge of the tarn. I poked my head out of the tent and saw that the air was clear and the sky empty. I emerged, and, walking around in the pure morning and all the happiness of the previous days, I smiled over to Nick.

“What a place – amazing, perfect!”

“Not quite so amazing, bhante, I’ve cut my foot.”

He had winged himself on a protruding tent peg early that morning and had lifted a flap of skin on the sole of his right foot. It did not seem too bad, so we decided to carry on as planned and slow up if it became too painful. By the time we had come down from the tarn to the edge of Coniston Water it was pretty sore, but rocky descents being the worst terrain for such wounds, he found it was not too painful on the level. We took the footpath along the lakeside through a couple of miles of woodland. Eventually we reached a string of campsites where we took a track up the steep slope into Bowmanstead village. Having misjudged our distances somewhat, we were a little late, but, as we walked up to our rendezvous spot at the church, there was Lydia coming down the road towards us. Noy appeared in the car a few minutes later so, the party complete, we took them to the edge of a small wood we had found and arranged all the things for the dāna. The day was hot; we sat at the edge of the shade amongst the few chickens that roamed in the wood and beside a large bank of crimson rose-bay willow-herb. In front of us a steady stream of summer-clad campers and day-trippers flowed in both directions along the broad track which ran down to the lake. After we had eaten we sat and talked long hours: Lydia had many questions. It was good to explain things to someone who had very little acquaintance with Buddhist terminology and teaching. Being Jewish she also told us many facts about Judaism which were helpful and interesting to hear.

As they had shopping to do that afternoon we parted company and Nick and I set off together up The Old Man of Coniston: a tall, stately peak which happened to lie on the route to our next rendezvous. The path was steep, broad and very stony. Nick found it a bit punishing for his foot but, as there was no alternative, we carried on the slow sweaty climb until we reached the top – breathing hard and drying off swiftly in the wind. Down below lay Morecambe Bay and, spread out all around, ragged peaks ranged off into the haze. The land to the east was covered with a charcoal mass and it seemed to be raining heavily there. As the wind was coming from the south, however, it passed us by and we stayed in the clear. It was quite late by this time and only two others came to the top while we were there. They had been climbing on the crags to our west and were taking a stroll before their descent to the town. We chatted for a little while but it was not long before we set off in our opposite directions – Nick and I following the ridge from the Old Man northwards. As we walked, the air to the west cleared, so we stopped at the cairn on the last peak before we would drop down, sat and had a good look. The shadowy figure of the Isle of Man, which we had speculated on before, was now quite clear; we could see the south-westernmost tip of Scotland as it jutted out into the sea, and, in between the two, the distant shape of the hills of Northern Ireland. We sat a long time taking it all in – the vastness of the scene and the fathomless age of these rough old mountains. Millions upon millions of years, rain and snow, sun and wind, have beaten them into a huge and awesome mass. Steep valleys and rocky peaks; long ridges where, until the sheep and the climbers came, only the swifts and ravens were to be found – swooping in fearless parabolae, gathering their evening feed, or floating on black wings amongst the crags.

It was a steep descent, treading from rock to rock, into the valley where we planned to stay the night. Nick’s foot was very bad and he had to stop and rest it part of the way down. It was soft and mossy in the valley bottom and soggy everywhere. We found a flat spot to pitch the tent and, after a long breather, it was up. The midges were bad but we have learned their ways well: they only rise up if you disturb the ground or trees which they are on. If you tread gently or sit upon a rock you can remain unknown to them. The sky had cleared by late evening but the night was not too cold; clouds came over and in the morning there was only a little dew. After a night’s rest Nick’s foot felt much better and the descent through the hills to our meeting place was quite pleasant. Even though we were going downhill it was a hot and sweaty morning, once again the air was thick and close. We were early for Noy and Lydia so we went around the tarn to a small promontory where we sat and awaited their arrival.

The pattern of the previous days repeated itself; they arrived safe and sound and we spent the meal happily in the shade of an old pine, down at the water’s edge. Conversation rolled along for a while, but, as the ladies were to walk with us that day, in mid-afternoon we set off – aiming to climb up Stickle Ghyll, a nearby stream which ran from Stickle Tarn, high in the hills above. I do not think that Lydia had ever had such an active holiday as this, and she certainly had had little experience of walking in this type of country. She was determined not to be a ‘weed’ though, and, even when she twisted her ankle and was quite uncomfortable, she was insistent that she carry on and stay with us. Like young Kristian on our walk into Doncaster, it was very good to see how being with a bhikkhu could help somebody in this way. To do that which they could not do, not to prove anything but simply out of resolution not to submit to habit. She and Noy came up the ghyll as far as they were able, having to return for dinner at their farmhouse hotel in Watermillock. I was very impressed as Lydia was also extremely afraid of heights. She was obviously making a grand effort that day but I half suspected that we would not see her on the morrow. We watched them go down until they were past the difficult stretch of steep rocks and were able to take the track down to the bottom.

It was still quite a climb up to the tarn where we had intended to take them, so it was fortunate that they had turned back when they did. We found out later that Lydia had had severe pains in her injured leg and had waited at the hotel at the base of the track while Noy went back for the car. It would have been a long walk for her but fortunately she was given a lift to where it was parked and so was able to be back with Lydia quite soon. Things continued to go well for them – they arrived back at their farmhouse just in time for supper and, when Lydia rang her husband (an orthopaedic surgeon) for advice about her ankle she was assured that nothing serious was wrong.

Nick and I sat up by Stickle Tarn watching the rock climbers on the dark grey faces hanging over the water. There were some tents around and it seemed as though people would come up and camp there, to stay and have a few days climbing. We puffed our way to the top of the ridge, high above Stickle, and clambered up a rocky outcrop. We could see the next little tarn, which was our destination, far away below us. We decided to sit up on the heights for a while; the evening was clear and there before us lay peak after peak, disappearing into the east. Sitting on a rock in the evening wind – there is something so good about mountains: you are so alone, so far away. “Ten thousand feet above the gnashing of the world.”

Down below us we could see a small pup-tent beside the water; after we went down and said hello we found out that it was a man from Newcastle.

He asked us where we were going.

“We’re on our way to Northumberland.”

“On foot? That’s a fair stretch.”

“A fair stretch! We’re nearly there! We started in Sussex.”

He was quite speechless for a moment but soon began to ask more about us; we told him of the journey so far, how we live on alms, invitations, and the mendicant spirit of the Sangha. He was up for a night to test his new tent and had been spending a few days in the area, before he went back to his home in Kent. We saw him again in the morning and shared some chocolate together: he wished us well for the journey before we said goodbye. At times there had been an awed look on his face, as though he was deeply struck by something and felt very lucky to have met us.

It had been a fine night and calm, so I slept out to keep the three night rule. I woke early, the air was clear and way below us a thin skim of mist was just visible, hanging over Coniston Water. It looked the perfect day for walking but, as we climbed around the ridge to meet our path, we saw the clouds rapidly appearing; swelling up from below us in the valleys. Soon only the mountain tops were visible; with all the lowland completely obscured it was just like the view from an aeroplane – there we were high in the sun with a solid bank of opal white beneath us. It was not long before it was all around us though, and for a short time we were very lost. Off the path and with poor visibility, Nick was finding the task of map-reading more and more difficult. We kept climbing to try and keep the view and to our great good fortune found that the clouds only reached to the ridge top, dispersing along its line ahead of us. After a few false starts, and my confident declaration that such and such a path felt like the right one, we found that we had overshot our turning way back and, had we followed my nose, would have ended up miles from our destination. The sun was scattering the clouds quite rapidly now and it was not long before Nick had us pinpointed. We dropped down a steep stream bed into a long glacial valley and walked down to the road below.

The morning sunshine and the relief of certainty after having been lost were warming as we tromped along the path – great hummocks, swampy tarns and flickering silver streamlets appearing from the banks – the happiness of things turning out all right. We came up beside the main road and saw Noy standing on a stile, waving to us, silhouetted on the skyline. We decided to have our meal in the meadow beside the road; it was quite late by now, so, even though we seemed to be on a hikers’ crossroads and so near the traffic, for us it was the perfect place. Noy and Lydia’s new farmhouse was a great success, even better than that of Peter and Rita in Broughton-in-Furness and their hotel in Grasmere, they had had a splendid evening and were raring to go for our last walk together.

As we had been coming down Nick had been getting a bit depressed about his foot; it was very painful now, and, what with being late and getting lost, he had been ready to tell them we wanted to stop for the day. The waves of inspiration and enthusiasm from the ladies, however, were enough to change his mind and he dropped the idea without saying a word. I was very impressed.

The climb up the stream was neither as steep nor as precipitous as that up Stickle Ghyll and, with frequent pauses, we all made it quite happily to the top. It was a blisteringly hot day, no clouds at all, but with a cool and steady breeze. Completely happy, feeling blessed to have made it, the four of us arrived at the tarn. Filled with a warm peace as I sat there, I thought what a fine and strange crew we must seem:- two middle-aged ladies: one in white, perched neatly on a rock; the other, small and oriental, struck with the majesty of the great tarn, its glowing hills, the azure sky, slowly weaving through a T’ai Chi sequence, down at the edge of the water; a tall red-bearded man, stretched on the turf after a swim; and the orangey-brown pyramidal form of a Buddhist monk, contemplating the Wonderful.

After the ladies had left us I too went in for a swim; quite a few days had passed since my last wash and it felt good to be wet and refreshed again. After a nod to any aquatics who had been disturbed by our passing, I followed Nick up the hill to the Helvellyn ridge. It was quite late and no people were to be seen. On the climb to the top I felt like Christ on his way, carrying his cross up to Calvary – weight, heat and dust-dry stony path. Nick miraculously managed to collect water from a small springlet on the way up and, before too long, we were enjoying the broad run of the path which runs almost level to Helvellyn peak. It felt as if we walked in the sky, there were steep drops on either side and the path ran like a ribbon; hazy blue, heaving ranks of mountains lay spread out to our left and right.

As we climbed the last incline to the peak I thought, “There’s bound to be no-one on Scafell Pike at this time of the evening so we will be the highest people in England, wow!” As it turned out, even if it had been so, being the highest person in England was a short-lived and pretty mundane attainment. Within twenty minutes five other people had appeared and more were on their way. Oh well.

The haze of the day had settled just below us. All around the mountains were muffled in thick mauve with only the peak of Skiddaw poking out. The line seemed to solidify as we walked along, the darkness of the haze and the crimson and gold of the sunset drew together into a dense interface. From the hilltop above where we planned to stop we watched the descent of the sun – squashed oval and then drawn pearlike as it crossed the line, finally disappearing behind the coastline of Stranraer. The bands of colour remained unmoving – as the ends drew in, short flushes of violet and green appeared, rays launched from the departed sun like a great wheel pivoting beneath the horizon. All of this flickering in the silvery sshh-h-h h h of the mind, silent and unmoving. A wondrous sunset it was.

Because it was so calm and clear on top we kept the tent flaps open. Eventually Nick had to leave and sleep outside as he was so hot – not something you would have expected at two and a half thousand feet in England. The next day the weather was still good. The path for the run down to our final meeting with Noy and Lydia was straight and simple, over the last hummocks of the ridge and then down a long spur to meet the road at the bottom. Nick had chosen the spot well. Noy met us right on time and drove us down to Ullswater. The ladies had wanted to swim, as they had not yet had the chance, so the lakeside seemed the perfect place for our picnic. We found a good secluded corner in some shade and enjoyed a quiet meal together. They wanted to leave for Harnham quite early in the afternoon so, after their swim, we were soon packed up and ready to leave. Originally Noy was to take us back to where we were picked up; since then, however, she had contacted her son Koy (who was doing botanical field work near Penrith) and had arranged for us to visit him at his cottage. Our plans thus altered, we said our goodbyes to Lydia, and Noy drove us around to the bottom end of the lake. It was not a long walk to where we have now stopped – down among some silver birches and dry spongy moss, perched a few yards from the water.