We had about six miles to go that morning and although our route was straightforward and easy, I felt grumpy and unsettled. I realized that it was probably the result of being without sugar for a while. With no ‘allowables’ on us we were making the last part of the walk without that extra charge. Having seen the tetchiness which comes with sugar’s cold-turkey, I did my best not to act on any irritation I felt. Being with only one other of course Nick became the villain. “Hopeless, selfish, bum, bumbling – then he did this, then he did that”, a familiar tune – but it takes a lot of care not to become entangled in it. I had realized before that, as long as you fail to see people as perfect, they will irritate you; however, it takes a lot of careful footwork to remain free when such a mood comes to visit. As it was the road rolled away under our feet. I sat by St Aidan’s Church in Throckrington, griping at Nick, waiting for him to reappear after visiting the graveyard plants – “Come on Nick, this is RIDICULOUS” – a car came by, packed with five young men who looked as though they were on their way to shoot something. The driver hesitated as he saw me at the roadside: as they drove by I smiled weakly and was given a V-sign by the boy in the back seat nearest me. Right on cue, like a flag saying, “How ugly is aversion?” A mirror, and not a pretty sight. It did not take long for the negativity to evaporate after that.

Negativity and the situations you blame for your suffering always seem to find a way of dissolving if you are patient. The annoyance over the women supposed to be travelling with us had been a big one; that had finally resolved itself, not only by Virginia and Nancy coming just a short way with us, but also, as Nick’s friend Micheline had rung us at Throssel Hole Priory and said that she too could not make it. Her mother was not able to return to Ireland without her help and so she had had to go with her instead. Not only was the molehill not a mountain but it had not lasted long as a molehill either.

The two of us burned along a tiny lane, over the cattle-grids, and into the neat and pretty village of Kirkwhelpington. John Rowland and his wife Olwen were to be our last stop on the walk. Their house, named ‘Wit’s End’, was in the centre of the village; a long stone bungalow with, as in the other houses we have visited hereabouts, a large, light living room and an air of children and well-being. We were welcomed in and given tea, chatting with Ollie and her new baby Carrie while John got the meal going in the kitchen. Monastery regulars, they had had monks to visit several times in the past and, like Pete and Jenny, Richard and Rachel and Nick and Zoë, they were all old friends of Nick.

We ate indoors, the four of us, making for the garden in the afternoon as by then the sun was bright and cheering. We talked long about the walk and John and Ollie’s history: he, long and lean from California, and she a red-haired Geordie. We told them that they would have a prime position in history as the last house on the walk and should come up with some really profound statement I could quote them on. John hummed and hawed a minute or two. Eventually he plumped for: “How about some more tea before you go?”

Sitting in the sun, beside his patent shuggie-boat swing, watching the free-range guinea pigs pattering on the grass – sun, breeze, good people – one last cup of tea – “Happy trails” – and we were gone; out of the village, along the stream, through the woods and down to mix with the Sunday afternooners at Wallington Hall; across the fields (excusing ourselves to a large white bull, snoozing in the heat across our path), up the slope into Shaftoe Crags and, from the top, our first sight of Harnham; looking just the same as every other house around: out there, grey stone, green trees; all about the land lay spread – green fields, gold fields, distant chimneys, small clouds mixing with the smoke from burning stubble – but there it was, Harnham.

“Shall we?”

“Let’s.”

We took the path down the hill and detoured past an old cave, famed for having had Bonnie Prince Charlie spend the night in it during his flight from England. As we clambered over the rocks we saw a young woman seated in the cave mouth with a young man about to take her photograph. Nick said hello to them and we began to chat. We told them we were almost at the end of a long walk; they were interested in our tale and we talked for a while together. The young woman’s face had a slightly amazed look on it; she explained that five minutes before, she had, for no apparent reason, been thinking of a visit she once paid to Green Gulch Farm, a Zen Buddhist centre in America. Obviously struck deeply by this coincidence, they said they would like to visit the monastery some time.

“Always welcome”, we said, and, waving goodbye, set off on the very last leg.

Through bracken along the hillside, down the slope; one step at a time; up onto Farmer Wake’s land: image of arrival. Nick dropped behind as we topped the hill; down we go to the gate. Hook and chain – through the gate – onto the drive, here we are: arrival. Climbing up the final hill – David’s head above the grass, bobs up to our left; seeing us a moment later he leaps, hand-clapping around the corner. Our little crowd is there: Dave and Jenny from Doncaster, a crew from the retreat, Marianne and Kristian, Virginia, Nancy, Jeanne, the children; all the others across the grass; hooped garlands arch above us, petals strewn beneath our feet: arrival – image of arrival – arrival.

“Welcome, Venerable”, a glittering smile shining from Ajahn Ānando. Stoop – unbuckle my sandals – my pack is taken; into the shrine room – radiant, white – before the Buddha-rūpa. Bell-ringer, ringing done, Tan Thānavaro holds my māla beads; fix my robe; bow – the Buddha, bow – the bhikkhus; set the rosary round the shrine; smiling faces –

“We made it”

Evaṁ