We followed the white lane up into the hills which make the western bank of Wharfedale. The whole area seems to be made of limestone, long pale grey crags with boulders strewn through well-grazed fields. Once up in a high valley out of the day’s heat we sat for a long time listening to the plovers and the worried bleating of a lost lamb. When it finally found the answer it was waiting for it rushed across the pasture and lovingly latched on to mum; it is quite haunting how human their cry is, “ma, ma, maaa!” – aching for the security of mother.

Late in the evening, leaning on a rock, I heard the soft thunder of galloping feet coming from behind me. I opened my eyes and saw it was a fox, sauntering at speed across the field; only six feet from my shoulder. It glanced, as it went, from side to side but half-concerned; unaware of my presence there, thinking it was alone. A little while later I saw the local shepherd, rounding up the flock with his dog. Having been tending his sheep and checking over a sick cow, which was also in the field, his first question to me was, “Are you all right?” Barefooted and wrapped in a robe I suppose I looked a little invalided. We talked for a while and I assured him I was fine; he gladly gave us permission to camp in the field but had to get on and attend to his sheep again. It was late by now: Nick and I had watched the sun setting and we sat for a long time before sleep.

The next morning broke still, warm and misty, the sun rose a pale orange over the crags and we set out early to allow ourselves a good length of time to reach Arncliffe for supplies. The whole of these hillsides are covered with small wild flowers: thyme, flax and a multitude of others, the turf is thin and seems like a green sheet thrown over a heap of rocks. Rabbits bound out from unseen corners as we go by and there is a great feeling of lightness. Down in the valley bottom ash trees are scattered singly and in small groves; small plants poke out from the cracked rocks. We took the path through Kilnsey Crags down into Littondale and followed the small lane beside the river, it was Friday morning and the only traffic was an occasional car running down the parallel road on the other side of the valley. Along the lane there was a feeling of great freshness, peace and beauty; time seemed to evaporate and suddenly we were in Arncliffe. Nick bought the food for the day at the village shop and we posted some of our unwanted belongings on to Harnham: the last part of the diary, excess maps, socks, etc. Once we had finished our business in the village we set off up a well-used path through the dale. There were quite a few other walkers about and, to my surprise, as a young couple passed us by the woman saw me, bowed her head and made añjali. I said hello but we did not stop to converse. A few paces further on Nick caught up with me again.

“Did that woman just pay respects to you, bhante?”

“Yes she did.”

Both of us were slightly surprised – not what one would have expected in the wilds of Yorkshire. We clambered up the hill to avoid the curiosity of the local cows and eventually ate our meal in peace. After we had finished Nick went off to explore the local flora and found a lot of interesting things; these included the bird’s-eye primrose, a very rare plant, which he had not expected to find in these parts. The whole valley seems to be a botanical treasure-house and Nick has been enjoying it all enormously, it has been a long time since his flower books were last out and I think he appreciates the opportunity now to see so much.

The afternoon continued hot and humid; we sweated, clegg and fly-chased, through the valley. The river bottom was dry and the thought of the windy tops of Pen-y-ghent was very inviting. We stopped by Litton village, where the path up the valley-side began, and Nick went off to fill our water-bottles. I sat on my pack in a farm gateway and waited. Much time passed, he seemed to have been gone for an age and I assumed that he had got into conversation with the farmer in the nearby house. About twenty minutes later he rounded the corner and, looking up, I thought, “What, no water-bottles? No water-bottles, no pack??”

“We have been invited for tea, bhante,” he said, smiling a cheesy smile. Having gone in search of orange juice as well as water he had sought out the local post office. For once he was disinclined to get into a chat with anyone, hoping to get the stuff and get over Pen-y-ghent as soon as possible. Nature has a way of putting the brakes on for us whenever we get too caught up in the impetus of our plans: the postmistress was very interested in where Nick was going, what he was doing and soon they were deep in conversation. Once he had started to tell her about the walk she called her husband to come and meet him too. After enough time just talking about it all the husband suggested that Nick go and fetch me and we have some tea together. That seemed like a good idea so in a little while there we were in the garden of Litton Post Office, sipping tea, talking of monastic life and enjoying the summer afternoon. All three of them there, Janet, her husband Geoffrey and Gordon, a young guest of theirs, were all very interested in religion and, as it turned out, it was very fortunate that we had appeared when we did. Young Gordon, son of a high-powered journalist colleague of Geoffrey, had come up for a short break from London. He had been receiving help for the last year and had spent most of this time being looked after away from his family; only seventeen, he had recently reached a crisis point and had been having a lot of problems. He had many questions about Christianity and religious forms, God and the Holy Spirit; we talked with him and all of them for what seemed a long, long time. Hours disappeared; we carried on until it was late and our conversation drew to a final close. They invited us to stay the night and for a meal on the following day but, as we had already arranged to meet some people and needed to leave early in the morning, we had to turn the offer of the meal down. Janet and Geoffrey were quite inspired by the whole thing and it is likely that they will visit the monasteries before too long. I told them about other people we knew in a predicament like Gordon’s, they felt sure he would want to visit Chithurst soon and that just to go there now and then would do him a lot of good.

After they were all gone Nick and I sat in the dark of the living room, not sleepy – the air was still electric from the inspiration of our talk. Phrases and thoughts from our conversation flickered through, the night was quiet and eventually we found ourselves asleep. With the morning I awoke from a long and lovely dream about Ajahn Chah; he was laughing uproariously in the midst of frantic people, mussing Nick’s hair and talking kindly to us. As he now is in Thailand – his body paralysed, speechless, spoon-fed and chair-bound – just seeing his face, so loving and good, made a golden day’s beginning. Andrew, one of Janet’s sons, arose early and made some tea. Janet, although she had said she would not be getting up, talked with us a little and joined us for a cup before we left.

Andrew came with us as far as the path up to Pen-y-ghent and, being an agricultural botany student, had a great time with Nick, talking and being instructed about the local plants. In amongst the limestone pavements, on the borders of the lane, many rare and interesting things were growing. When we had been at the house, Geoffrey had shown us a book about this valley, written by a vicar of Litton in the last century. Amongst other things, in it was told the story of the lady’s slipper orchid: this delicate flower of rare beauty once graced the area in large numbers but, even by the time the old book was written, the poor thing had been collected almost to extinction. The villain of the piece, apparently, was the then professor of botany at Edinburgh University; he had offered “a guinea a root” to those who undertook to collect specimens for him. This was indeed a princely sum for those days and very hard for the locals to resist. This flower is now the rarest plant in Britain and the last remaining site where it grows in the wild is a secret known only to the few. Each year a dozen flowers arise from the fragile root-system and are fenced and guarded twenty-four hours a day. It is said, though, that a Litton farmer knows of another place where the orchid grows; tucked away in some nook of the dale, unbeknownst to the world.

Although in the mist of such a botanistic dream-land, Andrew was unfamiliar with much that was there – his college was in Wales and the land in those parts held a very different variety of plant; Nick thus took great delight and was in his element explaining about it all.

We crossed the southern spur of Pen-y-ghent and took the well-worn path down into Horton-in-Ribblesdale. That morning we were to meet Alan Tweedie and Sarah Brimelow, a young couple coming out from Leeds. We waited a long time at the churchyard but they did not show. At one point, when Nick was off doing some shopping, I heard a motorcycle pull up in front of me. Opening my eyes I saw a man removing his helmet and gloves, he looked over and smiled at me.

“Are you going far?”

“No, only Ingleborough today, but I am on my way to Northumberland.”

“Oh, I’ve been meaning to visit that place – whereabouts is the monastery?”

“Near Belsay, north of Newcastle.”

“Do you have to bring bed and bedding or can you just turn up?”

The conversation carried on in this vein for a while, it was obvious that he knew all about the Sangha and did not find it in the least bit strange to meet a bhikkhu in Horton. Eventually he popped into the churchyard to give a message to one of the men scything the grass, climbed onto his bike, wished me well for the day and rode off. What with this meeting, the lady in Arnciiffe and the ‘Great Happening at Litton Post Office’, it seems that this small patch of England has great affinities with the Dhammadhātu. Furthermore, the welcome we have received at South House Farm, where we are now camped, has too been remarkable: originally we planned to eat near here then climb straight over Ingleborough, but the lateness of Alan and Sarah’s arrival and the imminence of a thunderstorm brought us back. The farmer said we could eat where we liked, camp where we liked, leave the car overnight, and has been generally delighted to have us around.

Now, after such a gentle day, I am sitting by, a small fire. Pen-y-ghent is a dusty blue whale snoozing in the distance; the others are off walking somewhere on the farm. The air is still misty, there is a cool breeze and the midges are hovering just far enough away to keep me happy.

Evaṁ.