It is now the morning of the third day, Nick is trying to get a fire started, it rained heavily last night so the damp twigs are difficult to burn.

We are in a little wood south of Guildford, not far from where the A3 goes over the Hog’s Back. The road is a constant roar in the distance. These first few days have been truly beautiful: leaving Chithurst in the rain, it poured most of the day. The land we passed through was almost all woodland; oak and young beeches began to glow when finally the sun appeared. Nick gave me a fine waterproof before we left so I find walking in the rain as lovely as in the sun; just as having the refuge of Dhamma in the rain of conditions, great joy arises in the heart.

I try to use the Ajahn’s phrase, about no-one going anywhere, as a constant reflection.

Who is walking? Where is there to get to? Who does this walk belong to? Who does this mind belong to?

Talking yesterday with Sri about how to live with paradox. To be attached as a good mother to her child, to be detached as a good Buddhist. The appearance of a journey but going nowhere.

Noy Thomson gave us a fine welcome when we arrived at her house in Tilford; Tew Bunnag and his wife Fizz were there too. We talked about meeting each other later on: Tew in Wisbech, Noy in the Lake District. It is such a comforting reflection that we have. As long as you are going somewhere you are living in the desire to get there and the fear of not making it: you feel a twinge in your knee, your arm goes dead, your shoe begins to rub; EEEEEEEEEEK! goes the mind. Dying into every step, seeking no future, life is painless.

We camped our first night under a great beech in the Land of Nod. The young green of the new leaves quivered in an amazing flickering dance, the evening sun and spring wind, the earth and the old tree. It must seem funny to see, in the space of one night (which is just one exhalation to a tree), these little pink critters come bustling up, clump down against the trunk, leap up, run around, tent, fire, tea, sleep, up, fire, tea, tent down and zip off again, all in the time it takes for a breath to leave your lungs. A lady who dropped in at Noy’s house later on told us that the Land of Nod was a dangerous place; nasty people with sawn-off shotguns roaming in the woods. It felt like Tusita Heaven – or like, when I took my pack off, the bliss of release that the Buddha found when he put his burden down under the Bo tree.