This area was once a butterfly’s paradise, even the Swallowtail used to thrive here; its source of food, the fragile milk-parsley, has nearly died out though and now the species is extinct in Britain. The intrusion of the proliferating and profiteering mind can disturb nature’s balances so easily.

We packed up and left the swans and swifts of Wicken Fen at about three thirty in the afternoon. We realized as we were walking that, as Parkinson’s Law points out, even though we had the shortest distance yet to cover in a day, we were going to be late: number of excuses for delay expanding according to the time allotted to make the distance. We had arranged to rendezvous with Carole Winter, Jill Court and David Cowie in Fordham village, to spend Visākha night in a nearby wood. It is the tradition in some Buddhist countries (especially in the forest monasteries of North-East Thailand), to celebrate observance days and the major festivals by sitting up all night in the monastery, listening to Dhamma talks and meditating. The big festivals generally fall on full-moon days and mark significant events of the Buddha’s life. Sitting up all night is a practice that is used to strengthen one’s resolve, to train one to arouse energy and to allow a long close look at the changing and fluid nature of the mind.

That day, unfortunately, only Carole was able to make it and we found her waiting patiently in her car at the edge of the village. We went into the wood and Nick sought out a good spot for us to spend the night. As we sat down and arranged our things the skies began to clear; soon the heavy grey cloud, which had been with us all day, was gone and blue sky filled in between the tree-tops. Nick started a fire to keep the midges at bay and soon we were happily sitting, listening to the bell-ringers practising in the local church. We were on a small path beside a brook surrounded by ash and willow trees; our floor was soft grass and little purple spear-like plants called bugles.

After we made some tea we sat until midnight when I did a little chanting; I forgot the words of the Karanīya-Mettā Sutta about half of the way through but broke off and completed the pūjā with a couple of other chants. We sat and talked some more, Carole leaving at about two o’clock as she had to be nursing the next day. Nick escorted her back to the car, leaving me alone in the wood.

“Don’t let the bogey-men get you, bhante”, she said as she departed. A wave or two of apprehension passed through in their absence but I found a smile coming to my face as I imagined a cold, heavy hand gripping my shoulder or a beast rising from the mire. A warm feeling of sleepy peace came over me instead and after a while Nick returned and we sat. A little later we had another drink, watching the sky begin to lighten; time passed and the next thing we knew it was four o’clock and broad daylight. Nick left me to tend the fire and went for a walk round the woods. As I moved the logs about, prodding in the embers, I contemplated the night – it had been nothing very much at all. We had been there, time had gone by, but nothing really seemed to happen. I wondered if it had been the same for the Buddha on that Visākha night of his enlightenment: he arrived at the place, sat down beneath the tree and before long the night had passed away – it was dawn and he was enlightened, awakened. He realized that he was indeed a Buddha.

“So this is all there is to it – things arise and pass away – really nothing very much at all.”

Carole had brought us the food for our meal when she came out to meet us so we decided to eat early, deeming it a simpler way of doing things. As he was putting the food together it struck Nick that there might not be enough, so he salvaged some leftovers from the previous day. After it was all prepared and in my bowl he unexpectedly found two large containers of rice and salad, so all of that went in too. Blinded once again by the old food demon, I ate it all (waste not, want not); the karmic result of this was terrible indigestion and a sleepiness which knocked me out until we arrived at Paul Hendrick’s house on the following day.

We had only six miles to go between Fordham Wood and Worlington so we walked slowly, with frequent long rests, and camped in a clearing about a mile short of the village. I slept from two p.m. until nine in the evening, Nick made a fire by which I sat for a couple of hours before turning in again. The next morning he got me up and we were on the road within half an hour, arriving at Paul’s quite early; he was very pleased to see us and we spent the morning talking and taking baths. The weather was rainy so we ate indoors, listening to the sound of the jets in the local air-show. Paul is such a light and happy man, so into Dhamma, that I felt my mood consciously elevate. As we left and he walked down the road with us I realized that I had fallen into something of a rut in recent days: getting caught up in places and schedules and worrying about the pain in my feet. As I began to put more effort into using the walk for awakening, turning to emptiness, I felt a smile appearing for the doubts and anxieties, feelings of inadequacy. Once a few miles of long straight lanes had passed beneath my feet the clouds had cleared. If you let your eyes close, drifting off the path is inevitable.

We have moved from the great flatness of the Fens into the country of the Brecklands; low undulating sandy heaths where Nick has been finding a mass of interesting plants. In the ancient past these parts were heavily wooded but early man’s excessive deforestation leached the soil. A few thousand years of these poor conditions now make it a unique environment and many rare species abide here. As Nick pointed out, however, it does not take long before even the Breckland is ordinary: like oxlips, tudong or anything else, the exciting becomes the mundane and only the unconditioned mind can recognise the perfect joy in that.

When we are walking through the country, all through England, if you turn your ear there always seems to be a lark singing nearby as endless and omnipresent as the shining of your true nature. Always it is there – listen – reminding you of the total joy and emptiness of it all. Even the death and sadness one sees: the squashed animals on the road; the spent beer cans and tubs of Colonel Sanders’; the frightened lady in Stoke D’Abernon and lonely old ‘Mum’ who asked, out of the blue –

“Do you know of the poem that goes: ‘She walked through the fields wearing her gloves,Fat white woman that nobody loves.’?”

– It almost made me cry, the beauty and sadness of it. How difficult our lives seem and how perfect, in true reality, we are.