That afternoon at Throssel Hole most of the Sangha came and had tea with us. Now seemingly used to each other’s presence and ways, our talk was fluid and we were all much more at ease. Then, and after the evening pūjā, we talked long and happily – pieces of monastic form, how we do this, how we do that, our histories and present state; assorted scraps from our memories. The feeling of warmth and brotherhood was clear and strong by the time the evening ended; we carried on long after ‘lights out’ in the zendo. Nick and I crept in after we had said goodnight to the others and it was not long before we were asleep.

After the six o’clock leap into action (you have fifteen minutes to get up, wash, go to the toilet1, get properly robed and be sitting on your mat before the Prior comes into the zendo), and the glorious inspiration of the morning pūjā, Nick and I packed our things and said our final goodbyes. Somewhere along the line I had mentioned that my umbrella had died the death and, when we were having this last tea, Master Daishin presented me with his old one. He explained that the point had been bent during a difference of opinion with an escalator in the days when he was a commuter in Tunbridge Wells. I was quite touched by this gesture and gratefully accepted it; unfortunately we did not have much time to spare, so we said a brief farewell and disappeared.

Being in quite a high valley it was not far from the monastery up the hill to the top of the fell. We followed the ridge to the south, bog-tromping and kicking through the heather until it was time to drop down into the East Allen valley, just opposite the village of Spartylea. We took the main road the last part of the way and arrived at Kailash Bawan right on time. This was a large old house which its owner, Ravinder Vij, lent out to various spiritual groups. At this time Ajahn Ānando was leading a ten-day retreat there and we had arrived on about the fourth day.

Pat Marshall and Simon Stillwell were working in the kitchen and greeted us at the door when we arrived; we sat quietly and rested over a cup of tea, waiting until the morning sitting was finished. As we were taking our packs upstairs we met Ajahn Ānando in the corridor, smiling joyously we said hello to each other. We went into his room and spent the next while exchanging news, telling tales of the walk and how things had been since we were last at Chithurst; also he passed on a bar of chocolate, a letter and some pens which Sister Nanda had left for me when she had visited Harnham with Ajahn Sumedho. After the meal things continued in much the same vein: Nick, myself, Ajahn Ānando and Anagarika Christopher carrying on happily together; the pleasure of life in being with the known and loved. We excused ourselves from the walking and sitting meditations in the early afternoon as we had things to sort out and repair. Once that was done though, we joined the others and sat from four until five. The retreat was now well under way and all the people seemed to be quite happy – it was good to sit with them and be in such a peaceful atmosphere. During the evening meeting Ajahn Ānando invited me to give a talk so I said a little bit, running into a dead end and resorting to the familiar Dhamma-talk bolt-hole of “any questions?” after about a quarter of an hour. As it was, it all went very well: Nick and I talked at length, until the questions ran out, right on cue, at half past nine. All the people seemed interested and happy to hear about our time on the road; it was a joy to be with them.

After a miso nightcap we were all up and about early the next day since, just as at Chithurst and Harnham, the morning chanting began at five o’clock. It was peculiar to be chanting with others again and, although the evening session had gone without a hitch, now my mind frequently went blank. We had to abandon the ‘Ratanattaya’, after a shaky beginning, and ended up going straight into ‘Iminā puñña kammena’ – oh well, no blame. The sitting was long and peaceful; Nick and I had to aim for an early start so we packed, drank some tea with Ajahn Ānando and Christopher, “See you on Sunday”, then left.

We had arranged to meet Nick’s parents that day. It was quite convenient for them since they were going to Hexham; it was a long drive from their house to where we were but, as Nick’s father played in a jazz band in those parts each week, it was an ideal time to meet up. As we had quite a distance to go over the next day or so we had arranged to meet them about eight miles down the river. The first part was a long stomp along the main road as far as Allendale town. We stopped for a break; and then, taking a footpath down to the riverbank, followed a winding woody course until we emerged on an old railway line which took us to our destination: the main road just above the beginning of the Allen Banks. It was not a long wait before they appeared – Bert and Dot – smiling broadly from a battered Ford; and it seemed a finger-snap between our hellos and our sitting down, mats and baskets, in a meadow below the road; organising the food and chatting excitedly together. It was very good that we had had the chance to meet up. They had only recently moved into the area, Nick having renovated and extended their cottage while living in it over the last few years. It is always good to help your parents and include yourselves in each other’s lives. To have them help and join in the walk with us was delightful for everyone; I think we all appreciated it.

The four of us followed the path through the dense and dark green woodland beside the river as far as Plankey Mill. Nick and his father took pictures of us as we walked over the small suspension bridge. There were dozens of other tourists about, many giving us that intrigued and startled look which has become so familiar to us. We sat on the far bank talking until it was time to part; “See you on Sunday”, we said and then goodbye.

Clear, warm and windy the afternoon, we carried on up the valley until we reached the South Tyne. By now the corn (rich, dark and green in Sussex) was a thick, dusty yellow and being harvested – almost three months it has been. The summer flowers are starting to tire and the afternoon heat has lost its sting, long gone the primroses and spring rain of our departure. Up from the valley bottom, up into the fells, ridge after ridge, we slowly climbed until topping the final slope we arrived at Hadrian’s Wall. Down to our south the Allen Valleys, Cross Fell and the farmlands of Northumbria spread out. A warm wind blasted from the west, carrying away the threat of rain. Now quite tired, we trudged along the wall, heading down to a distant hut we had spotted by a lough.

Skirt the water, peek through the window – great, a perfect spot. Good roof . . . dry floor . . . a disused fishing-club shed – a shelter from the wind and a lakeside vihāra for the night – sādhu. Quite exhausted, we shared a chocolate bar and sat until the nods overtook us.

The next day we rose to a clear and windy dawn. Out on the lake, the surface whipped into ripples, the geese and gulls, noble swans, bobbed, dipping, long-loose-necked, out for their morning feed.

Still with several miles to go before reaching Pete the Potter’s, we only had time for a short sitting before we were off again. It was a good tromp over rough farmland almost all the way. Down from the ridge of Hadrian’s Wall, across to Ravensheugh Crags and then the path, steeply sloped, down the valley from High to Low Moralee – the home of Pete and Jenny Hazell and their children: Seth, Kate, Jo and Luke. We arrived in good time and have spent a fine day together. Pete was the maker of the alms-bowl which I was given by Ajahn Sumedho just before the walk. When he glazed it he had intended it to come out an even matt black; something went wrong, however, and it emerged a beautiful mottled chestnut – probably one of those accidents the Japanese would take centuries to perfect. I was happy to be able to show it to him, unscathed after all this way; people are always extra-mindful when they wash it.

It has been a quiet day. We have had good talks; spending time together, visiting the kiln and sitting in the silence of the house.

1 Of which, in that era, there was only one; many more have been added now, in 2010.