Tudong is certainly a good teacher: as soon as you are drawn into the journey as a material thing you become struck with the pain of always having to get on to the next place, got to crack on, get up and go. The true journey, from distraction to awakening, steals all the tension and dukkha from whatever is happening in the senses. Being so much, so obviously, on a physical journey makes the distinction crystal clear: the urge to move, nowhere to go. Sunshine, the open road, going nowhere.

We walked from our lakeside camp feeling somewhat drained from all the bustle of London. We did not have far to go that morning, just to a rendezvous with Paul Dolby and Peter Da Costa in Shenley, a few miles down the road. We arrived, sat down in the porchway of the church and had a breather; Nick took his clock out – nine thirty exactly – we looked up and there was Paul, rounding the corner, his hand held up in greeting. Shortly afterwards Peter appeared and we all went off in Paul’s car to find a picnic spot.

It was overcast but quite bright as we organized the seating arrangements and the food. Paul, a chef in a St. Albans hotel, had prepared a great feast; napkins, table-cloths – avec du tous. In the monastic life, food – the one meal of the day – takes on a peculiar importance. It is the primary medium of support given by the laity to the Sangha: people like to make sure that the Sangha is well looked after and offering food is the most immediate means of ensuring this. Also, because we are celibate, penniless renunciates, the meal is generally the biggest thing which happens in the realm of the senses throughout the day. Whether one likes food, dislikes it or is indifferent, the meal-time always seems to be a major event.

As Paul began to offer the dishes it started to rain but, as can be the way with hungry people and food, we were not deterred. With no immediate shelter obvious and convincing ourselves it would soon pass over, we gave the blessing and began to eat. It poured. The heaviest rain we had seen so far sluiced down upon us, merciless. We sheltered beneath umbrellas and waterproofs, little puddles of rainwater formed in our bowls, in the food and in our gear. The single-minded interest in eating began to fade as we filled up and, about three-quarters of the way through the meal, Nick remembered a barn which we had passed on our way to the picnic spot. He began to look uneasy but said nothing. He had covered most of the gear but was soon up, exploring the possibilities of a dry place.

“So it’s raining”, I thought, “we’ll dry off sooner or later.” I carried on eating, determined not to be moved by the whole affair. The rain poured on, beating onto our brollies and pattering into our pasties. Eventually, gut satisfied, we found the rain fading out, we upped sticks and removed ourselves to the barn which Nick had found. Amazingly it was abandoned, with a good roof and a thick layer of dry hay on the floor; we laid out our wet things and made ourselves comfy. Safe in the dry Nick then finished his meal, dining on a large bowl of rice and vegetables which Peter had brought, made by some friends in Watford. We sat and watched the rain, which had gained strength again, drank coffee and talked.

All this rain is bringing us a mass of greenery, everywhere we go the country is thick, wet, lush and beautiful – tall banks of shining green and deep, deep mud. Peter joined us for the day’s walk and we set off towards Ayot St. Lawrence; the footpaths are so muddy I am finding it hard to keep up with Nick, sliding about in my sandals and scouting for the driest patches. It is easier once your feet are completely wet and muddy as you do not care so much, but until then there always seems to be a compulsion to find the driest way.

The rest of the day turned out quite sunny and, walking mostly on small roads, we set a brisk pace. As we passed some houses near St. Albans we were invited into the home of a lady called Josephine. She had spotted me walking down the street and had thought that I might be her long-lost cousin Jeffrey who is with the Hare Krishna movement. Although good-hearted she was very eccentric and I felt a bit wary and uneasy. My English reserve and fear of the unknown rose well to the fore; after a while of being there, however, the fear died and we had a lovely time. She offered us tea and we had a good talk, I did not say much, listening mostly to her and Nick. At one point she set about guessing our ages, looking at the wrinkles around our eyes. She got both Nick and Peter’s right to within a year or two and then came over and stood in front of me. Lowering her head to my level and staring into my face.

“Seventeen! But you can’t be – how old are you?”

“Twenty-six. I meditate a lot.” I replied a little nervously.

After tea we said goodbye and got back on the road again. It was a fine afternoon. We left Peter in Wheathampstead and camped for the night a mile or so south of Ayot St. Lawrence. Nick found a meadow surrounded by woods, a soft green square; in front of us a beautiful evening sky, sheltering nearly half a moon, sat shining over a wall of larches that linked arms at the field’s edge.

Happiness at the end of the day: Peter had helped to carry our packs, we had met the remarkable Josephine, picnicked in the rain and now we sat, caped against the midges, well-sheltered underneath the moon.

Evaṁ.

The next morning we set off early, needing to make more than ten miles before the meal-time. We had arranged to visit Phyllis Turner in Hitchin and again we walked along small roads to avoid the mud. We passed through Ayot and walked by the house where George Bernard Shaw spent his last years. Also the place where that sagacious Irishman fell out of his final tree.

Setting a good pace we bowled into town (going nowhere), crossing over the butt end of the Chilterns; gentle, rolling, woody hills, with prosperous farms of geese and goats, guinea-fowl and ducks. Apart from one shower the sun shone brightly; very happy, we found our way through the town and were met by Phyllis on the street. A neat, bright lady from a bygone age, she welcomed us into her home grandly. Nick had to let her know about the time factor1 and the size of our normal meals and she swiftly adapted. We ate at the table with her and her brother Norman, they did not seem to mind the mountain of bread and butter which Nick had prepared; quiet and peaceful we dined together happily.

We spent a long afternoon with them, chatting, looking at slides and having our picture taken in the garden; long talks of India and the East, Sikkim, the Karmapa and the Darjeeling Railway. We bathed and dried out our gear; Nick, to his great embarrassment, let my sandals get burned by the fire and strangely I found that I did not care at all. They are still usable; however, as Noy Thomson had given us some money for boots, we decided to buy some for me in Cambridge. When I was making the sandals I did my best to consider them as dead already and I seem to remember visualising their destruction several times.

Having two days to reach Bedford and the Jacksons we decided to head west into the hills again to spend the night. We climbed up onto Deacon Hill and spent a long time looking out over the countryside. Incredible the views, stretching into all directions: great yellow patches of oil-seed rape worked into the green on this little bloop of hills, dropping into the flat lands of the North – we can see for miles and miles. I keep remembering that the Sixth Patriarch, as he wandered in the mountains of China, would stop and gaze, linger when the views were such as this. We do not seem to be sitting much these days but still, constantly, I hear waves of the mind’s silence appearing from amidst the jungle of thoughts and images; it seems to be enough, in fact right now, how could it be otherwise?

We found a broad ledge up on the hillside, maybe some old earthwork, so we pitched our tent on it. Nick started a fire to keep the midges away and we sat together for a while, it is the half moon and we have seen our first oxlips. Sitting by the fire, a warm clear night; I had the thought, “This must be about as fine as human existence can get”. Great peace, we turned in late and had some tea this morning; as I have been writing Nick has been preparing the meal, at last both my hunger and the diary will be satisfied. Evaṁ.

1 Time factor – The bhikkhu-sangha follows the precept of not taking food after midday (this is regarded as being at twelve noon in the winter and at one p.m. when the clocks are changed to British Summer Time). This is a renunciate practice which is helpful in several ways: it conduces to a simplicity of life-style; food is taken at the beginning of the day, when it is most needed; it helps one to be easy to support; one’s head is clearer through the evening and the night; finally, one is hindered from taking refuge in food at will.