“My first ten-day meditation retreat was a very interesting experience, as only a few weeks prior to it, I had never even heard of Buddhism. I suppose I was expecting some kind of group holiday, with perhaps a bit of sitting practice now and then – I packed my sun-tan oil, my knitting, some books and thought what an ideal opportunity it would be to catch up on my letter writing.

I was in for a shock. The bell at 4:00 a. m. was the first of many. I took several days to adjust, but eventually, by about day five I began to experience some calm and inner peace; a glimpse of real tranquillity. I was just getting the hang of it, when Thursday arrived. That was the day the milkman came to collect his money and the telephone rang at the same time. This was the most my mind had dealt with in ages.

It was also the day that Tan Amaro and Nick Scott visited us.

In they bustled, full of energy and exciting news. Throughout the day there was much activity in Ajahn Ānando’s room, with tea and ‘allowables’. Hitherto-frowned-upon talking was going on, with frequent bursts of laughter . . . didn’t these people know there was a retreat going on out here?

I noticed this indignation arising in my mind and then the feeling of pride I attached to my own considerable efforts. I’d like to be able to say that I realised them for the impermanent conditions they undoubtedly were, but I was a being of very little wisdom then and at that stage in my practice I’m sure I probably identified with these conditions and claimed them as my own.

That evening the talk about their adventures provided more fuel for my busy mind and for days afterwards, in my formal meditation practice, my mind would take me out on the road with this extraordinary pair of men.

I survived the ten days and returned to Harnham just before Tan Amaro and Nick Scott. Their arrival was a special time for us all. An ending – of a journey through the country for them and a journey through my mind for me; and a beginning – of a new life at Harnham for Tan Amaro, and a new way of thinking for me.

Everything changes and everything stays the same.”

Katie