The last two days have been brilliantly hot and sunny. Nick and I are sheltering from the midday heat in the shade of a small thorn tree. In front of us the surface of a small reservoir is rippling in the threads of whatever thin breeze is stirring today. We are high in the Pennines of West Yorkshire, slowly drawing away from the industrial cities and old mill towns which are squeezed into these narrow valleys. The last week has been so filled with people and movement that it has been hard to keep the diary up to date. I would say, “Well, when we get to so-and-so’s there’s bound to be an hour or so before the meal, or at least after everyone has gone to bed.” But the time never seemed to appear. Always someone to talk to, somewhere to get to; by the time the days ended all that I could do would be to sit a while and empty out before sleepiness took over completely.

We reached Carol’s house in North Manchester in good time that evening, she welcomed us in and seemed to be much less worried about all the things that could go wrong than she had been when she invited us. Nick and I were tired but peaceful when we arrived and our evening followed suit. After tea and a clean-up the three of us sat together in the front room; I raised enough energy to mend more of the broken seams on my robe, Nick continued his eternal sock-darning and Carol, not wishing to be left out of the handicrafts, carried on with some macrame which she had begun earlier. Simple and quiet, a nothing-very-much evening we all needed. The following morning, well soothed after the rigours of central Manchester, we spent the time talking with Carol. Nigel West appeared at about ten with a contribution for the meal and more than a kilogram of Bournville chocolate to help us on our way. They only had a few small bars at the first shop, he explained, so he bought them all; he decided that this was not enough, so he found another place and got some more.

As we had a fair distance to go we set off early in the afternoon and headed almost due east to Greenfield, a small satellite town of Manchester on the edge of the Pennines. Our path took us through parks and streets, housing estates of fear-soaked boxes; over streams and meadows; down a canyon of wrecked cars, broken glass; through another kaleidoscope of calls and questions, giggles and amazed faces, to bring us to the edges of the city. After a long climb we sat our sweaty bodies down on top of Hartshead Pike; a white stone tower there looks out over the whole of Greater Manchester, spread in its long broad valley; but for the hills and the sky, man-made as far as the eye can see. How many people are born and die as the eye sweeps from one edge to the other?

We sat and gazed for a long while, cooling off in the wind and saying goodbye. Not far from Greenfield now, we crossed another ridge and were there, following a broad council-made track through the valley and up into the centre of the village. As we walked down the main street and neared our destination a stranger, coming towards us on the street, made añjali.

“I’m Dave, Jean Johnson’s husband. It’s the house where the white car is parked.”

Ushered in and made welcome in yet another home, Nick and I drank tea and talked with them well into the night; enjoying friendliness and the cool quietude after a long hot walk. It is wonderful how people continuously treat us so well and do everything just right for us. It seems so everywhere we go: somehow the right balance is found, each part of each day flowing effortlessly into the next. Nick and I shared the upper room of the house for our stay. I spent most of the following morning there, catching up on the diary and occasionally flicking my eyes over the bookshelves: ‘The Bell-Jar’; ‘The Waste-Land’; ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?’ Hmmm, strongly reminiscent of my university days; Dave and Jean were both at York and seemed to have arrived at interest in Dhamma practice via a route similar to my own.

Nick made most of our phone calls that morning: I talked with Nunie (Noy Thomson’s sister) and her husband Geoff who were on a short visit from Thailand. We had arranged to meet them on the walk but it turned out that they would not be able to make it. We chatted for a good while, as they would soon be going back to the East. A few minutes after my return to the attic, Nick came up again.

“Tan Sucitto would like to talk to you.”

We exchanged greetings and the news from our respective ends of the operation, after a while he said, “Would you like to talk to Tan Ajahn?” They, with Tan Tiradhammo, had been driven up to Harnham by Mudita and were spending a week there, the purpose of the trip being to consecrate the new shrine room and have a quiet celebration of American Independence Day. It was good to talk to the Ajahn, I told him how we were getting on and how the walk had been. He said that we had left a trail of inspired people behind us and that everyone was very happy about it all. Things were flourishing at Chithurst: three new nuns and four anagarikas would be taking ordination at the end of July and two weeks later four dasasīlamāta and three bhikku ordinations would take place. It seemed that a new monastery would have to be found to contain us all. Leaving me with the final exhortation to “walk on”, he said goodbye.

That day Jackie and her husband Les, also from the Samatha Centre, joined us for the meal and brought us food for the journey. Before, through and after the meal we all talked and there were many questions. I tried to express and explain the teaching thoroughly and it seemed, by the time we left, that all loose ends were tied. As we were about to go Dave asked if we would bless their Buddha-rūpas for them. This we agreed to, so Nick rounded up the requisite green sprig, bowl of water, candle and thread; all the necessary ingredients for the ceremony. It all went very well and for five boisterous children, the boys (Tom, Bobby, Joshie, Matthew and little Neil) were most restrained – sitting still and being quite obedient. I sprinkled the water all around and tied threads on everyone, including Nick.

Dave came with us part of the way when we left, guiding us up the river as far as Delph. He promised, as we parted, that they would visit us in Northumberland when they could. We headed further up into the hills and left behind the sunny Sunday afternoon crowds upon the river bank.

Exhausted again, we pitched our tent in the hills between two reservoirs and sat up top until the midges passed. We did not have far to go the next day for our meeting with Mudita.