Nick spent much of the evening embroiled in a game with the children, joining us when it was all over and it was time for them to go to bed. We talked together until late, explaining our way of life, the reasons for Dhamma-practice, and telling the story of the walk. Pete and Jenny are a fine couple and a good complement for each other: she a tall, elfin, quiet soul; he earthy, solidly rough-hewn, no-nonsense and powerful. We finally retired at midnight, I sat for a while before sleeping in their T.V. room which I had been given for the night; it was calm and clear and the shape of the Big Dipper could half be seen, framed in the window above my rūpa.

I woke early the next day and sat until I heard the sounds of the others filtering through the house. Pete and a couple of the children soon appeared; we talked over tea as the young ones ate their cereals, played ball and climbed all over their father. We were aiming to leave quite early as Nick wanted to help Rachel (at our next stop) to prepare the meal; it turned out though that it was past eight when our bags were packed and our boots were heading out the door. We did not have far to go that morning and, once we had gone down through the wood to the stream, our path was clear and level all the way. We followed the brook below Low Moralee eastwards until we met the North Tyne just south of Wark; a footpath took us up to the bridge where we crossed the river and sat down for a rest. We decided it would be a good time for Nick to do the last of our shopping, so he nipped back into the village and picked up some matches and some stamps. I had written the final postcard of the journey to my parents and was keen to send it that day. After he had returned and we were setting off, a car pulled up beside us on the lane; the man sitting behind the wheel made añjali and called out to us. It was George Brown, a friend of some of the Newcastle Group, on his way to Scotland on some wool business. A worker at the Tyneside Free Press, he was well known to many of the people we had recently met. He had heard from Ven. Sucitto that we were to be in the area and had had a dinner date with Pete and Jenny rearranged to allow them to have us for the day. It was nice to meet in such an unexpected way. He had to be getting on so we said goodbye, exchanging waves and smiles with his daughters through the back window as they drove away.

(We heard later through Nick and Zoë Owen that someone else passing over Wark bridge had recognized us. A young man called Guy had spotted us sitting there, and, his mentioning this to Zoë had helped her to guess that we were on our way. They had no telephone and the message from us, via the next-door neighbours, had been quite incomprehensible. When they talked with Guy however, they put two and two together and realized Nick and I would soon be with them.)

Bright sun with a cool breeze. We followed the lanes until we met an old railway line: now a track of grass and flowers; we tromped speedily along, rose-bay willow-herb, thistles, bell-flowers, and a thousand waist-high coloured heads, fences, stiles, steep banks, deep grass; feet flying through the dewy mass.

It hardly seemed a moment, since we joined the old track, before we were cutting off it, dropping down through a raspberry bush and onto Richard and Rachel’s back lawn. A disused schoolhouse which they moved into a year ago, much work is still to be done. The place is in need of a lot of renovation and, at the time we visited, there were several others there to help them with the work. We sat and talked as they all said hello:- Richard and Rachel; her twin Sarah and elder sister Kate, visiting for a month from America; Sarah’s boyfriend Christian; Kate’s daughter Vanessa; and finally Kate the Shepherdess. People arrived and departed, popping in and out, and slowly all the ice was broken; through the meal and the after-dinner chat, everything became relaxed and easy. We sat and talked a long while before moving into action on the worksite and clearing up in the living room. The afternoon passed swiftly and the three sisters went off to shop in Hexham, expecting to return by five. Nick and I decided to wait and say goodbye to them before we left, but by six o’clock they had not appeared so, “farewell”, and we were off again. It was only an hour’s walk to Nick and Zoë’s but we did not want to arrive too late as we were only due to drop in for a brief visit. We crossed the fields behind the quarry that sat beside the schoolhouse, crossing and climbing to the top – a spot called Gunnerton Nick. Sitting up there in the bright air of the afternoon we could see clearly all around: eyes following the Tyne Valley, patches of woodland, farms, houses and the small villages which lay within our vision. Although it looked quite densely populated, Nick pointed out that beyond the hills there was only moorland; empty of everything but heather, moss, cranberries and grouse. We pressed on across the fields and, after taking a path down through some woods, over a bridge and up along the other side, we found ourselves in a small cluster of estate workers’ cottages. We were now in the grounds of the abandoned stately home of Squire Riddle, known locally as ‘The Castle’.

Seeing smoke from the chimney and arriving to an open door we expected to find Nick and Zoë home: the fire was banked and the dogs were in, but the people were nowhere to be seen. We asked the neighbours and were told that they had taken off half an hour before, saying they were going to be out for the evening. We decided to wait until eight thirty in case they had only gone for a walk. We sat in the dining room. Time passed – but they did not appear. Having the next day free anyway, we reckoned that the best idea would be to camp nearby, just off the estate, and pop round in the morning. We figured that their children being away with Granny, they were out with friends for the evening. We back-tracked a short way after we left the cottage and followed the edge of the wood along the stream, until we reached a bridge lower down. We crossed over and found a flat patch beside the water, screened from the upper part of the field by a small hillock. In front of us lay a last filament of the wood and up above, a dark blue August sky. It was a quiet spot to mark the ending of the day; we sat until twilight, free from midges in cool air, even so close to water.

Erecting the tent in the dimness – barefoot between the thistles – me clambering into my bag, protected from the night; soon peacefully asleep, yet waking moments later to my alarm and a sliver of moon in the early morning sky. Nick did not stir as I bustled out from the tent, and there was no sound from him as I sat nearby, listening in turn to the sound of the stream, flurries of thought and the quicksilver hush of the mind.

Looking groggy he emerged an hour or two later, he had had a bad night and had only fallen asleep at two a.m., he had not heard me get up at all and was feeling not too good. We decided to wait a while before we left the stream; after sitting for a time he felt much better so we upped sticks, said goodbye and returned to Nick and Zoë’s. We met Nick Owen and the two dogs, Macnoe and Bumper, as we came up the lane to the cottage. Welcomed in and sat down over tea in the dining room, we were introduced and began to unravel the crossed wires of the previous day.

They had received a garbled message from the next-door neighbours whom Nick had rung a little while before. That, combined with their friend Guy spotting us on Wark Bridge, led them to suspect we were on our way. Zoë had even cooked a pan of rice for us which was still on the stove. They had never met a monk before and I was quite impressed by how at ease and unphased they were; the atmosphere was good and we seemed to fit in without the slightest trouble. The following day, Nick Owen’s mother was due to bring the children back from Wales, so it seemed a good idea that we stay and help to tidy up the house – Zoë on hoovering, the two Nicks on cleaning, varnishing doors etc., and myself polishing the silver and the brass. Halfway through the morning Nick (my companion) started putting the meal together and before too long the four of us were out in the garden, enjoying a picnic in the sun. After we had eaten and cleared up, we moved to the shady patches on the north side of the house. The sun by now was roasting hot and the dogs lay panting, collapsed beside us beneath the trees.

Peppermint tea and long, after-dinner talk carried on as we shifted to keep in the cool. After a while we returned indoors for another burst of housework but our enthusiasm waned after an hour or two. We returned to the garden and sat down beside the fishpond. This Nick had stocked from a nearby burn and was full of minnows, pond-skaters, water-boatmen, water-weed, yellow flag and especially starred two goldfish: Carrots and Normous (who was). Once tea was over, the four of us, with Macnoe, Bumper and a neighbour’s dog Lady, set off up the lane for Colt Crag Reservoir; Nick and I left the others behind just before the A68. There was not far to go to our resting place for the night.

Half a mile from the road on the southern shore, we found a good flat space and an abandoned house beside the path. We downed our packs and sat on top of the small cliffs. We looked out over the water: waves driven in the evening wind, sitting under the pines, watching the sporadic splashing of those annoying fishes who have always vanished by the time you look for them. I closed my eyes and, after a while, a huge splash was heard; Nick hit the water, down beneath the cliffs – kerrspish-pash-sshwoosh. He came up bristling and refreshed. A fisherman rowed across from the other shore and the evening sun settled over the lake, it disappeared behind a cloudbank just above a spinney in the north-west. After a sitting and a sleep I awoke to see the sun rising; a furnace into scarlet gold, barely watchable, spraying colour across the water: fat patches of shimmering pink, outrageous orange and crimson burning clouds – dawn of the last day. I half-expected a heavenly choir to start up and complete the scene; but for the wind, though, there was only silence. Anyway the sky, its dramatic flurry over, soon calmed to a sedate yellow-grey and became cloud-filled and simple once again.