We carried on down the valley where we had met the farmer, following the Viking Way into a little Roman town called Caistor. Nick bought the food for the next couple of days while I waited at the church; I could hear the sounds of the local schoolchildren coming out for their morning break, the calls and squeaks of teenage years running on for a while until the time was over. When Nick reappeared we left the town behind and ate our meal on a nearby hilltop, we sat looking out over the beginnings of the industrial belt emerging to our north and west. We spent the day following the western edge of the Wolds almost until they petered out completely; still walking through rich farmland we continued to see old places left to crumble here and there, often nearby there would be a sparkling new dream-home. It seems that these farmers are very rich and with great political power; they can build, pull down, and control the land with little restriction in these parts. One time Nick stopped for water at a small bungalow, the old man there said the owner of the estate had a hundred thousand acres: six farms in Lincolnshire and a sugar plantation in Barbados. Another day, as we walked beside a huge field of young cabbages, we saw a few men hoeing carefully between the plants. We stopped by the first man, leathery and weathered, and Nick opened up the conversation:

“Nice to see people still doing things by hand.”

“It’s the way y got ta do it if y want good cabbages”, he replied a little startled by our presence.

“Did you each come on your own tractor?” asked Nick, indicating the five large and very spiffy new machines (most with some expensive-looking piece of equipment attached), parked on the track beside the field.

“Aye – we all live on different parts of the estate. We’re on piece-work for this job.”

Maybe £100,000 worth of vehicles to bring five men to hoe some cabbages – these farms are very prosperous. Nick gave the ‘Ultimate Ponderosa Award’ to a new bungalow we passed that afternoon: it had huge picture windows, a landscaped garden and an old decorated street lamp standing on an island in the fish-pond.

Our path took us through a long thin wood at the end of the day and finally brought us to a perfect campsite. After the fracas of that morning I was very wary of camping intrusively, but the place we found was at the edge of the wood, beside a broad public track and with several fireplaces from the burnt off-cuts of the local woodsmen. It made me feel very happy, a perfect place, as though it had been put there especially for us; we spent a long night and morning there, finally packing up to leave about midday. We kept to small roads and tracks most of the way into Brigg, arriving at Daniel Mariau’s house after only three hours of walking. The feeling of the land has changed now; the pastures of the South with their chirruping woods are well behind us and the presence of the industry of the North is all around, the voices and faces of the people are quite different and there is a sense of strength and harshness.

Daniel and Vivienne welcomed us warmly into their home, a large house on a main street of the village, used until recently by the ‘Poor Clares’. We spent the afternoon, evening and sat late into the night talking and taking phone calls. Nick and I disappeared in turns for a long overdue and welcome bath (the last one I had was in Wisbech). It seemed as though a flood of arrangements and plans had been forming around us as we wandered up from Norfolk, our arrival in Brigg had opened the gates and to our surprise we found ourselves suddenly surrounded by water. By the next morning, however, we had things well sorted out – what we needed to do in Doncaster, our route there and the route to Manchester. The Doncaster group had been very efficient and it seemed that everything was well arranged for us.

Vivienne had to go to work quite early but Daniel was free to stay, we talked on for much of the morning; he is a lecturer in Indian Philosophy at Hull University so I found myself asking many questions about religious academia, Buddhist history and a host of other subjects. One does not often meet scholars with such a knowledge so, delighted, our conversations rambled everywhichway: talking of the walk, our lives, the evolution of the Sangha, the state of the nation and the rise of the computer age. I suspect that we could have gone on for days but it was soon time to leave; after the meal, which was beautifully offered, we gathered our belongings and departed. It was mid-afternoon and we had a long way to go. Just before we left Daniel asked if there was anything we needed for the road; Nick suggested that we could do with a bar of Bournville chocolate or some Kendal Mint Cake, as we had a long walk ahead, and maybe some cocoa for the evenings. When he returned from the shops Daniel presented us with a kilogram of chocolate bars and four large tins of cocoa; slightly stunned but very impressed by this gesture of generosity, we accepted only two of the tins (there’s renunciation for you) and packed the rest away.

From Brigg there were only two bridges over the River Trent within twenty miles of us and the closer of them was a motorway. Nick felt inclined to take this but, since a motorway is illegal for pedestrians, eventually I decided it would be wrong. This meant we had to walk a further four miles north and through the edges of Scunthorpe rather than through the open country. Nick bowed to this choice without a murmur and I was glad – the noble way may not always be the most direct but every step of it is in the peace of innocence.

It was not a pleasant feeling walking through the town – I kept remembering a book or a film I had seen somewhere called ‘Fear is a City’; there was fear and heaviness there, young hard-worn people and the air of factories. We crossed the river and walked southwards along the bank until little more than the half moon was lighting our way. Thoroughly but pleasantly exhausted we put down our packs, pitched our tent by the river and were soon stretched out peacefully asleep.