## Introduction

Tudong is a Thai derivative of the Pali word dhutanga translating literally as ‘means of shaking off’; it is used to refer to the austere or ascetic practices allowed by the Buddha for his disciples. These practices are thirteen in number and include, for example: eating only one meal a day, eating all your food together in your alms-bowl, never lying down, only wearing robes made from scraps of thrown-away cloth, taking the shade of a tree as your only shelter. These practices are seen as a ‘means of shaking off’ since austerity of lifestyle, when rightly applied, can be greatly conducive to the development of wisdom and insight – that is, the shaking off of one’s delusions.

The word tudong is also used to refer to those monks who adhere closely to the monastic discipline and whose practice of the Buddha’s teachings is based on meditation and the cultivation of these dhutangas. Both the monastic discipline and the additional constraints of the dhutanga practices are tools used to help contain the mind. This containment is achieved as they prevent or make clear the tendencies of the mind to ‘flow out’; that is, absorb into the likes and dislikes which accompany the sensory world. With the habitual attachment to all that is liked or disliked thus constrained, a harmonious, simple and joyous life led with full awareness is made possible. The monastic discipline, the vinaya, is intricate and extensive but, in essence, it offers precepts to control all possible avenues of ‘outflow’; in its details it is extremely wide ranging, however, the following principles provide a reasonable summary:

Complete harmlessness towards any living being – plant, animal or human.

Refraining from the use of any form of intoxicant.

Complete chastity – to refrain from all sexual activity and from any physical contact with members of the opposite sex.

Complete poverty – one may not possess, accept or handle money.

Mendicancy – one may not store or beg for food but must live on what is freely offered, into the hands or alms-bowl, between dawn and noon of that day. No food is eaten after noon.

One is prohibited from teaching others unless specifically requested to do so.

The final use of the word tudong is to describe the journeying undertaken for weeks, months or even years by such tudong monks. Usually dwelling in forests, caves or burning grounds (but always within reach of a village as an alms-resort), tudong monks use the hardships and quietude of a life in the wilds as tools for both deepening their understanding and to make the teachings available to the public at large. Most of the great meditation masters in Thailand spent many years on tudong, and the fruits which this life-style can bear are plain to see in the wisdom, compassion and power of their teaching.

The Ven. Ajahn Chah, shortly after his higher ordination, decided to take on the life of a tudong bhikkhu. For nearly twenty years he wandered through Thailand and Laos, visiting various teachers and practising on his own. Eventually he was invited to stay in a forest near the village of his birth and, over the years, the monastery of Wat Nong Pah Pong grew up around him. People would come both to ask for his advice about their problems, and to train under him as monks and nuns. In the mid-sixties Ven. Sumedho, then a newly-ordained bhikkhu, paid a visit to the Monastery; he was in search of a good teacher and proper training in the monastic discipline. He decided to stay and the following ten years were spent, living under Ajahn Chah’s guidance, at various forest monasteries in Thailand.

As time went by other westerners arrived and in 1975 a branch monastery for the western Sangha (called Wat Pah Nanachat), was set up with Ajahn Sumedho at its head. This was one among over forty monasteries under the direction of Ajahn Chah but was unique in Thailand in being populated almost entirely by foreigners. In 1977 Ven. Ajahn Chah and Ven. Ajahn Sumedho were invited to visit London by the English Sangha Trust: an organization set up some twenty years before to aid the establishment of a native Sangha in this country. The Trust was in possession of a small house in the north of London and, on his return to Thailand, Ven. Ajahn Chah invited Ven. Sumedho to remain there and make the Buddha’s teachings available to those who were interested. The flexibility of the tradition permitted the wearing of additional clothing in cold weather and adaptation of minor customs to a western environment; Ven. Sumedho, assisted by other monks who had come to join him, taught meditation every morning and evening. Retreats were also held at the Buddhist Centre at Oaken Holt, Oxford, and talks were given to groups throughout Britain.

It soon became apparent that a vihāra in central London was not suitable for training forest monks, and fortuitously, in the summer of 1978, a benefactor offered 108 acres of forest land, known as Hammer Wood, in a beautiful region of West Sussex. However, it was still necessary for the Trust to find a suitable residence for the Sangha, so that when Chithurst House, less than half a mile away from the forest, came up for sale in 1979, with its extensive outbuildings and 22 acres of land, the Trust sold the Hampstead Vihāra and purchased immediately. In this venture it was assisted by the Ārāma Fund, established in 1974 for this very type of purpose; another benefactor purchased a small cottage adjacent to Hammer Wood as a residence for nuns. In 1981 planning consent was given for the houses and forest to be used as a monastery, and an ordination precinct (sīma) was established. On the 21st of June 1981, the first branch monastery, the Harnham Vihāra, was opened in Northumberland; the Sangha residing there being supported by a group known as Magga Bhāvaka.

Life at these monasteries is similar to that at all the others under Ajahn Chah’s direction – promoting a simple way of living with a strong moral code of conduct in a natural setting. In this lifestyle the community abides contemplating body and mind, and developing inner harmony through mindfulness. So, the Sangha acts as a source of guidance and reflection for lay people by its living presence as well as by its verbal teachings.

It was in early 1978, whilst I was wandering in South-East Asia, that I stumbled upon Wat Pah Nanachat and it was this simplicity and purity of the bhikkhu’s life-style that struck me more than anything else. I had finished school and university and had no doubts about the limits of the intellect in encompassing and expressing the truths of our existence. Although it was not immediately apparent I was hungry for Truth and was also rapidly becoming weary of the intoxication which was required to blot out this hunger, even for a while. One paradisical beach after another (through Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand), served only to accentuate the inability of environment alone to liberate. The ripening of world-weariness and my arrival at the monastery seemed to synchronize perfectly and so, once there, I never left. The doors of deathlessness, of liberating wisdom, were open – there was no need to deliberate, so I walked in.

A few months after my ordination as a bhikkhu in 1979 my father suffered a severe heart-attack and consequently I returned to England. I stayed with my family for the first few weeks, until my father had recovered, and then went to join the community at Chithurst. The next few years, as a junior bhikkhu, found me mostly in the rôle of working on the house, which needed extensive repairs, and generally keeping in the background. A bhikkhu is not expected to teach or give guidance until he reaches ‘majority’, at the end of five years’ monastic training; even then the duties he is given are decided upon at the discretion of the abbot. Usually, after this period, giving public talks, leading retreats and increased responsibilities within the monastery accrue to one more and more.

During these early years at Chithurst there was much work to be done and not a lot of personal space: one was simply expected to surrender to the needs of the community and no thought could seriously be given to personal ventures. Talk of going on tudong in Thailand and the possibilities of it in England would occasionally crop up – at this time, however, all such suggestions and inclinations were given short shrift by the Ajahn. This was not the time for restless bhikkhus to wander off, fulfilling some personal ambition.

Things changed though and after the first few years, even the Ajahn would bring the subject up occasionally.

“It would be nice to go on tudong, wouldn’t it? You could probably walk all the way to Harnham – I’d like to myself, before this body gets too old.”

There were now more people, there was more time and the major work on the house had been completed. The idea of tudong in Britain was thus no longer just an overflow of fantasy and restlessness – it was now a genuine possibility, appropriate to both the Sangha and the Buddhist lay-community alike.

In the spring of 1982 we received a postcard from Ven. Viradhammo, then resident at Harnham Vihāra. It was posted from Lindisfarne, where he had arrived at the end of a brief tudong walk. Accompanied by a lay-supporter (Nick Scott), he had walked and climbed over fell and moor, sleeping in lambing sheds and receiving food in the homes of various of the layman’s friends en route. It was a small but significant beginning – you can keep warm enough, you can sleep rough, you can get fed. When Ajahn Sumedho subsequently invited Ven. Sucitto to spend the Vassa at Golden Square, near Honiton in Devon, he consented to his returning on foot to Chithurst in October. This he did, accompanied by one of the postulants (Tony Way), and arrived safe and sound after a walk of thirteen days.1

Tudong in Britain had begun.

The idea of requesting permission to walk to Harnham had arisen quite often in my mind. I was reaching the requisite monastic age of five years, I had been at Chithurst a long time and besides, I had been working really hard . . . I resisted the impetus to follow such thoughts when they first arose; however, the right moment for them eventually arrived: Ven. Viradhammo and Ven. Sucitto were both at Chithurst for the Kathina in 1982 and I found myself inquiring eagerly about their walks. Before I knew it the truth was out.

“Actually I, er, I was thinking of asking the Ajahn if I could walk to Harnham.” (Blush.)

“Sure – great idea. Why don’t you go ask him?”

Riding this wave of enthusiasm, at the first opportunity, I found my feet carrying me to the Ajahn’s room. After chatting for a while the conversation reached a pause . . .

“Do you think a walk from here to Harnham would be a good idea, Tan Ajahn?”

“Yes – that would be great. A very good thing.”

“Could I volunteer my services?”

He smiled a warm but non-committal smile, and there was silence.

After a while he spoke. “Yes, that would be very good.”

Still not quite sure if there was approval or if I had over-stepped the mark, I let things be. As it turned out, that moment was the last volitional act on my part needed for the walk to come about.

It was not long before word of the journey got around the monastery and soon Ven. Sucitto asked me for an outline of the route for the newsletter. I knew that there were a number of standing invitations from various groups around the country; I looked at the map and took a deep breath – it was certainly not the straightest line between Sussex and Northumberland. I looked at the map, the distribution of the towns and at first the thought came, “Well, I suppose I will just have to leave a few people out.” I looked at the map; looked around the room.

“Wait a minute – does one have to walk in a straight line? Why not include everyone . . . what else is there to do?”

This thought seemed to be of the grander heart, to resonate Brahmā Sahampati’s plea, and so I decided to follow it. I gave Ven. Sucitto my list: Chithurst; Farnham; London; St. Albans; Bedford; Swaffham; Doncaster; Manchester; Ulverston; Hexham; Harnham. This he included in the Chithurst newsletter, together with my name and the invitation to contact me should anyone be interested in helping on the way. The principle of dāna, of generosity, is the lifeblood of the Sangha – we cannot go where we are not invited and are totally dependent on alms for our support. Thus I knew that the walk could only happen if there were enough people in England willing to help and wishing to have the Sangha’s company. If there was not enough support the journey could not succeed; to undertake such a venture had to be an act of faith – I simply had to trust that the value of the Sangha to society would attract all that was needed to keep going.

Over the months, between November 1982 and when we set out the following May, a number of offers of assistance were made to me. Nick Scott, who had accompanied Ven. Viradhammo on his walk, wrote as soon as he heard the news – offering to come with me if it was convenient and appropriate. Invitations to stay for a night, have a meal, a cup of tea; Tilford, Hitchin, Wisbech, Yorkshire, Cumbria; the map began to fill up. At the time we came to leave there were about two dozen calls on our list; by the end, however, we had met up with, or visited, over fifty sets of people or Buddhist groups.

Following Ven. Viradhammo’s initial walk someone had donated a fine set of hiking equipment to Harnham. It was offered for my use but at first I was loath to accept it. My ascetic and traditionalist feelings were strong and I wanted to see if it could be done with the basic and conventional bhikkhu gear: alms-bowl; sandals; three robes, and an absolute minimum besides. Once again I decided to resist the impetus of all this; better, I reflected, to wait and see how things turned out. Nick came on a visit that winter, bringing all of the equipment with him. We discussed our plans and at first he thought that I was completely crazy.

“No boots, no sleeping-bag, no pack?!?”

He explained how essential all these were and was quite concerned about my views. The next day, however, as I was returning from my alms-round, I saw him digging in the garden.

“Nick.”

“Yes, bhante.”

“What we were talking about yesterday – I decided you were right.”

“That’s a coincidence, bhante – I just decided you were right!”

Eventually, having tested all the possibilities, we both left Chithurst carrying good ruck-sacks. We each had a foam mat, a sleeping bag, some warm clothing and a waterproof. A cheap but sturdy nylon tent had recently been donated to Chithurst and this was to be our shelter for much of the way. My original outer robe was big, woollen and very thick, so I requested a smaller, cotton one instead. On my feet were sandals which I had made with the guidance of Ven. Subbato (formerly a shoemaker by trade); Nick had proper walking-boots and some track-shoes for the roads. As a last-minute addition I took an umbrella, which turned out to be very useful. Nick took a billy-can for tea-brewing and a plastic tub for carrying food, which doubled as his alms-bowl. The bowl I carried was a clay one which had been made by Ven. Viradhammo and Pete Hazell, a potter near Harnham. It had been offered to Ajahn Sumedho and he had begun to make a cover for it. He realized, however, with all the travelling he did, that it would probably be too fragile to survive; consequently he was thinking of giving it away.

“Would you like this bowl?” he asked, knowing that I needed to change mine.

“Yes, Tan Ajahn”, I replied, somewhat surprised, “thank you – thank you very much.”

There was still a bit more work on the cover to be done so, for a while, he kept the bowl in his room. As it turned out, with the pressure of engagements at this time, his days were filled to the point where he had to get up at three a.m. one morning to complete it in time for me to take it on the walk. Eventually it was finished and given to me on the day that Nick and I departed. I almost felt as though I had been entrusted with the Holy Grail – could I carry it to the North without breaking it?

Often, before we left, the question of money would occur to me and I wondered about the best way to handle it. My yearnings were to set out penniless but, on reflection, it did not feel right to foist my ideals on Nick. “Just leave it up to him – there’s no harm in him bringing something if he wants to.” As it turned out, with the little cash he had and the last-minute donations from folk at Chithurst, he was carrying about seventeen pounds when we left. During the walk I left the finances completely up to him but he would always ask for approval before he bought something.

On the evening when the journey ended, after sorting out our things, Nick came up to me and smiled.

“Bhante.”

“Yes.”

“Including the price of the stamps we did not use, I have exactly seventeen pounds.”

In a strange way this seemed to sum the whole journey up. We had put forth the effort and completed the walk, yet on a material plane there was nothing that had been gained or lost; only our geographical position had changed a little. In the same way, on the inward journey, the change is simply one of position, of viewpoint, rather than accumulating, gaining or losing anything. The spiritual journey is, in essence, from distraction to awakening, and also from the personal to the universal. It is reflected in the emergence from the protection of a monastery, into a life of taking the monastery with you as you go; after the necessary years of shelter and nurturing, the time arrives to step out and test your wings. In this ‘going forth’ the heart opens and self-concern is realized as the shadow of concern for the welfare of all – “What can I gain from my practice, my efforts?” is replaced by, “What can I offer?”

A wise man once said that, in reality, nothing is ever lacking and nothing is in excess; when our actions are geared solely to awakening it is realized how exquisitely true this is. We get just what we need in life – no more, no less – and whatever we offer we will receive. This journey arose out of, and was sustained by, the good-heartedness of people; it was a gift and an offering, a flawless interchange of mutual support, with no remainder.

1 An account of this journey appears in ‘The Middle Way’, May ’83 – Vol. 58, No. 1, under the title of ‘Walking Dhutanga in Britain’.