“Only those who can see the invisible can do the impossible.”

We left Doncaster, heading south-west down the river, in the roasting heat of the first day of summer; the path took us by power-stations, coal-pits, metal towers and blackened chimneys looming in the hot skyline of the town. It was not long though before we were in countryside again and we stopped frequently to rest when we found a spot of shade in the woodland along the river. We took a railway bridge across the Don when we reached Conisbrough and climbed up through its streets to the castle which dominates the town. A refuge long past its best – Vernon told us it had been the inspiration for Sir Walter Scott, when he lived nearby, to write his famous novel Ivanhoe. A gleaming white citadel ringed around by the crumbled remains of an outer wall. We sat on the rim of the the old moat and rested for a while, enjoying ice-lollies and looking up at the great white edifice shining in the blue. We followed the winding streets and terraces out of the town and took a path southwards into farm-land. Nick spotted a scrubby patch good for a campsite near the M18 so we headed over there and downed our packs. It was airy and there were no midges so we did not bother with a fire. It was a fine evening, still very warm, and we could see clouds of pollen blowing off the fields across the way. I was very tired after our spell with all the good folk of Doncaster so I had an early night and woke the next day well rested.

We did not have far to go to reach Rotherham but we packed up and left early to give ourselves plenty of time. It was warm but overcast that morning and we had a pleasant walk; through lanes and footpaths, into suburbs, arriving at David and Chōco’s house at ten. Shortly after we sat down they presented us each with a wooden spoon which David himself had carved. He had had the idea after seeing us at the Oldfield’s and had spent the last few days working hard to make them, taking them to the factory where he worked to finish them during breaks in his job. On mine was carved a water-dragon and on Nick’s there was a tiger, to represent, respectively, the spiritual and the material. On the backs were our names with a footprint (mine the right, Nick’s the left) and ‘Chithurst – Harnham 1983’.

Some friends of David’s came in the morning and joined us for the day; we sat talking for most of the afternoon, soaking up their world and telling of the stories and the lessons learnt on our walk. Later in the day I had another repairing session on my sandals to bring them back to roadworthiness. They are still in good form, despite much patching and restitching, but I have to keep a close eye on them for wear and tear. They could easily give out if I did not bother to look after them – in this way they are a good example of a vehicle.

We met their son Lawrence briefly and spent the rest of our time talking of this and that, looking at David’s carvings and drinking cups of tea. We left at midday, after eating together, and set off down the River Rother towards Sheffield. We came into the outskirts through a blackened coal-cum-gasworks. Just like between Scylla and Charybdis, our path took us through the gap which divided the works from the wire-mesh wrapped around a rail-yard.

The appearance of the city itself came as a great surprise: as we came up from the railway, through the golf-park, over the hill, we saw a green mass of trees and tangled streets covering the steep and misty countryside. As we walked we found ourselves following a thin green line which took a curve through the south-east corner of the city. Along streams and over hills we came upon gorgeous views: rolling expanses of parkland, clusters of houses, tower-blocks, broad streets and terraces; all of these spread through the valleys and shaded in the haze of afternoon. We were amazed. In my mind Sheffield had been classed as an “odious black lump, somewhere up north” – and there we were, sitting in the mottled hills, delighting in the beauty of the view.

As we were making our way across one park a young fellow came up and asked if we were lost; he had spotted us from a passing bus, seen us going back on our tracks and wanted to help out if he could. He guided us through the town to our destination, asking us questions all the way; he was quite knowledgable and seemed to have read a lot about Buddha-Dhamma. We had a good talk and, when we arrived at Martin Killalla’s house, he joined us for a cup of tea. After a while he left and we spent a quiet evening talking with Martin and his wife Val. They were completely new to monastic form and also had many questions. When we had met Martin a few days before in the Oldfield’s garden it had been the first time that he had ever seen a bhikkhu, it was also his first contact with the Doncaster Buddhist Group. When he heard we would be walking near Sheffield his immediate response was to invite us to his home.

It is a good feeling to tell people about our life, the great joy in simply doing things the way we do them; they seemed to understand all we said very well and I was struck by how wonderful it is, that you can walk into the house of almost complete strangers and be so close and at peace together. I woke early the next day and listened in snatches to the dawn chorus, sat for a while and then took up my pen for the diary.