As we were stopped on the hillside overlooking Lothersdale the weather seemed to change on us, the wind picked up, clouds came over and there were a few light showers. It looked as though it was settling in and the two young farmers in the fields below were working hard to get their hay baled. It did not stay for long though. The air was still and humid by the time we set off again, remaining that way all the rest of the day; the walking in it hot and sticky.

After a while we dropped down off the hills and, passing through the richer lowland farms, walked along a disused railway line in the valley bottom, side-by-side with the river and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal. Down in the valley it was hot and there was not a breath of wind; we decided to camp high for the night and aimed for the distant point of Flasby Fell, looming hazy and dark to the north of us. “Maybe, with a bit of luck, there is an inch of air astir up there.” We crossed the canal, the knot of roads and railway, and began the long climb. Once again what we had estimated to be an easy day turned into one long and sweaty; our boots finally coming off at twilight. It felt very good to have endured through it though, carrying on until the very end was reached. As it turned out, even on such a high and open hill, there was only the slightest of breezes. These parts must be another story in winter but right now the air just seems to hover, still and heavy, too hot by far to move. Some rain came in the night but, by daybreak, what wind there had been had gone. The valley below us was filled with mist and only the tops of the far ridges were visible. I would have felt like the half-sketched figure of a Chinese landscape in such a scene, had the image not been marred by the fact that I was scurrying busily about, gathering all our bits to be on the move, hurrying away from the midges.

We crossed over the hilltop and decided to take a level-ish path to Winterburn Reservoir, where we planned to eat. Down along the valley edge the morning was cooler, the sun not having penetrated the mist, and we found it this way for most of the day. It was actually just a pleasantly warm July day but if you wanted to walk through it heavy-laden you were going to sweat. We stopped for the meal on the edge of the reservoir and laid our wet things out on an old stone wall. My robes were clammy from several days perspiration and our socks were soaked from the grass. A few hours in the sun and wind and things were much fresher. It was a lovely day; it kept reminding me that there is nothing inherently wrong with the world, it is just a matter of what you do in it: if you choose to walk you get hot, can you really blame the weather for your discomfort?

Later in the afternoon we followed the lane up from the reservoir to a local call-box beside the central farm of the valley. We needed to phone some people in Leeds who were coming to meet us, as well as the Manjushri Institute to arrange our stay. After the phone calls we saw an old farmer coming up the track towards us, hobbling along gently on two walking-sticks. Being English we soon got around to talking of the weather.

“A bit hot,” we said.

“Aye – expect it is, if y’ walkin’.”

So gentle and old, he could hardly hear or see; he had spent his life farming this valley and was obviously enjoying the slow fading of his years. We talked a long time together and, when he smiled, he reminded me of my old Jewish grandfather: so ancient, had worked so hard; when something tickled him you could see an impish spring-like grin run through him and you felt yourself melt away inside.