The morning that I wrote the last entry in the diary, Nick had been off to look around Lakenheath Air-base and meet up with Paul Hendrick, who had prepared our meal and was to bring it out to us. After finishing the writing I sat in the tent . . . and I sat in the tent . . . and I sat: eleven o’clock came around – no sign of anyone. Trying to avoid proliferating about what might be happening, I clipped my fingernails and mended some holes in my robe. Different possibilities would pop into my mind: Nick distracted by flowers; aiming to arrive late – very unlikely; gone shopping with Paul; Paul did not show up; Nick arrested for trespassing whilst in search of rare plants: the mind doing its best to fill up the unknown with the known, to no avail. At twelve I sat again but restless energy soon had me up and doing some walking meditation. After a while I began to suggest to myself the worst kind of uncertainties: maybe Nick would not return and I would be left alone, never knowing what had happened; looking at it that way made it seem inconsequential to be worried at all and things began to look quite pleasant. I simply did not know; struggling implied all sorts of horrors but really looking at the situation, what could possibly be wrong with it?

“Is Nick Scott your true nature?” I asked myself.

“Are you really incomplete if he is not about?”

Padding up and down laughing at myself, the sun came out and it all felt very good; even so my eyes still darted continually around the common, eager for a sight of anyone. Suddenly from amid the trees Nick appeared.

“It seems we are fasting today, bhante.”

Paul had not appeared at the meeting place and, after waiting until twelve thirty, Nick had decided to return to the campsite. With nothing else for it we packed our gear, which had dried out well in the sun, and set off across the Breckland towards Thetford Forest. Once again there was a mass of interesting plants around; Nick would often wander away into the heath or stay behind to investigate some small specimen – wild sedums, sorrel or sedge. Having dined modestly, on spirulina tablets and some honey which we had, we travelled at a gentle pace, aiming to conserve energy. We found that through the day we felt little different than had we had a normal-sized meal. The lanes were long and broad, through tall gentle pine-woods, and walking was a steady beat. I have begun to use the ‘Buddho’ mantra quite a lot and have found it a good reminder, with so much plain walking the mind remains very composed. The sun shone and overhead the old bombers of the local air-show gave us a frequent fly-past.

We camped that night near the Little Ouse in a hollow of alders couched amongst the pines; by this time I was quite weary and sat immobile as Nick gathered wood, lit the fire and put the tent up, he having found himself quite energetic. We sat by the fire until quite late, brewed some tea and watched the evening come over us, the mist rose from the river and the colour washed out of the day.

I woke the next morning to the sound of a deer barking fiercely at Nick, who was sat on the edge of the hollow, after a while it scooted away leaving the two of us to sit in the early quiet by a little anti-midge fire. We had arranged to meet Carole again that morning so we soon packed up and headed for the appointed spot. As we walked and were waiting we kept meeting up with people dressed in dull green, carrying telescopes, treading quietly and purposefully about the area. Nick assured me that they were what are known as ‘twitchers’ – people who have heard of the sighting of some rare bird and are keen to spot it for themselves. Like the other outdoor people we have met (horse-riders, canoeists, cyclists, runners and bikers), they are seekers of freedom like ourselves. It always feels a strange meeting though, like two galaxies passing through each other: there is our universe and yours and we pass by, sharing a nod or a smile but checking our values to see that they are still safely packed.

Carole arrived right on time and was relieved that she too had not missed us. She had been to Paul’s house and now had some notes from him and the remainder of the meal which he had made for us. He had sent us each a small Buddha-rūpa and a letter: he wrote that he had made a strange picture, zooming up and down the lane where he was trying to find us in his little car. Intermittently he would screech to a halt and leap out, running into the woods in his white shirt and trousers calling – “Bhante, Bhante; Nicki, Nicki.” Fear of arrest, the possibility of committal and the arrival of the clock at twelve thirty sent him home, where, following the only sensible course of action left, he dined on the meal himself.

He was very apologetic but he, as we, recognized that it had not really mattered very much. He knew that we would both be quite content; sometimes this is just the way things go.

Carole walked with us that day from Santon Downham up to Foulden; we took a winding route through the woods, the weather was warm and we had a lovely time. Nowadays, the rain having stopped and the sun come out, the place of mud in the hassle department has been taken over by bugs – Thetford Forest starring sheep ticks as its main feature. The continually changing object of annoyance, as it goes from mud to mind to midges, from him to me to it, is a fine reminder; things are never perfect but they are always good enough.

Carole’s parents came out to Foulden and picked her up at the end of the day. Nick and I pressed on for a mile or two, finding a good campsite on the common. To Nick’s delight it turned out to be yet another botanical paradise: milkworts, twayblades, adder’s-tongues and water-violets (to name a few), were all around us. After a little difficulty we got a fire going and sat until late. In the morning we had a straight run along the lanes into Swaffham. This area is spread with wide fields bordered by Scots pine, greens and greys undulating gently in the early mist. Joy in the space of walking, where arrival and destination? Good to be here on yet another country lane – somewhere in England on the way to see someone. Appearance of a journey, an image; sore feet tromping steadily along and now, here in Nanda’s flat, time and faces melting, merging happily.

Just before we reached Swaffham, Carole’s parents caught up with us in their car. They had been sent on a mission to warn us about the ticks; apparently sixteen of them had latched onto Carole during the walk and it was only afterwards that she had found them. She was very concerned that we be rid of any which might have attached themselves to us; thanking them kindly for the warning and quite touched by their concern, we determined to have a thorough search once we got to Nanda’s.

When we arrived and Nanda saw us, she flung her tiny arms aloft in greeting. She is the elfin archetype of a little old lady – soft-natured, white-haired and beaming. With more than eighty years behind her she had met the Sangha and been ordained by Ajahn Sumedho as an honorary nun. This day we shared a meal and a glorious time together: pottering through Swaffham’s gardens having long and interesting talks. Later on, once in the bath, I found a lone tick on my right leg. These little mites dig into your skin and then lock themselves in place. At first they are the size of a pin-head and you cannot feel them at all; after a few days of ingesting your blood, however, they have grown to be as big as a pea and their presence is extremely painful. It is hard to remove them without killing them so, after anaesthetizing it with witch-hazel, I carefully dug it out; plus its mandibles’ worth of flesh. I feared for a while that it had not survived the operation and was very happy when I saw it coming to; unfortunately, as I was showing it to Nick, it hopped down onto the carpet.

Somewhere, tucked alone under a good tuft, I suspect it is sleeping now, having slightly woozy sheep-tick dreams and gathering its strength for another day.