“When Noy first asked me to join her for a week in Cumbria to provide lunch each day for a monk and his student companion, I had agreed before she had finished phrasing the invitation. Enthusiasm turned to alarm when I understood that my friend proposed to strike out across country to meet the travellers, leaving me to bring the food and equipment by car.

Now, my little motor, admirable in every other respect, has no talent for orienteering. Turn its nose in the direction of home along familiar routes and it will make its way unerringly; set it adrift on the switchback roads of an alien terrain, and the odds on our meeting up with the rest of the party are long indeed.

Happily, the plan was scrapped before it and we could be put to the test; and by superior mapcraft on the part of Noy and Nick, we arrived each day at the agreed place and at the hour appointed. (On only one occasion did we have to wait for the gentlemen who, abandoning science for instinct, turned left instead of right and lost themselves for a time.)

My clearest memories are of the matchless beauty of the country that contained us, the kindness of its people, and the good humour and delicacy of my three companions. Early in our association, when it seemed that this superannuated female might not be up to the march, Tan Amaro, with exquisite tact, called a halt, on the grounds that he was too tired to carry on.

Northern hospitality can be daunting. At the farmhouse where we were to spend two nights, we were confronted by a dinner, monumental in kind, that made no concession to the hour (early) or the weather (blisteringly hot). With the best will in the world, we were unable to do justice to the four courses, and our hostess’s disappointment in us bordered on disgust.

The situation was retrieved when we had explained our purpose in coming to the Lakes. Such was the goodwill generated by the local Buddhist community that, not only were we forgiven our poor performance, but upon asking if we could take our breakfast for Venerable Amaro and Nick, the farmer insisted on giving us fresh eggs and bacon to be cooked at the picnic spot; he refused to allow the walkers to eat the cold eggs we were preparing to offer them.

Our days took on a satisfying rhythm. We learned to barricade the car against intrusion, not by brigands but by inquisitive hens, who enjoyed an occasional spin. We had to exercise ingenuity in warding off the helpful efforts of the scion of the household. He was as intrigued as the farmyard fowls, but less impressed with our cooking methods or the end products. “I doant like t’ look o’ that” was his frequent observation.

“Why doant y’eat me Mam’s luvly cooking?” We did. Poor Bhante and Nick had to make do with ours. Sheep and silence. Silence and sheep.

A strong contrast was provided by Grasmere, where Wordsworth would have opened his eyes a bit at what has become of his old stamping ground. But even the tourist traps cannot efface the beauty of the place. In the evening we paid a nostalgic visit to the hotel where Noy’s parents had stayed, years before. Had it changed? At least the wooden landing stage along which we walked down to the water was the same. Wasn’t it?

As the days passed we were aware of an increased feeling of well-being; of health and serenity. During the hours of conversation, sometimes profound, often amusing, usually interesting, we learned many things (such as what plants like having their feet wet, so that we could, if we chose, avoid doing likewise). Better than the talk were the silences, resonant and restorative.

At Ullswater we said goodbye to Bhante and Nick and made our way to the Northern fastness of Harnham, where we were made most welcome; but that is another story.

Our journey ended, as it had begun, in a monastery. For two middle-aged housewives the adventure was over.”

Lydia Lee