As a botanist, Nick has been having a great time with all of the different plants which we have been meeting on our travels. After we left our campsite on Deacon Hill he led us along the ridge; there was such a plenitude of different flowers there that he ended up losing the way, taking us south for a while. Once we had spotted our mistake we soon changed our course though, and righted ourselves again. Since the mud had been so bad we were keeping more to the minor roads but still using the occasional footpath. We were on a clay soil and the few stretches of mud that we went through made my sandals very hard to use; my feet slipped around inside them and could gain little traction on the path. I was also having some trouble with the backstrap on one of them, this I managed to fix up with some string but the need for some better footwear was obvious. I went barefoot for a while and the cracks in my heels were becoming very sore.

During that afternoon we found ourselves drawing closer and closer to a large round object in the country south-east of Bedford. Nick had chosen a route along local lanes and footpaths and, as we approached, it became increasingly clear that our intended path was going to take us right through the middle of this thing. It resembled a wedding-cake the size of a football stadium: round, silver and circled with spires. However, nothing to suggest the presence of such a thing was to be found on the map. As we approached, it loomed more and more ominously over us. We turned up a farm track, now realizing that it was indeed sitting right over our path and found (somewhat to our relief), the following notice:

“Ministry of Defence (Air) Restricted Area –Trespassers will be arrestedand may be prosecuted.”

We turned around and retraced our steps, taking an alternative route through Clophill village and up a track past a ruined church. A man whom we met there said that the great silver object was an American air-base called Chicksands Priory, a radio-telescope so powerful that it could pick up any signal broadcast in the world. We shuddered a little and agreed that we had made a good decision to turn back. To try and insist on one’s rights to a footpath through such a temple of fear would guarantee disaster. The man said the old church was often used for black magic rituals but it certainly felt more pleasant to be there than close to the secret air-base.

I am beginning to appreciate and enjoy the repetitious actions of this life: walking, stopping for a rest, a sip of water, little chats with Nick about nothing very much; arriving at houses, walking through towns, sitting in woods, pitching the tent, gathering our things and leaving a camp behind. Like the life in a monastery, once used to the changes in the backdrop, the scene becomes only a sign for awakening, a signal to free the mind. That day we pressed on towards Bedford and camped in a wood just to the north of a village called Haynes; it was dusk when we arrived and we sat for a long time.

It was a misty morning, we came down from the small ridge we had been on and followed the flat meandering road into town. Nick’s tendency is to always go for the pleasant paths whereas my conservative nature usually sounds a note of uneasiness when confronted with ‘Private Land’ or ‘No Right of Way’. Consequently we did not use the old railway line but kept to the road until we met the Great Ouse. This we followed, through the crowds of week-end river people, all the way into town; after a little direction-seeking we found the Jackson’s house.

The Jacksons being paragons of efficiency and good-heartedness, we had all our dirty washing done (delivered to us the next day in St. Neots), were supplied with everything we needed in the way of equipment and medicines and were finally driven into town – to a camping shop where we purchased some boots for my ailing feet. As the boots were the last in the shop of that make, the salesman very kindly offered them to us at a substantially reduced price, they fitted perfectly. Clean, dry, fed and re-equipped, we were dropped at the edge of town and so we set off down the river. We followed along the bank, tromping through lush vegetation and mud; my mind, still out of recent habit in my feet, kept being amazed at the warm sturdy sensation I was feeling and noticing how the mud was not so daunting anymore. We camped by the river half-way between Bedford and St. Neots; Nick and I leaned on the fence beside our tent and looked over at each other, a warm feeling of complete peace as the rain fell on us.

Nothing to do. Nowhere to go.“The old goat-footed balloon-man whistles far and weee.”

A morning’s walk along the river brought us into St. Neots, we found the house of Ven. Sucitto’s mother quite easily and she was very pleased to see us. Her life is a bit lonely these days so she enjoyed taking care of us very much. She gave us a grand meal and we spent the afternoon writing letters, poring over maps, talking at length about nothing very much and laughing a lot together. While at the Jackson’s they had passed on to me three large stamped envelopes, each of which contained three large blank sheets of paper – a gentle hint from Chithurst. I had been intending to write for a while and I found there was a lot to say – several hours went by as the mind shuttled between chatting with Win, sipping my tea and turning the journey into a letter.

With all our things dried out again we packed up and left quite late in the day. We headed south-east and camped for the night just beside Waresly Wood, a nature reserve that Nick knew of and was very keen to visit. There was a strange beauty to the place; it seemed to emanate a feeling of life buzzing in its fullness, a great rich happiness. That evening the moon was bright and we sat for a long time.

The walk into Cambridge was longer than we had expected. After picnicking in Hayley Wood (another nature reserve – described by Nick as, “a sea of mud with plants growing in it”), we walked clay-ball footed and sore-toed for about fifteen miles; coming off a ridge south of Haslingfield, walking up through Grantchester and along the meadow-paths into town. We arrived at about eight o’clock and were greeted at the door by Daniel Jones, our host. The ecclesiastical heritage of the city still lingers strongly in its streets: as we walked along, a tangible air of reverence came from the people whom we passed. Conversations halted and folk stood politely to one side; even as we crossed in front of the pavilion on Parker’s Piece, between a group of cricketers and their game, the air hushed and allowed a monk and his companion to pass in peace.

Later on an old friend of Nick’s came round to see us and I spent a quiet evening – my head and heart in conversation and my feet, at last relieved, deep in a mustard bath.