I talked with the people on the retreat for quite a time that morning, most of them knew little about monastic life so I was able to answer many questions. At eleven o’clock they all went off for a T’ai Chi session except for one old man who stayed behind to talk. A strangely bright person tangled in all kinds of doubt, I did my best to stay empty and be patient, it was plain that there was little I could say. Doubt is never truly resolved in words, so I just sat there, soaking up his world. The next day he thanked me for spending time with him, not for what was said but for listening, he looked several shades brighter and I told him it was good – listening to people is much harder than talking to them.

Tew and the others set to work in the garden in the afternoon; still hot and sunny, I sat on the garden seat and had a long talk with a man who had been at the Manjushri Institute and with a Rajneesh group. Later on the others came round and sat with us, asking more questions about practice and use of meditation. It was a good talk and we were there for a couple of hours, only the arrival of cold and rain eventually sending us indoors. Carole Winter came by for a visit and to bring us some waterproofer for the tent, she told us of the tangle with the ticks and we chatted together for a while. That evening Tew asked me to lead the meeting so I did a little chanting, unfortunately I forgot the words again but was able to break off and start anew without upsetting things too much.

Everyone on the retreat was preparing to leave the next day, Tew and his family went mid-morning as did most of the others; he was very appreciative of our visit and, although he has recently drifted away from Chapter House somewhat, he seemed keen to use it more and invite bhikkhus to lead retreats there. After he left I was thinking, and realized that I felt like some kind of wandering enzyme; everywhere we go people begin to talk of setting up retreats and monasteries and of visiting Chithurst and Harnham. I spent the afternoon mending my sandals and talking with Mike and Linda, the caretakers of the house. Nick passed his day digging in the garden and getting the last of his cards and letters written. Things were quiet again and we sat for a long time together in the evening. We ate early the next day and left around noon. With my sandals newly patched and waxed, it felt good to be clicking along the road again. It was a sunny day and people greeted us cheerfully as we passed by.

Even though we walked all day on country lanes and on a good straight path beside the River Nene, I was finding it very hard to concentrate. That familiar gnawing angst of ‘something’s wrong’ hung ever in the background and, on reflection, I put it down to be the karmic result of having had a long lie-in that morning. Despite the sun, the waving river-banks of soft grass, I felt persistently wretched; patience and a lot of sitting, I decided, would be the best cure. We reached the sea-wall at the mouth of the river that evening, sitting in the last of the day’s sun we sheltered from the wind; warm but blasting inland from the sea. It was after ten o’clock and still twilight when we turned in, the first stars had appeared and there were no clouds; I got up from my sitting mat, stuffed my hands into the pockets of my foam-filled waistcoat, stretched my back and looked around.

“Yup”, I thought, straightening my knees, blinking at the stars and evening sky, “despite a nameless discontent, blabbering aimless streams of thought, a clutch of painful gnawing doubts, everything is just as it should be.”

By the next dawn the wind had dropped so we sat on top of the sea-wall and watched the early sun; up on top a long time the sky was clear and soon the air felt quite warm again. I find it continually amazing now to realize that this world is just a shadow or a gesture of the Unborn; I look around, look at myself – it is so convincing, seems so real, so important, yet always in the background there is the silent balm, the endless song of life’s true nature: the real real, calling from afar, reminding you – “not so, not so”.