Now that we are well into the journey I have found I think very little in terms of getting anywhere: we have walked north, south, east and west; fast and slow; have had to rush, had to wait and have taken a host of small detours, often for very little reason. All of this combines together in the walk and helps dissolve any idea of progress or a goal. At any one time we are somewhere aiming to be somewhere else but the very physical nature of our day’s activities, the variety of places, moods and weathers we have been through, always return one to – “Well, here we are”. The memory of our departure from Chithurst and the fantasy of our arrival at Harnham occasionally flicker by; remote mirages, unconvincing, with their irrelevance so clear they fade almost as soon as they arise.

Our camp beside the Trent was just below West Butterwick, we had only five or six miles to go to Windy Ridge so we walked at a fairly gentle pace. The morning was misty and grey, but, as we went along, the air began to warm, the sun gathered strength and it was not long before it was bright and clear. As we walked through a village called Owston Ferry a man greeted us at his gate, he had seen us taking a nearby footpath through a cornfield. In a slightly prophetic tone he spoke.

“You are travelling an ancient path.”

“Yes indeed”, said I, responding to the theatrical flavour of the moment. We talked about our walk and the place which we were heading to that morning. He knew the area well and had come out to meet us; glad to see the old footpaths being used and being a keen rambler himself. After a little more talk we said goodbye, turned back to the road and carried on. We found Windy Ridge without too much trouble, arriving there a few minutes before Jenny Jaques and her family. It was her parents’ farm which we were on and, as it was conveniently placed between Doncaster and the Trent, we had arranged to meet there for a picnic. Jenny was also keen for her parents to meet a Buddhist monk to see that we are actually all right. There were Nick and I, Jenny and Dave, her children Marianne and Kristian together with their young friend Andrew, gathered in the sunshine for the meal. It was the first time that she had offered dāna to bhikkhus and she had put a lot of effort into getting everything right, she had had trial runs to see if some of the dishes would come out and had gathered special recipes from her friends.

Jenny and the children were keen to walk so Dave took the car, with most of our luggage, back to Doncaster and left the six of us behind. It was a beautiful afternoon and the children did very well with the lengthy hike. We went mostly by farm tracks and small roads; braving mosquito infested turbary woods, hot sun, bees tangled in hair and other small adventures. On the way Kristian found the walking a bit difficult, as I went along beside him we had a chat –

“How are you doing, Kristian?”

“It’s a bit hard, bhunty. I’m not tired: it’s just m’ legs that want to stop.”

We arrived in the village of Wroot at about tea-time. Jenny had some friends, Harry and June, who lived in the village so we called by and were warmly welcomed in; for the next hour or so we sat in the kitchen drinking tea and talking. Occasionally the children would dash in bright-eyed, clutching a proud bunch of goose-feathers or other treasures, then dash off again to some other adventure or go to watch the television. We still had quite a long way to go, so we rang Dave and he came to meet us, picking the children up at the edge of the village. Nick, Jenny and I carried on and followed the river the rest of the way into Cantley, a new suburb at the south-eastern corner of Doncaster. It was quite late when we arrived but we sat up talking for a long time, after a hot walk it was very peaceful sitting on the big cushions amongst the greenery of the front room. On the wall opposite me was a dark photo of palm-trees and a setting sun; as I let the road-pounding of the last few days fade out I felt myself peacefully merging and dissolving, glimmering like that Spanish sun setting slowly into the night.

Dāna had been arranged for the following day at the Oldfield’s house a few miles away in central Doncaster. Dave offered to take our packs over in the car so we walked pindabaht through the town and arrived at about ten thirty. There were quite a few people who had come round to visit us; once we had all gathered there were more than a dozen for the meal so we ate outside on the lawn. As the day went by more people appeared and we spent a long afternoon, talking, drinking tea and enjoying the sun. John from Hatfield, Martin and Bill from Sheffield, Marstan from Grimsby and David and Choco Major from Rotherham; all had come from way outside town and it was inspiring to see them having made such an effort to come and visit us. Jacqui Oldfield had asked David Major (who is something of a woodcarver), if he could make up a block of sorts for the Doncaster group’s Buddha-rūpa to sit upon. He brought his offering that evening and had worked hard to finish it in time; it was a version in wood of the cover design of the new pūjā-book from Chithurst, beautifully carved with the paint only just dry. It felt good that our arrival had been the occasion for so much warmth and friendliness between these people; after the chanting and meditation we stayed up until late, finally turning in at nearly midnight.

The next day was very quiet, I did not leave the house and spoke very little, catching up with the diary and writing a letter to Ajahn Sumedho. Jenny showed up in the evening to join us for the pūjā and meditation; she had been cooking and planning for her dāna the following day, we could see that she was keen to do everything right so we did our best to placate her fears of failure. I spent the next morning writing postcards until Dave arrived at ten to pick us up, Jenny was again delighted when we appeared at her house and welcomed us in warmly. The children were all at school but she had invited some friends around so there were several of us there for the meal: their old friend Forbsey and Angela from up the road with her little boy whose name was also David. The grey sky of the morning cleared in the early afternoon so by about two o’clock we had moved from the front room to the lawn; spending the rest of the day there. Other friends came by: Win and Steve, the next-door neighbours; an old student friend called Pete; Angela’s husband Ken, and finally the children, who returned from school at four and finished off what remained of the dāna. It was a long afternoon, we had many good exchanges and all seemed to have a bright and peaceful time. Jenny was very pleased with it all and Forbsey drove us back to the Oldfield’s when finally the afternoon was done.

That evening Phil Purser dropped by to pay his respects but as he had bronchitis he felt it better not to stay; it was very quiet with only a few phone calls to be made, organizing the rest of our journey to Manchester. Vernon was on the early shift at the colliery the next day, so we said our goodbyes that night. It was the summer solstice and a good day to mark the middle of our trip.