This article was written by Janet Taylor for BBC Radio Woman’s Hour. The programme editors were interested but not enough so to broadcast it.

“The close-cropped head and orange robe of the Buddhist monk made quite a sensation in our remote Yorkshire dale. Nobody living in this quiet place had ever before seen such a figure wandering up the track to Pen-y-Ghent, although four hundred years ago other religious, the Cistercian monks from Fountains Abbey, would have caused less comment. They regularly walked through this way to their grange in the neighbouring dale. In 1983, though, this figure could not have been expected. As the cars passed him, “What on earth was that?” was one astonished reaction. “Hey, did you see that?” was another. “One of them monk things sitting by the road! Cross-legged – he must have been praying or something!” And as a local commuter went down in the early morning, “He’s a long way from Tibet” was his wry reaction.

We had heard nothing about all this when the monk’s heavily-laden companion arrived at our small post office. He looked like any other of the dusty walkers who come in to have their water bottles filled and chat about their route. In this case, when we learned that he was walking from Sussex to Northumberland, the conversation developed, and when we heard about the monk, left sitting by the empty river, the whole thing became irresistible, and they were invited in for tea and talk. Hot and grimy in the sweltering weather, they seemed pleased to sit in the garden and drink endless cups of tea, and happy to answer all our questions. These were numerous as it is not often we have visitors from such a completely different world and we made the most of the opportunity.

Gradually a picture of his life emerged. He had trained in Thailand, he explained, and he and the other monks in England follow the non-scholastic and wandering tradition of that country. They are totally dependent on the community to support them, and they never handle money. All the gifts that they receive must be in kind. The emphasis is on owning nothing but the robe and the alms bowl. Nick, his lay companion, had started this journey two months ago with just £17. We assumed that this could hardly have lasted very long, and mostly they were dependent on the groups all over the country who had offered a meal and accommodation for a night. At other times they had their tent. They could not accept the flap-jack that we offered with the tea, as their single meal of the day has to be taken before noon, and after that perhaps just the odd piece of mint-cake, taken for energy, is acceptable.

I had only the haziest idea of the ways of Buddhism, and it was fascinating to compare its monastic life with that of the Anglican contemplative nuns with whom I am often in contact. In Sussex, the monastic day is divided between communal chanting and meditation and the manual work which, in their case, is the gradual rebuilding of the derelict house they took over some years ago, and the management of their woodland. Work on the house can proceed only if the necessary materials have been provided by their support groups. Every morning there is the alms round, a practice which in Thailand is vital for survival. It is not difficult to visualise the monk wandering through the forest there with his alms bowl ready for gifts of rice and vegetables, but the exercise must have looked more than odd around the streets of North London, where they were first established in England. The abbot insisted they keep up the practice, though, and his faith in the value of keeping to the tradition was justified one morning on Hampstead Heath when a surprised jogger stopped to ask them about their life. This chance meeting led to several visits and the eventual gift to the monks of a hundred acres of woodland in Sussex. Not many alms rounds in England have such a spectacular result. Normally they are simply a time for talk with anyone who wants to stop them as they wander about: if invited they will go into local houses and drink tea.

There is always the waiting to be asked. A monastery will not be set up unless a group of people invite the monks to come and undertake to support them. Nick explained that he and some others organised this in Northumberland. At first, the small lay group had to make sure that there was always enough food for each day, but as local people came to value the monks’ presence and realised that they themselves were welcome to come and go, to join them in the meditations or help with the work, or just to talk to the monks about anything at all, they too began bringing gifts of food. Now they are strong enough to have two more monks and our new friend, a senior monk, was on his way to help with its running, as the abbot finds more and more demands on his time for giving talks and visiting in the area.

Was he sad, I asked, to be leaving his home in Sussex? I was thinking of the mother and the sisters in the convent that I know in their warm family group. No, he said, he would meet them again if their paths happened to cross, and a monk should never be attached to any particular place: he was always a temporary lodger wherever he happened to be.

It was time then to inquire about names. How should I introduce him, I asked our monk friend, when our sons came home? His religious name was Amaro, be explained prefixed by the title Tan, and yes, it had a meaning which was “deathless”. “We all have incredibly inspiring names,” he said with a slightly ironic smile as he retired for a bath. We hurried to cook a meal and eat it, as their abstinence could not be practiced by us, and I hoped that the food smells would not disturb their quiet sipping of fruit juice in the other room.

When we were replete the conversation resumed. Tan Amaro brought out his alms bowl from the rucksack and we passed it round. Nothing could be put in it then, at this late stage in the day, as the monk could accept food for just one day: nothing should be stored even for the following 24 hours. Nor could they accept breakfast in the morning, just a cup of tea, and anyway their meal was assured. The group who were bringing it were like many others joining them for a small part of the walk. As well as the groups who expected them, there were many chance meetings and conversations that had happened. It was amazing, they said, how many people had stopped to talk to them as they sat in a town square or by a road-side, intrigued no doubt by the incongruity of the circumstances and impressed, one supposed, by the dedication and the discipline. For those, there would be the unhurried talk and the explanation, if it was invited, of what it was all about. It occurred to me that for many people this could have been their first and only meeting with a religious, Christian or otherwise, and that perhaps this quiet and relaxed man, making no attempt to proselytise but simply ready to answer questions, may have communicated something of the quality of religion which the Christian clergyman in his church would not have the opportunity to do. Certainly my fairly uncommitted 21-year-old son was clearly very impressed by the simplicity and the discipline.

Hearing about Tan Amaro’s way with religion was a totally new experience for me, and raised many questions to be pondered after they had gone. It had been interesting, for instance, to hear Nick explain that before he became involved with Buddhism, Christianity had never made any sense to him, that words like “revelation” and “redemption” had been meaningless. Now, having followed the Buddhist teaching of going down into the self and exploring the latent wisdom and insight that is in all of us, he understood much more of what Christianity was about. Was there an analogy here with what we try to do in modern education: to start with the child’s own personal experience and gradually, from that, lead outwards into understanding wider areas? Ideas and concepts are much more accessible if they are related to something which we know “in our bones” to be real. Is it possible that Buddhism provides a way into an understanding of religion simply because it starts with this concentrated contemplation of the self, the small part of the cosmos that we all as individuals know best of all?

Perhaps our institutionalised Western Church has something to learn from the patience and relaxation of the Eastern way with religion, just as our police force got out of touch with the people as they drove around in their panda cars, is there a case for Christian clergy to get out more “on the beat”, as it were, learning from Tan Amaro’s practice of wandering, of simply being about in the places where people are? The Church worries about its lack of contact with the great mass of people for whom church services seem inaccessible and irrelevant, and we try various ways of bridging the gap: modernising the language of worship, even jazzing the services with guitars and other high jinks, mounting missions of preaching and teaching at holiday sea-sides, using the media for expounding the faith. Perhaps we try too hard, in our busy Western way, hoping that our good organisation and strenuous efforts will produce results. Is there not something to be learned from the quiet and relaxed way of sitting or wandering about, not assaulting the populace with words, but ready to talk if invited? At least one of Christ’s important conversations happened in this way when he was simply sitting by a well in Samaria (St. John, chapter 4).

The woman’s response then came from a deeply-felt need, which institutional religion had not answered. The same is true today. Church attendance is a minority activity, “boring” to the many who still, however, seek the blessing of religion at the really important events of life like birth, marriage and death. There is, as the recently retired Archbishop of York pointed out, a great “consciousness of God” among the many who never go to church. Of the 10,000 letters a year that he received “the vast bulk of them are not from church members and they are not about church matters. But God often comes into them.” There must be hunger and often pain with which a casual but perceptive wanderer could get in touch. What was impressive about Tan Amaro was his lack of self-consciousness: there was no sense of “mission” or “witness” on his journey. His purpose was just to get to his new monastery in Northumberland and he was relaxed and unhurried on the way, sensitive, too, and quick to perceive that a young visitor we had staying with us at the time had complicated problems. There was a freedom and a peace about him as they set off into the early morning, accompanied this time by our son for half the way: Tan Amaro ready as before to let things happen, or not happen, as he went off on his wandering. I think we must visit him in his monastery and see for ourselves how it works.”

“As I walked through the heathland of life, I saw that others were in great burning misery. But I ignored them and went on searching for my own inner tranquility. What a lonely garden this would be were I to find it this way.”

Gordon