We have arrived in London and are staying the night at my sister’s flat in Balham.

We had a fine walk along the North Downs Way, having joined it as it passed by Sri and Tony’s house. The sun shone and people gave us little smiles of affection and approval – latter day pilgrims treading the old way. We crossed the river south of Guildford and passed by a small rivulet. A notice nearby said that in the past it was used by pilgrims on their way to Canterbury, a verse went with it:

My downward flow Your upward pathAre fixed by law divineMy task is to refresh your soulYours to discover mine

I set about trying to use ‘what is the soul of the stream?’ as a kōan but by this time I was getting a bit fed up with asking myself questions. It had become a matter of only remembering to arouse the question, the thought; the being was being forgotten. It was not long before I felt it peter out.

The experience of life as a lone being arises from the activity of the senses. Fed by ignorance, the activity of the senses creates the feeling of separateness. Remembering and recognizing that experience is simply sense-consciousness, this flicks the mind into emptiness. The touch of Ven. Kittisāro’s māla beads against my chest, the thud of my feet, throw the senses into transparency.

We headed east until we reached a village called Westcott, just before Dorking. After Nick had gone down to make some telephone calls we headed up the slope to the top of the North Downs. We had been high up on St. Martha’s Hill that morning, a great cone just to the east of Guildford. On its summit sits the only church in England dedicated to this lady. Apparently, after her master’s crucifixion, she went to France and became famous there for subduing a dragon near the town of Aix. We looked around the church for a while and chatted with the warden.

“Ninety-five percent visibility today”, he assured us – and he could easily have been right. We could clearly see Chanctonbury Ring perched on the Downs, maybe forty miles away to our south. We sat on the hillside and dined on the picnic which Sri had packed and offered to us, at her house, on the previous day.

That night, above Westcott, we slept in a shed in an abandoned woodyard-cum-rubbish-dump. The night was as clear as the day had been and, as we went to sleep, we could see a few stars shining very brightly.

The next day, when we woke, it was raining and the skies were heavy. It poured all morning and we tramped through sludgy paths, thick woods and great swards of sewagey mud. Next moment though, there we were, plonked down in a Stoke D’Abernon pâtisserie; a neat little world of gâteaux, cream horns, apple turnovers, home-made bread and little golden chairs with red velvet seats. As I sat there pondering the scene the rain stopped and Nick returned from the shops. He bought a few of the things which they had on sale and got chatting with the lady behind the counter. She was from Midhurst, near the Chithurst monastery, and was very interested in our walk. When Nick asked if it would be O.K. for us to eat there, with food bought elsewhere along with our bread and turn-overs, she said she was sure that it would be all right. She had to consult Doris, the manageress, though and sadly we did not meet with her approval. Bowing to this rebuff, we finished our tea, gathered up our packs and waved them goodbye as we left. We headed out of town with our bag of provisions (paid for with some dāna offered to Nick by Aminah Kulyanond, at Chithurst, just before we left), and repaired to a nearby hill. There we sat and ate in peace, looking out over the sprouting land before us.

More images came by: arriving in London by an old dirt road that runs over Telegraph Hill, down into Claygate and onwards. I washed the black and smelly gunk from my feet at a stand-pipe in a local graveyard and arrived almost sparkling at Khun Rumpie’s house in Kingston. Waves of shining people washed in and out: lovely conversation and gasps of admiration festooned the day. We walked on a processional pindabaht to the nearby house of Khun Vanee and received five carrier-bags-full of alms-food. Back at Rumpie’s, unloaded and arranged, it seemed as though a mountain range surrounded us. To cap it all Prachern and his wife Wantana, some other Thai friends, managed to look in and made some offerings of their own before we ate.

Unchecked generosity like this is truly the flowering of the Buddha’s dispensation in the world – how wonderful and lovely it is. The pārami of the Buddha comes to fruit and, as you witness the unwinding of this timeless pattern, the mind is filled with the most precious and heavenly images. That afternoon in Richmond Park, walking in the Isabella Plantation, I felt like the Buddha in Tusita Heaven – behind me a train of devatās, love and devotion over-flowing. I sat on a tree-trunk and talked with the people sitting on the grass around me. Children stared and cameras clicked. The group of us beneath the tree: the eyes of the world skim over us but the place of true refuge is intangible, untouched and completely clear. Saying our farewells and waving, finally we turned around and left.

At the Wimbledon Temple the Venerables Phra Khru Palāt and Mahā Manop gave us a fine greeting; we talked long and did the evening chanting together. It was good to be with bhikkhus again and my Thai is getting well exercised; they tried to persuade us to stay at the Temple but we had to decline as we had already arranged to go and stay with my sister. So, another ‘farewell’, a ‘hello’, and here we are in Balham.

I have not seen my sister for quite a time and there has been much news to exchange between us. She works for the Foreign Office now – doing exactly what I do not know – but before this new job began she took a six-week trip around the world. For much of the evening my attention flicked between our conversation and her photo albums – bright pictures of sunlit people and Himalayan ranges. All the talk is over now and everyone is in bed; it has been a long day and the liquid crystal digits of my clock tell me that it is nearly midnight.

It has been a long day; time to put things down and let it end.