## A final word

As with all the other aspects of the walk, the writing and publication of this diary could come about only because people wanted it to happen.

Originally I had intended to keep no record, allowing the journey to be a brief flash, soon over and forgotten. As word got around that I would be going, however, people began to ask:

“Will you be keeping a diary, bhante?”

“Are you going to record all this?”

“Oh you must keep a diary, venerable.”

People in and around Chithurst had been very much inspired by the book ‘Three Steps, One Bow’, a journal written by Bhikshu Heng Ju and Bhikshu Heng Yo during their eleven-hundred-mile pilgrimage up the west coast of America; Heng Ju bowing to the ground every third step of the way.

“Their teacher told them to keep a diary to help share the merit of their walk.”

Always ready to surrender the personal for the sake of common benefit, it became increasingly clear that a diary was not necessarily a selfish thing, it might even be helpful to a lot of people. Having had an inclination towards a literary career in my younger days, I was wary of writing just as an indulgence; however, when there is a true need, the soil fertile and the seed good, planting and cultivation can be selfless. People really wanted me to do this, so keep a diary I did. For the first few weeks, as the reader may have noticed, entries were sparse and lacking in detail. As time went by though I warmed to the task and there were eventually many hours consumed with writing.

Once the journey was over, it was clear that the diary was not going to be of much use if it never did more than occupy the four battered exercise books in which I had written it. It needed to be typed out, and Dr. and Mrs. Gilmour, Ven. Subbato’s parents, offered a box of paper for this to be done. I started to type and, one phase following naturally another, the different elements of the book began to appear. The walk was a shared concern, not just the project of an individual, and so too this book grew as the result of the hard work and generosity of many:

Sujāta helped out with the typing of the first draft of the manuscript and also contributed the elegant and flawless calligraphy.

The illustrations were all crafted by Nancy Sloane Stanley’s fine hand; the maps were drawn, in their unique detail, by Nick Scott and later edited for this web-edition by Vernon and Jacqui Oldfield.

The cover is a photographic reproduction of the wooden bindings carved by David Major for a single presentation copy; this volume was hand-bound by Vernon Oldfield, Jacqui Oldfield sewed an ochre-coloured pouch to contain it, and these were subsequently offered to my parents.

Richard Park, Arthur Pewsey and Richard Hopkins carried out all the photocopying which was needed.

David Babski did the typesetting; the final collation and assembly of the book being carried out with the help of Eric Taylor, George Brown, Chris Devine and the staff of the Tyneside Free Press.

The photographs were taken by various of the people we were with, and donated to us once copies had been made.

For the editing of the manuscript I am indebted to Lynne and Barrie Drayton, Nick Scott (who reminded me of many things which I had overlooked, forgotten or dismissed), but most of all to Venerable Sucitto. Without his careful attention and advice the text would have remained rather like a raw potato – fresh from the earth but mud-caked and indigestible. With his guidance the potato was washed, scrubbed, cooked and became at last suitable for human consumption. Below I include a letter he wrote to me after being given a copy of the original manuscript. I had asked for any observations or suggestions he might have concerning it. I choose to print it here not just for the elegance of his prose but more as an example of how the Sangha, and the efforts of its members, come to perfection by mutual admonition and support.

Sundaymid-March

Venerable —

I am writing this from Mike Constantine’s house in a new estate on the outskirts of Northampton. I am here via Harlow and Bedford on one of those teaching tours. This is a morning break while the others are off cooking and I have some time. The newsletter is written, due to complete art and graphic additions on Wednesday, print when I get back from Shrewsbury; owing to a brief gap and some presence of mind I brought your Tudong diary with me and read part two, partly before the Harlow dāna, partly this morning. The first part I read, if my memory serves me well, when I had an abcess on the molar nerve in November, in Chithurst, on my back.

I am writing to comment. This is something that sets an eddy moving in the mind because one has to assume a relative standard, which is a moot point. Such reflections that I can afford are coming from the surface of my mind, a lacquer of habits verbal and emotional, a veneer of literary study, a varnish of conditioning. How valid that reflection is is another reflection, because the mind just swallows it all as suchness and perfect, how-could-it-be-otherwise?

However, this is shirking the request and copping out of the conditioned.

Something does bother the lacquer of my mind about this book. Given that it is a diary, and reeking of the pleasant carefree unshaven ardour of the tudong bhikkhu, it is still sloppy in embarrassing and unnecessary places, grammar, syntax, length of sentence, missed out explanations, cumbersome poetic drunkenness and orgies of saññā. It is admittedly something that comes into the shaky realms of taste; not that there is need to judge a person’s verbal conditioning, however, much impresses me as verbal overspill, late-night punching the keys and not thinking. Perhaps, with justification, you don’t want to mould it, just let it spring out and look after itself. Just let it be perfect, shaggy, exalted, with the occasional burp. Very much a model of the Venerable himself, and loveable to boot.

However if you do want to bring it up, dress it, polish its shoes and make it serviceable, a more patient and parental attitude is needed. In my view, this would make it more valuable and acceptable for the well-being of the manyfolk. Compassionate – and that entails dull uninspiring work. Quite a bit that I could see if I wished to engage critical faculties. Something in me would like to help because it is a fine young book; something in me says, “I’ve got my own kids to look after” – something in me feels so inspired and happy with the whole saññā of the road, the story of foot, fell and star, that it just brushes aside the critical mind as petty and despoiling the magnificence of the walk.

If you’re interested and have time, I could offer to pencil in (and out) some basic verbal errors, spellings, misuse of words; and suggest some omissions and additions.

Let us hope the time comes around when we could look at it together.

My best wishes,

Sucitto

*      *       *

Fortunately it was possible for Ven. Sucitto and myself to spend quite some time working together on the manuscript. I am deeply grateful to him for his skill and diligence, and for his admirable tolerance towards my idiosyncracies. The essence of the potato remains unchanged, but with his help it has become enriched and certainly more palatable for the manyfolk.

It is part of our tradition that all our literature is for free distribution, thus the costs of printing had to be met by donations. These came from the general public and also from the legacy of Madeleine Goldsmith, my grandmother, who died in March of 1984. It was largely this inheritance which enabled the book to be published in its original sturdy and colourful form.

At the end of all these acknowledgements I cannot but mention Nick Scott once again; not only for his indomitable enthusiasm and kindnesses too numerous to mention, but for without him this would have been another story.

To him and to all those who have helped, I offer my anumodanā.

If there is anything in this book which has caused offence: doctrinal, grammatical or otherwise, accordingly I ask for forgiveness. If there is anything contained herein which is of benefit, then please do not consider me its source.

The ending of the book has now come so I bow, gratefully and in reverence, to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha; may all beings find final peace in this, the ultimate, eternal, healing Truth.

Evaṁ