While we were at the caves a few people came by through the day; they chatted a bit, “Lovely place you’ve got here”, looked around, looked delighted, and moved on. The caves were hand-carved in the eighteenth century as a folly for the big house across the river; hewn into their present shape out of a soft red sandstone outcrop. There were four interconnecting chambers – three of which had entrances to the outside – the fourth led off from one of the others and only had a small window out to the river. This room we called the chapel. The doorways and the window were all similarly arched in an ecclesiastical style, and the window of the chapel, where I slept, made a perfect setting for my small Buddha-rūpa. This had been given to me by Sam the Steelman, just before the walk began at Chithurst; a pocket-size shrine which by now I had sat in a great variety of places.

That evening was spent quietly, sitting out front under the overhanging trees. Nick put a small fire together for making tea; the river flowed by and it was almost dark when we left the outside and went to our rooms. Sitting in the chapel I thought, “This place is bound to be haunted”. I had memories of Ajahn Chah being attacked by demonic forces; there could be strange figures, malevolent, lurking, waiting to strike, in amongst these very shadows. Thoughts of ghostly demons and the way our masters have handled them came by: fear and radiant happiness, waltzing in perfect time, wove around me. At last all that was left was a warm peace and the gentle roaring of silence. I bowed six times and went to sleep.

The next morning we left quite early to arrive at the Holden’s in good time. The path followed the river bank through muddy springs, woods and cow-pastures, taking us out eventually on the road leading to Kirkoswald. We stopped at the general store in the village to pick up a few things and found, to our surprise, that the shopkeeper had been in Sri Lanka for many years and had recognized me at once as a bhikkhu. We chatted a while outside the shop and he wished us well for the journey.

It was only a mile or two from there that we saw two children running down the lane on the hill beside us and, when we reached the turning, we smiled over to them.

“I'm Darren Holden and this is my sister Jannelle, Alex Holden is my dad – we came to find you.”

We followed the two of them up the hill, Nick making friends and chatting with them as we walked. The little hamlet of Ruckcroft where they lived was only on the hilltop, it was not long before we were in their front room, drinking orange squash and cooling off. We talked with Jenny and the children for a time – Alex arrived a little later, having returned from a trip to Carlisle where he had been to pick up a new leg. All morning we sat talking, hearing Alex and Jenny’s story and telling ours.

They were people of great faith. Alex’s principal teacher had been the accident, which had occurred ten years before when they were living in Australia. He had been working on a tunnelling operation and it was his job to set the charges in the rock face. After everyone had left the site he would walk down, work alone, and then walk back. On the night the accident took place he had had intense premonitions of danger and so he had decided that he would not go. It was one a.m. – suddenly he found himself getting up, shaving, putting on fresh clothes and heading off down towards the tunnel.

He walked down the rail tracks to the rock face – methodically, in their holes, he set the charges. As he worked, behind him he heard a rumble. A loose wagon was rolling down the incline, someone had forgotten to fix the brake. He spun around to look for some crevice in which to shelter. Unfortunately it had been one of his best jobs – the tunnel’s end was completely smooth. The only thing to do was to try and use the space around the on-rushing train – there was little more than six inches on either side but maybe fifteen on top. He jumped and the world fell in.

Blackness and moisture. He stood up, fell over – stood up again fell over. He groped around, found the torch on his helmet, and shone it down – one leg where once there had been two. Patiently he lay there in the dark. He remembered an old miner’s trick, picked up a stone and began to tap on a water-pipe. Trapped there and injured – inky blackness. Suddenly, in the midst of horror, there was peace – rock, hand, but no self. The universe’s changing face, the original face – one heart. No separateness, no suffering, no limitation.

A few days later, as he lay in hospital, he saw his friend Jock lingering nervously outside the ward. It was he who had forgotten to put on the brake and he had been on a week-long bender since the crash. He was plainly terrified but Alex called to him, then told him absolutely straight.

“You’re not going to believe this Jock, but I want to thank you – it’s all right – I really can’t thank you enough.

“I saw something down there that I had never seen before, never realized, never suspected.

“Jock, it’s O.K. – I really don’t mind.”

Jock could not handle it though, whether thanked or criticised. He stayed on for a while but, after a week or two, he left the works and was gone.

The initial impact of Alex’s experience was enormous but it faded and he had to endure many years of depression. He could not turn back though, and eventually, it flowered in him as great strength and insight.

“The need for Truth was a matter of life and death, it was that simple. I knew I could not rest until I understood.”

His wife Jenny had been with him through all of this and now the two of them were living here in Ruckcroft with three children, a garden packed with fruit, flowers, vegetables, some chickens and a goat. Alex now passed most of his days building an extension to house his family and make a place for his great-aunt and great-uncle to live. He gave us a guided tour of the building site, as we walked around he complained about his leg.

“Trouble with these things”, he said, giving his plastic ankle a knock, “is that they keep breaking”. He followed this with his favourite joke. “They make them for cripples, y’know.”

That morning the seven of us ate together, spending the rest of the day talking . . . sitting in the sun, looking out over the vale of Eden, the distant lakeland hills . . . strange weather, sticky but windy . . . children playing in the garden . . . endless good talk which carried on . . . and on . . . into the evening . . . . . . eventually friends and people of the local Buddhist group began to arrive. By nine o’clock all those expected had appeared – Alex and Jenny, Steve, Cathleen and Jeremy. We had only heard of this group when we received their invitation in Doncaster. Several of them had been associated with the Manchester and Sale Buddhist groups, and it had been Dave and Jean of Greenfield who let them know of our journey. They were a really fine group, small but meeting regularly for the last seven years. They asked good questions and seemed to understand all that was said. We sat a while together before I invited more questions, and it was quite late by the time it was just Nick, myself and the Holdens. The night was dark and starry, the dew cold, as I walked out to the tent. I sat a long time, energised by the people and the evening; concerned about some things and loving others. Like a voice deep inside me I heard the words:

“You will be amazed at what will happen. Everything is exactly as it should be.” I pinned the tent flaps open, lay down and was soon asleep.

The main point of my concern had been Nick arranging for an old friend of his, Micheline, to walk and camp with us during the following week. It is not really proper for a bhikkhu to travel in a woman’s company like this and, as he had been arranging it that evening, it was plain that I did not like the idea. Alex had spotted this and had mentioned it during our talk, asking if we ever conflicted. Ajahn Sumedho had given permission for Mudita to go with us through Lincolnshire and to camp nearby if it was necessary; however, he had only agreed to this after much pleading on her part and because he knew her desire to help was very great. To find Nick now arranging a similar thing, and to be told that Virginia, Nancy and Helen had been invited to walk and camp with us at the week-end too – well, I was not pleased at all. But there was the voice:

“Wait and see, you will be amazed at how things turn out.”

In the morning Nick rang Virginia. She said she could not walk with us at the weekend and that Nancy and Helen could not make it either. She was still happy to meet us with a meal on Saturday but the camping was off. It was true, I was amazed; now it only remains to be seen what will happen with Micheline next week.

That morning I telephoned Ajahn Ānando about our plans to see him at the Allendale retreat house and he gave me the shocking news of the explosion at Chithurst. Apparently towards the end of the ordination of the three new nuns and four anagarikas, Sam Ford’s car had blown up. Hannah Renshaw, Colin and Jane’s two year old, had been inside and, although her father managed to pull her out, she had been very badly burned. There was a doctor at the monastery at the time and he had been able to help. It was stunning news, and all through the morning on our walk to Armathwaite, thoughts about Chithurst and speculations on what was happening went through my mind. One gets so used to the continual mounting of auspicious and wonderful events, flowering and growth, as though one’s life is charmed, then suddenly King Yama carries someone off right in the midst of the big day. It had been Ajahn Sumedho’s birthday, two of the new nuns had been waiting for several years for their ordination and many people had come to be there. You forget that death is always close at hand.

The two Holden boys, Stephen and Darren, walked to Armathwaite and waited on the bridge with us until Mo Robbley arrived. When she appeared the boys said goodbye and left us to find a picnic spot by the river. Her son Ravi and her new baby Aidan were with her; they had come down from their little place north of Brampton as it had been too far off our route to visit. I do not know if it was the news from Chithurst, Mo’s quiet nature, or just my tiredness – but we hardly seemed to speak at all. We sat by the water, under the trees, grey sky, cool; I had to search for conversation, things to say and talk of . . . nothing wanted to appear. It was a very quiet day.

An hour or so after we finished eating, Mo and her boys left, needing to run some errands for the farm. Nick went into the village to shop and make a few telephone calls: arranging our visit to Tom and Cath McGoldrick’s, and to leave a message at Harnham. When he got back he told me that Hannah had died early that morning. Sudden and unexpected death makes much of our lives seem so petty, a cold trump which outplays any card we hold. I contemplated death through the day, as we walked up out of the valley to the edge of the fells over Croglin; contemplating death, the suffering of separation and the only thing to do – recognize the fact and abide beyond it. As we sat on the hillside, wrapped up for a grey windy evening, I chanted ‘Aniccā vata sankhārā’ and ‘Aciraṁ vatayaṁ kāyo’, not quite sure if I got it right; little, and maybe not quite right, but good enough – truly warmed by the heart which listens.

A night’s sleep and a grey morning is with us. Nick has been busy collecting water, brewing tea, waxing boots and preparing food just like the morning on the hills outside Hitchin, ten days into our journey: ten days from the end the same again.