Late into the evening it was still hot so Nick decided to sleep out; it had been a bit harrowing for him trying to get through to Koy Thomson on the local pub telephone and it was twilight when he had returned. We decided to put the tent up anyway, as it looked as though it could rain, and it was not much later that he joined me there. Peals of thunder and lightning flashes were beginning all around and it seemed as though we were in for some heavy weather. As it turned out the thunderstorms missed us and we escaped with a few short showers. By the time we were packed and ready to go, early the next day, the air was warm and the tent was almost dry.

We followed the long roller-coaster of a path, on the eastern shore of the lake, for a couple of hours before we stopped to eat. We left the track and went down to the waterside, finding ourselves a quiet corner around the rocks from some anglers. During the meal there were a few spatterings of rain; Nick passed me my brolly which I found, when I opened it was now completely defunct – it had lost its point a while back and was now beyond repair. Fortunately the rain soon faded out and the rest of the morning was warm and dry. We set off again about mid-day, taking the lakeside path as far as Howtown, a small village whose name made me think of e. e. cummings (“anyone lived in a pretty how town with up so floating many bells down). Snatches of his poems accompanied me for much of the day, flickering with thoughts of an old friend and other times I had known.

We left the lakes and their swimmers, sailors, fishers and floaters behind; bidding a fond farewell, we set out across Askham Fell. Suddenly we were away from the great craggy slopes and the rocky paths, the mountains had ended now; instead, wide gentle undulations, acres and acres of heather and bracken and, underfoot, a soft peaty track to follow. It took us a couple of hours to cross the moor, it was overcast, with a good wind and was very comfy walking. Down in the valley things began to warm up again; we stopped by the River Lowther to rest, consult the maps and cool off. Down from the path, at the water’s edge, an untouched patch of river: thick with life, sprouting green, reedy, blue-bell flowered, six-legged, winged and walking; thick moss and undergrowth hanging from the rocks and the banks. We sat and drank Ribena, staring round; watching sunlight on the rock and the dashing of bugs, in crazy circles, on the skin of slow waters at the edge.

As this area was densely populated and farmed we decided to take the route south of Penrith up to our next destination near Melmerby. Many months before, when I had been visiting Noy Thomson’s house in Surrey, her son Koy happened to be there and we got talking about the walk.

“I will probably be going up through your part of the country.”

“But you won’t be coming anywhere near where I live, will you? Which way are you going.”

“Up through the Lake District, through Alston to Northumberland.”

“Alston is where I am! You must come by if you can.”

What with Koy’s uncertain work schedules, the wiggliness and indefinite nature of the route, plus the fact that I might not even get that far, we left it as a loose agreement. By the time we left Ullswater, however, it had solidified to a date, a time and a place.

We left the river and, passing by Lowther Castle, spent the rest of the afternoon following country lanes. These took us through rich farmland, small villages and finally to a large wood of conifers where we planned to spend the night. We pitched our tent under a pair of oak trees, standing alone in a large clearing. It was a lovely peaceful spot – quiet, soft and still after a long day’s walk; the rains which had threatened never came. The two of us sat quietly on the path by a fire and I mended the large hole which had appeared in my robe that afternoon as I sat down for a rest by the road. The daily rivers of sweat down my back had taken their toll and the poor cotton stitches across my rear-end had finally given up in despair. Thankfully the Buddha’s wisdom extends even to such mundanities:

one of the few things a bhikkhu has to take on his travels is a needle and thread.

We still had a lot of walking to do before we reached Koy’s so we aimed for an early start the next day. Unfortunately our day’s exertions and the sawdust underfelt of our tent that night, combined to see us wake up late, at six fifteen. With scarcely time for an ‘oh well’, we were packed up and moving off again. It was a straightforward run into Melmerby. Keeping to the country lanes we passed through Culgaith, Skirwith and Ousby, and had it not been for a minor detour when we took a wrong turning, we would have arrived at Koy’s place right on time. It was Sunday morning, the air was fresh and few cars were about. Koy was not in when we appeared, having driven out to look for us, but it was not long before he returned and we were all together.

His place had been loaned to him by another botanist who worked in Grange-over-Sands. It was a good sized croft which had recently been done up, a beautiful place indeed. One big, white, beamed room for the kitchen, sitting and dining; a long porch; two bedrooms, and a bathroom tacked on the side. During the meal, Karen, an Australian friend of Koy’s who was staying in the district, came by and spent the afternoon with us. After we had all had a long talk I went off to have a bath and shave my head, I was very grubby and hairy from the last week or so on the road. I felt a few pounds lighter and considerably refreshed once all the scrubbing and scraping had been done.

In the mid-afternoon Koy took us all in the Land-Rover to visit the research station on the moors where he works. It was a twenty-mile drive and it took us way, way up into the high country again. We drove by old lead mines and demolished houses, once used by miners during their long stays up here, far away from their families. The field station was the only building left standing and it did not look as if it would last for long. It had been unoccupied for the last two years and soon, I suspected, the cloud-covered moor would have its way and reduce it to moss and rubble. We parked at the house and Koy took us out to visit some of the plants he is working on. A third-year Ph. D. student, he had become very disheartened and negative about his work; having been given a project based on what looked like a false premise, little of the study had provided much satisfaction. He said it had all felt really bad until he realized that the moor did not care a tinker’s toss about his thesis on the cloud-berry; whether it worked or not, the moor would simply carry on as it had done for millenia before. From that point on, everything had been all right.

It began to rain just as I was waxing philosophical on this point so, deciding that the moor cared as much for my wise words as it did for Koy’s Ph. D., we headed back to the house, clambered into the van, and returned to Melmerby. Karen stayed for quite a while with us, asking much about our life, talking politics at length with Nick and Koy, until it was time for her to go. She was very happy to have met us and said she would try and pay Harnham a visit on her travels. After she left, Nick made a few telephone calls, Koy ate some supper and I did my washing. All this completed, we made some tea and, as it was the full moon day, settled in for an all-night sitting. It was about half past ten. As we sat, we heard the rain begin and then start to thunder on the roof; both Nick and I were thinking, “Glad we’re not up on Skiddaw after all”.

By midnight, however, it had cleared, and, since it was Āsālhā Pūjā, the day when we celebrate the anniversary of the Buddha’s first teaching, I chanted the Dhamma-cakkappavattana Sutta – ‘The Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Truth’ – with the light of the full moon shining through the window behind us. I was a little croaky from lack of practice but happy to have tried.

After the chanting Koy retired, having to drive to London in the Land Rover the next day. Nick and I soldiered sleepily on, calling a close at four o’clock when dawn finally came. After we had rested a while, we spent a quiet morning; I sat on the sofa crossing my legs, stretching them out, doing some sewing and staring off into space. Koy asked if he could cook for us again, even though Nick had offered, so the two of us had a very easy time. We did not intend to go very far in the afternoon, so we waited until Koy was all packed up and ready to go before we left. We had been wondering where to stay, since we had a day in hand, and he suggested some caves by the River Eden. They sounded too good to be true, but here we are, in Lacy’s Caves overlooking the river; dry and cool, with flat sandy floors and several doorways to sit in. It is now mid-afternoon. We have been well-sheltered from the rain all day and all night; sitting, eating, writing, watching the river swirling underneath us. Dry again after a little dousing in yesterday’s showers, the sun is beginning to appear.