We went up to the farmhouse before we left on the following day; both to say goodbye and to collect some milk which we had been offered. Unfortunately the farmer had been up late and was still fast asleep in bed, his cows queuing patiently at the dairy. We left our thanks with his young son and set off down the road. As we were walking through the lanes towards Stockport his wife drove past, taking the children to school; we looked up and saw them go by, waving excitedly from the windows. It had been the event of the week for them, having “a munk ’n’ ’is mate” camp in their field; they had been very happy to have us and had treated us well. One of the local ladies had seen our tent through the hedge and had gone to tell the family.

“There are two strange men in your field, y’know, probably the ones who raped and murdered that girl in the caves over at Castleton the other day.” The family would not have it though and the farmer reassured us with a big smile.

“We sent ’er packin’. Told ’er it was a munk ’n’ that we knew you was alright.”

The weather had been really filthy early that morning, low cloud, wind and rain but by the time we were walking it had dried up and left an endless stream of grey cloud crossing the sky high above us. Coming into the built-up areas through a park we joined a canal which ran into the city. We followed the towpath past locks and beneath a railway; surrounded by peaceful greenery and tall trees we carried on until the waterway disappeared into a tunnel. We picked a path through the woodland covering the banks of the River Goit, following it down until we emerged on the lane leading to Chadkirk Farm. As we walked down the road a motorcycle approached us, a large grin appearing from beneath the visor. We had arranged to meet Steve North from the Samatha Centre with our meal for the day near this spot so I presumed that it was him. My eyes flicked over the motorbike and the man – no pack + no pannier => no food. What! Allowing such thoughts to pass I decided there must be a good explanation.

“Good morning, bhante, there are a few people from the Samatha Centre to meet you, just up the road.”

We decided to go to a nearby picnic site for the meal so our friend on the bike zoomed off to inform the others; a few minutes later, to our amazement, three or four cars appeared and spilled their contents of food, children and smiling people at the entrance to the place. Out came primus stoves, thermoses of coffee, pots of curry, packets of bread, bowls of fruit, salads and a host of greetings. Manchester had come to meet us. There were about a dozen people altogether; we spread out our groundsheets and before too long we were all sitting, the food offered and shared, enjoying the blessings of good companionship and life as children of the Buddha.

After we had eaten it was not long before many of the people had to go but four of the men stayed behind and we chatted together for a while – taking it in turns to dissuade the local cattle from intruding on our party. Rod and Paul, two of those remaining, decided to walk with Nick and me across the town. After a while the four of us set off, heading towards the Mersey River which we planned to follow all the way to Chorlton. The weather stayed good during the afternoon and we took it in turns to carry the packs. One of the regulars of the Samatha group had a wholefood restaurant in town, this lay on our route so we stopped for a while for refreshments. Unfortunately the lady, Marion, was not there but we managed to say hello to her later in the evening. After another couple of hours of walking we met up again with our motorcyclist friend Adrian. He was a photographer for a local paper and had asked permission that morning to take pictures of us. We had arranged to meet him and a reporter on our way along the river, we stopped at the picnic-table where he was waiting and, before long, an hour of talking and photographing had passed. Finally leaving the river we picked our way through the floral evening streets of Chorlton; Steve North was waiting for us when we arrived. He took us to our room, we eased our boots off and cooled slowly over a cup of tea. I went down to pay my respects to the Ven. Ānanda Maitreya, a Buddhist scholar of international renown and formerly one of the supreme patriarchs in Sri Lanka. He has been a great source of guidance in matters of Dhamma and Vinaya at Chithurst and had been staying at the Samatha Centre for the last couple of weeks. I told him about the walk and he was highly delighted with it all; I bowed to him saying it felt very good to be there – I had been apart from other bhikkhus since South London six weeks before.

Many people of the centre came that evening, filling the meditation hall; we listened to their chanting (very impressive), and Ven. Ānanda Maitreya guided a short mettā meditation. Once the formal meeting was over we repaired to the back hall for questions and answers, Bhante carefully explained many different points and by the end had unravelled many tangles. The next day was a long series of little jobs being done: people bringing odds and ends for us, running errands, poring over maps, bringing tea, whisking away our washing and the empty cups. Nick and I had a long talk with Ven. Ānanda Maitreya, we showed him our route through England so far and the way we hoped to go. He was very impressed with the whole thing and told us that he had already written to a newspaper in Sri Lanka, telling them about the walk and the practice of tudong in Britain.

“It is truly a great thing, a grand thing that you are doing. Both of you are earning much merit.”

“That is the least of our considerations, bhante.”

“Yes yes yes”, he replied, smiling and gently wagging his head. “Now tell me: how long will the journey be from one end to the other? I told the newspaper about two hundred miles. Is that correct?”

“Actually it will be nearer to eight hundred, bhante. Probably a little bit more.”

“Eight hundred miles!” he gasped; adding an uncharacteristic, “my lord!”

After having dāna together the car for him arrived and he returned to London. Sunny and restful afternoon, I sat in the armchair of our room re-stitching the seams of my sanghāti and occasionally staring into space. They had asked if I would lead the meeting and give a talk that night; everything went smoothly and about thirty people came along. The questions and answers carried on past ten o’clock, Lance Cousins and Steve North staying on until it was gone one.

Niah Richards had organized dāna for the next day and through the morning she and others came and talked with me. We had long exchanges about emptiness and form, limitation and freedom and the expansion of consciousness beyond habitual confines. There was a general coming and going of people but most disappeared after the dāna was over. Nick and I were packed up and gone by about midday.

Our walk through the city was something I had slightly dreaded; I had prepared myself to be kicked to pieces and never leave the place alive but after all the spreading of Dhamma, together with the mountain of good wishes and blessings we were carrying, in the end it all went very well. Contained and keeping an even pace, I determined to hold wisdom as my refuge rather than the absence of immediate threat. Our route took us through the inner city, a mass of broken and dismal streets, through Old Trafford and the docklands stuck between Salford and central Manchester. We crossed the black and bubbling ship canal, passed through the lanes of towerblock estates and finally entered the genteel Jewish confines of the borough where Carol Batton lived. As we walked through the town you could see that people simply react to the sight of you out of their conditioning: little children go, “Wow”, slightly larger ones say, “What are you?” “Are you nuns?” “Are you Spanish?” “Are you a Egypt man?”

“That skin’ead’s wearing strange clothes.”

“It’s Jesus.”

“Jesus.”

Groups of teenage girls tend to laugh, giggling as you go by.

“Will you look at the state of that!”

Older boys bellow insults, incomprehensible, unfamiliar, from passing cars, across the street.

A pair of punks said, “Hi”, and a couple of old men smiled warmly.

The pattern of all attention simply comes out of our conditioning; by being resolute in non-contention with the effects you have on people, you can walk through it quite untouched. It was all very peaceful, I could feel the habitual reaction of fear to threat and derision fading, evaporating as we walked; illuminated from the inside by offering peace.