The last three days have been something of a mixed bag: a jumble of sunny ambling, picnics, campfires, an irate farmer; rolling through gentle valleys, windy hills, meadow churches; stopping to sit and rising to walk. Fears and worries, warmth and light, peace and agitation: one and all in the sky together like the sun and clouds.

The afternoon that we left Hoe Hill we joined a path called ‘The Viking Way’ which wanders north-south through the Lincoln Wolds, we have stayed with or nearby it ever since then. Like the North Downs Way it is an official long-distance path but, predictably, the marker for it is a little Viking’s head with a two-horned helmet thus:  this fellow we have named ‘Sven’ and we have enjoyed his company for this part of the trip. As we have been aiming to reach Brigg on Thursday we have been able to go at a very gentle pace, often stopping to sit and take in the surroundings.

That first evening we found an abandoned farm near a small nature reserve called ‘Red Hill’, it was very broken down but the barn had a good roof so we decided to spend the night there. I am always a bit nervous of “appearance of irate farmer with shotgun”; whenever we spend the night camping in the corner of some farm or in such places as this I tend to get the jitters. Neither that night, however, nor the following morning did anyone appear and after we had eaten we ambled on.

It was another hot day and the countryside was beautiful. As we approached Ludford Woods, where we had planned to stop, we could almost hear the Sirens’ song of the midges, calling out for us to join them amongst the trees; it was wet and humid with dense undergrowth and dark. We declined the invitation and carried on, finding a large barn off the road short before the village; it seemed a good place so we decided to stop there. We lit a fire under the huge lean-to as it had begun to rain and, despite ever more present fears of ‘the farmer’ and the sound of a shotgun nearby, no-one appeared. The next morning we were clearing up to go and, as I rounded the corner of the barn bearing two dead logs from the fire, my eyes fell upon a small flock of sheep and a farm-lad, clad in a blue boiler-suit, hands in pockets, strolling along beside them. He did not see me and I quickly turned around; I scurried through the barn to see Nick (who was in the middle of his yoga routine), and told him what was up, my heart pounding furiously. I started to pack and suddenly realized that I was completely terrified; “This is ridiculous”, I thought, so I paused for a few moments and stopped, slightly amazed at the intensity of my fear of being caught. The lad looked like the most amiable fellow in the world and, as it turned out, a few minutes later he drove off and we never saw him again.

Later that morning, whilst Nick and I were sitting at a crossroads, a policeman pulled up in his car and said hello, he made conversation with us, asking our names and where we were from. Thinking that he was just curious about us I was quite surprised when he asked for our dates of birth as well, as we were talking I felt quite at ease and we chatted happily away. Afterwards Nick told me that they would be checking up on us (having had some experience of his name being taken in the teenage days of his south coast jaunts with his young pals Tombstone and Weasel). They would look to see if we had a record or if anything suspicious had happened in the district “like a barn burning down”. “Oh dear”, I thought, trying hard to convince myself that we had been really thorough in putting the fire out; imagining the Lincolnshire Constabulary appearing at Chithurst with a warrant, or arresting us in an ambush further up the Viking Way.

Later on we sat on a windy hilltop, with the trees and all the land around blown wildly and buffeted; we ate our meal in a sheltered corner and I reflected on the doubt: you do not know exactly what is going on, as whence the wind comes and whither it will go you cannot say – all that is certain is that the wind is blowing; that whatever will happen, will happen. What can you do but find a sheltered spot where there is some peace amidst the winds?

Bright and breezy the afternoon; we pressed on through Tealby and Walesby and stopped for a while in the old wayfarers church up on the hilltop. Silence hovered – greeting us as we walked in, blessing us as we sat, unmoved in parting as we left; it was still windy outside and heavier clouds were coming from the south-west. As we crossed over Lincoln’s highest ridge we were rained upon but our path took us down into a sheltered valley and soon the weather cleared. We camped and, after making tea, sat until quite late. A crescent moon had appeared by then, together with a star. I watched as they sank behind the hill leaving the night alone to be lit by a few pale constellations. It was midnight and, feeling very clear and peaceful with the fading of the day’s traumas, I went happily to sleep.

Curiously it was the following morning, after all the doubts, fears and worries seemed to have vanished, that ‘irate farmer’ (but without shotgun), eventually appeared. For once we were camped right on a public footpath and were, I (incorrectly) thought, completely ‘legal’. He came at about eight o’clock, pulling up in his Land-Rover in the field across the stream. Immediately he started shouting at us, bawling loud abuse and furiously brandishing his crook; “Aha”, I thought, “Buddha as wrathful deity”. As I felt we were there quite rightfully it was not difficult to be calm with him. He came over to us very angry but after talking for a while he saw that we had meant no harm and were very sorry to have caused offence. Nick spoke very kindly to him and I was amazed to see his mood dissolve as rapidly as it did, he even became quite calm and quiet as they talked about the land and the running of his farm.

“They’re always like that”, said Nick afterwards, “come on all irate but are really friendly underneath. Their farm is the dearest thing to them, it’s their life, so it’s understandable they feel put out when someone just moves in – sets up like they own the place.” The thing he was most upset about was the fire, which was embarrassingly and unnecessarily big; we explained that it was all dead wood we had picked up and that we had tried to do no damage to his farm. When we parted company he was quite friendly but I still felt a bit guilty about the fire; having followed the Viking rather than the Buddha way in my wood-gathering exploits. I had not been very mindful of either what we really needed or the respect due to the land as someone’s private property. I realized that we should be more sensitive and careful, especially about fires, and not go about things in such a heedless way as we have done on occasions up to now.

It is good to see that when you wander off the track it only takes a while before the karma ripens and you get to taste the fruit. Guilt and remorse for being selfish, intrusive and clumsy; doubts about being pārājika for taking firewood; all the angst which comes from having lost your path. All this feeling is exactly what makes us resolve to do better in the future: to keep to the path since to struggle in the rough is both painful and exhausting. Hiri-ottappa, moral sensitivity, guardian and protector of the world.