Walking in the dales, on the Pennine Way and around has been good for meeting other travellers. Most of the time, conversation only begins when we ask for water or arrive at our destination; here, amongst so many other walkers, I am often taken to be simply strangely dressed and people talk to us quite freely. There is always a camaraderie between members of the same group and interest in how you are doing. Being so obviously hikers we are part of the family and people are very open with us.

A few days ago we met a couple of young Germans; we nodded and smiled as we passed them and they passed us as the day went by. As Nick and I were resting on a hill-top they came to a halt at a cairn ten yards behind us. Moved by a sudden wave of generosity and friendship I broke in half one of the large chocolate bars Nigel had given us and took it with me to where they were sitting. As I approached, one of them looked up.

“Would you like some chocolate?” I asked, proffering the gold-wrapped lump.

“Thank you, just one piece.”

“No, it’s all for you, please.”

“That’s too much.”

“Please take it, I have another kilo in my pack, we have plenty.”

“Are you eating just chocolate???” the other one asked, looking up somewhat amazed.

“No, it’s just that someone in Manchester gave us a lot to take with us. I thought you might like some.”

Still slightly bewildered but quite happily they accepted the gift and, as they passed us by later on; one of them held out a little bag.

“Would you like a fig? They are very good – Türkisch.” Gratefully we accepted and waved goodbye as they left, strange how joyous such a simple exchange can be.

A little later in the day, as we followed a broad track between some reservoirs above Rochdale, we saw a man with a tripod photographing the valley; now brilliant and hazy in the afternoon heat. It was plain that he was keen to meet us and, as we went by, he introduced himself. We stood together for a long while, listening to his gentle Orkney accent and telling him all about our walk. Before we parted he took some photographs and promised to send us copies. He was a truly gentle man and it had obviously meant a lot to him to meet us.

Another touching gesture made that day was the gift of some ice-cubes from a lady in Hebden Bridge: having just climbed a steep, long, cobbled lane, the two of us rested on a low stone wall, sitting there very hot and sweaty. After a while Nick went to ask for water at a house, the lady took the bottles in but was gone for a long time. When she returned she explained that she had been trying to break up ice-cubes to put in the water.

“The big-necked one was quite easy but the other one gave me a lot of trouble.”

Eventually she had given up, filled a margarine tub with ice and offered that to us instead. Very grateful, we drank many mugs of the delicious liquid – cool Yorkshire water like nectar in a hot and dusty throat.

It had been roasting all day and that evening, after long, hot and humid hours, the sun mellowed to a glimmering orange fire. It rested for a moment as a red balloon bulging on the hill-crest; lingering long before it disappeared, gently and as if for ever, beneath the blue slumber of the hills.