After the meal we carried on up the valley and took a path to the top of the fell where there was a small gate in the fence marking the county boundary between Cumbria and Northumberland. Nick had to grapple with the wire latching it for a few minutes but eventually we won through, there was a definite feeling of entering on the final leg: only one more county to cross. Even though movement and destinations are just conventional realities, conditions changing, there is a certain happiness which arises as you near your goal. We were glad indeed to have arrived. Not usually so emotional, Nick knelt down, plucked a handful of heather and kissed it.

We did not have far to go before we were descending again, following a tributary of the South Tyne down into the main valley. It was a craggy, rock-strewn river bed we followed, and, finding a good spot with wood and shelter to camp in, we decided to stay up there for the night. The sky had looked threatening all day so it seemed best to stop and get the tent up as soon as possible. As it turned out, a few hours later, the sky cleared and the sun shone brightly – barely a drop of rain had fallen. We had a long, quiet evening, sitting by a small fire and mending our gear. We set out quite early the next day as the wind had dropped and the midges were hungry. We followed the path which ran down the valley edge, meeting the main road just south of Slaggyford. The sky was still clear, so I found myself sitting by the river in the sun as Nick went into the village to make some calls.

Although they came from opposite directions, Virginia and Nancy managed to arrive at exactly the same moment; Nancy on a push-bike with front basket and paniers loaded with food. It was not long before we were in the midst of a flood of news and greetings. Being one of the main supporters of Harnham, Virginia had lots to tell about all the comings and goings: the visit of Ajahn Sumedho, the trip to Lindisfarne and her long walk in the Himalayas. She and Nancy had both prepared a lot of food and were plainly delighted to have the chance to meet up with us. Things were quite busy at the monastery, with the impending bhikkhu ordinations at Chithurst, the retreat at Allendale and the arrival of David and Choco of Rotherham to stay for a couple of weeks. Virginia had had to do a lot of helping out with all of this and so could only walk a little way that day. It was quite well into the afternoon before we set off, the four of us and Nan, Virginia’s dog. It was an easy walk, in the shade of old sycamores, up through the main valley a short way. After a while we took a track up through the fields of a side valley and followed the stream to the edge of the moors. After a long rest and a chat the women left us. We crossed over the fell, passing by the ominous lines of shooting boxes marked in large white numbers: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. It felt very sad to think that, within a week or so, after the ‘glorious twelfth’, this wide and lonely place would be filled with armed men, terrified birds and ear-splitting explosive death.

We crossed the main road over the moor at its highest point and followed the edge of a small pine plantation until we reached the path that would take us into the next valley. Unlike the newer paths over the moors this was a broad, stone-filled track and was very easy walking. It is interesting that as soon as you no longer have to carefully watch every step for ruts and boggy patches, holes and tussocks; as soon as the walking is straightforward, the mind will almost immediately conjure up other images to be concerned with – yesterdays and tomorrows . . . whys and wherefores . . . shoulds and shouldn’ts . . . Then, as soon as the going becomes difficult, concern immediately returns to the path.

The track took us down into the farmlands of the West Allen. From the hillside we could see the white buildings of Throssel Hole Priory and the small farm, a little to the right, where Tom and Cath McGoldrick and family lived. As we were not due to arrive until the next morning we decided to camp up in one of the small valleys off the main river. It was quite late by the time we arrived at a good spot, the midges were massing so we quickly gathered some fallen wood nearby and started a fire. High above there must have been a big wind, great clouds poured over the glowing hills before us and made a spectacular sunset. We sat by the fire until quite late, we put the tent up before the light disappeared and finally went to sleep when the moonless night arrived. The next morning we climbed the hill a little way to meet a farm track which would take us round to the fields opposite Tom and Cath’s. It was very easy walking, the weather was dry and we did not have far to go. We left the path and crossed the river on a badly flood-damaged foot-bridge; much of the vegetation had been recently washed out and the stone walls had also taken quite a pasting. There had been a massive thunderstorm over the valley two weeks before and a flood had ripped everything out along the river bed. The handrails of the bridge were buckled right over and wrapped in strands of the dead grass which had been carried along by the water. We came up to the farm from the riverside; past the chicken coop, through a horde of ducks, geese and bantam chicks then into the warm and glorious jumble of the house. Tom and Cath were very pleased to see us, and their children, Michael and Helen, bounced excitedly around as we talked. Somehow there had been a hitch along the line and Virginia had not been able to drop off the extra food from the day before as had been planned. So Nick and Cath slipped off for a while and busied themselves putting a meal together in the kitchen. We spent the day in their sitting room talking and drinking tea, looking around the room and at the photographs of the place as it had been when they moved in eight years ago. An old tumbledown farmhouse of the seventeenth century, they had repaired and rebuilt it with many, many hours of hard work. The end result was now a lovely hand-built home. However, it had cost so much in the way of materials and Tom, having refused to take money from the Social Security, was so poor that they had been on the brink of selling it in order to repay the bank. Understandably they were very keen to stay and were embarking on a project to sell water from their spring as a small business to help fund their survival at the farm.

When it was time to go, the whole troop of us went up the road to Throssel Hole Priory as it was only a few hundred yards away. Tom and Cath had been looking after a goose for the monks and so stopped for a chat at the monastery for a while. Nick and I were welcomed in and given tea as soon as we arrived. Reverend Chu Shin, the guest-master, showed us around and found a place for us to keep our things. We met the Prior, Reverend Master Daishin, and a few of the others, talking for a while before the evening meeting began at seven twenty-five. They run a pretty tight ship here and there is a lot of form, ritual and etiquette to fit in with. It was a very good feeling, being with them all; sitting, listening to the chanting in the zendo and talking with the monks afterwards. We are sleeping in the zendo along with the novices and lay-people, so we had to be in, with lights out, by ten o’clock. I think it must have been the first ‘bedtime’ I have had since my early teens. I lay awake a long time, sleeping lightly for short stretches, and, not being allowed to rise before the bell at six, lay obediently in my place until it was time to move. Their morning session is much longer than the evening one, with several devotional chants, including one for Kanzeon (Avalokiteshvara), the Prajñā Pāramitā Sūtra, the succession of the Patriarchs and several others. I am enjoying the clarity of their forms and the crispness of their lifestyle here; it is a good exercise to step along with a different dance for a while.