We ate the meal quite early; little Hannah, Martin and Val’s one-year-old, woke up from her morning sleep so the five of us walked together to the edge of the city. We followed a stream through a nearby park which ran all the way up to the moors, saying goodbye to Val and Hannah at about half way; parkland was on both sides of us and we hardly saw any more of the town.

As we walked along the pathway, through the neat lawns and flowerbeds, we passed a young man with a burly dog straining on its lead. Nick stared down at the panting beast and his curiosity was aroused.

“What an incredibly ugly dog!” he proclaimed. “What is it?”

“It’s a bull terrier”, the young man replied, “they are supposed to look like this.”

Conversation having begun, the two of them chatted on as we walked along. At some earlier point on the walk Nick and I had been talking about the different worlds we live in: how one can be skilled or expert or even famous in one field, yet unknowing or unknown outside of that. I mentioned how surprised we had all been in our family when we began to realize that my father had become an internationally famous journalist and judge of dog shows, and yet, within the home, he was just the same as when he had been a farmer. I suppose it must have sounded to Nick like a boast when I told him you could mention my father’s name to any dog-breeder and they would know him. We sat down to rest on a park bench and he decided to put me to the test . . .

“Tan Amaro’s father is a dog man. He says you are bound to have heard of him.”

“Oh? What’s his name?”

“Tom Horner.”

“Tom Horner! The bull terrier man! Well fancy that – of course I’ve heard of him. Fancy meeting Tom Horner’s son in the local park”

I suspect Nick was considerably humbled by this response. It is true that most dog-breeders have heard of my father but to pick a bull terrier owner was unlucky. This is the breed in which my father is most expert; he has bred them, shown them and has written a well-respected book about them.

We sat and chatted together for a while and at last parted company, the young man still shaking his head with incredulity at our meeting.

“You were right, bhante”, said Nick, “I am very impressed.”

I managed to restrain any self-satisfied remarks and, smiling quietly, we carried on down the path out of the city.

Martin, Nick and I headed out together across the moorlands and a very dry raised peat-bog, to bring us to the edge of the Peak District. The weather was still warm and hazy, the hills around us faded into blue mist; deep valleys sunk, steep and rocky inclines, miles and miles of dry-stone wall and everywhere hill-sheep scurrying away with their lambs as we pass by. The area is a national park and very popular with ramblers, climbers and sundry outdoor types like ourselves. For the first time on our journey we have begun to meet people who look something like us – walking somewhere purposefully bearing packs. For much of the afternoon we followed a rocky edge, enjoying an easy walk over the well-worn black stones of the area. There were big boulders and large masses of the rock all about, it is of a type called ‘millstone grit’ and strewn in various places were millstones which had been carved out of it. With the arrival of the mechanised era, I suppose that one day there was simply no more need for them and, as they were so heavy, they were left to lie just where they were and go back to the earth.

After a while we dropped into a valley, tromping through the heather to the top of a small ridge. We stopped for a rest and, as it was not too windy, decided to camp there for the night. Martin had arranged to meet his wife nearby so he left us and disappeared down the far side of the hill. A little while later he reappeared unexpectedly, together with his family to say a final farewell; after staying only a short time they left again as Hannah’s bedtime was approaching. We had had a fine day together: Martin had carried our packs for a while, and the move into this new countryside was lovely. The enormity of the landscape left the mind quite silent; an ocean of vast hills swallowing into the mist.

We put a small fire together from the dead wood around us and made some cocoa: it was a peaceful night and the air was warm and still. The next morning we carried on along the ridge to our rendezvous with David Wharton. He had just finished his exams at Durham University and had written to ask if he could join us for a couple of days. Nick and I spotted him waiting at the appointed place as we clambered down the steeps from the ridge, stumbling and scrambling through the little oaks and birches, sliding in between the tussocks. It was overcast and looking rainy but, after meeting, we headed up the other side of the valley and settled on a flat spot for our picnic; David had brought us food for the next two days. As he and Nick were preparing it the rain began; looking at the sky we decided that optimism would not be wise, so we repaired to an open shed next to a nearby inn. It turned out that we had moved just in time: as we began to eat, the rain came with a vengeance, soaking the road and the cyclists passing just in front of us.

The rain stopped after the heavy shower and, although it stayed cloudy with a stiff breeze all day, that was the last of the wet. We spent the day stomping through the hills and passed around the northern end of the Ladybower Reservoir. We crossed Derwent Dale and went up the other side of the valley. As we came past Hagg Farm Hostel I changed out of my waterproof (which I had worn diligently all day in expectation of rain) and donned my robe again. We had passed many people that day in the hills but it seemed that only once I had gone back to my true colours did anyone want to talk to us. As we took the lane past the dam we chatted with an old fellow who had been a walker for years. He rapped with Nick a long while about the local area and showed us a picture of Derwent village church-spire as it protruded from the waters when the valley was first flooded. As we said our goodbyes and were parting we began to talk about my being a Buddhist monk; he had been wanting to mention it all along but, probably because of his English reserve, had talked about everything else until it was time to go. He was a spiritualist and had strong feelings about religion and doctrines. We had a good talk together – I was able to tell him a little bit about the Buddhist faith and he was very sympathetic. We finally parted about half an hour later, happy to have met and spent some time together; he wished us well and we set off up the hill to find a campsite.

We found some shelter behind a dry-stone wall up above Lockerbrook Farm and passed a cold and windy night there. We spotted a few breaks of blue in amongst the clouds racing above us and by the following morning it was quite clear. For the first time in these parts we could see a long way. We walked down into the valley and up the other side until we reached the brink of Edale, by this time the sun was breaking through more and more often and we were lucky to have a warm clear spell for our meal. We sheltered from the wind in the lee of a wall and sat in peace looking out over the dale towards Lose Hill; the air was clear and we could see for miles. As we had a lot of time to spare we decided to take the scenic route: up over Lose Hill, along the ridge and down again into Edale village. We set off and, after a great tortuous tromp through the steep meadows to the top, we could see the whole of the Peak District spread about us. Disappearing into the far distance: hills and villages, trains and factories, long green dales and a pair of hang-gliders floating in the air above the ridge.

Mountain tops are great places for meditating but you can’t live there so we headed down the well-used track into Edale for supplies. The village is at the beginning of the Pennine Way and so is thickly populated with campers and the hiking set. The area is very carefully looked after and the use of land for camping is restricted. We headed out into open country to the north of the village and found a place to spend the night, well up in a secluded valley beside a stream which ran off Kinder Scout. It was quite late when we pitched the tents and we watched the sky as it cleared, by twilight there were no clouds and we looked forward to a fine day to cross the last of the big hills.

By the next morning things had changed and all my hopes of basking in sunshine on top of Kinder Scout (whose continually foul weather is legendary) were dashed. The day broke with heavy cloud which descended to meet us as we climbed the hill. Following the track called Jacob’s Ladder we walked into the whiteness and soon were soaking wet. We decided to go straight over the pass and thus avoid the summit. We resolved that it was much wiser to be buddhas than world conquerors – it was very wet and windy, visibility was less than twenty yards and the top of the hill was a trackless plateau of peat-bog – the obvious thing was to go through it as directly as possible and take a path straight down the other side. As we crossed over the pass I suddenly realized that in a way I had got my wish after all, but the “sunlight of wisdom” does not need a cloudless day to shine.

The weather remained gloomy for quite a time: we came down out of the cloud but the drizzle continued until after we had parted company with David, just after Hayfield village. He had to get back to Chesterfield for the evening so Nick and I branched off northwest, aiming ourselves at Manchester. We left the wet behind us for a while and found a good place to camp quite early in the afternoon. Nick asked a farmer if we could pitch our tent in his field and we have spent a quiet afternoon here, the rain has been returning in more frequent bursts but it is quite warm and we are well sheltered – what with our trusty tent and the Triple Gem what better protection could there be?