Alan had taken six hours the previous night to drive down from Edinburgh through thick fog. He and Sarah had been sorting out what to cook over the telephone throughout the week and, even though it was two a.m. when he had arrived in Leeds, they were both up early the next morning to finish off the preparations. In a sense they were complete strangers to me, so I was very touched and inspired by all the care and effort which had gone into this meeting. It seems that all it takes to bring such an occasion about is a common faith in, and recognition of, that which is truly good.

It appeared that it only wanted to rain enough to turn us back and spend a peaceful afternoon together in the farmer’s field. As we had a day in hand we decided to stay on and move later, crossing Ingleborough whenever the weather was best. As it turned out, the following morning was mistier than ever; Alan and Sarah were very tired, thus we opted to eat first and climb later. They had brought enough food for two days for all of us so we enjoyed another dāna together, setting off to climb the hill shortly afterwards. One of the reasons we had chosen to go that way was because of a fine outcrop of limestone pavement which occurred on the farm. Nick had been keen to see it as there were many rare plants which grew in that kind of rock formation. The freedom of the farm which we had been given was an unexpected bonus. When we left, Nick gave the farmer’s wife the bunch of carnations which Alan and Sarah had brought for us; her first reaction was:

“Oh, it’s such a shame you can’t take them with you.”

But she ended up accepting them happily. They had been very good to us and we promised to send them a postcard, when we arrived at Harnham, to assure them that we had got there safely.

It was still quite misty in the afternoon but there was a bit of a breeze, so our walk was not too sweltering. Alan had offered to carry my pack to the top of the hill so, walking very light, I had an easy climb. It was not far to the hill, and once on the main track we met many other walkers. We stopped frequently for long rests and spent much time looking out and soaking up the views; these shifted and changed as the mist moved in the valleys all around us. From the top we occasionally saw familiar, distant outlines but for the main part it seemed as though we sat on an island in the middle of a white sea. People passed by, appearing from all directions, sweating, dressed for heat, and with a look of conquest about them. After a little while together with us at the top, Alan and Sarah said farewell and headed back to their car. They had planned to have a meal with Sarah’s parents in Leeds that night and needed to leave the farm by five o’clock in order to arrive in time.

Nick and I donned our packs and headed down the steep western side of the hill. After a short time we cut away from the main track and found a good place to stop, in amongst the boulders of yet another limestone pavement. As there is a big layer of it in this area you tend to find matching outcrops of it on opposite sides of the hills. The one on this side of Ingleborough seemed much wider and there were great expanses of smooth white rock. They are called pavements because the erosion by water in the cracks of the limestone splits the rocks into great rectangular chunks. Flat and separated by deep fissures known as grikes, it is in these grikes that the plants peculiar to the terrain grow.

It was still quite early when we arrived, there was a warm breeze carrying the thick mauve scent of wild thyme up through the valley, the evening light and the soft turf to sit upon made it a perfect picture. We sat for a long time before Nick went off to explore the pavement and make a couple of calls from a telephone box, just visible down below on the road. I took the opportunity to write a batch of postcards to the family and the faithful, easily gathering inspiration from an occasional glance over the valley of Twistleton. Pretty views and summer evenings make a poor refuge, however; as soon as the wind dropped a mass of midges appeared and were, in no time, swarming all around me – oh well. Happiness is a fickle friend, no more than freedom from midges; freedom from suffering is another story.

As we had spent three nights sharing the same space I opted to sleep out; the windy afternoon had cleared the air and I woke, soon after dawn, to an empty sky and grass-heads wagging over me. It was a very midgy morning, I sat on the rocks and wrapped my robes all around me. Even though one feels compassion for the little creatures’ hunger, it is at times like this I am very grateful that the form of the Buddha’s enlightenment is in the realization of our limitations: he did not sit out in the open but beneath the Bodhi tree; he used just a reasonable amount of shelter from the harshness of the world. Such a precedent reminds us that it is not in conquering the world, but in recognizing the real that genuine liberation lies.

Nick had managed to buy enough food the previous evening from the local inn to make up a meal for the day. An old friend of his, Sue Lunn-Rockliffe, was unable to meet us as had been arranged. We thus deleted Ingleton from our route and headed straight across the hills into the next valley. The morning was very hot and we were dripping with sweat by the time we arrived at our stop. We found a rock ledge in the meadows of the eastern side of the valley and had our meal sitting in the sun, the midges being less voracious in the heat. In the afternoon an occasional breeze came by and, finding a good shady spot under some ash trees where the local bugs seemed quite gentle, I spent many hours just sitting there. There was nothing for me to do, it was the quietest time I had spent in weeks. Five hours alone, nothing to be written, mended or discussed; how lovely just to sit there and let go. No more real than anything else one does but certainly refreshing to the mind.

It was six o’clock by the time we moved on, the day had lost most of its heat and I found my feet flying up the first hill, taking me bright-eyed and breathless to the top. We followed the ridge along, past gloriously gaping and florid pot-holes, over moorland and through miles of heather and squidgy moss. Eventually, having crossed the topmost prong of Lancashire, in a small craggy valley of scalloped limestone, with steep banks and small rowans sprouting overhead, we decided to camp for the night.