We walked all day along the sea-wall of the Wash, an earth embankment dividing the sea and salt-marsh in the north from the farmland to the south. In the morning as we ate our meal, the local nazgûl, jet fighter planes, roared continually overhead; circling around the area they accompanied us all day. When I heard we would be walking by the marshes of the Wash I had imagined bleak empty stretches of boggy grass, lonely, silent but for the occasional cry of sea-birds; as we continued the planes came lower and louder until we found ourselves walking beside a firing range which occupied several miles of the marsh and where the planes were having target practice. We could see the dust kicked up by their bullets and the smoke rising from their bombs. It was a hot sunny day and we strode along, quite tickled by the strangeness of the scene; we could see people in the observation-towers looking at us and wondered if they thought we were Russian spies. Having bumped into several Ministry of Defence places on our travels I thought, “Maybe they’ve got a file going on us”; some of the air-force people waved and smiled as they drove by, happily we returned the greeting. It is good to know that people engaged in such different occupations can get along.

We pitched our tent on the sea-wall and had a windy night, neither of us slept well for the noisy flapping of the tent. As we lay there I was convinced that I could hear the sound of a horse grazing just outside, and my curiosity kept me half awake. Large sections of the wall are being rebuilt so, as we set off the next day, we walked past the early shift on the earth-movers; caterpillar tractors, huge bucket-and-crane machines; the men smiled cheerily and said good morning as we went by, a look of amused astonishment on their faces. Walkers of any sort seem to be a rare sight in these parts so we two must be quite a picture. It was hot and sunny again but with a fine breeze so we managed to keep quite cool. In the early afternoon we left the sea-wall and headed into Boston along the lanes.

From miles away we had been able to pin-point the town by its huge tower which dominates the skyline. It is known affectionately by the locals as ‘The Boston Stump’ and is supposed to be the tallest church in England. At first it was pale, shadowy and indistinct but as the day passed and we drew closer, its image became clearer and more solid. Eventually we arrived and made our way to the centre. It seemed like an old market town which had been swelled by modern industry. Sitting on the River Witham, the few winding streets and the great church tower are now surrounded by a spray of small factories and housing estates. Almost oblivious to the passers-by I sat beneath ‘The Stump’ while Nick did some shopping, appreciating the coolness after the heat of the day’s walk; after he returned and had made a few phone calls we were able to sketch out our route for the next few days. Ron Lamont was unable to see us in Lincoln so we decided to head straight up the Wolds to Brigg where Daniel Mariau had invited us; we have more than a week to reach him so we will be able to go at quite a gentle pace. It has been very pleasant these last few days: having nowhere, conventionally, to get to, no appointments; only stops for water or food supplies creating our schedule. Without pressure of time or destination there is a lot of ease in walking; padding along the sea-wall, the road and the river bank, it is quite easy to be peaceful.

We camped beside the river that night a few miles north-west of Boston; at one time the Witham must have meandered all around these low flat fields, nowadays it follows a strong broad band, channelled into straight stretches with tall embankments on either side, there are cattle most of the way along and they have made good paths. We pitched the tent on a flat patch below the bank and climbed back up on top, there was a beautiful sunset and while we sat an otter floated by looking at us; later on we could hear it upstream, splashing about as it fished.

The next morning we carried on for a few miles along the river and chose a good spot on the embankment to have our meal. At this time Nick had been getting low on funds and was experimenting with cheap ways of keeping us nourished; our food was thus basic and very simple to prepare. Having been struck by the sight of a pint tub of cheap natural yoghurt in a Boston shop, Nick had thought what a nice change it would make for us. Our custom was for him to prepare the food, put it in my bowl and then afterwards offer it to me. He poured in half of the yoghurt and then, having divided a large brown loaf into two equal chunks, placed one of these in there too; around the sides were lumps of carrot and a number of ginger biscuits. With it all arranged he offered it to me and gratefully I accepted – a noble square Sumeru, standing in a thick white sea.

At first all went well but after a while of breaking the bread, dunking it and conveying it to my mouth, yoghurt seemed to have got everywhere. With my robe falling off into the food and up to my wrists with white gunk and breadcrumbs, I looked helplessly around for some solution to my predicament. Nick looked up from his Tupperware alms-bowl a little apologetic –

“I’m sorry, bhante – I should have thought . . .”

“No problem”, I reassured him with a smile, I think there are some tissues in my pack.”

After it was over and we were all cleaned up, we sat and I watched the otter at work again: bobbing to the surface with a large silvery mouthful and then disappearing from our view. It was a very quiet river, we saw only a couple of boats all day and met no one until the path reached Chapel Hill.

It was later than we expected when we arrived in Tattershall and we were pretty tired; we took a footpath which led through the village, past Coningsby, to the small oakwood where we camped the night. Like Waresly Wood there was the lovely feeling to it of old age and multiplicity of life; there was also a horde of mosquitoes and midges so we found an airy spot and lit a fire. It was the new moon that night and, as Nick and I had already shared the tent for the allowable limit of three nights1, I decided to sleep out by the fire. On my ground-sheet, covered by my robes and the waterproofs, I bedded down; it was late and I fell asleep instantly. There was no rain in the night and I awoke feeling great, it was four o’clock (which I had not seen for a while), already bright and the air was ringing with birdsong. I got the fire going and did some exercises; after a while Nick emerged from the tent and we sat together, warm by the fire in the morning sun, light and air, slowly waking up.

1The allowable limit of three nights – A bhikkhu is not permitted to share the same dwelling place with a layman for more than three consecutive nights. This training rule was laid down to help promote privacy and an appropriate separateness between Sangha and laity.