After talking with us all morning and giving us a splendid meal Katie, my sister, had to rush off to a wedding. We said goodbye and parted company; then Nick and I set off for Oriana’s house in Kilburn. Zig-zagging our way north-westwards through the town, Nick said, “Bhante?”

“Yes.”

“We will be passing by Mudita’s restaurant in Fulham, should we pop in for a cup of tea?”

“That sounds like a jolly good idea.”

Arriving at the Busabong unannounced, they were surprised to see us; Mudita had been right in the thick of organizing a Thai boxing tournament which was to take place that night. When she appeared it looked as though she had been tied up in knots; we talked together and, after a couple of hours, she was untangled and happy again. She said that she had been on the verge of ringing Chithurst as she was going frantic and that we had appeared just at the right moment. Later her boxing team turned up and we sat together for a while: I did a little chant for them to help them on their way, they were all a bit nervous of the big night. I told them the chanting ensured that their fights would all go perfectly – whether they won or lost. This raised a smile and, as it turned out, that night they were all victorious.

We left in the late afternoon and headed north, the Saturday night vibration was beginning to soak into the air; you could feel the preta-energy of the ‘good-time’ take over as the afternoon shoppers faded out. We managed to make it to the house before things got too raucous, I reflected on the fear which I felt at times like that and how a peaceful house seems such a refuge. Sweet people and pleasant talk late into the night; life at its smooth and easiest. It is certainly a test to walk through the heavy areas (Kilburn, Camden Town), but the inclination to emptiness and acceptance is an unassailable refuge. When you are truly with any situation, cutting through habitual responses, even Camden Town is the Pure Land – lotus blossoms beneath my feet, surrounded by Buddhas.

A man called Charlie Gilbert stopped us for a rap. Telling me of his life, his heart and feelings. An old cockney, he said, “Travellin’ ain’t about miles and time but the people that you’re wiv. . . always listen to people.” Gnarled old Charlie: he had been a thief, a boxer, a traveller; he did not have much more than the clothes he stood up in and the determination to look on life as a comedy. “You gotta larf” he grinned, “ ’cos this world’s so piggin’ miserable.” I liked him but I felt myself pulling away and trying to get on, get moving on to the next place. No time to lose.

A very rainy morning was spent with Oriana, Hartley and their children, Oriana’s sister Pascal was there also. Talking, sitting, watching the rain and looking at family life; after the meal they walked with us part of the way along the canal which was taking us to Camden. Through Little Venice, Maida Vale and Regent’s Park in the green; we emerged at Camden Lock and suddenly found ourselves in the thick of the Sunday afternoon trendies market. It seemed a very different show when I wandered around there on week-ends, six or seven years ago.

We received a warm welcome at Rigpa and spent a couple of nights there. Family and friends of Nick came and visited, offered dāna and sat with us; on Monday he picked up some shopping for the trip while I went for a visit to Colin and Ray’s flat near Primrose Hill. This was the place where the Hampstead Buddhist Group usually met and they had invited us to drop by as we passed through London. A lady called Berry came by at tea-time and we had a good talk together. Back at Rigpa the nightly practice sessions in the music studio across the yard provided a strange backdrop for the evening sittings. The bands walk by and look in as we look out, all gaping at each other’s appearance, amazed at the world we live in.

After an early meal, cooked for us by a young Italian man called Mauro, we said goodbye to Rigpa and headed off again – out across Hampstead Heath and along its northern promontory to bring us to the Finchley Road via Beechwood Avenue. Number fifteen of this street was the house where my mother grew up and also the place where my grandparents lived until a few years ago. When my grandfather died, aged ninety-five, my grandmother moved to Sussex. I talked about them with Nick a lot that day: how my grandfather had been such a saintly man and how my grandmother now lay so helpless, passing her days almost comatose in a nursing home south of Chichester.

After crossing the Finchley Road, past a paddock of Highland Cattle, we eventually reached the long green finger which pokes into the city, from way out north-west beyond Barnet. We followed the Dollis Brook up out of town and now find ourselves encamped by the lake in Wrotham Park. It is raining slightly and you can hear the road to Potters Bar roaring nearby. Everything is going well. The aches wander around our bodies and we are even quite content to live with the mid-afternoon gripes. It hardly seems possible that London is behind us already.

“Feelings of apprehension about a bhikkhu walking through the friendless streets of Kilburn dispersed as the front door opened to the sight of Tan Amaro and Nick. For a few hours, calm and caring filled our lives – subtly leaving light and a smile in our hearts.”

Hartley, Oriana, Eleanor and Oliver