## Glossary

Accents – Vowels written with a line over them, e.g., ā ī ō ū are long: ‘ā’ as in ‘father’, ‘ī’ as in ‘machine’, ‘ō’ as in ‘more’, ‘ū’ as in ‘rude’, ‘ñ’ is pronounced as the ‘ny’ in ‘canyon’, ‘ṁ’ like the ‘ng’ in ‘hang’.

(Unless otherwise stated all the words listed below are from the Pali language.)

Ajahn – A Thai adaptation of the Pali word ‘ācariya’, meaning ‘teacher’. It is also often used in Thailand as an epithet for a senior or teaching monastic, or an academic such as a professor, occasionally becoming their regular form of address, e.g., Ajahn Chah, Ajahn Sumedho.

Anagārika (m), Anagārikā (f) – Literally, ‘homeless one’. A white-robed postulant monk or nun who lives according to the Eight Precepts:

Refraining from taking the life of any living thing.

Refraining from taking that which is not given.

Refraining from all forms of sexual activity.

Refraining from false or abusive speech.

Refraining from the use of drink and drugs for intoxication.

Refraining from taking food after midday.

Refraining from singing, dancing, listening to music, visiting shows, using garlands, scents, cosmetics or any form of adornment.

Refraining from the use of a luxurious sleeping place.

Aniccā vata sankhārā and Aciraṁ vatayaṁ kāyo are the first lines of two separate chants, recited when someone has died.

Aniccā vata sankhārā All things truly they are transient

Uppāda vayadhammino With the nature to arise and cease.

Uppajjitvā nirujjanti Having arisen, then they pass away;

Tesaṁ vūpasamo sukho In their passing, true happiness and peace.

Aciraṁ vatayaṁ kāyo Not long, alas, and it will lie,

Pathaviṁ adhisessati This body here, upon the earth.

Chuddho apetaviññāno Rejected, void of consciousness

Niratthaṁva kalingaraṁ And useless as a rotten log.

Añjali – Reverential salutation. The traditional Eastern gesture of respect and greeting. It is made by raising the hand, palms together, to the chest and bowing the head slightly.

Anumodanā – Blessings; rejoicing in the good which has been done.

Avalokiteshvara – Literally, ‘The One Who Contemplates the Sounds of the World’. A being devoted to the realization of Buddhahood who is of a greatly compassionate nature. In China Avalokiteshvara is known as Kuan Shih Yin or Kuan Yin, in Tibet as Chenrezig.

Bhante – ‘Venerable sir’.

Bhikkhu (Sanskrit: Bhikshu) – A Buddhist monk; literally, one who lives on alms.

Bo or Bodhi tree – The tree under which the Buddha sat on the night of his enlightenment. Generically a ficus religiosa.

Brahmā Sahampati’s plea – The time is shortly after the Buddha’s enlightenment:

Now while the Blessed One was alone in retreat this thought arose in him: “This Law that I have attained to is profound and hard to see, hard to discover; it is the most peaceful and superior goal of all, not attainable by mere ratiocination, subtle, for the wise to experience. But this generation relies on attachment, relishes attachment, delights in attachment. It is hard for such a generation to see this truth, that is to say, Specific Conditionality, Dependent Arising. And it is hard to see this truth, that is to say, the stilling of all formations, relinquishment of the chains of existence, exhaustion of craving, fading of lust, cessation, Nibbāna. And if I taught the Law others would not understand me, and that would be wearying and troublesome for me.” Thereupon there came to him spontaneously these stanzas, never heard before:

“Enough of teaching of the Law That even I found hard to reach;For it will never be perceivedBy those who live in lust and hate.Men dyed in lust, and whom a cloudOf darkness laps, will never seeWhat goes against the stream, is subtle,Deep and hard to see, abstruse.”

Considering thus, his mind favoured inaction and not teaching the Law.

Then it occurred to Brahmā Sahampati, who became aware in his mind of the thought in the Blessed One’s mind, “The world will be lost, the world will be utterly lost; for the mind of the Perfect One, accomplished and fully enlightened, favours inaction and not teaching the Law.”

Then as soon as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, Brahmā Sahampati vanished in the Brahma world and appeared before the Blessed One. He arranged his robe on one shoulder, and putting his right knee to the ground and raising his hands palms together towards the Blessed One, he said, “Lord, let the Blessed One teach the Law. Let the Sublime One teach the Law. There are beings with little dust in their eyes who are wasting through not hearing the Law. Some of them will gain final knowledge of the Law.”

When Brahmā Sahampati had said this he said further:

“In Magadha there has appeared till now Impure law thought out by men still stained:Open the Deathless Gateway: let them hearThe Law the Immaculate has found.Ascend, O Sage, the tower of the Law;And, just as one sees all the folk aroundWho stands upon a solid pile of rock,Survey, O Sorrowless All-seeing Sage,This human breed engulfed in sorrowingThat Birth has at its mercy and Old Age.Arise, O Hero, Victor, Knowledge-bringer,Free From All Debt, and wander in the world.Proclaim the Law; for some,O Blessed One, will understand.”

The Blessed One listened to Brahmā Sahampati’s pleading. Out of compassion for beings he surveyed the world with the eye of an Enlightened One. Just as in a pond of blue, red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without coming up out of it, and some other lotuses that are born and grow in the water rest on the water’s surface, and some other lotuses that are born and grow in the water come right up out of the water and stand clear, unwetted by it, so too he saw beings with little dust on their eyes and with much dust on their eyes, with keen faculties and dull faculties, with good qualities and bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach, and some who dwelt seeing fear in the other world and blame as well. When he had seen, he replied:

“Wide open are the portals of the Deathless. Let those who hear show faith. If I was mindedTo tell not the Law sublime I know,’Twas that I saw vexation in the telling.”

Then Brahmā Sahampati thought: “I have made it possible for the Law to be taught by the Blessed One”. And after he had paid homage to him, keeping him on his right, he vanished at once. (Mahavagga I, Bhikkhu Ñānamoli trans.)

Buddha pūjā – A symbolic offering, usually of food placed on the shrine-table during a ceremony.

Buddha-rūpa – A Buddha statue.

Dāna – Literally, ‘generosity’ or ‘offering’. In common usage it mostly refers to the offering of alms-food, alms-food itself or a financial donation. Generosity is held in such high regard and the cultivation of it so fundamental to the practice of the Buddha’s teaching, that it is found to permeate throughout the society of all Buddhist countries. For example, in virtually any part of Thailand, a monk can go out on his morning alms-round and he will receive enough food to last him for the day. It is recognized in the Buddhist world that to give is both a joy and an honour and, as the laity gives freely of its material support, so the Sangha provides spiritual support in return. This spiritual support is given both in demonstrating by example the benefits of a virtuous life, and also by the active exposition of the teaching. Since the blessings of wisdom and the awakened mind are realized only because of the freedom which such generosity provides, so, in return, once Truth is recognized and life is lived simply as a response to it, the only course open is to give freely of the understanding which one has. This mutual support is the fruition of faithful practice of the Buddha’s teaching.

Dasasīlamāta – A brown-robed Buddhist nun who has taken on the lifestyle of mendicancy in the form of the Ten Precepts, i.e., the anagārikā precepts plus the additional precept of refraining from the use of money. They also use a more refined code of conduct to encourage sensitivity towards other beings and limitations on their personal needs. Since the time of that first ordination in 1983 the community of Ten Precept nuns associated with Chithurst Monastery, and later Amaravati, have been known by the title of ‘Sīladharā’ – ‘those who cherish and uphold virtue’.

Devatā or Deva – A celestial being or deity, one who lives in heavenly realms.

Dhamma (Sanskrit: Dharma) – Law or truth: this is both in the sense of the laws of nature and as the teachings of the Buddha. In the wider sense both of these refer to the Ultimate Truth which, by its nature, defies the bounds of language. In the scriptures the Dhamma is often described as having the following qualities: it is to be realized here and now; it is timeless; it invites investigation; it is to be experienced by oneself; it is found within each wise person for themselves.

Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta – ‘The Discourse on Setting in Motion of the Wheel of Truth’. Following Brahmā Sahampati’s plea, this was the first discourse of the Buddha after his enlightenment; it was to his five disciples on the full-moon night of July (Āsālhā Pūjā) in the deer park near Benares. This event is celebrated each year by the recitation of the sutta on this night.

Dhammadhātu – Most often this word is used with ‘dhamma’ in the sense of ‘mental object’. In the context of the narrative, however, it means element or body of Truth.

Dukkha – Suffering, separateness, anguish, discontent, in fact any sense of unsatisfactoriness at all; mental, physical or emotional, coarse or refined.

Dukkha-nirodha – The cessation of suffering.

Evaṁ – ‘Thus’. ‘Thus it is’. The traditional form of signifying completion.

Gompa – The Tibetan word for the central teaching and meditation hall of a monastery.

Karmapa – His Holiness The 16th Karmapa Lama, head of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism, recently deceased.

Karmic, from the Sanskrit ‘karma’ (Pali: ‘kamma’) – Literally this word means ‘action’. It is used regularly in written and spoken English nowadays but is taken to mean more the result of an action than strictly ‘action’ itself.

Kathina – The ceremony of offering cloth and other requisites to the Sangha after the three-month ‘Rains Retreat’. Often a time when many disciples of a single teacher gather.

King Yama – In both Buddhist and Hindu cosmology he is the ‘Lord of the Dead’, ruler of the Underworld.

Kōan (Japanese, from the Chinese ‘kung an’; literally, ‘public record’.) – A fundamental paradox. A problem or question for which no logical answer will suffice. ‘Holding a kōan’ is a meditation practice designed to make clear the limitations of the intellect; bursting the bubbles of conceptualisation and awakening the mind to the true nature of things.

Māla beads – Recitation-beads or rosary.

Mantra – A vocally or mentally repeated syllable, word, phrase or passage of significance. The repetition of a mantra is used to focus the attention and guard the mind from straying thoughts and sensory influences.

Māra – ‘The Evil One’, the ‘tempter’ of Buddhist cosmology. He is lord of illusion and opponent of transcendent wisdom.

Mettā – Most commonly translated as ‘loving-kindness’, but refers more properly to peaceful coexistence. It is a non-contention with all things, a universal kindness to both lovable and unlovable alike.

Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa – ‘Homage to the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One’. This is the customary salutation to the Buddha at the beginning of all texts, devotional chants and formal talks in the Theravāda tradition.

Nazgûl (also called the Black Riders or Ringwraiths) – The menacing lieutenants of Sauron, the Dark Lord, in J.R.R. Tolkien’s fantasy, ‘The Lord of the Rings’.

Pali – An ancient Indian vernacular, the scriptural language of the Theravāda (or Southern) Buddhist School.

Pārājika – Literally, ‘defeat’. The first four precepts of the bhikkhu’s discipline are called the pārājika training rules. The breaking of these precepts brings about the cessation of one’s life as a bhikkhu (i. e. you have been defeated by greed, hatred and delusion). The four are:

Refraining from all forms of sexual intercourse.

Refraining from stealing.

Refraining from committing or encouraging murder or suicide.

Refraining from laying false claim to supernormal powers.

Pārami – And alternative Pali form of ‘pāramitā’, also used in Thai, meaning literally, ‘perfections’ or ‘virtues’. In common usage it means more the accumulated store of, or ease of access to, such qualities. One who is gifted or meets with much good fortune is ajudged as one who has a lot of pārami.

In the Theravāda tradition the pāramitā are reckoned ten in number:

Generosity,

Morality,

Renunciation,

Intelligence Or Wisdom,

Energy,

Patient Endurance,

Honesty,

Resolution,

Loving-kindness Or Non-contention,

Equanimity.

Pindabaht – The Thai form of ‘pindapāta’, meaning either the morning alms-round or alms-food itself.

Preta (Sanskrit; Pali: ‘peta’) – A hungry ghost, that is to say, a being of the lower realms of existence whose craving is insatiable. In traditional cosmology pretas are characterised as creatures of incessant hunger with a mouth the size of a pinhole.

Pūjā – Literally, ‘worship’. Often it is used to refer to devotional chanting.

Puñña – Blessings or benefit arising from living in accordance with the Truth.

Pure Land – In the Mahāyāna, or Northern Buddhist, tradition the Pure Land is the Western Paradise presided over by Amitabha Buddha; the Land of Ultimate Bliss. It is a realm of great richness and beauty, of saintly beings, where pain and sorrow are unknown. It corresponds to the higher Brahma Realms in Theravāda cosmology.

Rigpa – The centre and fellowship headed by Lama Sogyal Rimpoche. The name derives from a reform movement in Tibet, founded to help bring the different Buddhist schools together.

Sādhu – ‘It is well’. A traditional expression of approval.

Sangha – The community of those who practise the Buddha’s teaching, or, more specifically, those who have been ordained and taken on the lifestyle of mendicancy.

Sanghāti – A bhikkhu has only three robes:

The lower – Antaravāsaka, also known as the waist-cloth or, in Thai, sabong.

The upper – Uttarāsanga, worn covering the body from the neck to the shins. In Thai this is called the jeewon.

The outer – Sanghāti, of similar dimensions to the upper robe but is two layers thick for warmth in cold weather.

Other clothing, additional to these three, can be used according to climatic conditions.

Saññā – Memory, perception or ideation.

Sixth Patriarch – Hui Neng (or Wei Lang) was the sixth patriarch of the Ch’an Buddhist School in China. He lived in the T’ang Dynasty, some thirteen hundred years ago; his words are recorded in ‘The Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra’.

Stūpa – A reliquary, usually round or conical but of any size from an inch or two to several hundred feet. When Geshe-la handed this one to me he said, “This is an object of the Buddha’s mind.”

Sumeru (also called Meru or Sineru) – The sacred mountain and axis of the world in Buddhist cosmology. It is enormously high, surrounded by water and seven concentric mountain ranges.

T’ai Chi (also called T’ai Chi Chuan) – A Chinese form of physical and mental training. The practice takes the form of a sequence of slow, graceful, well-balanced movements, executed with a calm and concentrated mind.

Thangka – A Tibetan decorated wall-hanging. Usually thangkas bear symbolic pictures of the Buddha or the great disciples; they often form the centre-piece of a shrine.

The Land of Nod – An area in Surrey, just south of Frensham Ponds.

Triple Gem (also known as the Three Refuges) – Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha: these refer not only to Gotama Buddha, his teaching and disciples, but also to the qualities within an individual which correspond to these, that is to say: wisdom and compassion; the true nature of existence; and virtuous and harmonious abiding. One who takes refuge in the Triple Gem lives in the safety of the unshakable heart.

Tusita Heaven – ‘The Heaven of the Contented’. One of the realms of sensory bliss in Buddhist cosmology.

Vassa – Technically the Indian rainy season (July to November); however, the word is more commonly used to refer to the three-month ‘Rains Retreat’ which occurs at this time and is obligatory for the Theravāda Sangha.

Vihāra – A monastic residence, usually quite small.

Visākha day (also known as Wesak) – This is the full-moon day of May. It was on this day, in the appropriate years of the Buddha’s life, that his birth, enlightenment and final passing away occurred.

Zendo – The central meditation hall of a Zen monastery.