We have left the Fens far behind us and are now sitting, well fed, on top of Hoe Hill, an old mound near the Bluestone Ridge. Around us the Lincoln Wolds lie folded in gentle green rumples, the barley is billowing in the wind and the sun is shining brightly. It is hard to imagine that the world could be any more beautiful than this. It was only a few hours ago, however, that we were chased from our campsite by hordes of hungry midges, the skies were lowering, the wind cold and rain was threatening to fall. It was only a short while before that that the same valley seemed like paradise . . . it only goes to show.

We left the wood near Coningsby later than we thought and walked into Mareham-le-Fen for supplies, we could see the hills beginning to our left and were quite struck by them after so long in flat country. After Nick had found the village shop we pressed on, I was extremely hungry after the long walk we had had the day before and found myself becoming quite uptight as we walked on and on and on.

“Why don’t we just sit down and EAT? Find a beauty spot later, Nick. It’s terrible karma to keep a bhikkhu so hungry like this” – my thoughts bubbled on – “This is RIDICULOUS!”

Eventually Nick picked up my mood and we carried on just until we reached a nearby wood, finally coming to a halt under a beech tree on the verge. He had been planning to go another three miles, to where our route met a good footpath but was happy we had stopped when we found out the time. I took the clock out of my pack and looked at it – 12:16 – I had reckoned it much earlier. That same morning, for once, I had dismissed my desire to look at the time; “What do you need to know the time for? Let go. Stay with the timeless for a change.” Knowing that it was four o’clock when I got up lent the impression that we had ages before we need think about stopping for the meal.

Once we had got over our initial surprise Nick managed to put the food together in a matter of minutes; we were both able to eat quite calmly and I only had half an apple left by the time the midday limit arrived at one o’clock. It had been cloudy that morning and, by this time, it had got quite cold and windy. We walked on until we reached the footpath and found it to be a broad, well-used track, before long the wind dropped again and the humid atmosphere returned. We sat down to take a rest in the long grass of the verge. I was so tired and it was so comfy it seemed a little snooze would be just the thing, just this once; I wrapped myself up in my robe, stretched out my legs and thought aaaaahhh.

I awoke to the sound of breaking wood and found Nick getting a fire started for some afternoon tea, we had never made any at that time before but as we both seemed so tired it sounded like a very good idea; it was past five o’clock and I had slept a long time. Refreshed but still weary we headed on for Snipe Dales, a nature reserve just south-west of the village of Hagworthingham. On the way Nick stopped by a house to ask for some water and got into conversation with the people there; I sat on my pack at the roadside and, after a while, Nick returned smiling broadly, carrying goat’s milk, tea, sugar and eggs as well as the water he had gone for. He told me they had given us all this, so I went over and said hello. We chatted about the walk and the English countryside, Nick was able to help them out by identifying some trees in their garden and we parted company in good spirits. We walked through the nature reserve and pitched our tent on a hilltop just beyond the eastern edge. By the woods there were hordes of midges, so we opted for being wind-blown but unbitten.

It was cold and rainy the next morning, there was a stiff breeze and the skies were heavy. As I sat on the hilltop I could feel the effect again of trying to fill up the unknown with the known, as on the day before: waiting to see if there was a shop in the village; waiting to see when Nick was going to stop walking; now waiting to see where Nick had gone having disappeared so early. “Has he missed the time again? Will there be a village shop?” – You can feel a whimpering compulsion to know, to have things spelled out, safe and certain; yet there is that which intuits that uncertainty about the world is the realistic view and that the ‘known’ is little more than a fragile convention: a structure which is functional and valid for a while but definitely not worth taking refuge in. Letting go, renunciation of conventions, is the learning to be at ease in boundless emptiness.

Alone that morning I contemplated our perceptions: our problems, feelings, pains and hang-ups; all the things which happen in a life. Whether the cause is habitual attachments, the state of the weather, the planets, the government or just plain human ignorance, these things can only reach so far into the mind and then they cease. Like reaching the end of the world, they step off into a great nothingness.

We ate in the tent that day as it was raining and we decided that we would not move until the morrow. We had shifted camp down the hill to be near the stream in the valley bottom and had a good fire going to keep the midges at bay. I spent the afternoon mending some things and Nick went off to explore the nature reserve. We brewed up some tea early in the evening and sat, looking around the dale; it was a beautiful spot with willows and alders lining the stream. A patch of may-blossom and ash trees was half-way up the slope and blue streaks of sky flashed occasionally in the running cloud. So alone and quiet – it was hard to believe that this little valley had once witnessed the horrors of warfare. In this place though, a few hundred years ago, Cavalier had met Roundhead and many were slain in the battle.

As twilight came that evening the midge presence increased until we retreated up the hill, into the peace of the wind. We sat until late and then headed down the thistly slope in the dark. The night was quite black now but for a far-off road and the distant lights of Skegness. There were still a few midges in the tent when we returned but I managed to wrap myself up and, protected from their hungry bites, I fell asleep quite happily. At five a.m. I was awoken from a dream about orchids and a golden mango by their tickly bites all around my head. There were droves of them so I went back up the hill for refuge, on the top I found Nick fast asleep as he had fled there in the night; after sitting for a while it began to rain, Nick awoke and we returned together to pack up. Trying to keep cool amidst a flurry of midge-bites we got our things organized and left, heading north-east for the Viking Way.

As the sun broke out we arrived on this hilltop and we have been enjoying the warmth ever since. The acres of barley or somesuch are still rippling in the wind and, for the moment, all is right with the world.