I write this sitting in a spacious, white upper room of Chapter House near Wisbech. When we were at Noy Thomson’s in Tilford, Tew Bunnag invited us to join him and his students for the last day of this retreat and we arrived here last night. They are all pleased to see us and are looking after us very well.

Our time with Sister Nanda was packed with exciting little trifles: talks and visits, gardens and flowers and a stream of ‘allowables’1 which came our way at unerringly frequent intervals; sweets and chocolates heaped, daintily, on little dishes for our delight. As there were other people sleeping in neighbouring flats we did no morning chanting but simply met and sat. After tea we talked for a long time; each of us intermittently writing a postcard, preparing the food or popping off to take care of some little task. Our conversations took us into the late morning and carried on after the meal, Nanda’s tales of her life in Sri Lanka, how it is with Nick and I, Switzerland and Chithurst; talking, rambling ever on, never seeming to go in any particular direction but warmed and illuminated by peaceful light and happiness. If ever there was a devatā in the world, Nanda, in the company of bhikkhus, is the one.

In the afternoon Nanda’s daughter-in-law drove us to a nearby village to visit some friends, Lyn and Pelham Bird. They were a noble old couple living in a beautiful house and through their garden ran the River Nar. They asked us many questions about the walk and our lives; we spoke a long time, dawdling in pleasant boulevards of thought and view, insight and inner feeling. They were pleased to have Nick there since, as we walked around the garden, they were able to ask him all about their plants – the wild flowers and the trees they loved.

We arrived back at Nanda’s flat only minutes after Mr. Green, Carole Winter’s father, had drawn up; due to spend the evening with him and his wife, we switched cars and were driven off to their home in Saham Toney. Mrs. Green was very pleased to see us and, shortly after we arrived, she put on the video tape of Ajahn Sumedho’s T.V. appearance in a programme called ‘Partly Satirical Broadcast’. It had been a series of interviews and documentaries concerning the current political parties and their alternatives in Britain. This had been a special surprise for Nanda, but she was not very pleased with it and said, “It did not give him enough of a chance to explain everything.”

We spent the evening talking with the Greens; Mrs. has become quite a devoted Buddhist in recent months and Mr., although not too sympathetic, was very kind and friendly. Once again our conversation wandered here and there; although the words so often seem inconsequential in such chat, they seem to serve as a way for people to be together – an excuse to share some time and space in friendliness, meeting together and letting the light shine a little.

The next morning began with a terrific thunderstorm, lightning flashing all around the town and rain gushing on the roof in rivers; after a couple of hours it was all but finished and left us with a quiet and well-washed day. We spent our time looking at old photographs and getting our things ready for our departure; Nanda prepared another banquet for us and, as a special ‘treat’, she bought us fish and chips; given a choice we tend to encourage people to offer vegetarian food but our training as mendicants is to accept with a grateful heart whatever is presented sincerely to us. She is so kind and generous, one has to practically hold her down to stop her from running about bringing things; she gave me a beautiful mother-of-pearl shell to put on my shrine. After the meal her son came round and we had a good chat together; Nanda seems to have spent most of her life in the company of and caring for, men whom life has wounded: her father, her husband, her son. She lives as a small light dissolving the darkness that has invaded, truly a great blessing in the world.

At about three o’clock we departed, the rain had cleared and, after one final shower, it was a warm bright afternoon. We tromped down a long green lane filled with rain-soaked cow-parsley and may-blossom, it felt good to be outside again. We followed the lane westward through lush farmland; watching sunlight sparkling on the rivulet running down the path, it seemed just like the lark-song:

a thing so clear and beautiful, there is nothing you can say or think – it dances past the naming mind, glittering a smile and daring you to create. We put our packs down for a rest at the edge of a huge wheat field and sat for a while in the sun. After a moment a man came up to us and said hello. He was a truck-driver who made a run every week from Nottingham down through East Anglia and on Thursdays he would park in the wood by this wheat field to spend the night. He had never met other people at this spot before and was delighted to see us. We talked a long time about life and religion; he was a good man and very kindly offered to donate his sandwiches to us but, being well-supplied with food and not wishing him to go without, we declined the offer. We stayed a while together, exchanging Dhamma and enjoying the warm afternoon.

We pressed on through the long Norfolk lanes until we reached the River Nar which we followed for a while. After a painful stretch through half a mile of thick nettles, we arrived at the wood where we had chosen to camp for the night. We found a sandy hollow of young oak and birches within the pine plantation and were soon sitting by a fire. The night was wild and dark with high winds, spits of rain. I began to think of Norfolk witches: “This is just the place they would hold a sabbat”. Dark forces, lurking malice – the mind began to run. How to meet fear? How to meet evil, black wizardry and demons? A warm feeling welled within as I reflected on all this; taking refuge in true wisdom – lokuttara paññā – the ultimate white magic.

The following day broke fine and clear, we walked through the woodlands for a while and stopped for our meal just before the village of Watlington. After we crossed the Great Ouse the land became completely flat; miles and miles of lush, humble farms, deep ditches and vast skies. It was a long hot walk, following lanes and farm-tracks all the way to Wisbech; our circular horizon was broken only by occasional trees and houses and the slight green ridge which we had come from in the East. We do not talk very much these days and the walking through such countryside is very peaceful, like North-East Thailand the land is vast, open and unexciting.

We arrived at Chapter House at about eight o’clock last night and were warmly met by Fizz, Tew Bunnag’s wife. Sitting in the kitchen we talked and drank tea; happiness, with my feet thrumming gently in the warm relief of a mustard bath. Later on Tew appeared, the evening sitting having finished, and we talked together for a while. He is very glad to have us join the retreat and many of the people are eager to meet us. This morning we joined them for their first sitting of the day; soon I will go down to give a talk and answer questions. It is bright and sunny again, another perfect day.

1Allowables – The Buddha allowed bhikkhus to use certain things, outside of the dawn/noon time limit, for tonic or medicinal purposes. These include: sugar, honey, vegetable oil, tea, coffee and fruit juice, which are in quite common usage. Other items such as plain chocolate (milk is considered to be ‘food’, thus anything containing it is not allowable), may be used in moderation to counteract fatigue and illness – or in Sister Nanda’s case, to allow an old lady, living by herself, the joy of offering her guests a special treat.