We left the canal bank, following lanes and footpaths, and headed off to the west. By mid-morning it was very hot and the subject of the weather was being discussed all through the village of Levens. People on the street were speculating as to how long it would last; how they loved it, how they hated it. We crossed the flat plain of the estuary, and for a while it felt as though we were back in the fens again: suddenly the hills were gone and here were level roads, deep ditches and even low-flying fighters to complete the scene. It was not long before the great bulk of Whitbarrow was looming more and more clearly in the misty air, however, and soon we were climbing again. We stopped for our meal on a broad footpath on the lower slopes of the hill and stayed there, quite alone, for the remainder of the day. Quiet, sitting in the leafy shade, our sweat and dew-soaked things out drying in the sun.

“Now that want and hate are done away with, Attending to the moment, here I sitIn the shade of spreading leaves – and all is well.”

A little later Nick went up the hill to explore and found a spring from which to fill our water-bottles. From the top, he said, there was a good view over the haze of Morecambe Bay and over all the towns and hills around us. We carried on westwards through the gentle valleys and hillsides, woodlands of the area; frequently we stopped for rests to let the flies subside, put more fluid in and let the sweat dry off. Crossing through one farm we forded a small river and met the farmer on the other side. We chatted together for a while about our walk and how we had been doing. It seemed as though he would have liked us to stay on his farm but, as we had only walked for an hour since the meal, we felt the need to press on. As it happened we still did not go as far as we had expected. After a stiff climb through some woodland we sat to rest at the top and drank the last of our water. Nick decided to refill at a nearby farm and returned a while later bottle-less.

“We’ve been invited for tea, bhante.”

It turned out that the old farmer, Mr. Parkin, had spotted Nick going by the window and, mistaking him for Chris Bonnington the famous mountaineer, had called out loudly in surprise. Nick had knocked at the door and the farmer and his wife, after chatting with him for a while, had invited the two of us for tea. Being a bit of a wag the old farmer was a little concerned that he might not be able to resist teasing me, however he did very well and managed to restrain himself. We had a fine time with them, talking of our journey and the old farming days. His talk and questions were remarkably like those of the old man in Barbon.

“How did it all change so fast?”

“People always seem to be so discontent.”

“Her and I are eighty-three, we aren’t goin’ to be around much longer, why be miserable?”

It was good to be together and hard to tear ourselves away from all the words of friendliness and hospitality. Their country ways had warmed us. Their kitchen was old and mellow, with its big range and well-worn comfy chairs. They had been there for fifty years and their lives seemed completely merged with this room and the farm. As we finally left the house, from inside we heard the farmer’s voice.

“Smashin’ – that were really great.”

We had made some more friends and had left behind a small trace of the Buddha’s pollen to ripen in their lives. By this time the evening shadows were lengthening so we climbed the next hill above the farm and decided to look for a place to stop for the night. Our feet carried us over high pastures and through boggy patches of the hilltops, taking us onto the heights behind Grange-over-Sands. There was a good breeze and we could see for miles all around; as the night drew in the lights of the bay appeared and the crescent of a new moon hung in the southern sky. We sat until late, letting go of the day and watching the moon turn orange, dissolving at last in a swamp of cloud lying on the horizon.

Having both slept out again, because of the heat, we woke early and set off after sitting for a short while. The mist was thick and the hills around us had vanished in the white. We dropped over the wall of our field and clambered down the steep hillside to the main road beneath us. Down in the valley the air was thick and our progress slow, our energy sapped by the atmosphere – hot and humid even by early morning. We did not have far to go but the country was quite rough; it was later than we had reckoned when we passed through Haverthwaite.

This area has many fine plants: on the morning’s journey we found marsh-orchids and bog-ashphodels in profusion on the hilltops and Nick discovered a nature reserve close by the river where we stopped for our meal. As we were sitting in the shade by the water a little man came up and said hello to us. He was the bailiff and looking after the river was his job. He sat down with us and we talked together for quite a while. He asked about the Manjushri Institute (where we were going), how the place worked and the different Buddhist traditions. He had been there before with his children but had only seen around the grounds. He was keen to learn more about the place and was impressed by the usefulness of such a centre.

The old men around these parts really love to talk – being friendly, gaffing about old times and the way things are seems to be their province. A little later in the afternoon we met another old fellow and stood for ages chatting together on the pavement by the coast road. Hearing of his life, the local tales (how his brother had seen the one German prisoner who managed to escape in the war, skulking along the railway tracks, making his way to the coast), telling us of the paths we could take and a whole lot more besides. It was quite a sad situation though – I found that I wanted to get on and could feel this reflected in his wanting to get through: the more my ear closed and I wanted to get away, the stronger his efforts to penetrate. All this wanting led to little peace of mind and we ended up having to prise ourselves apart. Oh well.

Down by the sea there was a good breeze so at first the afternoon was cooler than we had known for a long time. We followed the old railway line down the headland and, after a long sweaty tramp, arrived on the beach below Conishead Priory, home of the Manjushri Institute. Nick was quite exhausted, sore-footed and hot so he asked if he might go for a swim; shedding most of his garments he plunged into the sea and returned smiling, cooler and refreshed. After sitting there for a little while we made our way through the small woodland up to the main house. As we emerged from the trees the towering, pinnacled building loomed above us. Block upon block, wings, turrets and curling towers stood stacked up high before us. We swung the great front door open as the gong for pūjā filled the air. Evening light streamed through the kaleidoscope of stained glass windows and, down the long broad corridor before us, Western Tibetan monks and nuns scurried about, getting ready for chanting.

One of the novices had time to show us to our rooms, leaving us to bathe and unwind for a couple of hours before other members of the Sangha came to see us. It turned out that it was the birthday of Geshe-la, the principal teacher at the institute, and so they had held a special ceremony of offering that evening. It felt good to have arrived on such an auspicious day and the greeting we received from the community was very touching: offering us the small trays of Buddha-pūjā, which had been placed on the shrine for that evening. We talked for a while over tea and arranged a few things about our stay before retiring for the night.

During the day, when we were sitting by the river, Nick mentioned that there had been a message from Manjushri that we were to call Harnham when we arrived. Both of us found the idea coming into our minds that we were going to be asked to hurry up and get to Northumberland as soon as possible. Nothing was said between us but, as I sat after the meal, I heard the familiar whispers of Māra, patterns of speculation and projection, running around in the mind. “When he says this, I shall say that” – practising lines for the scenario. As wisdom was telling me not to buy into this, I promptly brought up the ‘worst’ possibilities for the situation. I had not realized how attached I had become to the idea of how the walk would end and how upsetting any other alternative would be. I sat there, reflecting on the journey, the Journey and the priorities of monastic life. Of course, you just do what your teachers ask and you let go of what you want – if I was told to get on a bus and arrive at Harnham the next day, that would be absolutely fine. After a while of cutting off ideas about the walk in this way, I found the panic beginning to abate and, by the time I was due to make the call, I felt almost at ease about it all. As it was, predictably, we had only been asked to ring in order to allay the rumours of us needing to arrive at Harnham early.

“Just whenever, venerable. However long it takes is O.K.”

Thus Ajahn Ānando’s voice assured us. There had been some comment misunderstood earlier on, he had really not been concerned about the time at all. I must confess, even though I was prepared to do anything, I felt quite relieved that things were going to carry on as we had planned. It was a good lesson in seeing how attachment to ideas of the future secretly crystallize and solidify; you forget that anything can happen at any time – that plans are only “flowers in air” and that death comes without warning.

We spent the day talking with the monks, nuns and lay-people of the community: sat here in this fine room they have given us,  passing long and peaceful hours, talking of Chithurst and monastic forms, the walk, the precepts, family life and how to deal with everything. They invited me to give a talk in the Gompa that evening. As at the Samatha Centre, there were thirty or forty people there for the occasion: I spoke about tudong and our pilgrimage through England. There were many good questions and a joyous sense of fellowship.

After the talk some of the nuns came by and spent the remainder of the evening with us; asking about the structure of the precepts, levels of ordination and many other points of discipline. There is a very good feeling here and, although the Sangha is quite young, a lot of heart has obviously gone into the place. Smiling friendly faces, the massive, slightly ramshackled building, and a host of colourful images are ever present. People are doing everything possible to make our visit comfortable and we are being given much respect. It is very good to be here.