“Tudong, just the word to me is a very powerful word. I have always wanted to follow anyone when I hear they are doing a tudong, but being a woman, it’s always a bit complicated. I personally hope situations may be more flexible. When I heard that Tan Amaro was going to walk from Chithurst to Harnham with Nick Scott, I really wanted to join them – part of the way anyway. I was given permission to do so by Tan Ajahn Sumedho, somehow I was very lucky.

It was a very pleasant surprise, and an auspicious day for us, because we were having a Thai Boxing Tournament on the day when Tan Amaro and Nick turned up at the Busabong unexpectedly; the boxers were just about to do the meditation before leaving for the tournament, and I was personally wishing I had got more than one pair of hands and legs. Tan Amaro arrived with a big smile, and I felt well, I must have done a little bit of good sometime, somewhere for him to be here at just the right moment! His unexpected visit and his smile really cooled me down.

It may sound silly to some people, but I had made an ‘Adhitthāna’ (a determination) that I must meet Tan Amaro at somepoint during his walk before I go to Los Angeles. After many hectic, strange and stretched arrangements we (Abby and I) found ourselves waiting for them on the M62! Abby was looking left, I was looking to the right; an hour later, after a little bit of doubt – “Are we in the right place?” – Tan Amaro and Nick came walking up to us right on the road straight ahead. It was such a beautiful day, maybe a little windy, but the sun was shining and I felt very good, full of joy. We found a nice spot, laid out the food, offered to him and talked for nearly one and a half hours, then he and Nick left.

I learnt one thing from Tan Amaro, and I will always remember it; I thought I am the only person who thinks this way, but Tan Amaro has explained it.

‘Mudita’ he said, ‘it’s very nice to go into the unknown because it teaches us not to expect anything, and there there is so much space for our minds!’”

Mudita