We have come down from the moors and are suddenly back amongst small farms and country lanes; packed now with dog-roses, fox-gloves, honey-suckle and swarming flies – high summer is definitely with us. Last night the two of us slept out by an old canal after the sweatiest spell so far; soggy robe for a pillow at the end of a long day.

We had both rested well in our little camp up above the craggy valley, the sky was already clear by early morning so we set off promptly to reach Barbon before it got too hot. That little valley was the border with Cumbria, so once across it, with a last stretch of moorland, we descended for a couple of hours and were soon in amongst the gentle hills and woodlands of the coastal area. Following a small river valley down into the village, I waited in the shade while Nick went to do some shopping. An old farmer came by and said good morning, we had a long chat together and he said to drop in any time I was near Barbon again. He was a sweet old fellow, he met Nick in the shop also, so he heard some more about our walk. I asked a question about the village, he tried to remember the answer but it just would not appear.

“Can’t do anythin’ about, can you? Old age. You just can’t remember things so well. Got arthritis too,” he said smiling.

“Well if you were sixteen you would have good reason to complain.”

“I’m not doin’ so bad though – if I live ‘til next April I’ll be eighty. If y’ take it easy, go a bit steady, y’ll live to a good age. If y’re satisfied y’ll ’ave a good life. Only them as wants to be rich is never satisfied.”

The lanes took us further down into the valley and we stopped for our meal at the water’s edge after fording the River Lune. Under the dense greenery of an old sycamore we spent the day; watching some stoats at play on a fallen tree and the splashes of salmon as they leapt up to catch the passing insects. We did our washing in the river and laid our things out to dry over the hot, smooth rocks beside the water. Nick went for a bathe down at the deeper stretch but I did not join him, having had a good wash that morning, up in the limestone scoops of our little valley in the moors.

The walk from the Lune to this canal bank was hot and sticky; wet and smelly, we were like magnets for the flies – for long stretches there were clouds of them, buzzing frantically about our heads. Whenever we stopped and cooled off they would diminish, and whenever the sweat began to flow again they would increase: what a sweet and simple equation for our existence. At one point we were climbing a long hill past a dairy farm. From behind us we heard the farmer’s voice:

“’Ow far ’ave y’ come?”

We talked a little about our walk as we went along, he climbing the hill behind us with his dogs. He told us there was a small reservoir over the other side which we could visit if we liked.

“People are not supposed to go there wi’out permission, but I give y’ permission. It ain’t ma place but I’m supposed to look after it,” he smiled, nut-brown and bright-eyed. We said goodbye as he turned into a field about half-way up the hill. So hot and sweaty by the time we reached the top, Nick and I found ourselves almost irresistibly drawn to the lake. Before we knew it we were swimming there, with long happy strokes in the cool of the water; watching later the darts and dodges of electric, needle-blue dragon-flies as we sat drying off in the sun.