Still tired from the activity of the last few days, I have been nodding gently, as we sit here, on the banks of a small tarn up in the Cumbrian mountains. Noy and Lydia have left to return to their cottage for supper and, apart from the hills and the sheep, we are quite alone.

Our time at the Manjushri Institute was spent in almost incessant conversation. All through the afternoon of the first day people came by to see us; there were a few familiar faces from Chithurst and Wisbech and many, many new ones. A couple of the community members spent most of the time with us – first Karen and then Sue from Manchester. We sat in our upper room, drinking tea and letting the conversation roam; we carried on until it was time for me to give my talk in the Dharma hall. I had not had enough time to consider what to say let alone be worried about it, so I went in, began with ‘Namo’ and carried on until I got to ‘evaṁ’. There was much enthusiasm for it all; the inspiration and interest arising from our visit was becoming clear and it was not until quite late that we turned in.

The next day followed a similar pattern: I spent some time in the morning writing the diary and talking with Liba, a Czechoslovakian girl, who had stayed at Chithurst and was now living at Manjushri. She told us how difficult things were in her own country for someone who wishes to be a Buddhist. The only books available on the subject were those loosely related, so she had had to glean what she could from Asian philosophy and history texts. For people to meet as a Buddhist group was not allowable, so those interested had to be called a yoga or meditation society. These were considered passable because of their non-religious qualities, of exercise, in the former, and the psychotherapeutic value of the latter. Once you have overstayed your exit permit from the country, for holiday or study, if you go back, you go back to prison. Liba had been out well past this limit and was now seeking refugee status in Britain. Her only real interest was in practice of the Buddha-dharma and the job she now had, working in Manjushri’s kitchens, was like being in paradise for her.

After the meal some people joined us for tea but we soon had to part as an appointment had been arranged at one o’clock with Geshe Kelsang. Our meeting with him was a long and joyous occasion; it seemed as though there was an endless number of things to talk about and our conversation flowed like mountain rivers – clear water running in a thousand hidden crannies. It was lovely to share some time with him, he was very happy to see us and was delighted by the idea of our walk. His command of English was not too good and at first he did not realize that we had walked from Chithurst. When it became clear to him how we had been travelling he was quite astounded.

“What!” he exclaimed, “using feet?!?”

We told him of the recent developments at Chithurst and Harnham and swopped our news of mutual friends. During our talk he gave us a small wooden stūpa and some incense as gifts; we spent about an hour and a half together – it could have been all afternoon if we had not had to excuse ourselves and disappear to keep our appointment with Sister Rosa for tea.

An old friend of Phyllis Turner (whom we had visited in Hitchin), she had come up and handed me a couple of envelopes at the beginning of my talk. Phyllis had sent up some photographs from the time of our visit, together with a very sweet letter. We had chatted with Rosa afterwards and she had invited us to pay her a call the next day. Once we had left Geshe-la we went to meet her in the library and then repaired to her cottage for tea. For a time we sat and talked in the happy jumble of a sitting-room which occupied most of the ground floor of the house. Surrounded by images of the Buddha and luminaries of the Tibetan tradition, thangkas she had embroidered, pictures, books and a thousand undefined oddments, we sat sipping China tea and talking.

In the late afternoon we were expecting Noy and her friend Lydia to arrive. After we left the quadrangle of cottages where Rosa lived, we turned out onto the main drive. We took a few steps into the open and saw Noy emerge, waving to us from the doorway of her car. She and Lydia had pulled up that minute after a long hot drive and they were very happy to see us. We chatted a while together on the lawn and arranged things for the next day. It seemed that all their plans for supporting us during the next week were going to work out; it had hardly seemed possible, when we had talked about it ten weeks before at the beginning of the walk, but there we were all arrived and sitting happily together on the grass. When we had first talked about it, at their house in Tilford, the idea was that Noy and her husband Garry (a vice-president of the Buddhist Society of Great Britain) would visit the Lake District, stay in nearby hotels as we walked through the area, and offer dāna each day to us. As Garry was an enthusiastic walker and Noy keen to look after the cooking, it seemed to be a perfect arrangement. Unfortunately, Garry had not been able to make it, due to other commitments, but Noy had invited her friend Lydia Lee to come along instead. It was a unique chance for a Dhamma-holiday and a week out in the country.

After they left we went upstairs; I plunked myself in the armchair and watched my eyes staring vacantly into space. I had been talking non-stop for six hours and was left with only a faint grin and the joyous hum of emptiness that lingers after the sharing of Dhamma. I noticed that a small tray of flowers and fruits had appeared – one of the Sangha had apparently come to see us but, finding us absent, had left the offerings and gone.

After a little while there was a knock at the door and, to my surprise, Niah’s face appeared. Nick had bumped into her in the corridor and she had asked if she could come and see us; we had met a few weeks before in Manchester and she had not expected to find us here as well. She had come up for the week-end to visit her friend Sue, one of the people we had chatted with the day before. We talked a little while before she said goodbye, leaving Nick and me alone. I still had a few jobs to do that day, so I took my boots and sandals off to do the repairs and tucked myself into a remote corner of the shrubbery. The presence of a Theravāda bhikkhu seems to be like a magnet in a pin factory here and it was not long before I was engaged in yet another long and inspired conversation. This time with a goateed man called Mike, who had found me sitting there. He had come from much the same direction as I in his search for freedom and I could easily understand the questions which he had. Our talk cut good and deep and it did not seem to matter that it was twilight by the time my jobs were done. All that remains at the end of such a day is a gentle weariness and the joy of having given. Nick and I sat up until late, finally letting the day die when the moon had set – and my heart said that I had had enough.

I woke quite early the next day and sat for a while before we went to the morning Manjushri pūjā. It was our last day and we had invited the Sangha to meet with us and ask any questions which they had. After the pūjā about half a dozen of them came up and I spent the next few hours talking about meditation practice, why I became a bhikkhu, and the structure of our lives. It felt right to put a lot of energy into communication with the Sangha as they are mostly young and all seemed keen to grow closer to us. It is clear that the unity of the Sangha, in all its traditions, is the most important factor for proper growth of the Dhamma in these times. One finds that in the meetings with all these different Buddhist groups the urge is to give oneself completely. Recharged by a week or so in the countryside, by the quietude and formal practice, you find you really put your heart into being with people when you meet. When the need is there you do your best to simply offer people everything you can.

Life seemed quite hard for the Sangha at Manjushri as there are many compromises of traditional monastic form which they must make. The most difficult thing is that they have to find funds to support themselves at the monastery. This partly derives from the traditional set-up inTibet – where a sanghin’s family or a benefactor would undertake to support them – and partly from the lack of a sizeable community of Tibetan lay-people in this country. The consequence of this is that not only must the Sangha be closely involved with money, but they must also be able to guarantee some form of income. This can be a problem; some people have sponsors or are paid for work they do around the monastery, others, however, can only find work in the town or even have to sign on for Social Security payments – this is not an ideal situation. For the Theravāda Sangha the tradition of living directly on alms is still strong and there are large numbers of Thai, Singhalese and Burmese people spread throughout Britain; thus, for us, this problem never arises. Another difficulty for them is the fact that the majority of the community are lay-people (68 out of 80), and that the Sangha can change into lay-clothes for work or visiting town. This results in the Sangha/laity delineation becoming unclear and thus the full spiritual power of the Buddha’s lineage remains untapped. In this environment it must be hard to develop any genuine sense of renunciation – there is so much still tying one to the world.

Noy and Lydia appeared that morning at about ten thirty, just as the monks and nuns were leaving. Two of them, Martin and Youka, offered to show us around the buildings, so our small party set off for a short tour. Noy and Lydia had brought lots of food with them that day and so invited Martin to join us for the meal. The weather was still good so we sat at the edge of the lawn and spent the next hour or two together. Noy gave us news of events at Chithurst and Ash House and how hot it had been down south. She and Nick sorted out the plans for the week, poring over a heap of maps; Lydia and I talked together and with the others who had come around to join us. Carelessly we let time slip by and Marianna, one of the nuns, came over from the main house with the gift of a food parcel from Geshe-la. We were late for our appointment to say goodbye and he thought we might have gone. We scooted over and apologised but he did not seem to mind. We stayed with him only a short while, paid our respects and left.

It took us a while to get all our things together that afternoon. It was about four o’clock before all the farewells had been said and we were setting off again. As we tramped, exhausted and empty, down the drive towards Ulverston, it seemed an age ago that we had arrived, and lifetimes, at least, since I had seen a road roll away beneath my feet. As I sat on a bench in town, Nick went to make some telephone calls. I closed my eyes – so tired; focussing occasionally on the quiet buzzing of silence and the fall into fragmented streams, odd little thoughts, drifting away . . .

“Oi!”

A shout came from a nearby car, just pulled up at the junction. The face of a young skinhead poked out of the window, scarcely more hair on his scalp than on mine.

“Yer fallin’ asleep mate.”

“It’s been a long night”, I replied; jerked from my reverie and not quite sure why I had said it. The others in the car smiled as they drove off and I waved thankfully to them. I was utterly drained.

We walked a little way out of town and up into the hills which look out over Morecambe Bay. With numerous rests and refreshments, and a raucous bellow from a passing motorbike (“another garbled message from the Buddha”, quoth Nick), we finally made it to a heathery hillside and decided to stop for the night. Inadvertently Nick had planned our route on Noy’s map and then had returned it to her; consequently we had to guess the position of our destination for the next day. It felt pleasantly adventurous, sleeping just off the edge of our map. We turned in while it was still light, our attempts at sitting meditation having rapidly dissolved into a fog of sleepiness and nodding. We slept out but were roused by rain in the early hours. It was only a small shower but enough to tell us that the weather was on the change. In the morning light we were amazed at the clarity of the air: after two weeks of haze and mist, now we could see for miles. Hills, long left behind and forgotten, suddenly reappeared on the horizon, and we could see the industrial towers lining the coast, way away to the south. The horizon of the Irish Sea magically appeared and the Old Man of Coniston stood out clear in the north – a silent greeting for the new day. From nowhere the Cumbrian mountains were all about us – their straggly crags spread in all directions – and there we were.

According to Nick’s guesswork we were not far from the tarn where we were to meet Noy and Lydia; we crossed a couple of hills and saw what we were sure was the place. We were quite early and it was a couple of hours before they arrived; but arrive they did and our day has been spent happily together. It is very good to be with them and to have a chance to spend some time in this countryside. They have both been looking forward to this for a long, long time so it is good that it is working out so well.

Earlier today Noy remarked how delighted she had been when I told her that essentially there is nothing wrong with pleasure: that the feeling of pleasure arising from good action was one of the benefits of the religious life. As we were walking along Lydia spoke –

“I was just thinking how pleasurable it is to be alive in this time, in this place – do you think that’s wrong?”

Out of nowhere I heard myself reply, “Finding true happiness in the world is an art, not a sin.”

Cultivating the art of finding silence in the midst of sound. Sitting by this tarn at the end of the day, watching this pen move across the pages: motion but stasis, silence but sound, darkness but light.