##### Cultivation of Skilful Thought

This reflection was offered on the evening of 22 November 2014.

You may think that as soon as you stop thinking, you’ll just drop into the Deathless, but it’s more likely that you’ll drop into dullness! Actually, you don’t really stop thinking: it’s more accurate to say that there’s a resting, a ceasing of thought. Part of our practice is to train the thought faculty and there are different ways of doing that. In terms of content, we may consider training through learning lots of information, but in general, training our thought faculty involves lessening the amount of information. Another aspect of this training is developing the agility to conceive thought, to bring it to mind and to steadily sustain attention. You could say it’s our reading and writing capacity.

When we’re four or five years old and we start learning how to write, at first our letters are all spidery but gradually they become stronger. By ten or eleven they become quite clear, then it’s downhill all the way after that. By the time we’re fifty, they’re spidery again! Similarly with the way we speak: when we start to learn a language, our words sound faltering and clear. As we get better, they become more slurred and we may drop the endings. So as the information increases, its articulation degenerates.

Often in traditional Buddhist practice, a lot of emphasis is placed on simply saying the same things over and over again. The Buddha recommended that his disciples learn certain passages of his teachings by rote in order to get their thinking tackle behind them. When you speak a few words to yourself slowly, over and over again, you understand the meaning more deeply: there’s a resonance of ‘getting it’, a feeling of being stirred, activated, inspired or calmed.

For example, you can recollect death: you keep bringing that theme to mind and thinking it through clearly. At first the mind may blur and say, ‘So what? That’s not going to happen!’ or it may become agitated, but eventually you really feel the resonance of that information, the sense of, ‘Oh! This experience, which seems so final to what I am, is actually just a bubble in the life stream.’

Along with the recollection of death, the Buddha recommended that we recollect the nature of Buddha: liberation, the Deathless. These particular topics, these signs, become like buttons you push to trigger an activation of inspiration, restraint, etc. Certainly, if you do it skilfully, recollecting mortality helps you realize, ‘What’s the point in getting lost in all this stuff? What’s really worthwhile? When I bear death in mind, what’s really important and valuable in my life so that it’s bright and can move without regret?’ Generosity, gratitude, honesty are really important. When you’re doing the best you can to bring these qualities into your life, the heart is lifted and you can acknowledge this activation of uplift.

We read in the suttas that through skilful recollection of death, the citta rises and gathers itself in the Deathless.41 That might not be something we can intellectually understand but it certainly has a nice sound to it. What’s the citta? What’s ‘rising’? What’s the Deathless? Even if we don’t know the meaning, it sounds rather good – better than ‘stuck in hopelessness’! You can feel the activation of inspiration. The heart is lifted and perhaps for that moment you think, ‘Liberation is possible. This practice leads towards it. So let’s cultivate.’ That inspiration then gives you the energy to focus and work through some of the places where you feel stuck.

It’s important to recognize that the heart can be moved. It can be moved consciously, deliberately, clearly, skilfully, with a thought. It might not stay there for long, but you know you can lift it. Signals or signs are perceptions (saññā) and they trigger particular energies or activations (saṅkhārā). This activation can go up or down, round and round. When you get a negative signal, the heart activations (citta-saṅkhārā) can move you down into despair or overwhelm. Since it’s all very mutable and there are all sorts of potentials, what are the signs you want to put your attention on? The sign you put your attention on will activate: it could drive your heart down or it could lift it. So we have a sense of urgency (saṁvega) to cultivate skilful thought.

This cultivation of skilful thought can be done not just through content, but through careful placing and listening. It is not about overloading your mind with words. We might associate thought primarily with particular words that pop up, but in the Dhamma we have a slightly wider and perhaps more penetrative understanding of thought. It’s not just the language; it’s the ability to form language. It’s called vacī-saṅkhāra, the activation of language. Being able to articulate to oneself clearly is definitely considered an important skill. Take your time, think it through, think with a steady mind, slowly, purposefully and simply. Give articulation to thoughts that touch the heart in a purposeful, useful way. That’s also saṅkhāra. It means we activate our thoughtful process.

There are two aspects of that thoughtful process: first, you pick up a thought or an idea, such as kindness, goodwill or virtue; then, you hold it and touch your heart with it until the heart ‘gets it’ and you listen to the resonances. The picking-up or the placing is called vitakka and it happens in a moment, like placing a thumbtack. Vicāra (evaluation) is the process of taking that in, recognizing how it feels. The thought is not just a voice, it’s also an ear. We’re actually listening to what we’re thinking in an interested way. Listening to the verbalization gives clarity and a quality of steadiness and focus – it’s not fuzzy. We can train ourselves in this way.

In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta there is a whole sheet of recollections. For example, we can contemplate corpses in nine stages of decomposition for the recollection of mortality. These recollections help us to challenge the sense of being somehow wrapped up within this physical form. We can contemplate the physical form as a physical form, as a part of nature, rather than something permanent that we can claim to have ownership of. Other forms of recollection are around kamma, which is the potency of any kind of deliberate intention – good or bad. The kamma of the mind is the primary form of kamma and the most significant one – verbal and physical kamma just follow on. The mind is where we direct our inclinations. What do we light up around? In the sea of the mind there can be various images and notions swimming around, and at any given moment one of those will suddenly come into focus and we’ll pick it up and take it along. That decisive engagement – when we pick up a thought, an idea or an impulse and run with it – is the moment of kamma.

A lot of the time things are just bubbling in potential, but you’re not following them: they’re like static or white noise. This is called vipāka, the residues of where we’re living. It’s as if we were in a room with lots of people having conversations around us, and in which we’re not really engaged, and then we hear something and think, ‘Oh! What is he saying? I don’t agree with that at all!’ That’s kamma! We activate, we get involved. We can’t really stop the activations, but we can stop focusing on the negative signs which take us into nihilistic or fruitless pursuits, and instead begin to pick up the good ones, those which are based upon good intentions of clarity, simplicity, letting go, goodwill and so on.

The Precepts outline pathways for our intentionality. You can spend time thinking through the significance of being someone who doesn’t harm any creature. But don’t just consider what you refrain from, also recollect the effect of keeping that precept: nothing in the world need fear your presence nor mistrust you. Feel the resonance of that. The recollection of the precepts that we keep helps to give the mind its foundation in the training. You recognize more deeply the result of keeping those precepts: you have a grounding of ethics and of right intention. That’s an important ground to be able to stand on in a world where all kinds of potentials are reaching out and bustling in. Training in right thought is not an original or new idea, it’s a very old one. We train by bringing to mind signs that switch on beneficial currents that help to lift the heart.

We have started by looking at the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, but in fact this is already a few steps on from the way the Buddha presented his training, which starts with generosity, morality, renunciation and seeing the dangers if one’s sense-fields are not moderated: the mind then tends to proliferate and you can really get wrecked and dragged down. As you’re gradually able to maintain awareness, vigilance, care and custodianship over the energy that operates through the sense-fields, you can notice the results. The practice of thoroughly developing careful thought doesn’t end: it’s not just for beginners. Constantly generating this kind of activation, this wholesome mental kamma, will make the citta firm and strong. It won’t be as confused, blown out, falling apart or dissipated any more.

Tonight someone was asking if we could share blessings with their relative who is going through a difficult time with Alzheimer’s: ‘May she be free from all suffering. May her caring family be free from all suffering.’ If we slow our mind down around this word Alzheimer’s, how does that resonate? We know what those sounds mean, what they evoke in us. We may feel a sense of being sobered, because something in us can sympathize. In fact, if you think and articulate slowly and carefully you can’t help but sympathize. But when the thought faculty is not cultivated, the sympathy is lost because the mind is then so overloaded with concepts and ideas that there isn’t the space to actually listen to what they mean. So we can read this dedication very quickly and think, ‘OK, be free from suffering! Good luck! That’s it!’ or even, ‘So what? I don’t know this person. What is that to do with me?’ But if the thought faculty is carefully trained, there will be a resonance: something will lift with goodwill. The nature of the mind is resonant and empathic when it’s not overloaded.

Could that same focus be turned towards yourself? When you think about yourself, don’t think about all the stories and the details of your life but think of yourself as a person, a human being who is born, subject to ageing, sickness and death, fearing pain, enjoying pleasure, experiencing a sense of aloneness, seeking friendship, seeking refuge. Bring to mind simple things that you can recognize about all human beings. So you’re regarding yourself subjectively but not personally. You’re really getting to know this person as one member of the human race. How is he/she? Keep it simple and just take a few salient details that are relevant for all of us: struggles, is tired, has concerns, grief, aspirations, values, seeks the welfare of others ...

This is skilful thought rather than the compulsive thought of, ‘Oh, you idiot, you never really can get it together! Let’s face it, you’re not going to get anywhere. Don’t tell me you try so hard, you just can’t meditate!’ When the articulation is careening in this way, that’s the sign of a saṅkhāra that is taken over by these compulsive currents we call ignorance. Ignorance doesn’t mean it’s stupid, it means it’s insensitive. It doesn’t actually relate directly, intimately and sensitively to what is occurring. It’s just a blind automatic tape recording that gets switched on and goes on and on. When we feel the qualities of negativity or disappointment, we can easily follow them. They are tracks which lead us down. If you’ve noticed, going down a slope is generally a lot easier than climbing up one, so we easily incline down.

The quality of what’s called ‘deep attention’ or ‘appropriate attention’ is what precedes the four establishments of mindfulness (satipaṭṭhāna). Mindfulness is never seen alone; it’s always accompanied by other factors. It literally means ‘to bear something in mind’. It’s very important to have a sense of what is useful to bear in mind before you place your mindfulness on it. Mindfulness is also supported by right view and right intention. Deep attention is an activity often associated with thinking: thinking something through, bearing something in mind and getting to a point that’s worth settling on. We often use deliberate recollections such as our own welfare, the welfare of others, kamma, liberation, loving-kindness and compassion because they take us to points upon which the citta can establish itself. These points support the mind and make it firm. This is the value of right thinking.

When you sit and become aware of the stirring of thought, which is probably going on all the time, rather than going into the content, try to feel its flow, its energy. Can you go into soft focus on what the thought is saying and feel the energy underneath it? How is that energy? Is it racing, swirling, chattering, mumbling, jumping? Some thoughts can jump like sparks, sometimes they eddy, swirl around. Learn to feel the energy of thought formation.

Once you can touch into that, you begin to slow it down and steady it. This can be done by thinking deliberately. What you’re thinking about is not so significant, but it’s preferable to think about something that’s either neutral or benevolent and think it through slowly, steadily, being careful to form the thought, listen to it, notice when it finishes, bring it back, do it again, slow it down. For example, you can slowly recite a mantra, a small phrase or a list. You use the articulation of the content to steady and access the energy of thought. That’s a practice. Then that particular energy is something you are able to handle.

You can also apply that practice directly to your body. You’re bringing to mind parts of the body by thinking, ‘Left knee, right knee, left hand, right hand, left shoulder …’. You’re simply touching them with your attention and bringing the thought to mind, ‘Is that it? Are you pointing to the right thing?’ Then you can ask, ‘How is my left knee right now? How do I know I have one? How does it feel? Soft? Bony? Sharp? Hot? Cool? Now, how is the right hand? How is the left hand?’ Hands have a lot of sensations in them. How would you describe the quality, the sense, the direct experience of your left hand? And then the direct experience of your right hand? Then, what’s the difference? It’s like a slow puzzle.

Deliberate thinking is then the beginning of meditation: you’re using the thought, steadying the thought energy, clarifying it and then directing it to the body. Then the thought is no longer dealing with abstractions or notions but with direct, tangible physicality. You can practise in this way to help the mind not just to bond to its own notions, ideas, aspirations, joys and sorrows, but also to touch into direct bodily experiences. This is the process that leads to collectedness because you begin to gather the body, thought and heart together.

As you’re thinking into your body, turning the energy of articulation towards the body, the mind is beginning to learn to rest on an object and listen to it. The body is not just an idea, it will stay there and you can keep coming back to it, so you can put all your energy into placing your thought, your attentiveness there. This placing (vitakka) has to be backed up with the sampling, the handling or the evaluation (vicāra): ‘How is that? Tell me about it. How does it feel?’ You’re listening in. In one way, it doesn’t matter how it feels. The main point is to get that system going of ‘bring up the thought, place it, listen in, get it, do it again.’ Instead of letting the mind spin off to the next thought and leak out into further proliferations, you begin to seal it. It’s now connecting to the body and you keep it in that particular loop.

In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta we can read, ‘When he is walking along, he knows he is walking along.’ Is that such an incredibly difficult thing to do? It probably is because generally when we’re walking along we’re thinking about where we’re going, remembering things we have to do and so on. The mind leaks out. So we cultivate this process of restraining the mind by bringing it back to a very simple thought around the present experience of walking. What is ‘walking’ anyway? What walks? What happens when we walk? You’ve been doing it for years, but do you know how it happens? Study it. Where does it begin? You’re standing still: how does walking happen? First, there’s an intention (kamma), a particular decisive moment saying, ‘Now, it’s time to walk,’ and then something runs into the body, generally around the back of the hips. The body starts to shift its weight, pulls the leg up, turns the hip and places it forward. The foot comes down and touches the ground and when it feels stable enough, the body starts to lift the other leg. This process of ‘action and listening in’ is happening through the body and now we’re connecting the thinking mind to it. The thinking mind is no longer spinning out: it’s contained within the bodily movement. You begin to put a rein on the runaway horse by saying, ‘OK, you can run, but stay within this particular field, which is the body.’

You can cultivate that further around breathing in and out. The Buddha said that of all the bodies you can experience, the ‘breathing body’ is the one that gives the greatest benefit.42 You may be surprised to find out that you have more than one body – one is already quite a lot to be getting on with! We have a ‘visual body’: the body that we can see. We have an ‘impression body’: what we imagine our body to be. We have a ‘feeling body’: all the sensations we may feel. And then we have the body which we can experience in breathing. If you put aside the visual body and go to the direct experience of the breathing body, it is a rather different experience: it doesn’t have arms, legs, nails and hair. It’s just a process of rhythm, suffusion and energies moving: breathing in, breathing out. Can you touch into that?

Again, you place your attention with a thought. What is the experience of breathing? How do you know you’re breathing? You’re looking at some basics, some fundamentals. Very often the process of clear thinking is to go right back to the most simple, not the most complex. The mind tends to run towards more complicated things, so go back to very simple assumptions like: ‘Are you sure you’re breathing?’ What tells you that? Well, there is a series of sensations that happen over and over again. What are those sensations like? What’s the difference between breathing in and breathing out? The Buddha constantly emphasizes: ‘breathing in, breathing out.’ What’s a long breath? What’s a short one? How is that measure known?

What is it that gets the breath going, even when you’re asleep? The thing that gets the breath going is called ‘bodily activity’ (kāya-saṅkhāra). It’s like an energy or an intelligence that gives signals to various muscles that pull, contract and open so the air can come in, and when it knows it’s had enough, it gives another signal to the muscles so the air can go out. You don’t have to mentally figure out how to breathe: it just happens, and you can contemplate and name that experience. This practice enables the mind to gradually dispel the notion of solidity or permanence, because the breathing process is dynamic. It’s not really a thing at all; it’s a series of energies, sensations and activations. When you tune into the energy of breathing in and out, you can feel a flow of vitality occurring within the body. So you cultivate clear thought and deep attention, you learn how to ‘vitakka-vicāra’ something and keep that system going: you pick up a concept or a thought of your ailing sister, your beloved son or yourself, and then you feel the resonance. Instead of quickly dropping that thought or concept and scrambling or going into analysis, the mind just stays there and resonates and you bring that towards the body, successively from the outer body (the bones, the sensations, etc.) to the inner body (the breathing body). The benefit of doing that is that unlike your bones, the body that experiences breathing has a very immediate, involuntary and natural response to attention.

Attention is a boundary we place on something, and whatever we give attention to, energy goes towards it. Any topic that fastens itself in your mind is heightened. Whatever you attend to, there’s kamma there. What you give attention to becomes empowered. It could be an obsession, an infatuation, a commitment or something wholesome. If you bring your attention onto exciting topics like games or sports, you can notice that your mind becomes excited. If you work on a project that you’re interested in, your mind becomes interested. If you think of something worrisome, your mind takes on that quality. Your mind becomes energized in accordance with the nature of the theme you’re giving attention to. Now, if you bring that mind energy onto your body energy, the two start to light up because these two energetic systems are beginning to touch each other. The body energy can hold the mind energy and begins to steady and balance it.

When you give your attention to breathing in and out, you’re touching into the life force, that which refreshes, rejuvenates and cleans the body, that which gives it vitality. The mind touches into a source of deep nourishment. Breathing is a very generous thing: you don’t have to pay for it, work at it, deserve it or be good enough for it; it just happens. Even ‘bad people’ breathe and that keeps them alive, no matter what they do. But unfortunately ‘bad people’ generally don’t bother to contemplate their breathing. The breathing is beyond ethics, but the mind needs to be ethically attuned to have the interest to contemplate it. The mind also needs to be carefully trained to ‘listen’ to the breathing and then to receive the benefits coming from this practice. Your attention gives energy to the body and the body gives energy to the mind, and that creates a magnetic force: it builds up a certain power that draws your awareness in. Over time, the mind is drawn in, absorbed into breathing. This is the experience of samādhi (collectedness). The mind is fed, contented, it’s not leaking, it’s not invaded, it is content in itself.

This is a really lovely way to cultivate the mind. But you need to do it one step at a time. The Buddha’s teaching gives you very practical steps, and that approach provides incomparable benefits. So you take the first step and you stay with it until it’s fulfilled. As an analogy, when you first learn to walk, you need to really settle your foot on the ground before you can lift the other leg up. Once you are firm, it’s quite natural you want to keep walking, because you’re enjoying that experience. You’re bringing attention to the body time and time again and as the mind bonds to it, you may come to a point when you feel you don’t really struggle at it any more. The mind isn’t conjuring up fantasies or worries. It feels rather pleasant and you’re starting to experience enjoyment from that. That quality of enjoyment naturally moves the mind on to the next step.

The process moves forward in accordance with our ability to integrate enjoyment. When we’re working towards something and get to the place where it’s beginning to happen, it’s beginning to bond and settle, then it’s natural to experience enjoyment. You have to enjoy before you move on. You’re not running up a stepladder! You don’t briefly touch into something and then rush to the next thing: you stay with it. If you can be fully with that out-breath until its end, you stay with that. You stay with the point where your mind is settling and begin to experience a quality of enjoyment. Even if it still goes away, as soon as you notice it, you can come back to that place. Gradually you become better at it and you begin to dispel doubt and irritation with yourself. That place of enjoyment becomes a platform. Then you can extend your practice step by step, in accordance with the skill and enjoyment. You don’t extend out of desire or hunger for achievement. By analogy, once you’ve learned to stay on a bike without falling off, you naturally want to go for a ride because it’s becoming enjoyable, but if you’re still wobbling in the saddle, you’re not thinking about how fast you can go. First you have to aim to get in the saddle without falling off. Once that happens, there will be a natural process of moving onwards.

In your meditation, I encourage you to be prepared to stay at the place where you are gaining some ground – perhaps being in your body or holding your body posture – until it becomes really established and you don’t have to struggle at it any more. Then as you stay with that, you’re reaping the benefit and naturally your mind will deepen and move on. It will go into the heart of the matter. Often, it’s those early places that take us to the simplicity of the training: one step at a time, carefully remember what you’re doing, bring it to mind, consider why you’re doing it and apply directed attention.

41 Aṅguttara Nikāya 6.20, 7.46, 8.73 and 8.74.

42 Ānāpānasati Sutta, Majjhima Nikāya 118.