##### Recollections - The Door to the Universal

This reflection was offered on the evening of 28 November 2014.

Tonight some of you have dedicated the chanting to your departed relatives. You did it voluntarily: there has been no instruction to do that. What makes it something so natural and spontaneous that you overcome whatever self-consciousness may be there to write down a dedication with your name on it and put it right up here? What gives you the authority to do that? Where does that come from? When you really touch into what is very important, you can move forward with courage and faith. You are not doubting. You are not thinking, ‘I don’t want to disturb anybody by asking for a dedication. Is it right? Is it proper? I don’t want to take up your valuable time.’ Where is your strength? You see how much strength there is in us, in the quality of compassion – the great heart. I don’t think anybody is expecting a dedication to bring their mother back from death. What is important is to bring forth one’s great heart, and other people help us to do that.

We often comment, sometimes humorously I hope, that we can irritate each other or experience other people as irritations – and that’s also true, isn’t it? What makes it that way? What makes other people irritations to us, disappointments to us, fears to us? What makes people that way? Why do we experience it like that? How limited we feel within that experience! How made small we feel! How unsafe we feel! The heart drains in that experience, doesn’t it? So, what are people? Are they ‘irritations’, ‘people who challenge me’, ‘people who annoy me’, ‘people who get in my way’, ‘people who disturb me’, ‘people who don’t do what I have told them to do’? Is that true? As I have said many times, relationship is important and when we’re feeling annoyed by someone, it is an afflictive relationship, isn’t it? It’s a relationship that brings us into a very limited, depleted state of being, and no matter what we do within that, we won’t get out of that state. There’s nothing criminal about being annoyed by someone, it’s just what can occur – and you can always find very good reasons why that does occur. We can be this or that to each other, deliberately and undeliberately, consciously or unconsciously.

What resets the relationship is remembering death: we’re all dying. You don’t have to be that old to do it, I can tell you. You’re totally kitted for it as soon as you’re born. Some people don’t even make it out of the womb. In the monastery, you receive all of it. A woman came here to tell us that her baby has died in her womb – he hasn’t even been born yet. She will have to go through the whole process of giving birth to a dead baby. Heartrending, isn’t it? Some people don’t even make it here. Some people die pretty soon after they’re born: one year, two years, five years. In the monastery we’re receiving what are called the devadūtas, the ‘heavenly messengers’. Why are they ‘heavenly’? Because when they touch you, your heart opens in compassion. Suddenly the relationships are reset: ‘These annoying, irritating people … they too are subject to death, pain and fear.’ Once you start with death, you start to unravel the script of what must happen to all of us: not just death but also being blamed, feeling rejected, not getting it right, being seen with less than loving regard by other beings. Any individual can feel they’re not liked or respected. We may cultivate kind regard to each and every one of us – that’s the practice of  mettā – but strangely enough, what resets the relationship is remembering death. It resets many things actually. Compassion is one of them, and from that position we start to sense others as in that same predicament, along with all the other predicaments of  dukkha: ‘I too am not separated from  dukkha. She is not separated from it. He is not separated from it. They are not separated from it. They too have experienced the loss of those they love, the being blamed, criticized, hurt or abused. They too will experience this. They have not gone beyond this.’ When you see it like that, it resets the attitude, doesn’t it?

Those dedications are the indication of how absolutely necessary it is for us to be able to find a way to express our compassion. And it’s not just for the other person, although that’s certainly the aim, but in your compassion you become grand, big, large, rich, fruitful, skilful. Suddenly, everything starts to click. It’s not panic. It’s not even trying to make things better. There’s nothing we could do that would bring these people back from death. We may delay it, but there’s nothing we could do that would prevent each other dying. Compassion is not to ‘fix’ things. It’s because things can’t be fixed that we experience compassion. Of course, we may very well act upon that to cherish, to nourish, to support, to do what we can. But the most important thing is to experience compassion and to be able to present it. Then we are finding ourselves in a relationship that is really worthy of us and brings forth our strength, our grandeur, our beauty. When you are filled with that, there are things that you would do that you would not do from any other basis, efforts you would make that you would not make on another account, things you would give up that you would not give up otherwise: you would give up your time, you would give up your precious sleep! That’s a very powerful quality for us.

The Buddha presented what are called ‘the Four Noble Truths’: suffering, its cause, its cessation and the path leading to its cessation. What is so ‘noble’ about suffering? It doesn’t make us noble if we hear it as: ‘I’m suffering all the time!’ That has certainly a pang that one can sympathize with, but it’s not a Noble Truth. ‘There is suffering’ is the First Noble Truth. When you see suffering in that way the heart comes into its fullness and you can feel the power of that.

Like zip files, recollections help to encapsulate practices. You can then open them up. We can have deep experiences and come to very beautiful states in retreat – and the encouragement is definitely to continue with that – but they tend to quickly fade when the retreat is over. So, as I have asked you to do in the group dialogues, recollect how it has been for you. You can cognize and remember the keys, the pieces that work for you, otherwise you’ll forget them. You’ll easily go out and get flooded by other things, so really bring them to mind, verbalize them to yourself. This is recollection. It means taking the meaning and putting it into a series of words. This is the skill of the thought faculty. Thinking is a skilful aspect, a guardian and guide to meditation. Many ragged, helter-skelter thoughts are driven, but the problem is not the thinking itself; the problem is what drives the thinking. It’s like a fire: it can burn your house down or it can warm you up. Runaway thinking is certainly a problem, but don’t throw the baby out with the bath water! There’s nothing intrinsically wrong with thinking. You need to use vitakka-vicāra: recollections, pointing the mind until you really get it so that it’s not just an abstract thought. This skill is a simple process: think the word, the image, or a piece of experience that you can encapsulate, point your mind there and get the feeling for it. What is that about? What does that mean?

‘Death’ is an easy enough term, but what does that mean? We don’t want to spin out on it or come into a mood, so when we recollect death, we don’t just look at it as: ‘This is my own death or my sister’s or my mother’s,’ but also as something universal: ‘This is me, this is her, this is my dear mother, this is everybody’s dear mother, everybody’s favourite grandfather, everybody’s beloved cousin, and sometimes it’s my son.’ It’s everybody. And some day, someone will be grieving over you. When we recollect that, is there any separation? Is there anyone that you can leave out of that? Try to expand your awareness to include everybody, even these figures of animosity like ‘my unreasonable boss’, ‘my pig-headed neighbour who continually argues’ and so forth: they too experience the loss of the loved. When you recollect the death of others in that way, it helps you to come out of an unskilful relationship. There’s still going to be an unreasonable pig of a boss, but when you see him like that, at least he is not bothering you when you sit down on your own in the evening. He won’t be sitting there in your head. Then you will think, ‘He wasn’t so bad after all!’

When you recollect your own death, ask yourself, ‘What does that mean?’ You don’t know it yet, do you? You haven’t done it yet. The first thing it means is no future, no future for this being, the end of ‘tomorrow’. Sometimes it’s a blessing: ‘All right, I don’t have to get the job done because I’m dying tonight! I don’t have to worry about next week’s rent because I’m dying tonight! It’s somebody else’s problem!’ That sense of the future is gone. Then, what do you want to take with you? Look at your mind-state. Is it really necessary to keep that piece of story going? That person you have a problem with, couldn’t you just tell them, ‘Oh, look … good luck! I’m dying tonight, so just get on with it!’

Then recollect also your own past: all the things you never were, didn’t do very well, and didn’t quite work out … Is it time to say, ‘Enough of that!’? If there is something you really regret, now is the time to give attention to it. When you use ‘I’m dying tonight’ as your meditation, then genuinely forgive, ask for forgiveness and give a blessing to all the people you feel you may have hurt or disappointed. Spend some time with that. This is house-cleaning, keeping your place tidy.

Since you’re dying tonight, recollect what’s really important now. What’s important to treasure at this moment? What’s the beauty of your life? Where has it been? What do you really feel gratitude for? Much of your life has probably been nothing much, just going along, sometimes on a rough road, but there was one piece that makes you think, ‘It was good to have been alive for that!’ Try to find that one moment or that person; perhaps it wasn’t a person entirely, but one time when it really worked, when you met each other properly. Maybe it’s something in yourself or a good deed that you have done. Try to bring up your treasure. You’re distilling what’s important and brushing away what is not going to do you any good. It’s very important to die every night. This is like house-cleaning: you refresh and clean, and you find out what really has been important, what is important now, how you are, how you carry yourself, what you feel is worthwhile, what you stand for, where your dignity is, who is the person (or the people) or whatever it is that is vital to you. You are giving it some shape so it’s not just a blurred mass of experiences; you are distilling them.

Bearing that in mind, if you now had one more day to live – ‘OK, we won’t take you today, but tomorrow you’re going to go!’ – what would you do? What would you want to say? Is there something you would like to express? Then you prioritize. Maybe the most important thing was to say, ‘Thank you’ properly. Maybe for these people tonight, the most important thing was to say, ‘My mother has died, may she be well.’ So the most important thing is to find out what the most important thing is. Death helps us with that. Cut all the stories and ask yourself, ‘What’s the most important thing?’ That may change from day to day or from time to time, but it really does help to crystallize your priorities.

Then the heart and the head have spoken to each other. When they have spoken together, we say the king or the queen has arrived, the just leader or the true monarch has arrived. It’s really up to each and every one of us to support the just ruler. They are not going to be selling you anything. They don’t want anything but to keep you in correct alignment with your truth. That’s all they want. It doesn’t matter what your truth is as long as it is your truth. That is the truly grand ruler. They are not saying, ‘I want you to obey me or be like this for me.’ They say, ‘I just want you to find your truth and align yourself to it.’ The truth occurs when the heart and the head speak to each other – I mean really speak. It’s not the moaning heart and the twittering head, or the demanding head and the frightened heart. It’s the heart of value and the head of clarity that meet each other. Then what you have there is a message that’s really irrefutable. It may not be something that you would have thought of or even something that you want to hear, but it’s saying, ‘This happens to be your truth.’ At a personality level, you can then react like: ‘Well, I don’t know if I’m up to that!’, but you have to follow it. It’s a great blessing to have any of those moments when there is that inner voice. It’s not necessarily going to say anything in words but there is a felt sense and gravity to it. It’s coming from this inner quality, the wise ruler. This is our inner friend.

The Buddha said there are two essential resources for realization. It’s not mindfulness and wisdom, or kindness and compassion, or energy and concentration, but deep attention (yoniso manasikāra) and spiritual friendship (kalyāṇamittatā) – and they are mirrors of each other. A spiritual friend helps you to align yourself to your truth. It could be somebody who doesn’t believe in your stories and your doubts, somebody who says, ‘Yeah … But I see this.’ They may give you specific advice but primarily, they are the ones who see you in the light of Dhamma. We can see each other in a number of ways. At a personal level it could be: ‘I like you’, ‘I dislike you’, ‘I’m frightened of you’ or ‘I admire you’. We can also highlight the functional aspect of someone: whether he is a great engineer or a good this, that or the other. Or maybe you’re sharing the dormitory with a noisy person or someone who snores or whatever. But the kalyāṇamitta sees you in terms of your alignment to truth. They help you to speak your truth. They don’t really want anything out of you. They’re not demanding, ‘Be nice to me,’ so that’s really valuable. It can be a person or a group of people or it can be a person in a specific situation.

The kalyāṇamitta is often seen as a teacher. But who is a teacher? At times, I can come into that relationship with you because you are prepared to be taught. But I’m not a teacher of my brother: I’m just his brother. That’s a very different thing. You create me as a teacher. Of course I’m part of that, but it’s a co-created thing, isn’t it? It requires a certain sense of discipline or restraint: we’re not going to be kidding around or doing stuff that, while it may be blameless, isn’t about the practice. That particular role helps to hold that alignment. In these dialogue sessions that we have, I try to train myself to just listen and mirror, not to change you and not to put myself too much into it. On many of these occasions, I’m very moved and truly honoured by your expressions of gratitude. That’s very touching and also supportive for helping to affirm that I can provide that for you, and that you’re getting something there. But I also would like to tell you, as a kalyāṇamitta, that no matter what you think about yourself – which is probably not always so gracious – I have seen strength, honesty and aspiration in every one of you; and also I have seen your pain. Who you are personally, I don’t want to focus on that right now. This is the support a kalyāṇamitta offers. That support might help you to see yourself. But surely, sometimes it’s difficult for us to see each other in that way. We tend to see each other in other ways: as partners, friends, co-workers or strangers – and that is particularly the case in a retreat situation.

What can help is recollecting death and suffering, and also the nobility that’s brought you here. When you come here, you’re coming into random situations, sharing facilities, restraint and discipline, and that can be very tough. Yet you have really made that effort; some of you have travelled many miles to come here. There is courage and strong intentionality. Can you remember that in yourself? Can you touch that in yourself? Through the doubts and all the difficulties, can you recollect that? This is another topic of recollection and it’s not a simple and trivial one. Recollection of one’s virtue is not thinking, ‘I have been a good boy today: I did this, I did that, I fed the cat, put the milk out, helped so-and-so … good, good, good!’ No, it’s not Sunday school. When you recollect your own virtues, at first your mind might go, ‘Come off it!’ because that recollection doesn’t operate at the personality level but at a deeper level of heart. What really drives you? What would you do out of compassion? What would you do in a life-and-death situation? Which way will you jump?

Recollecting your own death and the death of others is helpful to sieve out the diamonds from the rest of the grit; then you take these diamonds. It’s important that you hold them carefully, and do that every day. You keep aligning yourself to your truth rather than to your distress and your confusion. How much time we can spend recycling our stress and confusion! Is that meditation? Recollection and many other practices are about the function of vitakka-vicāra. You get out of the groove and place it somewhere skilful, whether it’s the body, breathing in, breathing out or whatever. It’s there as your skill-place and will give you some grounding. Recollecting your values, your virtues, your diamonds, your pearls is another subject of recollection.

Another very important one is the recollection of the Triple Gem. Where is your refuge? What takes you to refuge? The kalyāṇamitta may help you to see that. Can your own deep attention help you to see that? Why is it called ‘refuge’? Because it brings us the sense of being safe and protected. You may find that the  mettā avenue is the way to help you remind yourself that you have real needs for nourishment, protectedness and safety. The refuge is unconditional. You don’t have to be good to take refuge. You don’t have to be good to be seen compassionately. You don’t have to be good to be loved. You don’t have to deserve it. You take away all those things, because they lead you to the wrong place – the judgement place. What is it that takes you to the place of safety? Where does your Dhamma arise? It can be in your body, in a quiet place in your heart, in the sense of non-aversion. You have something there that acts as a place you can go to (metaphorically speaking), where there’s no need to defend, justify, prove you’re good enough, deserve things or earn it. It’s there, it’s given. It’s a given quality. This is your Dhamma, and from that Dhamma, the Buddha, the clear knowing, arises. It’s very important to spend some time on this most valuable recollection.

Look at it also very specifically. What conditions support your taking refuge and what conditions hinder that? Maybe you need a place where you can close the door. It can be as simple and as external as that. Some conditions can help you to feel you don’t need to be, or do, anything. Refuge is a given quality. We are given refuge. We take it, we don’t earn it, we don’t deserve it. You don’t have to pay to get in. That’s why the teaching is as it is. It’s always open. It’s a given to anybody who is so inclined. You have to remember that you don’t have to be that good. When you find a place of safety, within it, the clarity comes. Then you find that the good starts to manifest; you begin to experience it. Recollections take you to a very fruitful place.

These recollections should be done daily. You can choose one, two or three of them – for example, recollecting death and suffering, your own virtues, your own past, what is really important for you, the Triple Gem – and do them every day, even for just ten minutes. That will help you to keep resetting your experience. Some of these recollections may of course open out and what they reveal then is the ‘not-self’ nature of experience. Even if it’s a subjective experience – what is happening for me – it’s also universal. Any person who cultivates like this will come to their refuge, their truth; they will touch into a universal place. Certainly, one of the beauties of practising together is that it makes the Sangha possible. Whatever our differences, our disagreements and our dissonances, there is this possibility of touching into a universal quality, which doesn’t claim anything. You can rest in it, you can open to it, you don’t have to grab it; then, something changes. That’s why you bow into the refuge. You don’t claim it, you release into it. You release into something universal that is bigger than yourself, bigger than your self-image and your self-limitations, bigger than who you think you are. This is the truth of not-self. Awareness is always bigger than any self-image, good or bad – thank goodness for that!

Relationship is the whole of the practice. This means that instead of being yourself, you relate to yourself. You relate to yourself by looking through all that self-experience and at one end of it you put ‘death’ – that helps to line it up. At the other end you put ‘awakening’ – that’s another possibility, a universal possibility. You put those two on either end of your self-impressions. This is really who you are. You’re in a place that has death and awakening. That’s what you’re in; that’s what everyone is in. It’s universal and yet it’s also subjective: it’s what happens to you; this is a potential for you. When we sit within that, it starts to realign our lives.

Recollections don’t necessarily take hours or involve you going on retreats. But certainly, within a retreat situation they become very potent, because as we’re on retreat, we’re all inevitably trawling through all the processes of our apparent self, of our personal experience. When all the worms are coming out of the can, as it were, this is a really good chance to put them under that light. You have a way of getting all your laundry out, so you can clear a lot of stuff. In retreat situations we’re often entering a process: opening things up, revealing things. Things come up and now there’s also the requirement to scan and filter the diamonds out of the dross. These recollections within retreat are very potent experiences. They really can help you to shape up and drop a lot of old kamma, a lot of old habits, a lot of old misalignments, and establish the wise leader, the one you can trust in your life.