##### Mealtime Reflection

During a retreat, the mealtime is an important time for reflection. I think this aspect of practice is not so much talked about, emphasized or developed. We talk more about mindfulness of breathing and concentration, but reflection is an important part of developing the wisdom faculty, which is necessary for true cultivation. Otherwise, the very attitudes with which we concentrate and train our mind can be either distorted or not really encouraged, not enhanced, not fulfilled. The wisdom teachings are really helpful for cultivating the right view and the right attitude, and a lot of this is about reflection. This retreat is particularly helpful because it’s based on reflection rather than on a technique.

When we consider the requisites which are actually necessary for our lives – food, clothing, shelter, warmth, protection and so on – we see that we are powerless beings, vulnerable creatures. A little baby is one of the most pathetic, vulnerable creatures in the world. All it can really do is hold on, and that’s the one thing that we develop all our life: this ability to hold on. The kamma-forming tendency to grasp, to cling, is right there from birth. It’s often only at death that there’s a kind of release.

We can see that the kamma of incarnation, of being born, having a physical form in a sensory circumstance, having animal bodies, means that we constantly take things from the environment. We constantly need . It’s not a matter of greed – though it often can be – but just for basic existence we have to keep breathing in air, eating food, drinking water, chopping down trees to make houses, digging up mud from the river to make bricks, burning up coal for warmth. We are constant, enormous consumers. Life in a physical form is a process of consumption. We take so much, physically use up so much, but we can pare it down to what is really needed, and not wanted just for the sake of gratification, amusement or entertainment. It’s skilful cultivation to know what is necessary, what is suitable, and to live lightly.

Although much of our consumption is not intentional – we’re not aware of what we’re doing – we’re still adopting certain attitudes. We expect a lot. We don’t tend to live in harmony, in cooperation with our environment. Instead, we expect it to suit us and we ask a lot from it. Of course, our needs are part of this process, but we should consider that as we take what we need from the environment, we also have the responsibility to give back to the environment. It’s a system of interdependence. Human beings can’t give back very much in terms of material things, but what we can give back are things like wisdom, love, compassion and virtue. The trees on this earth take in water, sunlight, trace elements, and then they give out oxygen to the earth. They help to control the weather. That’s the part they play in the system. We can’t sprout leaves or contribute as they do, but we don’t have to feel useless. We can learn to live on just what is really necessary and then dedicate our lives to purity, to bringing forth our capacities as human beings. Physically we’re very limited, but in terms of consciousness, conscientiousness, caring and skill, our capacities are far greater than those of a tree or an animal.

These are the kinds of reflections to bring to mind upon receiving requisites such as food, rather than just taking them for granted: ‘May whatever I receive today allow me to live my life skilfully.’