##### Contemplating Impermanence

We can meditate as a way of finding balance with the sensory world by noticing that it arises, changes and passes away. When we contemplate through the senses we focus the mind on a particular sense-object, and then we watch, we listen and we discern that sense-objects change. We can notice that what we’re observing is a process of constant change. Within that practice we experience a sense of stillness: the watchfulness or the ‘subject’ remains still, awake and bright.

One of the most commonly used sense-objects is the breath. You can observe breathing in and breathing out as a sensation of movement or you can watch the feelings in your body, asking yourself, ‘How does my body feel?’, and then feeling your arms, your shoulders, your back – being aware of them. You can recognize whether this part of the body is tingling or pulsating or warm, and you can discern a kind of vibration in that experience of ‘feeling’ as well. Also, if you look straight ahead of you or at what’s on the floor in front of you – you must really hold your gaze there without moving it around – you can see that visual consciousness changes, the focus changes. The perception of the object you are looking at has movement in it. It’s not that the floor or the wall is actually changing, but the visual consciousness is like a TV screen in a way: you can notice that there is a pulsation in it.

Objects such as the breath come and go, rise and fall; consciousness itself is a flickering, pulsating experience. Our attention is constantly wavering, and this is completely usual in normal consciousness. You can observe that the focus of your mind moves, wavers, grips, becomes mesmerized by something and then drifts off onto something else; it’s changing constantly. And in the normal consciousness the power of attention itself is changing, flowing.

When you meditate, things that arise sometimes become very repetitive. They keep coming back and repeating, repeating, repeating … but they change too. Mental phenomena are changing, moods are ephemeral. A powerful, painful mood is still something that arises in the mind, and though we may think it’s stuck there, in fact it’s rather like a vinyl record that gets stuck and keeps repeating. But it’s not immobile, is it? It’s changing nevertheless. Even the most obsessive thought is re-played.

Above all, the attitude of Buddhist meditation is one that keeps remembering and focusing on the changing nature of everything. When we witness, listen and relate to sensory experience as change, its power to burn, hold and trap us wanes. There is a sense of dispassion, not through rejection or some other kind of negative attitude to the sensory experience, but just through observing it, bringing the mind fully onto it – as fully as we can. Then the heart grows quiet and still.

This is the sign called ‘impermanence’ – variability, the ephemeral. It’s not just that things change, but also that the whole manifest world of phenomena has this mirage-like or dreamlike quality to it. It’s not that it doesn’t manifest, but you can’t hold it nor be held by it. Only when you lose focus, when you believe in it, when you’re caught up with aversion or desire, does it seem like you, that you’re in it, that you belong to it. You seem to be held by it, trapped by it. It has the reality of a dream. Dreams can be shocking, bizarre, funny, terrifying or strange, but on waking one views them with detachment.

When we close our eyes and go within, turn the senses inwards to the centre, we witness the inner world: memories, moods, the psychic, mental, perceptual world of mind-consciousness. This is the mind-base, not the external senses. This is what we feel our ‘self’ to be, and we can contemplate that too as changing. As we observe the inner world, all that expresses itself as our identity is seen as an object, as something that is looked at and related to, an experience, something that flows through our awareness, and is therefore not a ‘subject’. The subject is nameless, ineffable: beyond thought, beyond perception, beyond feeling, beyond sensation. It’s beyond consciousness, beyond the forms of consciousness, beyond the formed, the conditioned. It’s what we call the Unconditioned. This is a very powerful reflection.

In meditation the ongoing endeavour is to find balance: a dispassionate sense of right response and right relationship with the phenomenal world – internal or external. This doesn’t mean trying to push it away, change it, hold it, find something within it or extract something from it. Our effort in meditation doesn’t demand that the phenomenal world should express some profound truth; it’s not irritated by its profound falsehood. It has no demands, no expectations, no judgements. There’s an emotional cooling. This is the endeavour, the effort of practice.

The more you contemplate everything as change, the less it becomes necessary to defend, judge or otherwise react to things. We can live in harmony, in balance, in peace with it all. The effort we make is not to hold or push away. Using the words ‘to contemplate’ or ‘to reflect’ expresses this process of right view, of right observation. Notice what grabs you. What are the things that tend to stick, that you feel caught up with or overwhelmed by? Whenever you feel trapped by something, that is a sign of aversion: you don’t want that something. In this case, your practice must be one of developing non-aversion, of welcoming, brightening, of being more willing. You need to bring a good deal of attention and effort to this.

The wish to get something in meditation, to become one-pointed, peaceful, calm, bright or clear, is a kind of greed. Those are the moods, the perceptions, the attitudes, the drives about which you must learn to be more humble. Bring your mind always to the present, to the very quality of wanting or not wanting and to the simple way it is: the feelings in the body, the breathing in, the breathing out. When your mind becomes swamped or saturated, make your meditation object as clear and as tangible as possible, but not refined. For example, you can practise looking straight ahead of you with your eyes open, or reciting a word as you’re breathing in and out – something that gives a stronger effect, has a stronger contact. This is an important part of meditation and something to be quite emphatic about. Meditation is not just a practice of holding or stilling the mind through effort and power. Some of the most helpful results come through reflecting and understanding the nature of the phenomenal world, the fact that it changes, it passes.

Observe the characteristics of the flow of the mind and its objects. The flow is about time, isn’t it? It’s about going forward in time or going backwards in time. It sees aims and objectives in time: ‘How long is the sitting? How long do I have to do this? At some future time will this practice bear fruit?’ We remember, think, consider and are affected by things in time: what we did yesterday, what might happen to us tomorrow. Things are viewed as temporal. Aims and objectives are seen in time-bound ways, from the most humble desires to the profoundest kind of aspirations.

What you can notice about all those time-bound drives is that they’re unsatisfying. Time is an unsatisfactory experience. It’s always about what we’d like to have but don’t have yet, or that which we have and don’t want, and which we hope will stop in some future time. When we observe this time-bound stuff it gives a dimension to our life, and yet it’s always unsatisfactory. It is very important to learn this teaching, particularly in reflection on death. Death is where time stops, isn’t it? Death means no future any more, the end. So our minds, which work in terms of time, think, ‘When will it happen? What if it happens tomorrow? What should we do? What happens after it?’ We’re caught up in terms of time.

When we let go of time we can experience deliverance, a spiritual response to death. Then we understand why the Buddha’s passing away was seen as a release from time. We are always bringing ourselves back to now, trusting, taking refuge in now. This process of kamma, this psychic, phenomenal, internal dream is always seeking something, going towards something, trying to become, get rid of, change and so on. When we take refuge in the now, that means we have trust and faith. No matter what the dream or the mirage is about, no matter whether it’s dreary, anguished or desperate, however powerful the mood is, right now, at this time, we can notice that it changes. There is the knowing of that. The practice of Buddhism is nothing more; this is its essence.

We can always take refuge in Buddha and notice that the phenomenal world, whether it’s internal, external, joyful, bright, painful or nothing much at all, is leaving us, passing us by. And rather than trying to catch it, jump onto it or control it, we let it pass. We take refuge in this knowing, at this time. The Buddha refuge is a sense of trust, a very powerful experience. It’s essential not to make the effort to have it out of desire, but to truly allow our very personal experience to be reviewed, to be made conscious, to be recognized, to be seen, and to abandon everything else except that. When we chant the reflections on the Buddha, we say that he is ‘the knower of the worlds’ – this world we feel so much a part of – and that he bestows blessings on us. That knowing is a blessed quality. Then our serenity, our compassion and our strength come not from ourselves, not from our will or desire, or some kind of struggle, but from humbly bringing our minds into the present moment, allowing that moment to be reviewed by this Buddha-knowing. When, from that position, you offer your life to Buddha, to the knowing of your mind, there is serenity and strength, a kind of blessedness, wisdom, compassion and the patience to go on.

However, so often, in meditation as in life, we don’t do that. Instead we rely on ‘me-ness’, on ‘I’m going to … I can’t … I want … I’m not … I have … I don’t …’ and all that ‘I-ness’. We despair because of it. There’s conceit because of it. We grow angry and annoyed with life because it doesn’t fit the ‘me’. We become annoyed and feel disappointed with ourselves because we are not the way we think we should be. All that is based upon seeing things from self-view. And yet there is this marvellous opportunity to offer our life to Buddha. Then, from this position of knowing, we recognize that all the things which belong to ‘me’ are changing. All sense of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ is impermanent and death-bound. In this awakening there is blessedness, there is transcendence.

Meditation is a very open opportunity, because you can do it for a weekend, an hour, five minutes, or even just for a moment. It’s not such a massive act of faith. When we take that opportunity we begin to recognize that beyond the movement and the change there is a kind of strength and serenity. Slowly, slowly, through the valleys, through the clouds, through the mirages of our self-view, a light begins to glow and guide us on to Dhamma: not delayed in time, here and now, leading to liberation; and to Sangha: the good practice, the resolve, the recognition of ourselves as spiritual pilgrims who are living through their kamma.