##### One-Pointedness

This reflection was offered on the morning of 27 November 2014.

Wisdom is one of the great blessings of the citta. True inner happiness is a lovely quality which allows the citta to unfold and be free from anxiety, criticism, doubt, anger and so forth. As the citta unfolds, its wisdom capacities become more available, more revealed. You can imagine the citta as something that gets contracted, distracted and tangled up. Even when it’s excited, it doesn’t have the deep, comfortable happiness of this process of practice we’re going through.

First of all, we establish our foundation and maintain our faith. The citta is able to do that. We have a certain faith and determination, the confidence that we can be here and it’s going to be for our welfare. Even though at times it’s going to feel difficult and painful, or confusing and pointless, we persevere with faith and determination – not in a jaw-grinding way, but by steadily reminding ourselves, ‘Don’t believe in that mood. It arose: you weren’t permanently in this mood. Because it’s arisen, it’s going to pass.’ If you were happy you wouldn’t be worrying about being in this state, would you? But when you feel unhappy, you worry about it. Happiness and unhappiness arise and pass. We’re not always happy; we’re not always unhappy.

Happiness has many features and faces. The deeper happiness of serenity comes from faith and confidence and is associated with clarity of realization; it is enhanced by the skilful process of practice that we’re in. The citta spreads over the experience; it spreads over the moods and the mind-states. Wisdom is not just intellectual knowledge. It’s the capacity for constantly assessing, ‘How is this?’ It wants to get a sense of how something really is. And then, having assessed how it is, there may be the arising of thoughts like, ‘What’s needed is this’ or ‘What’s helpful is this’ or sometimes you don’t know: you need to wait and test a few things.

Making less, clearing away, discarding what’s not necessary, firming up what is helpful: this is the ongoing process that we call ‘meditation’. This is what leads to collectedness (samādhi). What is not necessary? That which tangles, agitates, leads away and doesn’t settle. What is helpful? That which enables the citta to settle, to unfold. It has to settle down to be able to unfold. What does that? Patience and skilful relationship. We’re not forcing, we’re not hanging back; we’re not pushing forward, we’re not dithering. Or if we are, we’re trying to stop doing that.

Wisdom supervises the practice, and the result of supervising wisely is that wisdom develops. As wisdom increases, happiness becomes deeper. The wise and completely unfolded citta is resplendent. In the suttas it says that one abides with a great citta, a citta ‘abundant and exalted’.50 The citta of a Tathāgata is even described as ‘measureless’. You can’t get any angle around it, it’s completely open. What does that mean? We can notice what the contracted citta is like: it’s tight and continually fragmenting into, ‘I should be … Why? … Who? … What’s happening now? … What do they say about that? …’. It’s contracted and it’s broken up into fragments that often contend and compare with each other. A thought quarrels with an emotion. An emotion objects to a thought. An emotion wants to hang on; a determination wants to get rid of it. There’s this kind of clashing of mental factors, of mental experiences. It’s like when you fold up a sheet into a clump and one bit of the sheet is quarrelling with the other bit: ‘Get out of here!’ When you have this tangled-up ball, it looks like many separate forms with creases in between them, and you want to try and get rid of those creases. How do we try and get the cloth so it feels clear and unified? Well, let’s try and press it a bit more firmly so that it will come into one shape. Or, what about if we spread it out so that all the lumps and all the creases disappear? The Buddha used an image to illustrate this: it’s like stretching out the hide of a bull.51 First it’s all twisted and tangled, then you stretch it out until it’s refined and smooth. This is the process of emptying out all the inner boundaries, contradictions and dissonances; the citta is made vast through this.

This process leads towards the unified experience: what we call samādhi, collectedness or concentration. But the processes that take us to that are not just one thing. There’s a variety of factors coming together and wisdom supervises all of it. When is the time for relaxing? When is the time for exerting? When is the time for gladdening the mind? When is the time to restrain the mind? – ‘Don’t go there, come back here’, ‘Put that down.’ When is the time to soothe the mind? – ‘You really don’t need that, you know.’ And like calming a frantic dog, the mind doesn’t calm down at just one word. You have to stroke it time and time again, talk to it, give it something nice to eat, and then it begins to settle down. This is the way you train the wild citta.

We can illustrate the training of the citta with two elephants: the wild forest elephant and the tamed elephant. In order to tame the wild elephant, the tamed elephant is taken out into the jungle. It goes up against the wild elephant, strokes it with its trunk and soothes it. Then they go back together. In other words, the skilful aspects of mind such as wisdom, faith and confidence don’t reject the unskilful aspects but actually recognize, ‘We’re of the same kind; this too is a mind-state, this too is an aspect of mind: this is the dissonant mind, this is the jealous mind, this is the complaining mind, this is the frightened mind …’. And instead of having one bit fighting against the other, the skilful mind receives the unskilful mind and begins to soothe it, calm it and straighten it. We have to take in unskilful states as they arise in the citta and work with them. We ask ourselves, ‘What’s needed here?’ Wisdom knows when it’s time to firm the mind, to encourage it, to relax it, to calm it, to love it, to gladden it and to rest it.

The descriptions of the results of practice apply to both the body and the mind: they are malleable, pliable, light, fit for work and strong; they’re not bowed down or heavy. You train the mind just like you train the body, so it becomes fit. Then you can work it. The Buddha sometimes likened this process to taking a lump of rock with gold in it.52 First you melt it down; then you repeatedly blow on it and skim off the dross until you finally end up with very pure gold. Then you can make whatever you like with it: beads, ornaments, etc. This process is about putting aside what isn’t necessary. First, we have to recognize that every lump of rock has gold in it – when it comes down to the human being. So we ask ourselves, ‘What helps to melt?’ We never give up on ourselves: we hold the whole of it with faith, kindness, goodwill and right intent.

This is how we work, but one doesn’t want to make it sound too frantic because it can be a slow process of working. Wisdom will tell you, ‘Now is the time: I am settled to this extent, I have enough space in this respect – there’s a space within my breathing where I feel settled.’ Don’t wait until everything is completely settled because it isn’t going to happen! You have to find the flecks of gold within the rock; then you attend to them and begin to work them out. The citta will unfold in that process.

When you feel a skilful mind-state such as confidence, happiness, loving-kindness, ease or compassion in your citta, sense how the breathing is then. Don’t make a particular effort to breathe; just stay in touch with the breathing in a skilful mind-state. The quality of the breathing is not something you have to do: it just happens. And if you stay with the skilful mind-state, it will carry that quality into you. It will spread. As it spreads it helps the citta to unfold. This is the relationship between body and mind. As the body can unfold, the citta can unfold. The breathing is the vehicle for doing that. First we need a little bit of open citta, a heart that’s not seized up, then we follow that and use it to sense our breathing – so the two come together. We stay with that quality and breathe into it. The citta will then spread and unfold. This is the unfolding of the citta through the body. Then, of course, the breathing itself receives the effects: it becomes brighter and stronger. This relationship between body and mind is everything.

Sometimes you lead with the body: when you feel angry or upset you just sit down on the ground or walk up and down until some of that rage has dissolved. Sometimes you lead with the mind: you bring up the memory of a person who was kind and gracious to you or the person you love, and you take that into your body. This is samādhi. It means bringing disparate pieces together. We so often believe that the mind is separate from the body and is going to get on top of it all and make the practice work – and we try to practise from that basis. That’s not relationship. First of all, we need to meet ourselves, then we investigate: ‘Where is the strength? What are the skills?’

Walking meditation is a very dominant practice in forest monasteries, partly because of the heat. When it’s hot, you can become sleepy easily and lose energy. Walking meditation energizes; it’s one of its features. Being with the whole movement of the body gives energy and you can stay within that for an hour or two. Sometimes people do three or four hours, or even non-stop walking. By feeling the rhythm and the movement of the body, the citta begins to come out of its restlessness and distractedness. You don’t have to squeeze it into shape: it slowly picks it up. There’s a certain steadfastness when you commit to an hour or so of walking, or an hour or so of sitting. But you do that from the place of, ‘I’m up for this.’ You lead with confidence, with faith. You lead from your strength rather than pushing yourself into it. Wisdom leads, cultivates and supports everything. It collects everything and discards what’s unnecessary, and that naturally leads to samādhi, collectedness or unification.

In the Buddha’s presentation, both in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta and the Ānāpānasati Sutta, we might note that there isn’t a description of ‘concentrating’; there isn’t a ‘holding the mind on to a point’. There is an expression ‘one-pointedness’ but it’s presented as a result rather than an approach. In the Ānāpānasati Sutta, the Buddha says, ‘Mindfully one breathes in, mindfully one breathes out. One discerns (pajānāti) one is breathing long; one discerns one is breathing short.’ There’s an assessment occurring: one discerns it’s short, one discerns it’s long; one trains oneself. We’re actually one-pointed on this intention to train in that way. It’s one-pointedness of  intention, rather than one-pointedness of  attention, that leads to one-pointedness as a result. You’re not necessarily focusing on a particular spot, although that may be a skilful means; you can find a place where you’re feeling the best quality of your breathing and stay there. Later in the sutta it says: ‘Sabba-kāya-paṭisaṁvedī’ which means ‘experiencing the entire body’. Where is the one-pointedness? You’re one-pointed on one aim, which is to thoroughly feel your entire body. Do you see the difference?

You may find it helpful to locate where you feel your breathing the strongest: maybe it’s in your belly, your chest, your head, your throat or your nose. Find out where the mind feels comfortable, where it tends to naturally sit. As your attention sits there, you begin to receive something quite dynamic and flowing. You don’t want to crush that by gripping too tightly. The point of attention is an open point through which things pass. Sometimes the image is used of someone turning wood on a lathe: he has his eyes on this particular place where he has his chisel. If he wanted to look at the wood, his gaze would be going round and round. But he is actually looking at an area through which the wood turns. If he wants to really look at the wood, he has to switch the lathe off and hold it steady. But in your practice, you actually want to keep your mind focused with a certain openness to allow a dynamic process to flow through.

Wisdom supervises our attention and gives rise to a helpful sense of where and how we want to focus. In a way, it doesn’t really matter. I often encourage people to get to know what breathing actually is by feeling the complete flow and movement of it through the body, because we don’t necessarily really take in the fullness of what breathing is as an experience: the happiness of it, the ease of it, the involuntary quality of it. We can overdo our attention and tighten up. You want to simply experience the fullness, the full length of the breath. As your mind settles a bit and becomes calmer, the breathing becomes shorter and calms down. You’re feeling that, assessing that. ‘Sensing the entire body’ doesn’t mean that your mind is skipping around to your fingers and your toes. Rather, as your mind settles down, it’s like being in a centre of a communications network where you have these nerve endings or wires, and you’re picking up signals from all over the body. You don’t run around to this place and that place; you stay where you are and you feel what you can through the entire body. This is unified and one-pointed in that respect. The mind is settling down.

The next step in the practice of ānāpānasati is ‘passambhayaṁ kāya-saṅkhāraṁ’. ‘Passambhayaṁ’ means calming or soothing – just like you’re stroking something gently to soothe it. It’s not numbing, blocking or suppressing. We’re looking at an organic system here. We’re not belting something into shape, but rather soothing a living system into a rest state, soothing the entire experience of body. The body-formation (kāya-saṅkhāra) refers to the dynamic that gets you breathing: the energy behind the breathing. It might be jerky, snappy or flaccid, or it could be shuddering, gasping or flapping around in your chest. You want to smooth it out so that there’s a regular, easeful breathing. You’re feeling the full, complete release of the out-breath and you’re not in a hurry to pull one in. Then, you’re feeling the end of the in-breath, the moment when things seem to hover before the out-breath starts. You’re fully sensing and soothing, calming, steadying. The energy is easeful.

The word ‘pajānāti’ is similar to ‘sampajañña’. I use the Pali because it’s quite distinct as to what particular kind of wisdom is being used. In this case, it’s a directed, sensing, feeling type of wisdom: one is witnessing or knowing the arising, changing and passing of bodily states – the experience of body. One may sense the elements of the body, the energies or the pressure in the body, or even an overall sense of what the body is. One may sense certain qualities in the body shifting or dissolving. Sometimes the body can feel very open and spacious, sometimes it feels rigid and rusty. This is what is called ‘the body within the body’. We’re touching into the breathing behind and through all that experience of body.

The first realization touched into in the fourth tetrad of the Ānāpānasati Sutta is ‘One abides contemplating change’ – the changeability, the shifting, evanescent and ephemeral nature of whatever is manifesting. Instead of trying to hold a particular sensation, you open up to allow the sensations and energies to change, the experience of body to shift. When we’re looking at the body – not the visual one but the direct, here-within-you experience of body – it doesn’t necessarily change between dichotomies like day/night or pain/pleasure. Instead, every feeling within it flows and is vibrating, pulsing. It may be painful but the pain comes in waves or pulses. You might feel it running down your leg and up again or moving around. You abide contemplating change, changeability – there is the one-pointedness: staying at that place and witnessing change. This kind of one-pointedness gives rise to dispassion (virāga) because you’re not taking a stand, you’re not reacting. This is what leads the mind to unfold, to release. The relationship of antagonism to feeling changes; the relationship of infatuation with feeling changes. The relationship to feeling shifts from ‘want/don’t want’ to ‘it arises/it passes.’ Then one’s faith and confidence increase.

As one’s confidence increases, one’s inner happiness increases. It doesn’t become more bubbly; it becomes smoother and deeper. It’s not excitement but a happiness of well-being: soothed and contented. Because of this, the citta becomes subtler and more able to distinguish the space element – the moments at the end of experiences, when a sensation fades out, when the breath pauses. The body feels lighter, a little more spacious and less compacted. The mind is spacious, less frantic and welded to experience, less gripped by it. You may wonder, ‘How is it that the same kind of situation is happening, but I’m not getting the same immediate hit or reaction to it?’ Dispassion leads to unfolding into spaciousness – we can trust this process.

When we become a little more spacious, we’re able to discern subtler experiences that we thought were actually fixed, such as ‘my opinions, my standards, my attitudes, what I need to do, who I am, what’s wrong with me …’. What is all that? Just more stress and tension, isn’t it? How would it be to not have an opinion? Instead, we could just be open. Things that seem so structurally important for us – for who we are, for our integrity – are actually all just mental structures. Instead of believing in and following an opinion, we may find that there’s something wiser and more open about simply noticing it come and go – even when we think it’s a ‘good’ opinion. Having an opinion can be useful in its time, but does it have to be here all the time? Do we have to always take a stand and convince others of it? These very senses of identity can simply be experienced as a structure that is useful in its time and place, but not something you need to have all the time.

To take an example: boots are great, but you don’t want to have boots on your feet all day long and all night as well. It’s nice to be able to take them off, not because they’re wrong or bad, but simply because you don’t need them right now. We have to keep asking ourselves, ‘What is not necessary?’ When we say ‘not necessary’ it doesn’t mean ‘never again for the rest of my life’, but just ‘not at this time’. Right now, I don’t need to think of the future or who I am, where I am, what I am, why I am, how I am, who I’m not, what I could be … That very aim of seeking to find myself is stressful. I don’t need to find myself, because I just am. When something seems very intimate, obsessive, difficult or important about me, when something makes me seem special and different – like my character – then we should put it aside and tell ourselves, ‘Let’s take a break!’

The mind, as it opens, is measureless: there’s no definition, no identity, no naming itself. As the Buddha remarked, the world is lost in the tangle of names.53 And we look for security in that world by defining ourselves: in having certain things we can place, find and register about me. Well, when that’s necessary, then, make your identity a good one. But don’t make it so obsessive that you have any old rubbish as your identity, just for the sake of having an identity!

What gives our mind the opportunity to open and be measureless is the ability to release the compulsion to compare ourselves with others –as being better, worse or the same as them. You don’t throw the compulsion away; you release it, because you know that the quality of openness and space is actually much more delightful, supportive, beautiful, wise and happy than the tangled, contracted mind. That’s the kind of movement that allows what’s called ‘ceasing’. You don’t need to keep regenerating all these defective functions that nag you and beat you up all the time. It’s enough!

As an experience, the understanding of impermanence reminds us that the practice is not about getting rid of anything, because everything is in fact continually being regenerated. We reflect and consider: if the nature of phenomena is changeable, arising and passing, it means that what may seem to be a fixed state or a fixed problem or standard is actually something that’s just regenerating. It’s like when you switch the fan blades on, you suddenly seem to have a very solid circle. But when you switch the fan off, where did the circle go? Did you smash the circle? Did you throw it away? No, just by switching off the motor, the circle disappeared.

This is the nature of formations. They seem to be permanent because they are running down the same track. And the track seems to be permanent because it’s held by certain assumptions and views, such as: ‘I am’, ‘I need to be’, ‘I should be’. Because of that assumption ‘I am’, I need to fill the space with being something so that I feel I’m worthwhile, that I’m doing a useful job, making something of my life and getting somewhere. Underneath these perceptions there is no real substance at all, but simply a view – a wrong view – that takes deep penetration to relinquish. It’s only relinquished when we have a deep happiness that replaces it. Then we don’t need to know the future or ‘who I am’ any more. But as long as you do, focus on generating skilful factors such as virtue, loving-kindness and simplicity. If you’re going to generate an identity, make it something that’s made of good material. The process of practice doesn’t really negate a self, it just relativizes it. That’s what is meant by the word ‘ceasing’. We don’t regenerate the compulsive and addictive mental factors; we let them rest. What’s called paṭinissagga (relinquishment) is the giving away of the limited view which is called ‘self’.

The mind, really, is measureless. Awareness is measureless. Everywhere you go, there’s awareness. You can’t find an edge to it. According to the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, we should not only bring our awareness to the body-states and the feeling-states, but also to the mind-states. The Buddha presents a synopsis of a whole range of them. We register or recognize, ‘This is a mind affected by, measured by, defined by or covering the characteristic of aversion (for example).’ When there is aversion, the mind is limited: it only sees things in terms of aversion. For its three-second duration or however long it is, it’s experiencing things that are registered, limited and defined by aversion, and then another state arises. Mind-states have a characteristic, a definition, a measurement. They see things within a certain range, an emotional range. The Buddha also talks about the radiant mind as being limitless, really open. Our practice is ‘knowing the contracted mind as the contracted mind’, acknowledging the panoply of mind-states – of course, it doesn’t mean you have all of them.

You’re probably not harbouring a permanent, undying hatred: that kind of mind-state comes and goes. You acknowledge the transiency of mind-states and more deeply rest in that understanding. That is your one-pointedness. You rest in one-pointedness on wisdom. Don’t give up on it. Be tenacious. This means you refuse to reject or adopt mind-states. Sometimes we are ready to see mind-states pass, but we don’t want mind-states to arise, especially a wobbly or confused one. But it can’t pass until it has arisen. Once something has started to arise you can’t say, ‘I’ve changed my mind, go back!’ You have to go through it; you can’t push it back.

Once the feeling of frustration has arisen you can’t say, ‘I don’t really feel like that’ because, ‘Yes, you do!’ Whether it’s justified or not, whether it fits your self-image or not, here it is! Stay steady within the body and open to the movement of frustration or disappointment. Contemplate it but don’t keep feeding it with a thought. Just feel the raw quality of the emotional movement. If you keep adding another topic to it, then you are cooking up more of it, or keeping it going. You may have noticed that just as you get to the end of your upset, you start thinking, ‘But! Another thing …’ or ‘After all I’ve done!’ or ‘But I already said that anyway!’ or ‘He never said this!’ You keep throwing a little bit more wood into the fire as the flames go down. That’s a habit to keep in check. If you open to the fullness of the frustration or the disappointment, hold it in your body and don’t keep going back and feeding it, it will pass through. It has to come through and be felt, then it passes. And generally the passing gives rise to more compassion in the heart. When we have allowed ourselves to feel the fullness of an emotion as it rushes through, holding it in our body carefully so that it doesn’t overflow, then it passes through.

Adding thinking, criticizing or more topics to it will prevent the fulfilment of that process; the emotion will come back again. That’s what we notice in this cycling of experience: the worry or the fear comes back because we haven’t really had enough space, enough embodiment, to handle it. Emotions can be extremely powerful; they blow us away. There’s no point in getting blown away or overwhelmed by an emotion, so when you feel overwhelmed you have to carefully pause, turn your attention inwards, feel your feet, walk up and down until there’s the capacity to allow the emotion to move through. Many of them are not that intense, but some may be. Wisdom needs to check: ‘Is it the right time? Do you have the capacity to allow this to pass through?’

The growing development of that capacity is why and how we meditate. It takes a long time, but who’s counting? After about forty years of meditation, I think I’m just getting to be able to experience my emotions more completely, without blaming them, feeling ashamed of them or dumping them on somebody else. It’s only forty years! Forty years could be a finger-snap; it depends what you’re carrying. And because you don’t know what you’re carrying, there’s no point having a clock around this one. You just know when it’s finished: the triggers occur but the fire doesn’t get going. Maybe you see that kind of warming-up and you think, ‘What’s that? That’s really pretty annoying! I could go there … but I don’t think I’ll bother!’

One-pointedness is really a faith in oneself. If we keep quarrelling with ourselves, we’re not going to allow the process to come through. You have the wisdom to know what would help. Is it wise to sit, to stand, to walk or to recline? Where are your faculties ripening? Where does the confidence ripen? Where does the joyfulness ripen? Where does the clarity ripen? Can you firm it up? That’s one-pointedness: one-pointedness on freedom, on liberation, on meeting yourself. You can employ a whole range of skills to fulfil this process of ‘ purification of beings’ – and not the eradication of them!

As we see in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, ‘One knows the collected mind as the collected mind; one knows the scattered mind as the scattered mind.’ We might think, ‘So, what do I do about it?’ It doesn’t seem we’re doing anything about it, apart from knowing it. In a way, it’s not just what the sutta says that’s awesome, it’s also what it doesn’t say. For example: ‘He knows the mind affected by ill-will. He worries about the mind affected by ill-will. He feels guilty about the mind affected by ill-will; he wonders what he should do about feeling guilty about the mind affected by ill-will. He blames other people for the mind affected by ill-will; he feels guilty about blaming other people out of a mind affected by ill-will …’. No, the Buddha just says, ‘He knows the mind affected by ill-will.’ The more we can terminate some of those knock-on effects, the proliferations (papañca), the clearer and cleaner the process is going to be. Unfortunately we do proliferate, so we check, ‘What is the bit that I can chip off – the proliferations?’ And what helps that is returning to compassion and goodwill, again and again. Gradually, we allow the melting of the past.

The first enlightenment factor is mindfulness. Then there is investigation: one discerns and enquires – that’s a wisdom factor. Wisdom carries many different faces and many different hands. It holds attentively and discerns: ‘Why is this? Who is this? Where did this come from? Once it arises, what are the results of that?’ Wisdom stimulates energy, which is the third enlightenment factor. Energy comes because you know there’s something purposeful to do. It’s not a command to apply more effort. As you begin to see the relevance of the practice, your energy is kindled, your fire is lit (ātāpī). These are the dynamics of it.

50 Majjhima Nikāya 106.3, and see Aṅguttara Nikāya 3.100 for the imperturbability of the developed mind.

51 Majjhima Nikāya 121.5.

52 Aṅguttara Nikāya 3.101.

53 Saṁyutta Nikāya 1.23 and 1.61.