#### Ajahn Candasirī

December 2017

Over the years Ajahn Sucitto has put an enormous amount of time and energy into making the extraordinary teachings of Ajahn Sumedho available: selecting talks, editing them and arranging for their publication as books. It is extremely gladdening that now Sister Kittiñāṇī has been inspired to prepare this collection of his own remarkable teachings.

I’ve known Ajahn Sucitto for almost forty years. My very earliest recollection is of a talk he gave one evening, shortly after he had arrived from Thailand, at the newly re-opened Hampstead Vihāra in London. His teaching was basic, raw, immediate and practical; it comprised an encouragement to contemplate the experience of body … Since then, over several decades, he has developed many modes of recollection in his guiding of countless monks, nuns and lay people all over the world.

My personal experience of him is as a true friend of the best kind – a kalyāṇamitta  – totally committed both to his own liberation and to supporting others in their aspiration. Opening the door of his kuti at 4.00 a.m. and bathing in the freshly fallen snow was just one of the many austerities he seemed to delight in. However, rather than imposing the same rigorous standards that he would expect of himself on others, he finds ways of adapting his approach to the needs of an individual or group with humour and kindness.

Some might think of him as a kind of Dhamma warrior, rather intimidating at times, but I have also observed a deep tenderness. One time many years ago he painstakingly studied knitting under the tutelage of an elderly friend. He had wanted to knit a pair of socks from the spun fleeces of sheep that had been grazing at Chithurst as a birthday present for Ajahn Sumedho. His account of the process of creating them was just one in his repertoire of hilarious encounters with practical matters, involving, among other things, sewing machines, old-fashioned printers and – almost fatally – fungicide. He was also willing to share even the most intimate personal vulnerability as means of supporting us to approach similar aspects of our own life experience. ‘Don’t ever put doubt into your mind. Don’t do that to yourself’ is one of many sound bites I captured and noted down during a period of deep despair over my own practice. It eased my struggle.

Ajahn Sucitto’s teaching legacy is huge, and perhaps the most significant contribution – although it may not have been appreciated by everyone – was the crafting of our nuns’ training Rule and procedures. The firmness and persistence he brought to that task has enabled a group of women of different ages, backgrounds, nationalities and temperaments to live and practise in community for over twenty-five years, using a form based on the bhikkhu and bhikkhuni Pāṭimokkhas – there being no such training previously available for women.

Now his focus has turned to a concern for how we might best cope with the ageing process, and towards guiding our collective awareness towards the welfare of the planet. I strongly suspect that until his last breath he will continue to share what he can for the ultimate benefit of all. I end with a most selfish wish: May he not take that last breath for a very long time!