#### Ajahn Kāruṇiko

March 2016

Ajahn Sucitto, a true kalyāṇamitta

I feel privileged to have known Ajahn Sucitto for over thirty years, during twenty years of which we lived together at Cittaviveka Monastery, and I value him as both a teacher and a kalyāṇamitta.

When Ajahn Sucitto was abbot of Cittaviveka, he presented a good example of uprightness and restraint in Vinaya, balanced with a sense of humour. His early years of being abbot were not easy, as he took on the role after quite a charismatic former abbot who had suddenly left in unfortunate circumstances. But Ajahn Sucitto is not one to shy away from difficulties; he lives up to the phrase he coined: ‘The only way out is in,’ meaning, ‘To go beyond dukkha one must face it.’ I remember as an anagārika being his attendant on a weekend retreat which he offered to lead at the last minute because Sogyal Rinpoche had to cancel. The retreatants were very disappointed, and when Ajahn Sucitto questioned them as to why they had come, several of them replied: ‘We thought Sogyal Rinpoche was teaching.’ However this did not hinder him from offering some fine teachings, and I think most left the retreat uplifted in Dhamma and no longer disappointed.

Ajahn Sucitto is generous in offering teachings which many people appreciate in both his talks and his writings. His wisdom and empathetic nature make him someone you feel you can go to if you are struggling and need some helpful advice. I find his way of teaching Vinaya inspiring, and he has put much thought and effort into establishing a good standard of training at Cittaviveka, as well as establishing the Sīladharā training for the nuns. I have valued his perspective on various issues that have arisen in developing the monasteries in the West. If a letter which calls for some sensitivity is required from the Elders’ Council, he is often chosen to write it.

As human beings we all have characteristics which some people like and others dislike. In positions of leadership and teaching one receives both positive and negative reactions. Ajahn Sucitto has been described as ‘inscrutable’; this leaves a lot of scope for people to misinterpret some of his expressions and misread them as indicating disapproval. But I have found Ajahn Sucitto willing to receive negative reactions and feedback without reciprocating them, one of the qualities which I feel contributes to his living up to his bhikkhu name of Sucitto, ‘Noble Mind’.