#### Refuge

This reflection was offered to the monastic community during the winter retreat at Cittaviveka Monastery, on 26 January 2002.

I’d like to mention the significance of the sense of connection as being the foundation for samādhi and also for paññā. When you have something you feel you can be with, you have that sense of connection. You’re not simply conceiving that ‘thing’ or having a blurred contact with it, but you’re able to bond onto it – to bond onto the body, mood, mind and feeling. You fully connect to it and sustain that connection. It’s easy to connect to the unwholesome states – somehow we get snagged on them – but the experience of pīti or rapture occurs when we connect to a wholesome state. There is a particular tonality that occurs in the citta: it’s bright, and not flustered or agitated. That brightness has a certain steadiness. It may not be a rock-solid calm, but it has an ease of rhythm to it. It’s not panicky or clouded. That quality of brightness gives us a sense of confidence. With that confidence, there’s a quality of being able to stay relaxed or settled back (viveka), a quality of being able to stay in our space and be with the feeling of the tactile sensations of the body, the walking, the standing, the breathing – and that makes it a meditation practice.

Connectedness needs to be established as a general way of life. It’s more than just being able to revert your attention onto a meditation object – that application comes out of a much larger sense of connection. It’s not a desperate hanging on, but a feeling of being able to contact, to be with, to feel settled in your own space, into where you are. You really know where you are. You sit and are able to acknowledge a particularity of where you are and how you’re feeling right now, without being too refined: sensing the ground beneath you, the room or the space around you, the medium around your body. It may seem slightly mysterious because there isn’t anything in the space around you, but by connecting to it, your attention is taken away from the mental afflictions to which you are prone (internally mulling things over, remembering things from the past) and brought to the present moment. You ask, ‘What’s an inch in front of my chest right now?’ Then you feel, ‘It’s all right. There’s nothing harmful there. There’s nothing painful there. There’s nothing desperate there. I don’t have to reach out for that space: it’s right here.’ You’re making it conscious, something that the body begins to feel. You are settled into your space. Space doesn’t require you to be a good, bright or brilliant person; it’s just there.

We would all be in a terrible state without space – squashed! We don’t need that much room – just a few inches – but without that vital bit of space, where would we be? Of course this seems puerile because it’s so simple. You are able to come back to something immediate, obvious and palpable, and you don’t have to develop an extraordinary refinement of it. It’s always here for you: your own little space around you. To me, that’s what refuge is about, really. It’s there whether you notice it or not, whether you’re in a bad mood or a good mood; whatever happens, it’s still there for you. You keep breathing it, you can move around in it: it allows all. We can build up a lot of skilful saññā (perception) around such a simple thing as space.

Connecting to simple things helps to take us out of the mental states that are desperately seeking connection – for example, when we’re thinking of ‘something I want and I’ve got to have’, ‘something I’m going to get’ or ‘something I don’t have’. We’re like a hungry ghost, with a pin-mouth and a big belly: ‘I want to find … have … get … become … be!’ We feel we ought to attain something and get somewhere, and with that comes the terrible hungry ghost experience: ‘I haven’t got … I can’t … I’ll never get enough … I’ll never get what I want … I can’t be …’. But when we develop a sense of connection to simple things, we strengthen our sense of refuge – a good place to be.

The Buddha said to Ānanda, ‘Ānanda, anyone you have compassion for – your friends and relatives – you should establish them in the Triple Gem. Because for someone who is established in the Triple Gem, it’s impossible that they would be reborn in the hell realm, the hungry ghost realm or the animal realm.’26 Therefore we establish anyone we have compassion for in the Triple Gem, so that they will not be reborn in terrible, afflicted, demented, fearful, hungry states. And of course, as we have compassion for ourselves, we also establish ourselves in the Triple Gem. This is more than just a brief Pali formula or a one-off initiation; it’s a continual sense of knowing that you’re in something that is protecting you. You’re in something good and bright, that offers you the opportunity to bring forth and mature your own goodness and brightness. It also offers you an opportunity to clean out this gorge, to ‘throw up’ these afflictions: it acts as the most efficient lavatory ever built that can and will flush them all away. The refuge in the Triple Gem is really priceless: sometimes it’s a source of food, and sometimes it’s something to ‘throw up’ in. I think we need both.

Most of the time, we are not able to establish ourselves in the refuge. We are either in the animal realm (experiencing sense desires, fear or restlessness), in the hungry ghost realm (endlessly needy, orphaned, a refugee of saṁsāra desperately trying to get something) or in the hell realms (experiencing resentment and bitterness), which arise when we are not connected. To strengthen our sense of refuge, we can consider the Precepts and sense-restraint, and dwell within that. We can consider the foundations of mindfulness and dwell within that. As monastics, we consider our requisites and develop a sense of contentment to be in this form. We establish our refuge by what we do and hold, but also by recognizing what holds us – the two go together.

As monastics, we can consider the fact that we’re living with people who keep precepts, who have the inclination and the intention to do so. I’ve been in some of the most troubled countries and yet I always seem to be with these kinds of people. When I go to different countries in the world, it’s as though somebody were changing the wallpaper and putting different masks on, because there is a very similar perception of being with the good. Maybe people aren’t good all the time, but at that specific time when we get together, it’s coming around in that particular realm. We bond around generosity, harmlessness, respect, listening and caring for each other.

Of course, we may also have negative and critical perceptions of those around us. We can get lost in the fine details of a person’s behaviour, mannerisms or speech, of what they didn’t say and should have said. At these times, we can go back to the perception: ‘Nobody is here to harm me. Nobody is here to deceive me. I may get these impressions, but nobody is here to do that.’ That’s something I feel absolutely clear about. Without thinking about it that much, it seems obvious. We easily recognize that it isn’t the case everywhere: some people actually do want to harm others, lie, deceive, cheat, steal, mutilate and maim, so it’s nice to be able to recognize what we are part of – a group of people who keep precepts and have no harmful intentions. From that position, we can see the frenzy, the desperateness, the neediness or the grumbliness of the mind fading out.

Let’s consider the four requisites. We who live in this particular monastery may not think about them very much, because we have all the food, robes, shelter and medicines that we need. We even give things away to shelters and old people’s homes when we have more than we need. If we didn’t have any clothes and shelter we would be out naked on a cold night like this, with howling rain and wind. It would be pretty miserable, wouldn’t it? As alms-mendicants we consider not only the requisites themselves but also how they came around: they were all given, and we didn’t have to go out and hassle people to get them. People gave them because they wanted to. They liked it; they thought we were somehow worthy of respect, worthy of alms. These requisites are actually saturated in lovely things. They are not about me – ‘Because I deserved it.’ They are about everybody, what the whole thing means for people who offer them. People don’t say, ‘This is just for so-and-so.’ No, it’s for the whole sangha.

I think we all have a room of our own now, but in the old days, there would be two, three or four of us in a room. The house was leaky, so there were buckets catching the water as it splashed all over from the roof. Yet it was better than being outside! These mantled sheep out there can grow their own wool, munch the grass and stagger around, but we can’t do that as human beings. We can’t grow our own hide or our own wool and munch grass like a yak or sheep. And as monastics, we have to be given these things. Sometimes you may want to be like these mantled sheep: ‘I’m all right on my own, thank you! I don’t need very much. I munch my bit of grass and grow my wool. Don’t bother me!’ Although we may conceive that idea, it’s untrue really. No matter how much we like the idea of being self-reliant and independent, we still need food, robes and some kind of shelter, even if it’s just a big umbrella. These requisites don’t grow on trees; they are brought forth by people.

Whether we acknowledge it or not, there is that connection to a wider sphere. That connection doesn’t come through pressure, but through people’s love, respect and wish to support. We build our refuge by taking the time to carefully consider and reflect in this way. We call this anussati (recollection), which is bringing our mindfulness to consider the presence of something that’s actual. The Sangha refuge is something you can build up by considering the people visiting here, the people living here and everything that’s around you. They are all physical, tangible. But I’m sure all of us can become disconnected from that. Perhaps you think it’s not very important, or maybe you feel obligated to be grateful for everything – for example, when eating your porridge, you may think, ‘I’ve got to be grateful for this!’ – but that is not how it is.

We need to realize that, unless the mind is able to find a refuge, we are going to go into the hell realms, hungry ghost realms or animal realms. The disconnected mind spins into these afflictive states. We all have that kammic propensity, that past kamma of affliction, which intensifies the self-view: this sense of ‘me and mine, separate from everything else’. We tend to intensify the experiences that create a stronger sense of separation, whether they feel good or bad. If we are very good at something we may think, ‘I’m different, I’m special,’ but at other times, a sense of separateness from others brings awkwardness and pain – and the introversion that might result from that. Often we live in the realm of thoughts. All that activity in our head is trying to connect to something that will give us a sense of stability. We may want to find an answer or a particular state of knowledge. We may want to find a particular place of calm. We want to find something to connect to, a place where we feel settled. It’s very basic. This restlessness is something that only arahants don’t have; they are totally connected. This restless energy has been consummated by connecting to the Deathless, by abiding in nibbāna. We need to find the goodness in the present and bond with that. The mind needs this kind of nourishment, support and holding, to enable it to develop in a more refined way.

Thought plays a significant role in cultivating the mind, the citta. It’s extremely potent and powerful for us. The advice of the Buddha is to refrain from clinging to either the major signs or the minor characteristics of thought.27 A ‘major sign’ could be the greed, confusion or aversion by which a thought is powered. The ‘minor characteristics’ are the particular parentheses or twists of interesting new concoctions we have created out of these basic patterns – that kind of restless urging of the thinking mind. As a practising bodhisattva, the Buddha divided thought into two classes.28 On one hand there are thoughts of aversion, cruelty and greed, and on the other hand there are thoughts of loving-kindness, compassion and letting go or relinquishment. We can divide thought in this particular way. When the mind is caught up with unskilful thought, is it possible to turn it towards a wish of well-being for ourselves or for another being, and get that modality of experience going?

Cruelty can be hard-heartedness, callousness, indifference or dismissiveness. It’s the sense of not taking in another, not opening up, not receiving or meeting another, either through direct ill-will or with the attitude of, ‘You don’t count. I don’t care what you think!’ When cruelty is present in our minds, we need to go to something more open, receptive, compassionate, sharing, empathetic – from their grosser to their subtler forms. This is very important. Cruelty is not necessarily thinking of pulling people’s eyes out or other nasty, unkind deeds. Quite a lot of the time we might be dismissive or caricature people: ‘Oh, he’s a basket case!’ or ‘She’s kind of dumb!’ These sort of remarks can be quite flippant and come out easily. We can make general comments such as: ‘Well, all Italians are like that!’, and 57 million people are disparaged on the basis of one! Or we can say something like, ‘Typical woman!’, and 3 billion people are dismissed in one shot.

This dismissiveness arises because we don’t want to open up to some-thing different or strange. We have to come out of our own thinking or our own mode of being. To my mind, this is really what compassion is: the ability to come out of ‘my bit of it’. It doesn’t mean that I have to cling to ‘your bit of it’ (or even agree with it), but at least I can receive it, feel it and be willing to hold it. We can do this through speech or by simply acknowledging other people’s presence. When we live together in a house, we acknowledge that somebody is living next door, so maybe we have to be a bit quieter. If you see somebody struggling with their chore, perhaps you can help them, rather than walking around in your own little space: ‘Get out of my way! I’m busy. I’m meditating!’ Actually, there’s another human here, with sense organs and feelings. It’s not that we have to do a whole number on them, but we need to open our consciousness to include them. It’s something very important to bear in mind, otherwise we might cling to the idea of ‘concentrating the mind’ and get absorbed in a not particularly wholesome way.

This is not to say that we have to be terrifically sociable. However, when we live with other people, when there are people moving around, we need to develop a sense of openness. We don’t necessarily need to engage with each other, but we are open and give people space. When you do this in silence, it’s really lovely. Certainly, in a monastic community, we can feel the sense of mutual support that can occur without a lot of conversation or request; people just attune. It’s one of the beautiful things that happen in a community where people have been practising together for some time. It’s really nice to feel that you are in an intelligent sphere of connectedness, rather than living in a bus station or a place where everybody is moving about ignoring each other. When we are in a sphere of knowing or attentiveness, the emotive mind feels more settled. Our physical actions and ways of thinking can help to bring us into that state of feeling centred or settled – which happens as a felt sense in the citta rather than as a thought. Thought is a part of what happens in the mind, but it’s only one part of it. There is also a whole receptive, emotive, feeling aspect to mind.

Relinquishment comes from feeling the sense of, ‘Well, I have this, but I don’t need it,’ which can occur when we have a sense of connection: being with what we are with, feeling welcome, feeling here, feeling the richness of the life. The sense of ‘I don’t need this’ arises because we recognize nothing is worth hanging on to. We can let things go, and that actually feels nice. We need to develop the ability to not cling to the things we have, including our requisites, because by clinging, the mind moves out of a sense of shared connection into a modality that is much more prone to criticism and complaint. For example, somebody wanted to renovate the kuti I live in, but because I didn’t want it or hanker after it, there’s a nice feeling about it. I can live in it and I can move out of it. I like to have people live there when I am away. I share it. And I can go to other places and feel happy there. When I am in this kuti, I feel it’s a very lovely place to live – the roof doesn’t leak! But if I started to think of it as mine, I would probably find all kinds of things I would want to do there: painting, jazzing that up, fixing this, changing that … and then trying to make it always be this way. But being able to live in the generosity and goodness from which these things arose, and trust in it, is much more satisfying than holding the  requisites too tightly.

We might consider all the things that are here, or even the very space of the meditation retreat. We have this opportunity; it’s a supported opportunity. But if we think, ‘Oh, I’ve got these three months of retreat; it’s mine and my space!’, then the mind starts to get a bit nasty and tight, because it changes from the feeling of abundance to a feeling of, ‘I want to get something, make something, have something, be something with it.’ Then it’s easy for the mind to get on to a particular track, and anything that doesn’t fit with it is seen as disruptive. We become agitated and grumble: ‘Oh, no, group pūjā … breakfast together … people coming giving dāna on Sundays … people wanting chanting for their dead relatives … Why do you have to die and get in the way of my retreat! Please, stop dying! How inconsiderate!’ Instead, we can use the whole thing as something to hold with dispassion: this is the space, and this is what’s happening – nothing in particular: just this body … chanting … this … that … and it can all flow together. We can reflect on whatever is happening now and what it’s doing to the citta: irritation, joy or whatever mental state is triggered. We have a container to receive it all: that basic sense of ‘this is all the offering; this is all the refuge’. Everything is happening within that refuge, and we are connected to it.

We can more broadly develop that way of considering things and apply it with the standards we keep, the whole monastic form and the ethos of the life. That’s very helpful; that enables us to take these things internally. The mind is emotive; it can be stirred, aroused, joyful, elated, depressed, irritated or sad. This is the activation of the mind; it’s called citta-saṅkhāra. The mind bumbles along in particular modalities. Then that basic upheaval, that welling-up of citta-saṅkhāra, throws up thought. The thought process comes and spins. What activates the speech function is called vacī-saṅkhāra – of course, speech is also internal. The citta-saṅkhāra is the emotive welling-up, and the vacī-saṅkhāra is the welling-up of speech, the thinking, the inner chatter. The two are obviously connected: what we think about tends to stir up our emotive faculties; when our emotive faculties are stirred up, thought gets activated.

Thoughts introduce new material to the mind. That material isn’t physically in front of us, but it can be extremely potent. When you think about something that is not how you would like it to be, it induces this extremely potent stuff that gets the citta moving again: where it should be, where I ought to be, what so-and-so is, what so-and-so isn’t, what so-and-so thinks I am, what so-and-so doesn’t think I am, why I think that so-and-so thinks that I think they think I am, what so-and-so used to think I was … and so on. This is the awful, heartbreaking truth of the here and now: we’re usually living in a place that’s actually quite  sabai, quite OK in many ways, but we get caught up in these reels of disconnected thought, which make life miserable for us.

The pain in the knee is just the prologue. When it stops, the curtains are drawn and the big stuff comes downstage: all the stored-up tangles of these unresolved emotive currents well up, bringing particular thoughts with them. Thoughts are the results of these emotive currents, but they also stir the mind. We get this kind of wrestling team of thought and emotion: when one tires out, the other one takes over and boosts it up again in a kind of spin or oscillation. The whole thing disconnects us very seriously from the Triple Gem, from the present moment, from that sense of belonging, of being here. This is something that occurs for all of us.

We can only let go of a particular thought process when we understand it fully or when we can see it arise and pass. And we can only do that when we have something to hold on to, or something that holds us. It’s difficult to really perceive or experience the rising and passing, and selflessness of phenomena, because we get dragged into them. Even though a particular thought may arise and cease, the emotive current carrying that thought wells up and keeps welling up, stirring up new aspects of it. We’re not actually cutting out the stream of it.

You need a firm ground to stand on so that you don’t get caught in a riptide; then letting go is possible. Letting go is not possible until there’s something holding you. We may think that this ‘holding’ occurs through having strong concentration, and yes that can be the case. The truth is that when you lack strong concentration, at first you are in a riptide. Then you think, ‘I need strong concentration to get out of this!’ Yes, but you don’t have it, otherwise you wouldn’t be there! In this case you need to come back to something more accessible. For example, you bring to mind the thought, ‘Nobody is here to harm me’ or ‘All the requisites are offered.’ You’re not just thinking these thoughts but also taking in the feeling behind them. You can also bring to mind the goodness of people, timelessness, or the sense of being received. You take and hold the thought, distilling it until you come to the meaning of it. More than holding, we are held in something: the good kamma of our lives.

I find this principle very beautiful because there are times when the mind seems to be unable to focus or hold. The hindrances, the pain or the past kamma just wear the mind down and we become wearied. At other times, we genuinely recognize the refuge. Often, it’s at the time of death, or when you’re really helpless, that you realize that you’re carried in the goodness around you. But sometimes the energy of our thinking mind resists that helplessness: we can desperately try not to feel helpless, not to be frightened of helplessness or not to experience it as painful. To my mind, helplessness is one of the doors to compassion – when we feel a sense of ‘I can’t do it … I can’t make this work … I can’t control this … I can’t stop this.’ When we really receive that helplessness, something in us can give up, let go. Then we realize we are actually held in something.

Although we talk about ‘being held in something’ as if it’s some external medium, we are actually describing the process of citta itself. The citta gets activated and stirred and then it streams: the thought process runs ahead, pulling and throwing the mind around. That activity of the citta eventually stops, either because we manage to stop it, or because it gets to the point where it can’t find a way out, it can’t go on any further. For a moment, the activity stops. Then the citta-saṅkhāra subsides and we find ourselves in a mental openness or sensitivity. This is the internal aspect of the refuge. It’s our own innate mind. It’s the open ground. The mental activity subsides back to reveal this space, and for this moment we perhaps feel strangely quiet, free, larger or stopped. Before we were spinning, we were in a quite tight space; there was a whole flurry and fluster to it. We’ve been pushed, driven, dragged, and now it has stopped; it’s just an open, quiet space. Without anything having been resolved, everything feels OK.

It is tremendously enriching to recognize that we don’t have to think our way out of a problem and find a solution. We just need to find a way in which the citta-saṅkhāra subsides again. It has been pulled out by the magnetic power of perception, thoughts and feelings, and we need to take it out of this charged state. It actually seeks discharge. Often, in our ways of thinking we seek discharge by finding an ‘answer’. For example, if we’re filled with desire, we try to get what we want so that desire will be discharged. Or when there’s aversion, we try to get away from whatever it is that we don’t like. We seek the discharge of citta-saṅkhāra in some particular object, state or scenario, and it can momentarily occur. That’s why we follow desire, to get a momentary ‘Ah!’ But the quality of desire is such that it very quickly picks up again, and we are pulled in, because we haven’t actually cut the stream.

When the stream of the citta-saṅkhāra subsides – when the desire or fear or aversion stops – we find ourselves in this open, quiet state, with no particular aim, no particular drive, no particular activation. The volitional element ceases. That can be done deliberately, but sometimes it happens by itself, when we come into a cul-de-sac, when we have to give up. None of us gives up easily – or rather, the citta-saṅkhāra doesn’t give up easily. It struggles, it fights, it kind of holds on to itself. Even if it’s not saying anything, it’s still pushing.

We can calm down our thinking but the citta-saṅkhāra still remains hunched in a particular state of tension: fear or hankering of some kind. For the discharge to occur, often you have to fully experience the anger or the greed or whatever it is, without acting upon it. When you go to the energy itself of that particular thing, it rises up, and it’s only when it rises up that it can subside again. This whole process has to be held within the crucible of refuge. We can be angry within refuge or greedy within refuge. The citta-saṅkhāra is not out of the refuge if you stay connected to it. The only thing that takes you out of refuge is disconnecting from the citta-saṅkhāra, denying it or thinking that you can manipulate it.

If you take the Precept level of refuge internally, then any unkind thought will take you away from refuge: shame and guilt will arise. However, the Precepts only involve deliberate, intended activity: that which we refrain from doing. Of course our inclination is to put an end to the greed, hatred and delusion of our internal process, but we can’t do that from a moral perspective. You might get the moral tone: ‘This is not good,’ but that alone is not enough to bring you to cessation. You need to hold unwholesome impulses within a sphere of not acting upon them. Feel them as citta-saṅkhāra. What is the energy of this surge? How does it affect the body? If you can, disengage or put aside the story or the thought, which will tend to keep disconnecting you from the energy of citta-saṅkhāra, and take you out into then and there. Connect to the energy of citta-saṅkhāra and feel it. Having arisen, it can subside; it discharges.

Because thinking is so associated with the citta-saṅkhāra, in order to get to the energy, we often have to deliberately play with the thought. We could stop thinking, but it isn’t always possible. To counteract the thinking, we can think on another theme, such as: ‘Even though he’s a completely arrogant, selfish pig, he means well.’ This doesn’t always work. Alternatively, you can try to slow it down: ‘Arrogant … selfish … pig …’ and maybe visualize pigs. When the thought is allowed its own energy and its own speed, it captures the energy of the citta-saṅkhāra, but if we change the rhythm of the thought, it can’t hold the same energetic pattern. What conveys the mood is the particular energy of the citta-saṅkhāra behind the thought, not the thought itself. If your thinking process is getting manic and fast, that’s the energy of the citta-saṅkhāra.

If you change the energy of the thought – its speed, rhythm or tonality – it can become neutral. Play with the tonality of thought. Doing so breaks the bond between the thought and the emotive basis or the affects of the mind. There are a number of ways we can do this, but the important thing is to be able to curb the runaway drive of thought – which will tend to take us into what’s going to happen next year or for the rest of our life. We are all very good at rapidly constructing scenarios out of a few initial thoughts. A thought is suggested and we’re pulled in by it. We are quick-minded and very easily deduce and jump to conclusions, so it’s good to be able to take the initial thought and slow it right down. Play with it. Change the energy of it. The citta-saṅkhāra can’t be kept going if we have affected the energy of the thought.

The subsiding of our affliction, the ending of suffering, is just for one moment. ‘At this moment, my mind is not worried; I’m liberated from worry.’ You take it like that. We hear the words: ‘End of suffering … complete end … liberation … total freedom,’ and we see how our thinking turns to big pictures, big patterns, perfections and absolutes. But the practice is learning how, in the present moment, to note the absence of cruelty and enjoy it. Note the presence of the mood of gratitude and enjoy that. Note the absence of fear and really enjoy that. Liberation is something you develop through fully appreciating and dwelling in the wholesome.

Liberation is built up through slowing down the energy of the mind, changing its compulsive runs. When we can do this tinkering on that level of meditation, we realize that one of the most powerful reasons why the mind runs is because it’s looking for something to connect to. It’s looking for birth, and if we do not get born in the human realm or in the devaloka, we get born in the animal, hungry ghost or hell realm. It’s going to connect to something – it’s a heat-seeking missile – so you have to develop the cultivation of connection, this sense of being held in something. This is called ‘the heap of the wholesome’.

When an affliction falters, stops, slows down or subsides, be aware of that. When it isn’t here, know the absence of it. When you are not suffering from a particular affliction, appreciate that: here is the absence of doubt or the absence of depression. Note and dwell in that. What does it feel like? Make your absences things that are present for you. The volitional quality, the driven quality of citta-saṅkhāra can be allayed, and by that process we find our refuge. The completion of allaying is a complete dropping, plunging into, merging into the Deathless, nibbāna, rather than a reaching out for it. So it’s important to develop this mode of mental behaviour: dropping into the present, feeling held by it and building up our perceptions of this refuge.

26 Aṅguttara Nikāya 3.75.

27 Dīgha Nikāya 2.64 and Saṁyutta Nikāya 35.120.

28 Majjhima Nikāya 19.2.