#### Kittisāro

March 2017

I first met Ajahn Sucitto almost forty years ago, in 1979, when we were young monks together at Oakenholt, a small Buddhist centre in the English countryside outside Oxford. Both of us had just returned from Thailand; I was recovering from typhoid fever, and he was visiting his family after the death of his father. Although I didn’t have much energy, and he was very quiet and somewhat aloof, I’ll never forget the sheer joy that poured through us whenever we chanted the paritta  blessings together at special meal offerings, especially the Victories of the Buddha . JAYAMANGALA!

When I remember Ajahn Sucitto, I’m inspired to begin again on this Path of Awakening with renewed faith, determination and vigour – and not to get too disheartened by yet another setback. I once heard him say that enlightenment is death by a thousand cuts. He took the long, patient view. ‘Kittisāro, Māra works for a living. He’s always on the job.’ When I think of Ajahn Sucitto, I see a bhikkhu’s bhikkhu, someone truly dedicated to the spirit and embodiment of living the holy life to its completion for the ending of suffering – not looking for shortcuts, not preoccupied with the superficial highs, but focused wholeheartedly on the essence.

From our earliest conversations and from listening to his Dhamma talks, it was obvious that he had a brilliant mind, with a deep passion for investigation and reflection, and an extraordinary gift for articulating the subtleties of the Buddha’s teachings. I have never met anyone else who could so skilfully relate the classical Pali terms to actual lived human experience. He brings the Dhamma to life year after year, with a dry, brutally honest, self-deprecating humour and a quiet compassion.

Having known the Ajahn for almost four decades, I’ve witnessed striking transformations in his way of being, which has richly blessed me and countless others. Not long after our short stay in Oxford we moved to Chithurst, and were part of the small group of monks and nuns who helped establish a forest monastery in the West Sussex countryside. In those early days there was a lot of work just to repair the monastic residence. The place was a building site, and yet morning and evening chanting continued, as did the all-night sittings every week with the phases of the moon. For me the young Sucitto was an intimidating intellectual and creative genius, with a fierce ascetic motivation for spiritual practice and tireless service to the monastic community. He seemed quite unconcerned about the welfare of his body, however, and not very adept at bodily awareness. When he started writing, editing and printing the first Chithurst newsletters, I remember seeing him one day covered in ink after a bout with the copying machine, or banging precariously into walls when carrying materials for the building restoration work. Although we would chuckle and kid him on occasion – and give him some space – he just quietly carried on undeterred. Once, he was the senior monk leading a pūjā  in the old reception room, in front of the elaborately layered Thai shrine, with various engraved tables and shelves adorning the Buddha-image with flowers and candles. After the final bows he solemnly stood up and turned to leave, with the monastic community reverently waiting for his departure. His robe caught one of the tables and the whole shrine slowly came crashing down. Without flinching, undaunted, he stood there quietly and looked at the wreckage with his inscrutable gaze … and then without a word, he walked away.

Whenever he noticed something out of balance within himself – dukkha, something he was averse to or struggling with – he’d determine right then and there not to avoid it, but to check it out and get to the heart of the matter. He did this without any fanfare or grand announcements. At first it seemed as if his motto was the more bitter, the better . Ajahn Sucitto wasn’t afraid to suffer. Yet as he deepened his cultivation of the Way, he realized that the path was one of unification and integration of body, speech (thinking mind), and heart. He had tremendous willpower, but he saw that you can’t bully the heart: it just rebels. Rather than viewing enlightenment as something to be conquered, he began to see the path as one of healing. Realizing that to a large extent he had become disembodied (like so many of us), and aware that many styles of meditation perpetuate and even exacerbate staying up in the head,  he studied the Buddha’s original teachings on samādhi  and saw that they emphasized profound rootedness in the body, training ourselves progressively to be sensitive to the whole body  as we breathe in and out, calming the whole body  as we breathe in and out. I’ll never forget his exclaiming to me, ‘Who took the body out of Buddhism?’ So he dedicated himself to practising conscious embodiment, mindfulness of the body. He began to balance unrelenting effort with embodied ease, and the results are impressive. I’ve seen the blessing of embodied practice transform Ajahn Sucitto from a clumsy, awkward, top-heavy genius into a calm, radiant, grounded, poised, balanced and graceful presence.

In the early days at Chithurst we shared a tiny room. We had no heating, but we were warmed by the camaraderie of sharing our dedication to the path. In some respects we were an odd couple: me lying down all the time, collapsed on the floor with the lingering effects of debilitating illness, and Ajahn Sucitto never lying down for months at a time as he undertook the ascetic ‘sitters’ practice. I knew he worked hard during the day with the building projects, and yet at night I saw him patiently leaning over his little desk for hours as he painstakingly illustrated the Buddha’s first discourse with elaborate Celtic designs and intricate Buddhist symbols. We had a highly esoteric secret school practice to employ when it was bitterly cold. We imagined that the defunct cast iron stove by the wall (with Rose  engraved on the front) was blazing away. ‘Ole Rosie is really pumping out the BTU’s2 tonight. I’m sweating, it’s so hot in here.’ We’d put our hands up and warm them in the luminous glow of our faithful fire.

In those years I started to feel a bit useless, lying there like a sack of potatoes while everyone else was working so hard. I was eventually given my own room in the attic, and the opportunity to recuperate in peace, away from the fray. Ajahn Sucitto used to drop by from time to time to check in and see how I was doing. I always felt better from his encouraging visits. One day he arrived after a hard day of working in the monastic routine, lay down flat on the floor next to me, splayed out, and sighed with satisfaction: ‘Kitty, it’s hell out there! Dog eat dog. What a relief to come here to see you, a man pared down to the bone, a man of nothing.’ What a kind, compassionate and illuminating gift he gave me. He helped me see that being sick, working with that and letting go into it, was also an important offering to the community.

Ajahn Sucitto’s Dhamma is profound and subtle, empty and mind-blowing, trustworthy and enlightening. In so many ways he’s helped me and countless others deepen our understanding and stay with the gradually transformative process of awakening. But with all that brilliance and unstoppable determination to walk the noble path to its completion, he hasn’t forgotten the power of kindness, the blessing of being a friend. Twenty-five years ago, in 1991, when Ṭhānissarā and I fell in love and decided to leave the monastic life, there was a lot of controversy about the situation, with strong opinions and judgements in various quarters about what were perceived as our selfish deluded actions which harmed the sangha. It was a difficult time. Soon before I left, Ajahn Sucitto walked up to me, smiling. He said, ‘Kitty, I have my running shoes near the door. Who knows, I might be next.’ I didn’t feel judged. He wasn’t going anywhere or planning to disrobe; he was just being kind and compassionate, letting me know he could relate to our predicament. In the twenty-five years since that day, Ajahn Sucitto has been a wonderful teacher and true friend.

On the occasion of Ajahn Sucitto’s seventieth birthday, I rejoice at this commemorative collection of his teachings, and am grateful for his noble presence on this earth. Thank you, Ajahn, for your life, your inspiring example and your kindness. May you be well.

2 British Thermal Unit: a unit of heat equal to the amount of heat required to raise one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit at one atmosphere pressure; equivalent to 251.997 calories.