##### Nibbāna and the Four Noble Truths

This reflection was offered on the morning of 29 November 2014.

It seems one shouldn’t conclude a retreat without mentioning nibbāna and the Four Noble Truths, which are the main working axis of the Buddha’s teachings. Nibbāna is difficult to see, realized by the wise, the secure, the unshakable, the place you cannot go beyond, the end of ageing, sorrow, decay and death. It’s likened to an island, a safe place. It’s the sublime, the peaceful, the highest and most fulfilling kind of ease. Nibbāna is hinted at as both subtle, not easy to see, and yet available and attractive.

There is a sequence I sometimes bring to mind about the nature of  dhammas (phenomena). ‘Rooted in motivation’: all  dhammas are rooted in some kind of interest or motivation; something in us brightens up in response to attractive forms, something switches on. ‘Rising with attention’: attention steers towards something. ‘Coming into being’: taking a definite form with contact. ‘Converging on feeling’: feeling is the bit that really touches and gets things going. ‘Led by concentration (or collectedness), dominated by mindfulness, surmountable by wisdom, yielding deliverance, merging in the Deathless, terminating in nibbāna.’55 This is the whole sequence. Nothing stands alone. There’s a conditioned path to the Unconditioned. Here, the Buddha is saying that if you track them, this is what all dhammas do: they end in this incredible peace. That’s pretty jaw-dropping, isn’t it?

‘Converging on feeling’ is the lively bit, when something touches us. Where do  dhammas touch? Do they touch the skin or the eyes? No, they touch the heart, they touch the citta. We can be quite oblivious to sights and sounds at times. Some sights you see, some you don’t, but what touches your heart is where the action happens. We place  sati (mindfulness) on feeling instead of on the reverberations, proliferations and all the processes that get stirred up. It’s just unpleasant feeling or pleasant feeling. Things are not always that strong. If you don’t know what you’re feeling, ask yourself, ‘Would I like this to continue or not?’ If you think, ‘Well, it would be good if this was over’, it’s called ‘unpleasant feeling’. Naturally, we have the capacity to endure and we may think, ‘I’m OK. It’s fine, no problem,’ but that’s not the point. We can all manage unpleasant feelings to a degree, but when we feel, ‘It will be good when this is finished,’ it’s an unpleasant feeling. We need to supervise feeling with incredible patience and honesty.

‘This is sublime, this is peaceful: the stilling of saṅkhāras, the relinquishment of the basis of attachment, the destruction of craving, dispassion, nibbāna.’56 There is a process here. The first thing we come to sense is the ‘stilling of saṅkhāras’. Saṅkhāras are the activations, the mental formations, the intentions, the activities that arise depending on something touching us and a feeling of being aroused. The verb ‘to still’ indicates a calming process, doesn’t it? We’re calming, soothing and making less by either deliberately saying, ‘It doesn’t matter’ or letting the feeling pass. In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, the Buddha recommends us to be aware of the rising, the flowing and the passing. Can you have the presence of mind to acknowledge that something is difficult or unpleasant, open to it and  let it pass? It won’t pass if we add more to it, if we keep regenerating it.

What is required is a kind of patience, relinquishment, letting go, and also enough inner stability to be able to do that. If we feel calm and assured, if we have what we call the ‘refuge foundation’ – it could be self-respect, kindness, patience, faith or confidence – then we can witness the arising and passing of feeling without snagging on it. Saṅkhāra could be the ripple of, ‘I don’t feel I can manage this!’, ‘How is that?’, ‘What am I supposed to do with this?’, ‘Whose fault is it?’ or ‘Something is wrong with me, I shouldn’t feel this way’, and we gradually feel OK with that shivering. When the perception ‘I can’t bear it!’ arises, it’s just for a moment.

A certain amount of stilling can happen as an attitude, but generally it requires enough basis in inner calm, inner steadiness, inner refuge. We need somewhere to stand, a place from which we can let things run through. This is developed by what we call the samatha practices, which can be anything that helps the mind to settle down and feel comfortable. There’s a whole range of them that you can use, for example:  mettā, mindfulness of breathing, mental recitations, walking up and down, awareness of the movements of the body. There’s no particular system. When the citta is held and gradually settles, you can understand a lot about the citta: its jumpiness, its contractedness, its doubting, its turning itself inside out. You’re handling it – relationship is everything.

The saṅkhāra process can be stilled with regard to its intentionality: its impulse to do, to become, to have or to make something out of an experience, and that certainly begins to sweep away what I call ‘the tinder’ for further saṅkhāras. They’ll keep flaring up, but you don’t have to get into this cycle of reactivity. This is samatha, and I think it’s a big part of the practice. It’s certainly something to make use of a retreat for, because a retreat provides such a rare encouragement and support. We really try to hold that retreat space as a safe, secure place. Most of the world is about excitement, running, getting stirred up, being annoyed, frightened, going faster and so forth, so samatha is definitely to be encouraged a lot. It enables your system to come out of its spasms and its shatteredness. With that stilling, a more subtle form of saṅkhāra can begin to relax.

Another way in which mental saṅkhāras manifest is through the quality of attention. Attention is that which forms a boundary. We can notice this with our eyes: there’s a certain zone that is clear and there is a fuzzy zone around it. The sense-bases are held by what you are interested in: your focus crystallizes around where there’s interest. Dhammas are rooted in chanda (motivation, desire, interest). They spring up where your attention rests. From there, things start manifesting. The process of engagement with phenomena begins with attention;  dhammas arise there. Dhammas are the experience of engagement with phenomena.

The mind has no natural exterior object. It doesn’t see, hear or touch anything. The subject matter for the citta is its own creations. The citta is likened to a spider that draws silk out of its body to weave its web and then runs around or sits on it. It feels everything that touches the web: if a fly touches the web, the spider feels the effect of that. That’s what the citta does in its unawakened state. Because of its intention, it’s constantly generating webs. All kinds of things get stuck in that web. It’s shivering a lot because of the number of things that touch it. The web is called ‘attention’, and that could be to just about anything: the state of the world, the square root of minus one, your knees, your grandmother’s arthritis, the emperors of the Song Dynasty, etc. In fact, there’s almost no limitation to what the mind can create a web around. The citta then scuttles over that web, ruminating, thinking in terms of the web that it’s spun. It gets delighted by it, curious, desperate, hungry for whatever it can catch in that web – this is where the juicy flies are going to land! We don’t consider that to be an activity because the citta is always doing it; and because it’s happening all the time, we can’t imagine that it could switch off or that the mind could not have to create a web to run around on.

Could you possibly at least still the attention? Instead of generating one web after another, just stay in one particular web – your body. Don’t get too refined: stay with your body or your breath as you are experiencing it, right now – this is your web. Now, see what lands in it: phenomena that come and go, this, that, juicy flies, nasty stuff, sticky stuff … there’s a lot happening in this thing! And what does it all do? It arises, it causes the web to shiver, the spider gets a bit excited, desperate, hungry, or finds something to nibble on, then it goes and something else lands in it. Where is the ‘right’ one? When is nibbāna going to land in my web? No, nibbāna is the destruction of the web. Does that mean you’re blanked out, in a coma? No. You don’t need a web to trap space, do you?

Why do we pay attention to something? We have certain particular reasons. We are looking for something to be interested in, something to feed on or something that will give us understanding or happiness. The other thing that we’re looking for is something that makes us feel we have a grip on life, we know who we are, we’re stable, steady and protected. Sometimes we can notice that our attention is on the lookout for things that could hurt us. We are aware of the possibility of being rejected, hurt or disapproved of. The web is very attuned to that. Attention carries all kinds of subliminal messages. Why did the spider weave that web? Sometimes it can be very mysterious and we may wonder, ‘Why on earth am I thinking about this? How did I get here?’ We don’t understand the subliminal motivations, which are called upadhi (basis of attachment). Upadhi is not quite the same as upādāna (clinging);  it’s the underlying tendency upon which any kind of clinging is based. The fundamental tendency is ‘I am’ – ‘I am this body’, ‘I am this being here’ – and therefore it needs protecting, caring for and so on. At the same time, we recognize that it dies; no matter what we do, it breaks up. This thing here that I call myself, my body, in the end it breaks up. There’s nothing you can do that can really protect it.

Nothing can be owned. This incredible phrase, ‘All that is mine, beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise’ is a very bitter medicine, but do you think the Buddha is trying to make people feel depressed and unhappy by using this very straight talking? It’s through really tuning into this truth that something else happens: the spider stops spinning because you begin to sense that this is pointless. Also, as the saṅkhāras begin to still, you begin to sense the citta knowing itself. It’s aware of awareness. Awareness and attention are different things. Attention is the boundary, the thing that creates the focus. Awareness is the ability to receive an impression. What creates our objects of attention? What are the boundaries of it? What do you want to hold? What do you want to gather with attention?

The stilling of saṅkhāra is not the eradication of it. As you get calmer, you don’t really want stimulation and excitement. You don’t want to have things to think about. You don’t want games or entertainment, not because you hate them but because they don’t feed you any more. There’s a progressive way in which the gathering of your awareness begins to become deeply satisfying, so these other things fall away. Similarly with attention: as you’re gathering more awareness, what your mind perceives is no longer so striking. The web doesn’t shiver. It’s just sights, sounds, people, comings, goings … that’s not too difficult. You cultivate like that, but then there are further ones. When you are blamed, is there any shiver there? When you’re being left out or didn’t get the same as everybody else, is there any shiver there? When people are not being the way you want them, not following your rules, what does that do? Maybe there is a bit of shiver there – shiver and shake. You become aware of all that and recognize: ‘Oh, here goes the proliferation!’ Then you can trim it back so that at least you don’t feel guilty about it any more. You come back to: ‘This is just the experience of irritation or desperation’ and you hold it with mindfulness until the saṅkhāra can be held steadily, still. The feeling is felt, moves and changes, and then the saṅkhāra quietens down.

At times, these mental  dhammas can be very poignant. ‘I have been practising for fifteen years and … I failed!’ That’s a poignant one, isn’t it, when you get to that sense of despair. The suttas are always quite beautiful: the Buddha says something and within three paragraphs the people who are listening become arahants. It’s really great: they just listen to one talk and all the defilements drop away! But in the Therīgāthā, which are poems of enlightened nuns, there is a nun saying, ‘In twenty five years my mind has not had one single moment of peace, not a fingersnap!’ This nun was so despairing that she thought, ‘I have had enough, I’m going to kill myself. I can’t stand it any longer.’ She hooked up a rope on a tree and just as the rope touched her neck, something went ‘Oh!’ – realization occurred, just in the nick of time! Some people really got to the edge. The stories of the monks (Theragāthā) and the nuns (Therīgāthā) are very gritty. One nun said, ‘This grouchy old so-and-so of a husband, I finally got rid of him and I went to see the Buddha.’ They had their feet very much in the mud of human existence. For the one who said, ‘In twenty five years, my mind has not settled for one fingersnap,’ recognizing this, sensing this, realizing, ‘It’s just the mind; it’s just feeling’, suddenly the Deathless opened.

You can look at the path in several ways. It can be progressive: going up, getting calmer and quieter, having better behaviour and so forth. But there’s also another way, which is a stepping back – not ascending, not descending, but just stepping back to: ‘This is the mind, this is a feeling, this is a saṅkhāra.’ It’s much more than an intellectual statement; it’s a statement of the heart. You have been with this so many times; it doesn’t have to end. You don’t have to find an answer to it. It’s just ‘this’. The most deeply experienced practitioners say you get pure to a certain degree but some stuff remains and ‘it’s just this’, there’s no self involved with it. The underlying fundamental basis of ‘this is who I am’ or ‘this is what I am’ is not there. There are still these recognizable identities doing their thing – they are called vāsanā (traces) – but your spider isn’t running around it. It has stepped back, it has gone off the web.

Ajahn Mahā Boowa was renowned as a real tiger of a forest master because of his severity: he could be a very firm, stirring and powerful teacher. He was certainly not reluctant to point things out to people, where they were lacking. When the chairman of the English Sangha Trust was looking for bhikkhus to come to Britain, he went to see both Ajahn Chah and Ajahn Mahā Boowa. After having stayed for some time with Ajahn Mahā Boowa, he asked him, ‘Why are you always so grumpy? Why are you so rude to people?’ Nobody had ever said that to Ajahn Mahā Boowa before. I mean, you just wouldn’t dare to say that to this kind of tiger! Ajahn Mahā Boowa looked at him and laughed: somebody finally had had the guts to present it to him. Then he said, ‘It’s just the way I am.’ In other words, that’s just the way his aggregates manifest.

This means we don’t need to ‘destroy’ the aggregates. That gives us some possibility because trying to wipe yourself out is like the spider running around the web trying to pull all the silk back into its body. It doesn’t go back. The really sticky stuff loses its glue, the gross stuff wears out and some of it is just there. You have to be somebody. These traces still remain but there isn’t a kind of embeddedness in it. Our attention then remains open to what is – not just to what is externally but even to what is internally. This is a very holistic process. Whatever is happening in the mind, there’s attention to it. Whether it’s a busy mind or a worrying mind, we’re knowing it. We see the spaces in the web: when things pass, the empty space is there. Our attention is stilled to the point where it’s not rigid and gluey.

We relax the boundaries of what we are desperate for or hope won’t happen. We allow feelings to arise: sadness, fearfulness, etc. These are not easy, but when we have become more calm and steadied, we can allow some of these very poignant emotions to enter. All of this is generally considered really good stuff to exercise. As you become more steady, you are able to handle conflicting emotions without getting knotted up about them. After all, most of the web is space, isn’t it? In the space is the Deathless. Things merge in the Deathless, they terminate in that space – you could call it ‘psychological space’.

Realization is progressive. Classically, you have four profound levels of realization, but you can take it as just being able to notice and allow an emotion to arise and pass. As it passes, how is that? When the echoes die down, what’s that? We could say it is a nibbāna movement. The movement unbinds the furthering of stuff. We could say that nibbāna is a verb: to unbind, to undo, to release. We need to realize that potential we all have. We all have the potential to let things fade, let things pass without holding on or tangling with them.

Nibbāna is sometimes called ‘a property’ or ‘an element’, just like earth, air, fire and water. Therefore, it’s as much an element as your skin, your spittle or your vitality is. It’s of the same quality, but it’s one you don’t discern. It’s not synonymous with space, because it’s something that has a releasing quality to it. And if we didn’t have that, I think we would be completely mad. Fortunately, we do let a few things pass. All of us have ‘nibbāna’d’ a little bit already. Imagine if everything stayed with you forever and you got fuller and fuller and fuller of every impression: every thought and every emotion would be locked in there. Can you imagine what it would be like just at the end of a day? Let alone decades of it! We would be bursting!

Can you notice the ability to soften and widen? It can be cultivated. Nibbāna is not the end of the pathway in the distance. You can imagine: the bell rings, the curtains open, the Buddhas cheer you: ‘Welcome in!’, and here you are after who knows how many decades or lifetimes grinding away! But it doesn’t happen like that. Something that can be progressively developed is our ability to nibbāna things: the stilling of saṅkhāras, the relinquishment of ‘I am. I have to be. I shouldn’t be. I wish I was. When will I ever? I have never managed. I won’t. I will …’. Although I can verbalize it, this goes much deeper than verbalization. This relinquishment implies the destruction of craving – ‘destruction’ is a very fierce word, isn’t it?

What is it that keeps sticking it all together? The second of the Four Noble Truths is that suffering has a cause, and that cause is taṇhā (craving). Taṇhā is not quite the same as desire. Desire can be a motivated sense. When we have initiative or the motivation to practise, that’s not taṇhā, that’s called chanda. We’re eager, we’re motivated. That’s a form of skilful desire, and we can direct it. We have some say over it, we can bring it up. Taṇhā is something we don’t have say over; it has say over us. It’s a pathology and an instinctive quality. The word literally means ‘thirst’. You can’t say, ‘Let me be thirsty’ or ‘Let me not be thirsty.’ Taṇhā is a gut level, instinctive, feeling sense of ‘I don’t have enough, I need to take something in’ (kāma-taṇhā) or ‘I am not enough, I need to be something’ (bhava-taṇhā). This is where, at some level, human beings seek status, recognition, being something. This is not criminal, sinful or defiled in a gross way. We could think, ‘Surely this is what life is about, isn’t it? We need to become something useful.’ It’s as basic as that.

But this means that sometimes you may think, ‘I haven’t done much at all, have I? I have tried a few things, but …’. When we want to be useful, when that underlying drive is not really understood as finite, there’s only so much you can do. Bhava-taṇhā brings along the shadow of failure: ‘I haven’t saved the world. I haven’t … I haven’t …’. It keeps pushing to become something more. We can see it in a grosser way, in terms of people who seek performance, prizes and so on. They can get pushed to the place where they break up. But it’s there in all of us, and this is what has to be destroyed. How is that? We recognize that taṇhā, which assumes that ‘we are’, is some kind of grab system that can accumulate all that is mine, beloved and pleasing. This doesn’t mean just beads and trinkets, but also prowess, status and accomplishments – things of that nature. We’ll become separated from that. ‘I too will be forgotten.’ That’s why it’s a rap on the knuckles. That doesn’t mean we don’t do things: there is a doing which has no particular need for acclaim; it doesn’t have the shadow effect of self. The Buddha certainly did a lot, and you could say he became a very influential person, but I don’t think that perception entered his mind.

Of course, in many ways, the Sangha was a constant failure. There were always people breaking up and quarrelling. When you look in the suttas they all look good, but when you look in the Vinaya (the books of discipline) they are all a bunch of rascals! I’m sure they are both true. The Buddha didn’t say, ‘I have told these people so many times and there he is, storing honey again, eating in the evening, hankering after new robes, cajoling lay people, wheeling and dealing and scheming. After all I’ve done! Why did I bother?’, but he just said, ‘This foolish, misguided person has not understood the teaching.’ There is no expectation. The intentionality can remain, but there is no longer the sense of needing to be fulfilled by some result. This is nibbāna: the mind changes from having that grab mechanism to being a very open palm. There’s an open bestowing.

Buddha-images often express different qualities with their hands: blessing, protection, collectedness, etc. One of the beautiful ones you see sometimes is the right hand down with the palm outstretched. It is called ‘the bestowing mudrā’. There’s no grabbing there. It’s just here; you don’t even have to pick it up. It’s like that. This too is nibbāna. It doesn’t mean that the mind has a new, subtle mental state; it means that it has radically changed in how it operates. It now has the ability to be completely open, with no boundaries to attention. Whatever can be seen, whether it’s subtle or nothing much, noise, people or things, attention does not contract and vibrate; it is stilled.

There’s a stilling of saṅkhāra, of intentionality. There isn’t that urging drive and restlessness. Yet it’s not killed: it can rise up when it’s needed and it can still when it’s needed. Attention can firm up when it’s needed and release when it’s needed. That’s the way enlightened beings operate because there’s no attachment to saṅkhāra. Nibbāna is the stilling of saṅkhāras, the relinquishment of the basis of attachment, the destruction of craving.

When we look at the Second Noble Truth, it says: kāma-taṇhā,  bhava-taṇhā and  vibhava-taṇhā.  Vibhava-taṇhā is the craving to contract altogether: you don’t want to feel anything, you don’t want to be anything. It’s like a shrinking of being, perhaps to get out of here and find safety. But nibbāna is not the ‘eradication of being’. In brief, craving is the fundamental instinct to clench, to contract, either to get hold of or to get away from. Attention can be open but peaceful. The Third Noble Truth refers to the relinquishment of craving: there are no strings attached. The Fourth Noble Truth is the path that makes it possible: the exercises and practices that bring us into correct alignment with the way to nibbāna, the way to realize, the way to open. This must, therefore, be our ongoing practice.

Samatha is really a fundamental requirement. We need to learn how to still. We need to learn how our attention can be less trembly, more quiet, subtle and pliable; it can then be a beautiful experience. You can firm it up and relax it by using meditation systems that encourage that. Work it thoroughly. Don’t imagine that calm means sitting there and going numb. It means you work with vitakka-vicāra. It’s not frantic; it’s a steady enquiry, ‘How is this?’ until things become quieter. This is an enormous thing to be doing. You feel better. You gain faith in yourself. You realize you do have some say over how your life is, how you feel things. You have a good amount of say in increasing your well-being. Everybody needs that.

To gain confidence, to have the confidence that something works, really makes us feel better. From there, insight becomes possible. I don’t think insight is possible without some calming, steadying process. Insight is the ability to see or to review experience itself. Even a steady, calm experience is essentially constantly subtly shifting and changing. There’s nothing there to really be held, and none of it is finally consequential. You don’t get better and better experiences and then … Ta-da! The doors of the Deathless fling open and the Buddhas usher you in! No, it’s not like that. It gets quite good until you get used to it. Then you may think, ‘OK, this is pretty nice. My mind does get calm … So? This too is something that has arisen through intention, interest and attention, in terms of contact. It feels a certain way: it’s pleasant. Being mindful of that, being wise about that, I can see that this too is being constructed, fabricated, made. That which is fabricated must pass.’ That’s as good as you can do, therefore ask yourself, ‘Is there another movement here?’ You’re not rejecting the experience of calm but enquiring: ‘Who has this happened to anyway? Who has this experience?’ It’s just one set of forms that the mind takes when it’s given the optimal circumstances – which are dependent upon conditions.

If the citta really acknowledges that and softens around that, then the release can occur. It’s described as virāga (dispassion). In the Ānāpānasati Sutta you see the same thing: dispassion, ceasing (a certain ceasing of the need to go further) and relinquishment (paṭinissagga). You’re giving up the view of ‘this I am’, ‘this belongs to me’, ‘this is for me’, ‘this is what I have become’. This is nibbāna, the completed. According to the Buddha, the process of it seems to occur in different stages. The first stage is more on the cognitive level. You don’t believe in belief any more, and you don’t believe there’s this person living behind your eyes, up there in a control box with wheels, levers, buttons and things. You know that this chattering voice isn’t really who you are at all. That whole way of conceiving an identity blows out. This is called ‘stream-entry’ and it’s a big turn-around. You begin to really get a sense of what the citta is: not this personal self, but something more primary and perhaps more mysterious. Then you can have the direct experience that something has shifted profoundly. And it doesn’t go back; you can’t go back to believing in it any more. This is an enormous blessing; it takes a weight off life.

Most of your practice is still going to be about calming and steadying the places where you get reactive. If you’re becoming reactive, at least you’re not getting guilty about it: acknowledge that and start anew – it’s a new day, a new moment. Constantly use loving-kindness and compassion to keep wiping the slate clean. Then enquire, ‘How did that happen? What was the triggering for that?’ Note, really get to know something, be wise. If you understand what the triggers are, the practice is certainly going to extend for much longer than the retreat. Keep cultivating!

55 Aṅguttara Nikāya 10.58.

56 Majjhima Nikāya 64 and Aṅguttara Nikāya 3.32, 9.36, 10.6 and 10.60.