##### Practising With an Organic System

This reflection was offered on the morning of 23 November 2014.

The first section of the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta is an overview, a synopsis of what is laid out afterwards. Let’s look at a few words in there: ardent (ātāpī),43 mindful (satimā)44 and fully aware (sampajāna).45 Of course, these are all translations from the Pali into English and the Pali itself is a translation of an experience. No words are absolutes; they attempt to signify a direct experience.

Ātāpī carries the connotations of a certain quality of ardour, warming up, kindling, firing up. You have to light your fire, but at first the wood is damp, the matches are damp and they keep snapping. How can the wood start to ignite? What does it take to gather attention? What is attention? How do you collect it? How do you place it? Often we’re doing very simple and humble things. During this retreat we’re placing shoes on a rack, opening doors, cleaning up, straightening the bed, with an unhurried clarity of attention. Over time, this quality of clarifying and simplifying attention has its effects.

A significant part of our practice is pruning away or dropping what’s unnecessary, cluttering, complicating and fuzzy, and just coming more clearly into what we’re doing now. Often the mind’s untrained habit is proliferation, complication, addition, so we try to come down to simple things like gathering attention and putting aside expectation, disappointment, self-imagery, histories, stories and narratives. We’re putting them aside not out of anger, but because our mind has followed this track many times and we know where it leads. So now, we choose another direction. As we put aside these complications our mind becomes clearer and clearer.

Quite a lot of Buddhist language is couched negatively: ‘refraining from’, ‘abstaining from’, ‘relinquishing’, ‘putting aside’, not because the aim is annihilation, but because there’s a recognition that when we clear away the clutter, a brightness comes through by itself. We don’t have to create, believe or adopt anything. Much of our application and sense of ‘getting it right’ is established upon doing, building up, learning and adding another piece. The idea that you could reduce and be enhanced by reduction is an immense act of faith for one who hasn’t experienced it. When you reduce the content, you feel better; when you reduce the amount, you feel better. Imagine carrying that through to a global level with the consumer fever and just saying, ‘Simpler is better.’ It’s not just morally correct, it makes you feel better.

As you develop the quality of deep attention, ask yourself, ‘What’s of worth? What’s helpful? What’s suitable now?’ Put aside everything else: expectations, disappointment, self-imagery, other people, the past, the future, because as soon as you touch any of them you might start proliferating. Of course, you can decide to deeply attend to another person or to your memory of another person, but then it’s up to you to know what’s happening. There’s nobody else: you’re dealing with your own perceptions, impressions, feelings, interpretations and responses, and the citta is aware of them.

We have three factors: ātappa (eagerness), sati (mindfulness) and sampajañña. Sampajañña is usually translated as ‘full awareness’ or ‘clear comprehension’ and comes from a certain listening quality – we feel or sense what’s happening in relation to the object of attention. Vitakka is the pointing, the establishing of attention through directed thought or directed thoughtfulness and it’s a foundation for  sati: you’re placing your attention on an object, bringing it back as it slips away and trying to sustain it a little longer. Sampajañña is generated and sustained through vicāra (evaluation): you’re asking yourself, ‘How is that? What is it like? How does it feel? What is it doing?’, and then listening in and feeling the resonances. Sati and sampajañña work together in this way, along with ātappa, which is the eagerness to do this practice. Together, they form the threefold model.

Later in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta you can see that you sustain those three essential approaches of ātappa, sati and sampajañña through a whole range of activities: when you’re scratching, stretching, urinating, eating, lying down, walking, standing and so on. That has a clarifying and purifying effect because the mind would normally stutter, rush into, blur or become obsessed with certain things, and now you’re pruning away to a simple clarity. Before you walk out the door you have to put your foot on the ground, so just do that. Before you go into the kitchen, you have to open the door, so just be there opening the door. You’re reining in the runaway mind so you’re poised and balanced. There’s a lovely feature of presence in there and you can apply it to whatever you’re doing – within the broad range of sīla, of course.

We can look at another map in which  sati appears as part of the Eightfold Path. There,  sati is accompanied by seven other factors which have to do with ethics, understanding and so on. Sati never stands alone; it’s always teamed up, often with right view. One of the features of right view is relatedness, cause and effect. That gives you faith because if you bring up right intention and sustain it, you can’t have a bad result. Even if the result may not be everything you want, you will still receive some benefit from that practice, and that benefit will give you enough understanding and clarity to take another step forward. So every good intention, every good application gives you a little more of a foothold on what is your path. You’re putting your feet on the ground, you’re eager to get that basis. At this stage, don’t think of where it’s going: solving your problems, gaining clarity or jhānas – that’s too far for now. You’re just finding the measure of how to practise continuously,  because the mind is a constant process. It’s through that constancy that you’re pruning away the clutter, the defilements, the unnecessary, and you’re beginning to sense the strengthening, where it is and what comes into that.

Before you start a job, whether it’s in the kitchen or the workshop, you need to check the place, tidy and clean up, get the lighting right and sharpen your tools. This is something I try to train myself in because I tend to be impulsive. As soon as I have an idea, I want to start and finish it; I become eager, excited. For example, when I do some calligraphy, I might think, ‘I want to produce those lovely swirling letters. I don’t want to take a piece of paper, draw a grid, get the angle right, get the angle of the board right, clean the nibs, make the ink, get the lighting right. I don’t want to do that. I just want to do the masterpiece!’ Then of course it doesn’t go very well. So you might make a practice out of just setting things up; sometimes that’s all I do.

Particularly in the beginning of a retreat, most of your practice is about clearing space and finding out where your tools are. What tools do you need? Are they in order? Are they in shape? Where do you get them from? Have they been exercised? The tools we have are organic; they are our own body, the breathing and this amazing experience called mind. We’re an organic system. The body and the mind are related. Attention, intention and attitude are related. Everything is related to everything else. How you attend to your body will affect how you attend to your thoughts. How you attend to other people will affect how you attend to yourself. All this is related to practice and attitude. Your attitude affects everything.

There is another phrase in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta which says that you’re applying mindfulness and full awareness to the extent necessary for direct knowing or bare knowing – in other words, for non-proliferation. You’re fully inhabiting your body, your own physicality, your own form, and cleaning it, clearing it. It means that you’re giving it fresh air by breathing in and out and you’re exercising it by moving around. Also, you’re careful with regard to food. How much do you need to eat? What’s good? Without becoming obsessive, it’s often good to reduce the quantity and simplify. That’s why, as a standard, we don’t eat in the evening. Of course, people have various health issues and if they need to eat something after noon, then it’s quite minimal; they just take what is necessary. You start to incline towards renunciation, not from an ideological position, but because you recognize its value. It’s not that the person who renounces the most is the best. This view doesn’t come from clear knowing but from ambition and self-view. It’s not about being the best; it’s sensing what the right balance is. Try to take a little less and see how that goes. Try to do a little less thinking, a little less planning. Clear some space and cultivate this attitude of renunciation. It wouldn’t be taught if it wasn’t good for you. It isn’t just about moral probity; it’s about feeling good, feeling fresher and clearer.

The amount of food you need will change in accordance with what you’re doing, and the same goes for sleep and everything else. You can’t create abstract standards for these things. You create general inclinations in which you train. An important thing to bear in mind and understand deeply is that you’re dealing with an organic system and the feature of organic systems is that they are responsive. So you listen in and pick up the response. Sometimes the response is muffled or not clear, so you ask again, ‘What is that? How is that?’ You don’t just feel the sensation, but you also notice how it’s held or received. What is the result of that? You have to track it and give it time. This is what sampajañña and vicāra do.

When you pay attention to your posture, don’t try to force your body into some abstract position, such as: ‘I must sit with my back straight!’ Instead, notice what happens if you draw your lower back in, drop your shoulders and even restrain your breathing and breathe as little as possible. It may sound ridiculous if you have the assumption that you should be doing a lot of breathing, but actually less is better. You can practise like this: simplifying, limiting, opening up and clarifying. If you get that spring in the lower back, it will support the ribs. If you start drawing the body upright, the breath channel opens and your abdomen, which is where your breathing begins, can extend and open fully. Is there anything in the way of this opening? If your shoulders are pressing down and your head is hunching forward, give more attention to the centre of your back between your shoulder blades, and connect the front to the back of the body.

We relate to the body as a complete structure. This is why I often don’t emphasize immediately going to one point, say breathing or focusing on the nostrils. We may go there, but for now, take the whole body in because it’s only when the body is treated as a whole thing that it begins to wake up by itself. Then we have the right balance. When it comes out of its compressed or twisted state, the body begins to open up and respond. The response is quite involuntary and most of these experiences will be subtle. You may sense something in your back, then your nose opens up or your breath deepens or your shoulders drop back or something in your arm moves. Your breath at first can be quite fast, then irregular, because the system is still finding its way. All this irregularity is totally natural because we’re dealing with an organic system. It doesn’t switch on like a light. It comes into being, struggles, feels itself, fumbles around, gains a little bit, loses it and then comes back; it wriggles around a lot internally, energetically.

You feel all that and then your emotions and thoughts start to do the same thing. At first it may be very confusing, but that’s just the system coming out of one set of drives, imperatives, engagements and functions into something completely different, so it flounders. Nothing is going wrong, but how do we guide ourselves through that? First, we simplify our experience. You don’t need to make a story, a self or a judgement out of what you’re experiencing. That’s not going to do any good at all. Instead, ask yourself: ‘What is necessary? What is helpful?’ Take another breath, open your eyes, clear some space and don’t close down. Even if it’s uncomfortable, open yourself to it. This doesn’t mean, ‘Force your way through it’ or ‘Take command of it’ or ‘Grit your teeth and push through it.’ You just open to it. And because your mind is also an organic system, once you open to it, it will start to respond. It may take time, but it begins to feel the lightness, the openness, and move out of darkness and confusion. This is a lot of the practice: just bearing with what is uncomfortable and difficult, and opening to it. We can recognize that the default is to close, huddle or shut down. Ātappa is the eagerness to open, extend the body, feel it more fully and listen to these shifts and responses.

Much of the time we’re living in relationship with inorganic systems such as cars and computers. They don’t operate like organic systems. They don’t respond, they don’t care, they crash for no apparent reason. Inorganic systems operate according to rules rather than sensitivities: ‘This is how I work and I don’t work any other way than this.’ So you have to follow their rules and in the end, you have this sense of becoming programmed by the things that are supposed to help you. They don’t help you at all, they just support a function, and you become functionalized through that process.

Inorganic systems are not just physical systems, they’re also abstracts, such as time. We see these numbers which are drawn on clocks and sheets of paper and we say, ‘It’s nine! It’s four! It’s six!’ Where are all these sixes and fours and nines? They have incredible power. They don’t bend. ‘This is five, and not five past five! You’ve missed the train. It’s gone!’ Numbers are also inorganic; they don’t respond at all. There is no such thing as a nice five or a friendly eight. They’re completely abstract and a real tyranny. You have to follow them, they’re not going to bend at all. We end up being programmed by such things as time and date, and we lose the sense of reality. Dawn is a soft experience, twilight is a fading experience. It doesn’t suddenly go day-night, does it?

It takes time to fully wake up. It’s an organic experience of feeling, sensing, breathing, brightening, fading, brightening, fading, brightening, brightening, brightening, fading, brightening … It wobbles and eventually it becomes awake. When I wake up in the morning, I get up, walk up and down, breathe in and out and just let the system come into wakefulness. I always find it useful to get up a good while before morning pūjā, because it takes time to prepare for that.

In our practice, we’re eager to find our way into opening up. Finding that way in is going to involve fumbling through cloud, fog and rocky roads. It doesn’t suddenly become neat and clean. Computers can do this, but organic systems can’t. However, they do respond beautifully to goodwill, clarity, simplicity and to being met rather than forced. Then they will start to calm, clarify and feel happy.

Much of our work is preparing to tune into an organic system, into its quirks and the way it is. We start by the simple process of opening. The body is one of our primary workshops, so how do we open it? Notice where it’s constricted. Is it constricted in your head, in your forehead, around your eyes? Is your throat open? Is your chest open? Is your abdomen open? Do you have a back? You get in touch with your real body, which is the felt body, and not the one you see or imagine. The pull of the senses is to create objects, and this includes your own physical form. We can ‘lose’ the real body, the wholeness of it, because we tend to move towards the visual one. The visual body isn’t going to do you much good. It’s just for other people to look at, that’s all it can do. You can look really good yet be totally miserable, feeling really confused and energetically stale.

When you start to feel the body energetically, you will probably find that the strongest activity is happening in about a fifth of the body: basically, the front of your head, your eyes, your mouth, perhaps a little bit of upper chest and some fingers. Then there is that vague swirling mass happening in the rest of it, with occasional twinges. We tend to feel the front of the body very strongly but not so much the lower back or the shoulders, unless they hurt. You have to balance that out by bringing more awareness into the areas that don’t have any sense organs, such as the back, the sides of the body, the ribs, the flexing in the abdomen, the legs and the soles of the feet. Feet encased in shoes quickly die as living systems. They’re not permanently dead but they shut down, so you have stumps at the end of your legs and you march along. Walking without shoes gives a chance for the foot to open up. It’s not just a stump on the end of your leg but something rather like a hand. There’s a lot of energy in the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands. So you start by checking your workshop: is it all there and cleaned up, or is it closed down and covered over with dust?

The central organizing place for the body isn’t the head or the face (which have to do with function, gesture and relationship) but the spine, a place that you probably hardly notice except when it hurts. If you’re using a chair, try not to sit back in it, or only sit back when you’re conscious of doing so, because you need to rest your back. Try to sit so that your back has to activate, wake up, and then feel that connection between the tailbone and the skull. Your body turns around the spine; everything operates around it. It’s through ignorance about this that back damage has become one of the most common forms of accidents that occur at work and even in the home – people don’t pay attention to their spines any more. Now you can notice how it works; if you draw your lower back in, how does that affect your shoulders? If you draw your head back, how does that affect your general sense of balance and posture? Is that clarifying? Is that steadying? Naturally, it’s going to slip out again, but then you come back to that. You’re preparing your tools, tidying the place, setting things up.

In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta the Buddha emphasizes the body as the first place to establish mindfulness – he prioritizes it. You can’t do the work unless you open the workshop door and tidy up the place. In the same way, you can’t do the work of practice unless you learn some of the fundamental skills of relationship to your body and mind: how different parts of your body integrate and synchronize with each other, how your body affects your mind through the experience of energy. Then you realize that nothing is really separate. Yet whenever there is suffering and stress, something separates, becomes obsessive and loses the whole picture. This is a very common experience in our mental landscape. One particular event, thought, person or topic becomes like a cancer. It swells and grows and the rest of our life is forgotten. We lose the bigger picture. One part breaks off and becomes bloated: ‘This person who drives me nuts’ or ‘This stupid habit I have’ or ‘This pain in my back.’

When you have physical pain, the rest of your body tends to disappear and you’re just aware of the pain. Then something tightens up around it when you don’t want it and try to push it away. So the counter-intuitive instruction is to open to that pain and feel it within the larger domain of your body. If you have pain in your back, sense what’s happening in your lower back or down your thighs. You’re widening your attention and letting the body sort itself out.

This is not necessarily one hundred per cent successful with physical stuff, but it’s very successful with mental stuff because the mind has no inherent, fixed quality apart from awareness. You have no problem and no identity as a fixed thing. The only fixed thing there is is awareness. But we fixate, and by fixating, things become more lasting and solid. I feel I have them, when actually, they have me. They’ve created me and I struggle against them: ‘I don’t want to be this way’, ‘I don’t want to have that thought’, ‘I don’t like this feeling’, ‘Why does this happen to me?’, ‘How can I find an answer?’ You can’t find an answer from the voice of the problem. The ‘I am’ is the voice of the problem, it doesn’t have an answer, otherwise you would have had it by now.

So now, you open up with deep attention and recognize, ‘This is worrying, resisting, struggling. This is a nasty feeling, an emotional state.’ You allow the pain; you allow the splinter to come out. When you have a splinter in your finger, you might have a boil around it with all kinds of things going on, so you start to open up the tissues, which is not particularly pretty and pleasant. Then you are able to see that little splinter, which could have inflamed and swelled the whole hand, and you can pull it out.

You open up and get right down to the fundamental point, which is feeling, the second establishment of mindfulness. As you come into embodiment, it gives you a place to work, and then you can see that the triggering of  dukkha is never ‘them’ or ‘me’ or ‘the way it should be’, but it’s always feeling. All  dhammas converge on feeling. It’s the gate through which everything that affects you must pass. Our practice is to get down to that feeling place and begin to relate to feeling in a balanced way. We are no longer fighting or grabbing feelings. If wanting and not wanting could lead us to nibbāna, we would do that, but in fact they just take us to frustration. So instead, we are mindful of feeling. We are eager, keen to find the splinter. Mindfully aware, we tune into it.

We breathe into the resistances and we receive the magic of the response when things start to release. Release isn’t something you can do; it’s something that happens by itself because of the response of the heart. Remember, we are an organic system and organic systems respond. At first the response is often a bit confused, but somewhere in there, bearing with it, you’re going to find the point where something opens and you realize, ‘I was just trying to not feel the pain, but it is painful.’ Then you recognize what’s always here. Whether your experience is difficult or not, it changes. So, what’s always here?

43 Ātāpī is the adjective (ardent) and ātappa the noun (ardour, eagerness).

44 Satimā is the adjective (mindful) and sati the noun (mindfulness).

45 Sampajāna is the adjective (fully aware) and sampajañña the noun (full awareness).