##### Mindfulness, the True Monarch

This reflection was offered on the afternoon of 27 November 2014.

Mindfulness is sometimes likened to a monarch. This monarch is surveying, supervising, impartial, aware, connected. They are not pulling, not struggling, not trying to hold things, not arrogant. It is the true monarch – the true king or queen. The false monarchs are the inner tyrant who keeps bullying you and the braggart who becomes cocksure when they get a little bit of something good. Mindfulness doesn’t want anything, it isn’t interested in owning anything; it doesn’t need that. It’s a benevolent quality that is blessing everything. Mindfulness is established with equanimity as its tone: it’s even. It’s like a hand on the shaft of an umbrella, holding a safe and steady space in which all  dhammas can be encompassed, settle down, firm up – or dissolve. This abiding in mindfulness sits in its confidence.

When we come to sitting, walking or standing practice, or in any other postures, we should have that sense of a carriage that has a quality of dignity, safety and assurance. It doesn’t really matter what it looks like. What matters is what it feels like internally. Is there anything constricted or withdrawn? Can we open to that? Opening requires both a really good connection to the ground – the earth element, the sense of being grounded – and a clear and consciously acknowledged sense of benevolence around us.

When we are in a hostile, insecure or frantic environment, when people are quarrelling or fighting, we pick that up and that affects how we feel. Now that you are in a harmonious environment, acknowledge it and sense how you feel. Most of us don’t know that feeling because the world doesn’t provide many harmonious situations. So you have to generate it: whatever the world is doing, you’re living in your harmonious environment. There’s a boundary, ‘Let no harm come here.’ The wise monarch has that authority. Feel the front of your body, the back, the face, the throat and so forth. Get a sense of that. You stay focused internally and don’t go somewhere else. The experience of the body can change into something quite bright and clear.

The assured monarch has no need to run after or catch anything, no need to become anything. They know their place. When you sit, as if in your own court, other things can come, such as the body and the breathing; mind-states can arise, but you’re not rushing after them. If they try to push you, come back to that centre in your body, into your confidence. It’s an embodied wisdom centre. Everything else is just weather passing over.

The practice of sustaining that centre is to bear in mind that this image of the true monarch is not a personal identity. If you move off the throne, you’re no longer it. It’s as immediate as that. If you start chasing something or running away from things, you have lost your seat. All those forces and energies that wash over and rush against you are the host of Māra. You don’t have to take issue with them. They’re working themselves out. In a way, you simply hold a blessing attitude and let whatever is there find its way. When confused, fearful, angry or doubting energies come, let them find their own way, let them go, let them pass, let them be in peace. You don’t fight with anything. You don’t fear anything. As long as you hold that seat, you can maintain authority. If you move off it, you lose it.

It’s very important to know that seat. This is the place of resolution where the Buddha sat under the Bodhi tree. It’s not something you can feel as a sensation. It’s where sensations stop, but it’s awake. It’s something like a silence or a stillness; there is no particular feeling. There’s a sense of inner space which is not spacey. It’s aware of the delightful, the esoteric, the refined and the coarse alike as change, and it’s giving a kind of blessing to them, letting them be the way they are.

If you feel you can’t maintain that balance within yourself, then use one of your primary supports. It could be sensing the upright structure of your body or setting your heart straight with loving-kindness. What is your strong force? What is your strongest meditation ally? Use that to take a rest on. When you’re cultivating the sitting position, really inhabit your body: either its physicality (the sensations, the textures) or its energies, which are often associated with emotional traces. If you’re looking for steadiness, you need to step back from the energies of the body. Instead, go towards the simple sensations like the pressure of your body sitting on the ground, the quality of the spine or the skeletal structure. You can also return to the ground of goodwill, kindness or compassion (towards yourself or towards others) or to the ground of faith in the Buddha, using an image or the recollection of his qualities. You use your allies so that your heart can easily find a stable place.

In a retreat situation we are holding a special space, a rare place, so we need to hold it very carefully. You may feel quite happy and comfortable; it does not mean everyone else is happy and comfortable. You may feel relaxed and at ease; it does not mean everyone is relaxed and at ease, so be sensitive to the needs of others. One thing we are really encouraging is the quality of silence, deep silence – not a silence of disregard but a silence of respect. Sound carries such emotional tones for us and strangely enough, even benevolent sounds in a sensitive state can feel intrusive – and as we all know we can become quite sensitive in these retreat situations. It really is our responsibility to make an effort to be restrained and to hold an attitude of respect of each other’s consciousness – and it’s helpful when we can acknowledge that from everyone.