#### The Supreme Giving

This reflection was offered on 6 September 1997 at Cittaviveka Monastery.

The quality of giving and generosity has always been an easily recognizable sign of goodness. It’s universally recognized in all religions and in all walks of life – any kind of charitable action is a good one. In Buddhism, generosity is recognized, understood, honoured and is a foundation of Dhamma practice. We can look at generosity in different ways. It’s good to study it. Buddhism tends to study things in a very full way, particularly in terms of our own mind.

In the case of generosity, we can consider the particular external things we are giving and the people or organizations we are giving things to – which we consider deserving, worthy or needy. We give what we can in terms of money, food and requisites to poor or needy people. These are the external signs of giving, but they’re also related to certain internal signs, such as the feeling that something is worth giving. You understand, ‘This is worth giving’ and also, ‘This person is worthy of giving to, or is needy.’ Then you understand in yourself, ‘I have something that’s worth giving. I can do this.’ After you have given help, you know in yourself, ‘This is good. There’s a result in my own mind that feels good.’ We look at it very broadly. We can feel that giving this thing to this person does them some good and that’s why we’re doing it, and we also recognize that helping another person makes us  feel good. So it benefits both ourselves and the other person.

Certainly, in Buddhism there’s an emphasis on understanding by studying what happens in our own mind, and by doing so, we see things that perhaps we wouldn’t see otherwise. Our attention goes to, ‘She needs that, he needs this. I have this. I can do that,’ and we value giving in those terms. But in the understanding of the Buddha, we also learn to value it in terms of what’s happening in our own consciousness. In studying it closely, you gain a far greater aptitude and understanding of giving, because you begin to understand what’s happening in your awareness. You see the benefits of giving, the far-reaching effects of it. You begin to learn that this gesture is something that does not have to be constrained by material requirements or things of that nature.

When we find ourselves in a situation where we are unable to give, we perhaps feel sad and impotent. When I see people in need and don’t have anything to offer them, if I’m open to that experience, certainly, it makes me feel sad or constrained. In these situations, we tend to look the other way and think, ‘Oh, that’s just the way it is. I can’t help them. I’m sorry about that.’ It’s an unpleasant feeling. We feel limited, powerless and joyless.

When we have something to give, it makes us feel empathy, joy, a sense of freedom from constraint in that we’ve reached that person. There’s a feeling of direct reaching and flowing along with that person at that moment, and this is the beauty of it: the sense of loving and sharing. It’s a time when our sense of self is no longer so contracted, defensive, petty and introverted. It’s made grander and it feels good; we enjoy that.

In Buddhist countries, generosity is not regarded as a social duty but more as a fun thing to do. In Thailand they have a ceremony called Tort Pha Pa . It means ‘offering cloth’. Originally these ceremonies came from the time of the Buddha. Back then the monks and nuns were wandering all the time. People gave them alms-food, but there was only one time of the year when the monastics were staying in one place long enough for people to be able to give them a lot of robes and other things. That’s why there was only one cloth-offering ceremony at the end of the Vassa, which wasn’t enough for the Thai people, who really enjoy giving. So they invented these ceremonies called Tort Pha Pa , which are like alms-giving ceremonies. For us it’s quite staggering because you see people coming to the monastery all the way from Thailand for the ceremony. They give you lots of things and go away – that was their excursion! They saw Windsor Castle, Madame Tussaud’s, Harrods and Chithurst, then they went back to Thailand. Everybody looks very happy; they enjoy doing these things. It’s seen as an exciting, interesting, fun thing to do because of this understanding of what happens to the mind in that particular action of giving.

In the West, we tend to see giving more as a duty. I don’t want to generalize or exaggerate, but it feels more like a serious thing. Some-times you get charities that make you feel guilty, so you think, ‘Oh, dear, I’ll give them something,’ to assuage the guilt. The plate comes round and you put your ten pence in, feeling rather guilty about it! Whereas the Asian mentality is: ‘Look! I’m giving this, it’s great!’ They’re making a whole thing out of it. They’re not at all bashful or ashamed. They enjoy it; they don’t mind publicly enjoying their generosity – perhaps because the giving is stemming from the actual witnessing of the benefits to the mind, rather than a feeling of social obligation.

So there’s the generosity, the willingness to give, the feeling that we have something to give and a sense that there is something or someone worthy of giving to. These are all factors that have to be there. If we don’t have anything to give or nobody needs anything or we’re not willing to give, then it can’t happen. When we’re not willing to give, it’s regarded as a kind of disease in Buddhism. The metaphor used by the Buddha to illustrate this was a kind of stain, blight or mildew: ‘the stain of stinginess’.19 Someone who is stingy is considered to be afflicted with a sort of disease that’s actually making their heart go mouldy and cramped. So when we have cultivated generosity, we think, ‘Thank goodness I’m not sick! I can feel at ease, I can feel grand.

There’s some grandeur in my life!’ When we look into our mind and see that we are not willing to give – for whatever reason – then our mood is not a happy one. It may be frightened or defensive. It’s an unpleasant, contracted state of mind. When we feel we don’t have anything to give, it’s an impoverished state. When you think there’s no one worth giving to, it’s a cynical or an impoverished state of mind. You can see the unpleasantness if this possibility of giving can’t occur. It’s always associated with unpleasant mind-states. This is not to say that we can escape that by forcing ourselves to give things, but we can look and understand what’s happening.

When we look at material things, what are the most important things to give? We can think of things being important in different ways. It may be ‘the most valuable thing’ or ‘things that provide the greatest benefit’. But when we look in terms of the mind, what’s the first thing we have to give? The first thing we have to give is the most immediate thing and the thing that gives rise to everything else, and that is  attention . It’s impossible to give anything if you can’t give attention, but it’s often taken for granted.

Very often, we may find ourselves not giving attention to things, so we don’t give because we don’t see a need for it. Maybe our attention is very limited, closed in or impoverished; it’s an attention that has no love, no warmth and no expansiveness. It’s a fearful, impoverished, guilty or frightened attention. It’s very important for us to see this in our minds. In some ways, anything we do requires some act of attention. This is not a social duty or a moral obligation, it’s a fact. Are you well? Are you healthy enough? If we are only living in a ten-per-cent world that we can’t give much attention to, then our life is considerably reduced in terms of its extent, its richness.

If we do give our attention to things and make that the primary thing to do, then we don’t feel guilty or pressured, or in some way forced or socially obliged to do things. We see what comes up out of that natural extending of our attention. This is something we can all do, whether we’re rich or poor, whether there’s anybody around or nobody around, we can still give attention. The mind has a willingness, an openness, an interest in giving its own quality, its own awareness to things. Then we see what comes out of that. It may be that there’s nobody around or nothing to give. We can’t always have a say over these things, but we have some say over whether or not we give attention. That’s something we’re directly responsible for. And it’s free!

When we consider this topic of giving attention, it opens up the whole realm of who needs to be given things. If we start to develop the giving of attention in a universal way, then it very directly affects our response to and relationship with our experience. A lot of our relationship with experience is quite limited, so we tend to snatch at this and ignore or gloss over that. We indulge or saturate in a particular point, skip over this and wander off on that. The array of attention is very scattered, so we need to be aware and recognize what it is like when we do give attention more steadily. One attribute of mindfulness is a steady giving of attention to things, whether they are great, small, external or internal. And the result is that we live in a more in-tune and in-touch way.

The experience of attention is the present moment. You can think about the future but you can’t attend to it. You can only attend to the thought about the future that’s happening in the present. In a way, the present moment defines where our giving of attention is and widens the scope of it. We can give loving-kindness to people who have died, because that’s something we’re experiencing now. We’re experiencing a sense of loss or appreciation or respect, or we can forgive something that happened ten years ago. If it’s still twitching away somewhere in the heart, then you can be giving attention there. You can be giving attention to your own body or the realm around you – it’s what’s contacting you. The meditation itself can be seen in this light, as a scanning. Then you can give particular attention to the citta : the heart, the basic repository of our sense of self, the centre of our psyche. The sense of a personal core is the citta , so to give it attention must always be a primary focal point because it is the thing that’s receiving the living, the dead, the near, the far, the poor, the rich, the needy, the happy … The whole lot is happening there. That’s where it contacts you; that’s where you’re moved.

You can notice a day like today, when millions of people gathered to pay their respects to Princess Diana who died a few days ago. Actually, what’s happening there? Where is she? What good is it doing her? These are the things you could very well ask if you’re outside the situation. And yet when you’re inside the situation and you’re doing it, you feel very much a part of something. These people are obviously doing it, not because they’re being forced to, but because there’s a real need to do that: mourning, grieving, bringing her into consciousness. Somehow that person or perception has become part of our conscious experience and so it has to be properly attended to. Rituals and prayers are ways in which these bits of our conscious mind can be properly attended to.

We can consider: who are we giving these things to? Who are we doing it for? How does it affect her? Will it make her happier? Well, we can’t know exactly by looking at reality through a spatiotemporal lens. We look at things in terms of form, time and space, and it’s confusing because our own citta  is not in contact with that. It doesn’t know what day it is, it doesn’t know the other side of the moon. All it knows is what’s happening here, now. It doesn’t know anything else. All the rest – ‘Thursday’, ‘Tuesday’ and whatever – that’s all happening as a thought; that’s the way you think of the world, but the way you experience it is here , now . What is there? Grief, sorrow, joy, happiness, love and what’s coming out of that. These are citta  experiences.

In terms of people and impressions, what we’re dealing with are perceptions in the citta.  That’s the immediate expression, the immediate experience; you’re dealing with a perception in your mind. In ordinary daily life, this is happening all the time. You have a perception of your son, daughter, cousin, granddad or whoever, then you think, ‘Oh, I wonder how they are?’, so you phone them up. Now, that affects that person, doesn’t it? Yet what happened to you was that ‘that person’ arose in your mind. And when you’re talking to them, you’re getting a certain audible impression that also feeds into that perception in your mind. When you look at them, you get a visual impression and that feeds into that perception in your mind. So you’re dealing with that. That perception in your mind has certain qualities: it gives warmth, it’s loving, it’s concerned or whatever. It has certain emotional and psychological qualities in it. That’s all happening here , to you . This is not to deny an external reality, but that’s ‘your door’ to it. Your door to what we call the external world is through the perceived experience. And if you aim accurately and directly for that, you don’t get confused; you know what you’re doing.

The problem is that sometimes there’s a kind of shift between the perceived and the external: you’re aiming for this person in your mind, but they’ve gone somewhere else, they’ve let you down or they’ve changed. Let’s think of someone like Muhammad Ali, who was an ebullient, bouncy lion of a man. Now he’s this rather shrunken figure with Parkinson’s disease, this kind of saddened old guy. But Muhammad Ali in my perceptual mind is always this bouncy, fast-talking, sassy, punchy, big, strong man. So if I were to see him there would be a feeling of, ‘Who’s that?’ There would be a sense of dissonance.

When somebody dies, we might think, ‘What happened to you? Where have you gone? You’re not doing it  any more.’ I was looking at the corpse of one of our supporters who was never short of words, and it’s the first time I’ve seen her shut up in years actually! There she was, not saying anything, being quite composed and calm. She was not particularly composed, calm or quiet when she was alive. The animated experience had died away, so you think, ‘Who’s that?’ Suddenly you hardly even physically recognize them. But when you bring up your memory of them, you think about ‘that person who had that kind of way of speaking’, and there is that particular feeling in your mind that you have become used to, so you give through that. Certainly, when we’re relating to each other, we tend to have these kinds of images and feelings, that, if we’re attentive, we keep adjusting so that we’re not holding a false image. That’s what we have to steer through.

When they had the funeral of Ajahn Chah, a million people came through Wat Pah Pong monastery. This place normally looks like nothing is happening: twenty people turn up and it’s a crowd! There were a million people going through, 500,000 in one day alone. Even the king and the queen came to pay their respects. Everyone was giving attention … to what? This man died a year before; if you were to be crudely materialistic about it, you could say it’s just a bunch of rotten meat in a box. But the perception of Ajahn Chah for all these people was that of a really worthy, honourable, noble being, someone who was able to bring into daily life many beautiful values that people honoured: honesty, diligence, effort, scrupulousness, mindfulness, wisdom and compassion.

There’s a need for people to find a way of addressing that perception and to give themselves to it, so we do these ceremonies. We haven’t really given anything; we bow, light some candles and incense. These are just ritual actions that we need to do to express that feeling of giving: giving our attention, giving our hearts, giving our love, giving our respects … to what? An image, a perception. That’s not an empty thing at all. The perceptual world, however changing and tricky it can be, is where our citta  resides. And if we don’t have perceptions of things such as nobility, trust or kindness, and we don’t have people who are able to carry that for us to some degree, then our world is very sad indeed – because of the inability to give and extend outside of our own contracted state of being.

The highest kind of giving, not in material terms but in terms of extending the mind, is the fullest giving of the brightest kind of attention towards the things that mean the most to us, towards the things that sustain our perceptual realm. This is the emphasis the Buddha placed upon it. From the material, charity point of view, the Buddha said that it’s more worthwhile to give alms-food to a virtuous person like a Buddhist monk than to an immoral person.20 The cynic in your mind might think, ‘Mmmm … I think he has a bit of self-interest there!’ The Buddha also said that it’s even more worthwhile to give things to a Buddha than giving to a hundred arahants.21 So, if you’re extremely cynical, you could think, ‘That’s self-interest. It means “give everything to me, I want it all.”’

If we suspend that way of looking at it for a moment, we can consider what is really being taught here. What can you give a Buddha anyway? They don’t want a new car, they don’t handle money, they don’t accept gold, silver or land. You can only give them rice, cloth or a candle. But in order to give that, you’re actually extending your mind, you have to attend to the thing you’re giving, attend to the person you’re giving to, and to feel that the reason to give is a sense of wanting to connect. What you connect to and what you relate to is something that, for you, means enlightenment, supreme wisdom and compassion – someone who has managed to live that way. It’s not really for their benefit, but it’s in order to firm up your own perceptual realm, to have that feeling of connection to an enlightened being. If you don’t have that perception, then your life is incredibly impoverished.

We all have a perception of people who make money, deal in power and operate nations and countries, and it’s OK on one level, but if that’s all our perceptual world contains, it doesn’t go very far. Our perceptual world could also contain things like empathy, liberation, awakening, peace, freedom from delusion, joy and compassion; these are tremendously important things to have going for you in your mind. This is where that sense of generosity, extending your mind, extending yourself into that realm, gives you the highest kind of happiness and uplift, and sustains you.

I was reading something from a talk of Ajahn Sumedho that touched me very much. He was saying that when he’d just become a monk, he didn’t speak Thai at all and he met a Thai monk who had previously been in the Thai Navy, so he’d met Americans and knew a bit of English. This Thai monk had been with Ajahn Chah for a while, so he was quite diligent in terms of discipline and meditation. Ajahn Sumedho got quite inspired so this monk said he would take him to see Ajahn Chah. This is how Ajahn Sumedho got introduced to Ajahn Chah, so he always felt grateful to this monk. But later on, this Thai monk disrobed and went right downhill. He became a drunkard, an alcoholic and a wastrel.

He became quite renowned in that province as being ‘a real no-good’, so Ajahn Sumedho no longer wanted to feel connected to this person. But Ajahn Chah said to him, ‘Whenever you come to Ubon, you should always make the effort to see this man, because when you do, he can remember one good thing he’s done in his life. Your act of generosity would just be to make contact with him. Even if he’s a complete wastrel and degenerate, at least maintain contact. This is what you can do: give of yourself to just be in that person’s attention. It reminds him of one good thing he has done in his life, so he is a little bit stronger than he would be if you didn’t do it.’ Ajahn Chah had a remarkable sense of compassion and insight to point to that and ask Ajahn Sumedho to give himself in that way. It really shows the understanding of how generosity can be practised by anybody, when we’re giving attention.

We all know how, very often, when we have problems or difficulties, all we really want is somebody to listen to us. If you have somebody who listens fully, gives their attention to you, then in the end of it you think, ‘Oh, I suppose it was not so bad. Never mind, it doesn’t matter. I was getting too het up about it. I was taking things too seriously.’ A person can be incredibly valuable in their own right, just by giving attention to you or by being a good example.

This aspect of giving is certainly to be encouraged. When we gather together in a monastery, as we are doing now, then in some way we’re all giving something to each other. We’re saying, ‘This is an occasion I feel is worth coming to. I’ve driven fifteen miles to come here – or I’ve walked downstairs; that was a major effort but I did it.’ That means there is a certain kind of uplift and brightness in the air. We’ve done that. That’s a generous thing to do. The important thing with all acts of dāna  is to actually notice them. In Buddhist countries, any act of dāna  is very firmly underlined. It’s not to make people feel proud but it’s to say, ‘Look, watch that, you’ve just done something good. Don’t get lost in who you think you are, what you didn’t do and what you don’t have enough of. Look, you did that! That’s good. Stay with that, focus on that.’

The giving of attention is the basis of all other goodness, and sometimes it’s the only act of goodness you need to do. Sometimes it’s actually all you can do. The more you highlight the quality of, ‘I’ve been there, I was present, I was open, I gave myself to it,’ the more you recognize the feeling of uplift that arises with it. When you think, ‘I can’t do that … I always do that … My mind’s like this,’ and dwell on that perception, it doesn’t do much good. It makes you feel depressed and dull; you close down and you get lost in yourself: ‘What can I do? I’m always …’. Rather than beating your breast and lamenting, come out and tell yourself, ‘Look, just attend to this .’

When I was in India, I met a Canadian man who had been a monk. He was talking about his experience with Ajahn Chah. He was out of place being in Thailand and he was having a lot of problems, doubting about whether he should practise samatha  or vipassanā , whether he should practise as a layman or as a monk, whether he should practise in America or Thailand. So he thought, ‘I’m going to sort this out!’ He went over to see Ajahn Chah who was in another monastery about five or six miles away, expecting him to give an answer to his questions. When he arrived, Ajahn Chah was sweeping the dead leaves around his kuti. The Canadian monk came up to him. Ajahn Chah looked at him and said, ‘Working is better than talking’ and gave him a broom. So the monk said, ‘OK,’ and they both swept and swept and swept … It was getting quite dusty and the sun was going down. He thought, ‘Well, it’s time to go back to the monastery. I suppose Ajahn Chah doesn’t want to talk to me.’ He put his broom away and went to take leave of Ajahn Chah. Ajahn Chah turned round, caught hold of him by his shoulders and held him. He looked straight into his eyes and said, ‘Whatever you’re doing, be with that. That’s all.’ ‘Oh!’ That was his way of giving total attention, and you could see that at that particular moment. The timing of his gift gave it even more value.

If that person came along with his questions, I expect many of us would have replied something like: ‘Well, let’s sit down and talk about this. Some people say you need to practise samatha  first but others say practise vipassanā . In the Aṅguttara Nikāya it says you practise them equally, but someone who practises vipassanā  should practise more samatha  and someone who practises samatha  should practise more vipassanā  … Well, of course you could practise in America or Thailand …’. The person would just come back with a mind full of thoughts, still thinking, ‘Yeah, but then I could … or maybe …’. You have given them quite a bit of time, but you haven’t actually given them very much.

What Ajahn Chah was doing was trying to bring that person’s mind into the present moment, because when the mind is in the present moment, that’s where you can most directly give. Then the mind is open. When it’s dealing with this and that, it’s not present; you’re not there. To give, we have to be present. What is given is present, and the person who receives it has to be present. When these come together then we have the highest kind of giving, which is the giving of insight, the giving of Dhamma. These are things we can consider in terms of the act of generosity.

Moreover, once you begin to see the pattern of it, it becomes of some significance in relating to yourself. Mostly, our experience of self-consciousness is one where we have an impression of ourselves; we have a perception of ourselves. We think about ourselves: ‘I think about me … I watch me … I wonder about me … I didn’t do that right … I have these kinds of problems … I’m this and that …’. In a way, it’s the same model, but now the other person is the ‘me’ that ‘I’ am watching. Very often, our relationship between the ‘I’ and the ‘me’ can be one that’s not very generous. It can be one that’s quite demanding, judging, tight-fisted and forceful: ‘I don’t trust me. I don’t even like me very much. I like me on the good days, but I don’t like me when I’m out of it altogether, when I have these horrible moods going on or when I blow it.’ Then the ‘I’ and the ‘me’ can be at loggerheads. So often the actual activity across that relationship is one that’s very tense and taut, and even frightened: ‘I don’t really want to know me, so if I can just put the lid on me and shut me up, then I’ll be all right!’

We can try to do this in a number of ways: by sensory stimulation, by suppression, or by putting the ‘me’ out to somebody else: ‘You made me like this! I was all right until you made me like this. You made me do this!’ If we’re stuck into this, it sours everything, really, because the ‘I/me’ relationship becomes a model of the ‘I/you’ relationship. The ‘me’ keeps on changing and ‘you’ keeps on changing, but very often the same kinds of activities are recurring: ‘I want something from you. I have an opinion about you. I judge you. I fend you off. I pull you in.’ These kinds of things can be happening. This is a tendency. I’m not saying this is the total picture, but these things definitely do occur among people. Then you find you’re doing the same thing to yourself (to ‘me’): ‘I shut things down, I bully me, I shut me up or I don’t listen.’

The idea and the cultivation of generosity are of great value. We can see generosity as being of enormous value to other people in the world, and when we give to other people, it’s of enormous value to us; it uplifts us. It doesn’t really matter what we give specifically so much as the appropriateness and timing of the gift, and the purity of the giving. And this applies also in giving to yourself. In a way you have even fewer things to give to yourself, but the timing and the appropriateness are crucial. I suppose the obvious thing to say is that so much of the time we just need to give a bit of love: a simple word, a bit of attention. We attend to this experience and we note what’s really happening. We note the wounding, the disparaging, the belittling, the blustering, the bluffing, the puffing-up or the distracting. We recognize that we can’t give attention if we keep doing these things. It’s like a moving target, isn’t it? If we keep clouding it, shrouding it and pushing it away, we can’t really give anything to it. We are missing that opportunity. If we were able to fully give to ourselves, there would be a possibility of healing, a togetherness and a unification of this experience.

The experience of meditation gets stuck when we are watching our mind or trying to deal with it and it’s going all over the place. What that means to us is: ‘I can’t concentrate. I can’t meditate. I have all these defilements. I’m impure. My mind goes bonkers. I was doing quite well yesterday, now it’s gone off.’ We think that the real problem is that ‘I can’t concentrate, I can’t do it, I have this and that,’ but the real problem is the ‘me’: ‘I have this opinion about me, and the “me” is not good enough.’

When you begin to understand the experience of generosity, you realize that the real problem is the relationship between the two (‘I’ and ‘me’); that’s the vital point – and the point we miss. So often there’s that statement of, ‘Well, I’m not very good at this. How do I get rid of that? How can I become like this?’ If somebody says, ‘What do you feel about yourself?’, the experience we feel is often one of sadness, loss, distaste, and sometimes probably fury and even rage at ourselves.

The Buddha’s insight in this process of experience was that there are certain things that seem like fixed realities, such as ‘me’ and ‘the world’. As long as we are operating on that level, it’s always confusing. ‘Who am I? What happens to me when I die? How can I relate to the world? How big is it? Where did it come from? Where does it stop?’ The Buddha said that if you keep thinking in that way, you just go round and round; you just get caught up in a jungle.22 What you should really look at is the arising condition that bonds the two – this is ‘dependent arising’. The relationship between ‘me’ and ‘the world’ is the thing you should be aware of. This is really the living point of where you are. And from that relationship, the self and the world are born. From that relationship of fear, worry, narrowness, stinginess, brightness or joy, the world and the self are born. They are dependently arisen. They are dependent upon these crucial psychological movements that can be experienced in our own citta .

External realities are certainly affected by external conditions, but one movement of forgiveness in the mind actually changes the whole realm of our experience. One movement of love or acceptance in the mind changes the world and the self: ‘I’ no longer judge, ‘I’ no longer complain, ‘I’ no longer demand, ‘I’ no longer control, ‘I’ no longer bully, ‘I’ no longer tyrannize, ‘I’ no longer run away. And ‘me’ is no longer some kind of nasty, snide demon ‘I’ keep pushing away. It’s not some scruffy little herbert that I have to try and tidy up. It’s not some whimpering, snivelling thing that I have to try to shut up. When we reach into that, then we have a transformative experience.

In relative terms, you can say that this is the highest kind of giving, because if we could do this internally, then it would lead to liberation from our negative, corrupting tendencies. The way we create an internal world is the way we relate to the external world, because this is the only way our mind can work. It works in terms of dependent arising of a subject and an object and the relationship between the two. An untrained person would tend to either see the subject or the object, but miss the vital point of the response. This response is the supreme thing to give our attention to. If we notice that and scan it in meditation, we see that it’s actually something supple and variable. At first, it’s chaotic. Chaos is a negative expression: it’s disordered and strange; we’re alarmed and frightened. This is because of neglect, and the more we keep attending to that living-edge of chaos, then, instead of trying to tame it or prune it, we actually begin to be made wise by it.

Life is madness, but it doesn’t have to be upsetting. It’s random, chaotic, variable, spontaneous, unpredictable, uncertain, bizarre, unfair, unknowable and uncontrollable. It is  that way, and the problem is that we have never learned to operate in that world. In that world of chaos you can’t operate from the position of principles, of ‘self’, control, holding on or of perceptions of ‘mine’. You just have to flow, give and trust that purity. These are the things we become more capable of doing when we have cultivated the qualities of knowing the right time, the right way and the right point to get to. All skilful actions will lead towards finding the time and the place for the fullest act of giving ourselves.

The giving in this sense is something that seems obscure or perhaps the most risky thing to give to. We’re giving ourselves to the insecurity, to chaos, and not expecting anything back, because insecurity is the thing that most fully opens us, reveals us, makes us awake and gives us the greatest freedom. It doesn’t have to be a negative experience at all. It can become suffused with the quality of our own love, aspiration and faith, and then it becomes a refuge. It’s a refuge that is not shakeable, because worlds may come and go, people are born and die, things arise and cease, but what goes on forever is uncertainty and insecurity. You can bank on it! It has never let us down. Things have always been this way and always will be, so this is the edge to aim for.

When you get stuck on an opinion of yourself, notice that it’s something that’s becoming permanent. It’s hardening up and therefore suspect. When you start to make a designation of yourself, it’s suspect. It may give you something to look at. For example, if you think, ‘I am a jealous person,’ you say, ‘OK, let’s focus on that.’ Then what really needs to be done is to come out of those views and to start to examine what’s really going on: how it arises, what it’s caused by and what the processes that keep putting you in those positions are. Perhaps you’re not giving enough space to your resentment; you’re trying to shut it up. So you have to learn to relate to your resentment and take it in. If we’re generous towards our resentments and fears, then they can cease. That’s all they need. When they’re fed, they’re satisfied, so they cease and turn into other forms. This practice of meditation is the most powerful kamma; it can transform demons into angels. But you have to get to know and trust yourself with these things.

19 For example, as at Saṁyutta Nikāya 55.6, 55.32 and 55.37.

20 Majjhima Nikāya 142 and Saṁyutta Nikāya 3.24.

21 Aṅguttara Nikāya 9.20.

22 Majjhima Nikāya 2.