##### Melting Down to the Natural State

This reflection was offered on the morning of 26 November 2014.

I have been presenting the map of the practice that the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta offers; now I would like to talk about the very process of practice. It’s like when you want to cook, you go into the kitchen; there you find the stove and all the spices, herbs, vegetables, knives and pots, but how do you actually do it? What is ‘cooking’ for you? The retreat time gives us a chance to unwind and look into that because during this time, some of the usual daily life signals are not generated. On this retreat, there are certainly times we have to be places, there are experiences and bells, but these are perhaps less violent alarms, pressures and drives than in daily life; it’s quieter.

In the practice, there is a lot of emphasis on coming into the body: being aware of your body, feeling it more fully. Can you get your breathing? Can the breathing become long, complete, involuntary, pleasant, so you’re not struggling around it? Can you tune into that? Now, you might take these instructions to mean ‘hurry up and get mindful of the breathing, hold it together, focus intensely on it.’ But what does that kind of signal do? Probably nothing good for you.

I didn’t give you a lot of instructions about how to enter into the body domain. You may think that’s a bit vague, but it’s actually compassionate. The bodily field is your home base. Notice what occurs as you’re entering into it. Perhaps there are a lot of discordant experiences. Some can be put down to physical pain or discomfort, but also other things like feeling really tired, sleepy or woozy. All sorts of strange emotions, memories and perceptions can come up and they become very fluid.

As you’re entering into the bodily field you’re also becoming more aware of emotions like fear, worry, nervousness and sadness. Where did they come from? I haven’t said to you, ‘Feel your emotions’ and yet that’s what happens because as you are sitting and entering your bodily field, you are starting to melt a little from the impacted, compacted, functional state, which tends to be much harder-edged, into something softer: the water element. In that melting, the body starts to release experiences that we feel as emotions or as felt experiences, like feeling sleepy or dull. Our emotions tend to be the register of experiences we can most easily classify – for example as ‘sad’, ‘nervous’ or ‘tense’. They are attuned to the auditory experience and have strong signals of happiness, rage, threat and so on. When you’re entering the bodily sense there’s a much wider range of felt senses than the normal range of what we call emotion. How am I feeling? Slightly groggy, spacey, stuck, sticky, gluey, spinning? This is the result of beginning to melt.

Every now and then you may get the signal: ‘I’m not meditating properly.’ You may think, ‘I should be getting this clear attention and sustained mindfulness on the breathing in and breathing out, but things are going wrong.’ No, they’re not going wrong. You’re having a totally normal experience, which is the ‘meltdown’. Within that, this rather disturbing sense of ‘slight hostility around me’ can come up; you feel judged: ‘There’s something I have to be nervous about because I might be getting it wrong.’ Where is that coming from? Who is doing that? In daily life, there are many occasions that can trigger the sense of hostility, and that can be quite valid, but nothing of that sort is occurring here. The sense of hostility and all the emotional patterns are retained in the body. As the body-sense begins to release, they start floating up. We can regress to quite early experiences.

Everybody here is following the Precepts and is pleasant and reasonable. Yet we all probably feel differently about the group. You may feel welcome, reasonably OK, nervous and so on. The sense of ‘the other’ is registered differently for each one of us. Don’t worry about it. Try to not add to it. Feel the feeling in your body, using the sense of the upright posture, the simple and fundamental organization of the body around the spine. You’re centring your attention around the spine when you walk, when you stand, when you sit and even when you lie down. It’s a useful reference. It means you have something there that acts as a mooring post. Holding that as a basic frame of reference, you can then sense anything that may occur around breathing in and breathing out – and maybe that becomes clearer and stronger in accordance with the degree to which your meltdown has occurred.

You may wonder why the practice seems so easy in the suttas and so difficult to realize. How come in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta the Buddha mentioned that we can realize nibbāna in seven days? It may take seven days if you’re in the natural state, if you’ve already returned to normality completely. But we haven’t switched the clock on yet; we haven’t even got to the starting block. We’re still limbering up, taking off the armour and switching off some of the triggers, and they don’t switch off easily. In fact, you can’t switch them off, but you can enter a situation whereby the fundamental awareness begins to sense them more fully. Eventually, you may start to notice that the original signal is no longer there. You can notice its release in the mind and body.

In meditation, you go time and time again to those places where you’re triggered, while holding in mind and trying to fulfil the simplicity of the posture. You can hardly call it a practice; it’s just being aware of the rhythm, which is a very soothing, comforting experience. Don’t try to get pinpoint accuracy, just get into the rhythm and give it time. The awareness extends fully into that as if this is exactly right, this is all you need, everything is fine. You’re reaching some of those triggers where they’re happening in your bodily sense. If you can’t get it exact, don’t worry about it. It could be an overall sense of ‘not much room here’, ‘over-alert’ or ‘edgy’. These senses may be not specific to locations. They can be overall bodily senses. You touch them and you breathe through them, and it allows the system to reorganize itself around the involuntary quality of stresslessness. Then things begin to melt.

When things begin to melt, what occurs may be a sudden sense of relief, but it’s probably more likely to be a feeling of disorientation. Perhaps some of the emotional patterns that are in there begin to unfold and we feel sad, exhausted or whatever. Often people want to crash out. They think, ‘Why don’t we just have a sleeping retreat?’ I think there are retreats set up like that. You learn to rest a lot, which could be a great idea. Here is a bed and every now and then someone comes around with a glass of mango juice, ‘Are you all right, dear?’ They offer you a little foot massage if necessary and you gurgle. That may work to a degree at a symptomatic level, but if you want to get some understanding of how to release these patterns, then it’s better to stay in a meditative state without massive amounts of stress, attuned to your spine – even if you are lying down – alert but open, switched on with no particular program. You want to fully feel what is being felt.

As your awareness spreads through your body and even into the space around you, ask yourself, ‘How is that?’ Is your awareness happening around you? Maybe your nerve endings or your signalling system is sensing what’s around you. Every creature does that, and we can do the same thing if we allow ourselves to do so. You can feel at the edge of your skin and the periphery of the body: ‘What’s around me? Is there anything here that I need to organize or get done? How am I being seen?’ What if there’s nobody looking or what’s looking at us is benevolent and admiring – the Buddha? What would that be like? You can play with these perceptions.

The entire body system can come to what we call ‘the natural state’. The path to it may take you through some rocky territory as things unfold, but it’s extremely encouraging to recognize that this process will occur with only a little effort, just what it takes to stay mindful in a very broad way, with no conclusion, no aim, no performance, no graduation, no marks, no certificates, no time boundaries. It will all start to unfold because it wants to. In a way, we have to hand it over to something that’s intuitive and not controlled through our normal way of operating.

One of the things to frame up is the control system. How important control and organization are for us in our lives! We’re driving a car, working on a problem, fulfilling a function and so forth. We control, organize and make sure everything is working in order to arrive at a result. This has a profound effect on our lives for a very long time. My father started working when he was fourteen and worked until he dropped dead at sixty-eight. He was in work-mode for fifty-four years and he basically died of stress.

The primary signals of ‘I have to get it done! It’s important! It’s urgent! It’s necessary! Get the right results! Make everyone else happy! Achieve!’ are very easily switched on because our system responds easily to stress, to the danger of getting it wrong. We go on alert. Switching these signals off takes a bit longer; you have to check them out, feel them out. Because that signal of stress goes into your body – which then firms it up – you stay in that mode. So even if you sleep seven or eight hours at night, you’re still not completely resting. Sometimes you can’t even fall asleep because the body is still holding that signal in a subliminal way. You can’t control your ability to control. If you think, ‘I’d like to be in control of my control systems so that I can switch them off,’ that’s a control attitude. You can’t control un-control. You have to allow – allow the chaos and find it safe, allow getting it wrong and find it safe, just sustaining that present awareness to allow things to happen.

We control a lot: our social behaviour, what’s suitable, what’s acceptable, what’s polite, what’s decent. It’s happening a lot, but does it work? Yes, control is necessary, but how can you undo it so that you can let the system rest? When we control, there’s a certain activating, energizing, a tightening up that occurs with it. When you’re doing abstract things such as developing ideas, work programs, schedules or goals, that’s going to be held in your head and your eyes, which can become very tight, and that does not switch off. As most of us can recognize, the work is never finished: ‘OK, I have today’s quota done but tomorrow … by the end of the week … and let me think … the way it’s going now, perhaps by next weekend I could relax. But how am I going to get that done?’ And you go to bed with these thoughts. The stress is still there; you’re still on alert. When you wake up in the morning, maybe you have a cup of coffee, toast and a bowl of cereal, most likely with the drive of ‘getting the thing done’. So you’ve hardly even stopped! The work is a very strong program. There’s nothing inherently wrong with earning a living but when the criteria tighten up, they become less tolerant and more abstract. You’re then operating in a completely inorganic way and that’s more stress on the system. You keep upping the stress quotas to the point where it becomes absurd.

A man I knew had been feeling really tired, exhausted, sick and  nauseous. When he became so bad that he couldn’t go to work any more, he went to the doctor and asked to take a week off work. He didn’t know what was wrong with him. The doctor said, ‘Come back in three days’ time, when we have examined these samples.’ When the man came back the doctor told him, ‘I’m afraid I have to tell you that you need to go into a hospital for ten days or so in order to do more tests because it looks like you have a serious form of pelvic cancer and might only have two weeks left to live.’ The man replied, ‘But I only took a week off work!’ … as if he were thinking, ‘I can’t laze around in a hospital and die! I only took a week off work!’ Imagine you know you only have two weeks left to live and only took a week off work … and have this kind of reaction!

When I look in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, I don’t think people at the time of the Buddha were operating like that. They may have been farmers or merchants so they didn’t have this huge amount of stress to unpack. Nowadays, we really believe in numbers and that makes us disembodied; we go very abstract. It’s a common enough observation. It was particularly so in the early days when some Westerners went to Thailand to train in the forest monasteries. A lot of the Thai monks had been village men, farming and tending buffaloes. They were in their bodies because that’s what their lifestyle was about. They couldn’t believe how clumsy these Westerners were. They were constantly stubbing their feet on roots of trees, walking into spider’s webs and bashing their heads on low-hanging branches. They were thinking, ‘How can these people be so utterly stupid?’ and the Westerners were thinking, ‘I’m trying to be mindful as I walk!’ They thought mindfulness is something you do with your mind, which is up in your head, so to really be mindful, you want to screw this head up tight so you know what you’re doing. But then you go out of your body; you’re not fully embodied.

When Ajahn Amaro was an anagārika he had to chop some firewood with a machete, so he held the wood between his feet and thought, ‘I’ll be really mindful.’ He took a sweep of the machete and he slashed his foot. One of his toes has been permanently affected since. The Thais could not believe how anybody could do something so utterly stupid and ‘be really mindful’ in doing it! They were somewhere between shock and humour. We haven’t really operated through our bodies properly, so all our mindfulness is up in our heads; that’s where we live.

Some people hold the idea that mindfulness or awareness should be collected onto one point. But when an ice skater is dancing with her partner, she’s aware of the whole thing: her partner, her skates, her legs, the movement of her muscles, her hands and so forth. Everything is working together. The awareness is completely saturated, steeped into the entire form. That can be a very ecstatic and happy experience, not stressful at all. And yet these champions had to practise again and again over many years to get their body to learn that.

To concentrate (in the sense of samādhi) doesn’t means to go up in your head, screw it tight and go unconscious in doing so. Particularly in traditional Buddhist countries, people think that if the mind is anywhere, it must be in the centre of the body. Sometimes they sense it in the heart, sometimes in the belly. This is where the GHQ is. We’re sensing things through there and through the entire form. The experience of being there is a happy one, because those centres are directly connected, not to abstract thought, but to sensory contact and feeling: ‘Oh look, there’s no pressure. Nobody is bothering me. I’m in a safe place, I’ve taken refuge.’ A sense of happiness comes from that.

Whereas if you’re just thinking with your brain you will have these kinds of dialogues going on in your mind: ‘I am in a safe place. I have taken refuge in the Buddha.’ ‘So what?’ ‘I did a good deed yesterday.’ ‘You shouldn’t congratulate yourself! That’s attachment, that’s egotism!’ ‘Oh … sorry.’ ‘Now remember you’re a failure and you have to get it right.’ ‘Yes, I know that.’ ‘That experience you are having is not what you should be experiencing at all. You should be experiencing something other than what you are experiencing.’ ‘That sounds convincing.’ ‘So try harder. Screw it up a bit tighter!’

The movement towards collectedness starts when you recollect skilful states. You recollect feeling warm, being appreciated or you recollect the happy qualities of your generosity and your goodwill. You touch into these recollections and you let their signal run through your entire system. Then your body begins to relax and you feel fresh. The Buddha says that when the body is relaxed and fresh, the mind starts to feel happy. When the mind is happy in this way, internally happy, there is no need to make an effort to concentrate. It concentrates on its own because it has somewhere comfortable to sit. Why would it go anywhere else? Unless you create a comfortable place, your mind is not going to sit down. Creating a comfortable place isn’t exactly something we can dictate, but we can set up processes that begin to allow that to form. It’s both voluntary and involuntary. We can ask ourselves, ‘Do I have enough faith and determination to open up and keep practising this very simple thing?’ and then, ‘Do I have enough faith to trust what’s happening in its own bizarre way?’ We look at whatever is happening with the perception that ‘It’s what should be happening’ instead of ‘It’s wrong.’ We let it change; we let it rest in impermanence, while feeling it in the body.

Instead of thinking, ‘My mind is always wandering off to other things when it should be concentrating on the breathing,’ could it be that, ‘My mind is going through its unpredictable process of unpacking itself and it’s doing exactly what it should be doing’? The mind is starting to go through those familiar areas of concern and keeps visiting them again and again, but instead of visiting them with a feeling of, ‘Oh, don’t! Stop doing that. Go somewhere else!’ or just recycling the same concern, touch into it and investigate it: ‘How is this? What’s the real feeling with this? How could this be sensed?’ Look at it in body metaphors, in terms of pressure, space, threat or need. Instead of looking at it with the thought, ‘I have such-and-such a psychological issue’ – which could be true – rather, sense it from the body’s way of sensing things. What’s happening in your body? Maybe it doesn’t feel safe or it doesn’t feel it has any ground underneath it. It may feel teetering or pressed. You don’t have to locate a particular area, but it may be that some part of your body does seem more heightened, perhaps your chest or your face. Whether that’s a general sense or a more localized sense, you’re touching it, breathing in, breathing out and gradually opening to it. This is the process of clearing. It’s partly decisive and partly random.

You wouldn’t be able to construct some of these patterns of experience. Sometimes you don’t even know them yourself, so you’re clearly not doing them. You didn’t decide, ‘Let me think … I’ll get really tired and exhausted.’ It just opens up, doesn’t it? How much control do we have? On a certain behavioural level, when it becomes functional, we have a reasonable degree of control: we can drive a car, write, read and organize. We could say that the external, functional level is under our control. But the closer we get to the real business, the less we have decisive control. Could you stop worrying? Sometimes you can’t sleep. You can’t even control that. You can’t simply decide, ‘I will be happy. I will forgive others. I will not have jealousy.’ It would be nice, wouldn’t it? But it doesn’t happen like that. The closer you get to the real business of where you are, the less say you have over it.

We can control what we say. Sometimes we don’t, but we can have some say over that. We can learn to write, but sometimes our handwriting is scrawling all over the page. We have a reasonable degree of control in driving a car, but even that’s not complete. We can forget, we can slip, we can make a mistake, we lose attention, the car breaks down. How much decisive control do we have in our life? Can you say, ‘I will get to work on time?’ No, because you could be stuck in a traffic jam, the bus could break down, you could slip on the street and break your ankle – a hundred and one things could happen. You can’t decisively say what will happen; you can just set up an intention.

In meditation, one thing you need to learn is knowing what you can do. What can be done, do it fully, completely, slowly, carefully and fully sense it out. If it’s sitting up, do that. If it’s having a meal, just do that, be there with that. What you don’t need to do, don’t do it. Don’t think about the future if you don’t need to. Don’t remember the past if you don’t need to. Anything you can switch off, do so. You don’t need to be nice to people, just don’t violate them. You don’t have to smile and look happy for everybody. Don’t bother. You can be as miserable as you like. It’s a great relief, isn’t it?

Simplify what you need to do, do it thoroughly with full awareness and recognize what you don’t need any more. Some of the stuff doesn’t switch off easily, so try to keep putting your energy thoroughly into what can be done and gradually things will shift. As you regain normality, the citta begins to unfold and open. Its nature is wise, intelligent and balanced in the natural state. What are the qualities where our controls kick in? Fear is certainly one of them, along with threat, making things work, getting things right, being a nice person, achieving what I need to achieve, being liked and so on. You can sense these profound and ingrained things as they happen.

When we hear, ‘Without clinging to anything in the world’, we might think, ‘I really have to stop clinging!’ But how much say do you have over that? As I said, it’s a very simple phrase but do we really know what that upādāna (clinging) refers to? Clinging sounds gross, but what actually happens is not gross at all. The five aggregates are described as ‘the modes of experience affected by clinging’. They are ‘cling-able’. Now, using an analogy, planets have gravity, they pull things towards them. If you go into the gravitational field of one of these planets, it pulls you in. The aggregates are rather like that. They have the potential to pull in; they have a gravitational force. What happens when we perceive a form (rūpa)? There’s some sense of ‘There is the form and I’m here.’ That already is the first degree of upādāna because what occurs is the sense of a separate self. Form attracts attention and if attention is attracted to it, then there’s the sense of ‘I’m here, that’s there.’ This is mild; it’s functional.

When perception and feeling kick in, a little bit more energy happens: ‘That’s a nice-looking thing. I want one of those.’ And as it happens, I become ‘a needy person’ or ‘a hungry person’. That thing becomes ‘very nice, desirable, absolutely necessary’ so ‘I want it.’ Its gravitational force has increased through perception, feeling and saṅkhāra, which are these impulsive habits: ‘If I put my two quid on the table, I’ll get one of those.’ Then you get it and think, ‘Right … so what? I have three of these in the drawer already. How did I do that?’ It’s just the force of gravity alone – clinging.

Some people are shopaholics. They like to go to the shopping mall and spend some money because they enjoy the feeling of, ‘There it is. It’s desirable. I’m about to get it. I have it.’ Perception and feeling are subject to clinging. They arouse a particular energy that sets up the basis of desire, craving, need or want. That’s a totally irrational experience; it rings in our nervous system. Most people have some degree of say over that, but sometimes – especially during the January sales – some people become very excited and think, ‘Look! I’m going to save fifty quid!’ They’re going to spend two hundred quid to save fifty and they would trample other people down to get that special offer. People do this to each other. It’s like a herd driven by an irrational instinct. Suddenly, the behavioural systems begin to melt under the effect of craving.

What does craving do? The object becomes luscious, desirable, cool, neat, necessary and so forth (I’m exaggerating of course) and my experience is feeling a bit depleted, so I think, ‘How good that one would be!’ or ‘I really need this!’ I see a model in the catalogue with a smiling face sitting on a chair with the desirable object. She looks totally blissed out. With this signal comes the thought, ‘That lovely, glowing, luscious object is out there. I feel depleted. I want it.’ This is taṇhā (craving). As soon as we have the object, it’s no longer out there: it’s here. I can’t want it any more because I have it. The glow has gone and I still feel depleted.

What sets up the psychology is: ‘What I don’t have is full of lovely, glowing, good energy; what I am doesn’t have it.’ The more the mind follows the gravitational force of that habit, the more you spin into a sense of need and depletion. You don’t feel good enough until you get the stars, the gold marks, the status, the approval, the degree and so on. Once you have it, there is a kind of glow but then you start thinking about what else you could get. It transfers to something else. Taṇhā is a state whereby a lot of the richness of your life is projected onto an object and leaves your presence. Your awareness then loses its intelligence, its richness, its joyfulness and all that juice flows out onto the objects around you. That’s the effect of clinging and craving.

Extreme states of craving are called addictions and perhaps we all have mild addictions. People we would call ‘addicts’ feel extremely depleted and lost. They are repeatedly drinking, shooting up, going into porn or something or other, and they’re still not feeling full enough of the joy juice. And yet they can’t stop because they’re in the pull of it. It’s like they are in a black hole and it has an immense gravitational force. That’s clinging. They don’t decide to do it, it just takes over. But we can decisively begin to edge out of that. That’s what restraint and renunciation are about. We’re switching things off. It’s a bit like going cold turkey when you deliberately switch off your mobile phone for the duration of the retreat. You may get the shakes for a text message but you can be with that. Then you come through the sense of depletion, nervousness or compulsiveness, and begin to enrich your awareness. This is the way we regain the fullness of being.

If you say, ‘I shouldn’t cling’, you end up going back to the control system up in your head telling you how naughty you are and how you have really terrible habits. That system is not awareness. Awareness is not ideologies. You have to shift to full awareness, and sometimes the full awareness first touches into the sense of depletion or the not feeling full and joyful. You have to be aware of the rather uncomfortable pieces until awareness begins to sense something healthy, stable and begins to sense itself: ‘There is awareness, there is citta.’ Thus you abide independent of anything in the world of the five aggregates. It doesn’t mean there aren’t any aggregates, but you have the ability to experience them in a much more aware way. You notice the signals, the triggering, the pulls, the pushes, the comments.

For example, there is the perception of being late: ‘I’m terribly late. Oh, disgrace, shame, shock, horror! I can’t even get to the shrine room on time. How am I going to meditate like this? Idiot, stupid, lazy, fool, failure! I’ll disturb everybody! The teacher is there and he sees me. He’s always on time. He disapproves of me because I’m so lazy, stupid and self-indulgent, always having a kip after breakfast.’ It was only two minutes late! It’s all right. Learn to be late, but don’t deliberately be late! You can’t all go through the door at the same time; it’s not big enough, so somebody has to come in last, feeling, ‘Oh, I’m last. I’m going to move the cushion and disturb all these people.’ Check out your perception of other people. Who are these other people? Who is looking at you? Who is commenting on your posture? Who is commenting on how much food you eat? Who is commenting on how you do the chore? You know who it is! It’s not other people, is it? That’s called ‘projection’.

When there isn’t an object of clinging, we create one. The subject and the object are created by clinging and perception. If there isn’t anybody, I can create somebody who disapproves of me. That isn’t a choice; nobody would want to do that. That’s the effect of clinging. So we come back to the basic experience of, ‘Here I am getting it wrong … feeling my body … getting it wrong … breathing out … getting it wrong …’. There’s a very different set of intentions that occur from established awareness. Instead of the habitual negative reactions, you start to feel some of the signals: ‘I’m getting it wrong, therefore I need encouragement’, ‘I’m getting it wrong, therefore I need to be given a little more time’, ‘I’m getting it wrong, therefore I need just a little more kindness’, ‘I’m getting it wrong, therefore I need to trust my ability to learn’, and you refuse to send a different kind of signal. Then you begin to question: ‘What is wrong anyway? Who are other people?’ These experiences can be very difficult.

There was a young man who became a monastic at Chithurst and he had to be in the corner with his back against two walls on either side to be able to sit in a room with other people – even in a sangha meeting of about sixteen people. That was as much as he could handle. Clearly, as much as he tried, community life wasn’t something he could manage. The sense of ‘other people’ was irrationally terrifying, nerve-racking, and there was history to back that up. Now I’ll give you another example of one of our devoted Thai supporters. We offered her a kuti in the forest so that she could have some time on retreat, and she replied, ‘That would be very nice. Can I bring my friend?’ – because for her being on her own doesn’t feel nice; it’s so nice to be with a friend. So how are we going to organize this monastery? For some people, the idea of being on your own feels a bit bleak and lonely, for other people the idea of being with somebody else is terrifying or awkward. What’s happening? There are different signifiers of what ‘other people’ means. Generally speaking, in village communities, where people have learned to live as extended families, running around, sharing each other’s houses and so forth, being with other people is pleasant, comfortable and fun. For other people who have been in war zones or are severely traumatized, being with other people is nerve-racking.

At Chithurst, we built this very nice Dhamma hall with plenty of space and we sit and meditate in there. Some people think, ‘Great! Now we don’t have to be in our room hearing people walking down the corridor and so forth.’ But some monks who live in a kuti in the forest would tell me, ‘Oh, I don’t like to be in a hall with other people. I feel more comfortable on my own.’ I would reply, ‘OK, fine, go out to your meditation hut.’ Then I would see them at teatime, sitting around and chatting with people, so I would say, ‘I thought you wanted to be alone!’ and they would reply, ‘Well, I’m just having a chat.’ In this case, the difficulty is not just about being alone, it’s about being somewhere which represents form, formality or an organization. We can feel over-formalized being with other people in that situation. When we sit around and have a cup of tea together, ‘other people’ suddenly become a form of friendship and company. So ‘other people’ are not people, they are signals.

As a  mettā practice, try to feel the impression that everything immediately around your body is spacious, open, warm and friendly. Feel that in your arms, your chest, your face and your belly. Perhaps you can imagine you’re sitting in a warm bath or on a sunny beach. Play with it. How does that feel? These experiences are very much bodily signals. We may have psychological interpretations of them and emotional responses, but the primary thing is what the body senses.

Clinging can’t be undone completely just through clarity and intentionality, but it can’t be undone without them. You use clarity and intentionality to come into the place where clinging can undo itself, and that place is in the embodied state, breathing in and breathing out. We can all do this practice. If we couldn’t do it, it wouldn’t have been taught, and because we struggle with it, it needs to be taught and encouraged.

Some of the maps presented in the suttas can be very daunting. In the map, you can move from the beginning to the end in a few minutes, but when you start your practice at point A, it may take quite a while before point B begins to open. The way I recommend practising is to stay with what you know, what you can do, until there’s an opening. At some point, the breathing is completed and long. Then it’s calming down and becoming much briefer and quieter. Then you can sense your whole body as a unified thing, rather than bits and pieces stuck together. You look for these openings as they come in, and you incline towards them, but you don’t try to push from one stage to the next.

Before you practise ānāpānasati, recollect, feel comfortable. Really get the sense of refuge. Look at those ‘getting it right’ and ‘getting it wrong’ messages. Start to unhook those workaholic ‘I have to get it done by Friday’ messages. Really look at those ‘I’m not as good as somebody else’ messages, and breathe through them, feel your body independently of them. The body in itself is independent of them, but we don’t often feel the entirety of the body. When the entirety of the body is felt, is sensed, then your breathing will come through and you can pick it up. There’s a gradual unfolding which doesn’t support the sense of the controlling self. It’s a sense of relaxation, subtle joy and happiness. This is why it’s for our welfare.