##### Beyond the Sense of Self

What does it mean to contemplate death? What is the purpose of it? Is it going to stop us dying? It’s not going to change the physiological processes in any way, is it? No, the aim of this contemplation is to resolve the emotional conflict, despair, anxiety and confusion around death. This is what is meant by freedom from death or, in Buddhist terminology, ‘deathlessness’. It means that the mind is not caught by the habits of attachment, despair, disappointment, fear and grief. These are all attributes of the mind’s emotional plane, which is very limited – basically, it only responds in terms of pleasure and pain. We are excited, interested, cheerful and brightened by things that are supportive and life-sustaining: by birth, increase and light. But darkness, death, decay and separation draw our mind into depression, anxiety and grief. Through our practice, we realize that both our physical form and our sensory form, including our thoughts and feelings, are ever-changing. They are impermanent; they come and go. Yet it’s possible for our minds and hearts to no longer be caught in that sense of loss, despair and confusion.

There is a difference between passing away and death; they mean slightly different things to us. When somebody dies and we want to be euphemistic about their death, we say they ‘passed away’ or ‘passed on’. Somehow those expressions don’t have the same punch to them as ‘he died’ – ‘he died and his body is rotting away now, degenerating.’ That would be a harder way to put it, but what actually is the difference? Why is it that saying somebody passed away is different from saying they’ve died? Because in ‘passing away’ there seems to be no loss of self involved. When we say somebody passed away , we’re implying that although they’re not here any more, they’re still around; they’ve just gone somewhere else. Whereas when we say somebody’s dead,  that implies annihilation, a complete breaking up, the loss of that integral self; the subject is destroyed.

When your clothes wear out, you say, ‘They’re finished! Let’s chuck them away!’ When your thirty-year-old car finally blows its last gasket and conks out, you probably feel a little tug in your heart. Why? Because when you’ve had a car for thirty years you start to endow it with a certain character. You call it Esmeralda or Gertrude, you pat it and talk to it, polish its headlamps and treat it as if it’s a person. So when it ‘passes away’ you feel, ‘That’s the end of Esmeralda (or Gertrude)!’ and perhaps you want to keep her wing mirrors or windscreen wipers as a souvenir. But even the most fanatical car enthusiasts probably don’t feel the same sort of heartbreak and emotion over the demise of their thirty-year-old jalopy as they would over the death of their brother, sister, mother or friend. You could say, ‘Jim passed away. Let’s keep his ears as a souvenir!’ as if he were just another thing that had broken down, but you don’t. We don’t like to have skeletons around, do we? Would you like to have the skeleton of your Auntie Bessie hanging up in the sitting room? It would be socially unorthodox! It wouldn’t be something you’d look on with fondness as you would look on a piece of a beloved object from which you’ve been parted. The bodies of people make a very different impression upon us. The one abiding impression we have of them is that they are living beings.

What do we mean when we say someone is dear to us? It means that we have a strong sense of their personality, their identity. If 100,000 Chinese people on the other side of the planet are wiped out in a flood, we think, ‘That’s terrible! That’s sad. It’s a tragedy, isn’t it?’ But it’s not anywhere near as emotionally disturbing as when one person you know, who is dear to you, dies. Krishnamurti had an awakening experience when his brother died. He was in the cemetery and saw a woman grieving over her departed relative, and he realized that while he didn’t feel any sorrow about that person’s death, he felt his brother’s death profoundly. So what’s the difference between one body dying and another body dying? It’s ‘self’, isn’t it? With someone you know, including your own being, you have a very strong feeling of self. What actually is that ‘self’? It’s a perception, a memory. You see someone you know and recognition arises, and with it there’s an emotional quality of familiarity, a kind of cosiness, comfort or even excitement, thrill, delight. What triggers that? Is it something in them? Is it something they have? If it’s in them, why is it that when someone they don’t know sees them, they don’t have the same feeling? In fact, our reaction is caused by something that we implant in those we know, that we project onto them – or we could say that memory  projects it.

The function of memory, perception, is called saññā in Pali – a denoting, signifying, associative process. It creates and adds a dimension to someone’s physical appearance, and that happens in our own mind. If right now you close your eyes and think of someone you know very well, you could probably get as clear a perception of them as if they’d walked into this room, sometimes even clearer. Even with someone who’s dead you can get as clear an image, in terms of feeling, in terms of that saññā dimension, as if they were physically present here. In fact, sometimes it’s easier to remember a dead person, because although this process of saññā is going on inside you, living people tend to not quite conform to your perception of them. They do to a certain extent, but sometimes they disappoint or let you down, or you misunderstand them. There’s a slight credibility gap between your impression and perception of them, and their independent existence.

When two of you comment on a third person, you may say, ‘He’s so charming, witty and bright,’ while the other person may say, ‘He’s inane, always coming out with his silly jokes. I wish he’d just shut up sometimes.’ You’re not seeing the same person. We create a personal world of other people in our own mind. Notice that. Notice the separation between the person you see, feel and experience, and what that person actually is. Sometimes the difference is very difficult to see because we are programmed to believe our own perceptions. We each have our own perceptions of another person, and often it’s to those perceptions that we actually relate. We are in love with and comforted by the familiarity of our own ideas, our own associations, our own mind-stuff.

Our ability to create a perception of a person and then project it onto them is very much caught up with the physical world, the physical appearance of things. When a person dies, our ability to project our perception of them is torn away from us. Then there’s a feeling of aloneness, rift, separation and sorrow. If somebody just goes away, we still have that ability. We say, ‘He’s gone to New Zealand; he’s doing this and that.’ We feel they’re still around somewhere and we don’t feel so bereft. Our grief at their absence is not the same sort of grief as if they had died. We can notice this with our teacher Ajahn Chah, who I believe is still technically alive.8 His physical processes are probably still just about operating, but as regards being able to communicate, say anything, do anything, that’s all finished. There’s just a body and a sensory mechanism, and a tremendous amount of effort has gone into keeping him going, so that many people may have the perception: ‘Ajahn Chah is alive.’ What are they gaining from that perception? The ability to be inspired, to have the feeling that there is a wise master – even though, to all intents and purposes, in terms of what he can give, the wise master no longer exists. Just that perception is more comforting than to think, ‘Ajahn Chah is dead.’

In meditation, we learn to liberate our perceptions, to see what they do, why they are so important to us and what kind of refuge we take in them. We can also regularly bring to mind perceptions of values that can be sustained through life, such as wisdom, purity, truth, virtue and awakening. We have Buddha-images as physical signs that we can use to stimulate the perception of what it is that we seek for ourselves in life: support, guidance, refuge, wisdom, compassion. Of course, these qualities also issue from our own minds when we learn to rise up to them. The two processes go together. Finding the refuge, that which is true, that which takes us beyond the sense of aloneness, separateness, losing and impermanence, is very much associated with the practice of fully recognizing and letting go of that which comes, changes and goes. With this recognition, there arises the consciousness or the mind that does not change: the Buddha which is blessed, which has serenity, truth, wisdom and virtue, which is compassionate and not dragged down by circumstances. When we experience this, our life – the sensory world and the people around us – can be a joyful life, a beautiful life, a life of great harmony.

To Brahmin Mogharāja, who asked how to escape death, the Buddha said, ‘Look upon the world as empty, Mogharāja, then the King of Death will not find you.’9 Look upon the world as empty of self, as void of self, then you will not be captured by death. Then your mind will not be drawn down with sorrow, and you will not feel the sense of separation and loneliness, the despair, fear and anxiety. ‘Looking upon the world as empty of self’ means that we see bodies as just ‘bodies’, forms as just ‘forms’, and we respond wisely to them. We don’t abuse or misuse them. We see people’s thoughts and actions, their desires and wishes, as empty of self, as just actions, as kamma, as cause and effect – rather than a self. Then we don’t feel a sense of irritation, despair or fascination, and our mind has a quality of empathy and balance.

So much of our sense of a ‘self’ is based not just upon the physical appearance of people’s bodies, but upon all that seems to make up the person: the way they do things, the way they look, the way they talk: ‘That’s her way of doing it.’ ‘He has that funny way of saying this.’ ‘That’s just typical of her.’ And the same for ourselves: ‘Oh, here I go again, that’s just like me. I like to do things this way. These are the things that I like. That’s just my nature.’ That’s what we see as a person, isn’t it? Someone’s habitual actions and moods, the way they behave, what makes them tick … these things mark the difference between a person and a corpse. Corpses don’t do very much. We create our perception of a person around their kamma, their actions – whether it is ourselves or other people. We tend to see kamma as ‘self’. For example, when our friend Joe comes into the room, we feel that it’s not just a body coming into a room, it’s Joe. Sooner or later Joe will do something and we find his actions familiar. We trust Joe, we know he isn’t going to attack us or do anything weird. We have a feeling of comfort and happiness. Or maybe the opposite: if we perceive Joe as being violent, we may feel threatened that he might attack us. Or perhaps we have a perception of Joe being weird, so we think, ‘Wait a minute and then Joe will do something weird. That will be really entertaining!’

Kamma is will, volition, desires, movements, inclinations, intentions, resistances and aversions: all the things that move, create and generate activity in terms of body, speech and mind. That’s what we see as self; that’s what self is made of. When you meditate you get a very close look at kamma as it works away in the mind, and you begin to recognize that ‘It’s not mine. It does things when I don’t want it to. It goes this way and it goes that way.’ There’s a strange dislocation, a dissociation experience: ‘My mind is not going the way I want it to. It’s not mine any more.’ For many of us that experience is quite unsettling – to experience what I take to be my ‘self’ as not mine, to lose control, to lose ownership and not be able to manage and possess and be in charge. We feel lost, all at sea, shipwrecked, uncertain. When we meditate, quite a lot of our effort – often heavily tainted with all kinds of wrong views – is in trying to get the mind under control and calmed down, to make it shut up and behave itself, to produce the kamma that I want, not some kind of incessant rambling.

Buddhist meditation is not about control and power, but about the wisdom that sees, that learns from whatever happens. We learn that this unsettling experience is not self: this is kamma. There is a kind of dying that happens in meditation. Sometimes we even feel it as like dying because the very key point of what ‘dying’ means to us is no longer being able to create a self, not being able to establish an identity around kamma. So it is when somebody dies: their body is just lying there. They’re not producing kamma any more. Where did they go? Whereas even if we don’t see them for fifteen years, but we think they’re living in Timbuktu, we may feel a sense of lack, but we don’t feel grief as we would if they were stretched out right there in front of us, stark, cold, dead. Then our friend hasn’t gone anywhere: here is his body. So what’s gone? Their ability to produce kamma, and our ability to be able to project a ‘self’ onto their kamma.

Now, when we look within ourselves in our meditation, we begin to see this very same predicament. Doubts and worries come up – wanderings of the mind. First, if they’re not too radical, just a little shimmy here and there, we might think, ‘Well, I’ll soon get it under control. I’m just settling down now. Dullness will disappear, the pain will probably pass away in a little while and I’ll get into it.’ And then more kamma comes up, deeper stuff. You find yourself feeling a kind of nameless frustration or sorrow. Emotions well up in the mind, strange stuff from goodness knows where. The Pandora’s box is open. Many memories and moods seem to well up. It’s definitely not under control! The difference between seeing this as ‘me degenerating’ and being able to recognize it as simply mental states arising and passing away is the sense of self. As long as the sense of self is there, fear, anxiety, suffering, conflict and struggle are there too.

To resolve this in terms of our own attitudes there has to be a kind of inner dying of the self: an ability to let it go, not to create an identity, not to control, achieve and be somebody – to let it all break up. It’s through that kind of dying that the ‘spirit’ is regenerated or resurrected, because through that dying away, that letting go of kamma, of the mortal, the conditioned, there is recognition of that which is not kamma. We recognize that which is not caused and created, which does not come and go, that which is not an identity or a person: the Buddha, the sublime, the transfigured, the bright, radiant, wise mind. That possibility is the opportunity of the spiritual path: to go through the realm of death, to go through that breakdown of self and arrive at the promised, the blessed, the pure ‘land’ where there is total love, wisdom, compassion, serenity and fearlessness.

What do religions say about death? What do they talk about in their various languages? They talk about passing through the gates of death and then arriving in heaven. Can you take that literally, that our bodies float up into the air and play harps on clouds? Are these bodies going to go somewhere else? Can this kammic personality go somewhere else? When we yearn for life after death, what do we really yearn for? That our self will not die, that our personality will go somewhere else. The real dying occurs when we recognize that the personality is not what we are, that it’s just another envelope, another apparent prison from which we can break out, through the way we live, through meditation.

‘Look on the world as void of self, then death will not catch you.’10 ‘Learn to die before you die, so that when you die you won’t die’11 – the teachings of those who have understood. ‘Life is a bridge; pass over it, do not build your house upon it. […] The world is but for an hour; spend it in devotion.’12 ‘Resurrection’. Why are these images brought up? What do they mean? Are they all just fantasies and blind hopes? Why do they spark something in us, some half-remembered intuition? Could it be possible that this process of birth, life and death, which we can only see in very personal terms, as a one-off, is actually a multiple process, that there are many births, many deaths? Just as in our mind-consciousness there are many births and deaths in a day, could it possibly be that we go through this life-and-death cycle time and time again, until we have learned the teachings of birth, ageing and death, the teachings of kamma?

In the monastery, we frequently chant: ‘I am the owner of my kamma, born of my kamma, heir to my kamma.’ It means we are responsible for our kamma because it’s what we do, what we say and what we think. It’s where we create self, where our ambitions, our desires, our obsessions rest and roost. It’s where our self is born and where it dies. It gets no further than kamma. Seeing this, the wise refrain from creating more obsession with the self; and we begin to do this with meditation. Then there is arising and passing away, comings, goings, endless shuffling around in the sensory plane, but there’s no ‘death’. There’s none of that despair, loss and confusion.

In your meditation, consider these things. As you practise, look first at ‘wanting’ – ordinary old legitimate wanting, blameless wishes and inclinations: wanting to be happy, wanting not to be miserable, wanting to know, wanting to feel comfortable. Then look at all the blameworthy inclinations, the wild, crazy desires. Look at all the things that you shouldn’t do. Contemplate desire without judgement, without belief or justification, so that you see it as just a movement, a constant twitching and thrashing around, like a fish in a net – the wanting to get away, to get out, to have and to become.

Look at the desire to become something. That doesn’t mean wanting to become the next prime minister or even a Buddha, but that you want to go from the state that you’re experiencing now to another state that you’re imagining. That’s what we mean by ‘becoming’. In momentary terms, it comes down to just that much. It’s not that you shouldn’t have any desires at all. This is not a puritanical attack on desires. It’s a letting go of them to the point where you contemplate them, rather than forming views about them, and you can see that movement away and the suffering involved in the yearning, the craving. In meditation, the longer you stay in this position of watchfulness, the more your mind can create the most wonderful possibilities of how good it could be … somewhere else! You’ll be surprised how rich and saturated with wonderful opportunities the world seems! Even simply walking out of the room could seem like the glorious possibility of going to a place where everyone experiences boundless freedom and light! Why is it that when you are outside the monastery you think, ‘I’m fed up with London, it gets on my nerves. I want to go to a Buddhist monastery!’, but when you’re here you think, ‘This is so sterile and boring, I want to leave!’? It’s because desire is the creator of the world.

So be aware of desire. Watch it, and rather than let it create a world, just keep coming back to the edge of it, the dying away. The essential dying process is to endeavour, with patience, faith, love, surrender, sheer tenacity and resolve, to let go, to relinquish, to abandon the possibilities of the future, to die to the present moment. When we die to the present we are born to the timeless, the eternal. When your mind acquires that skill, that faith, that willingness, you see that everything is all right – physical feelings are all right, mental stuff is all right. They’re not something that you would particularly relish or find disappointing; they’re just the way they are. That sounds so bland and neutral, but you can’t really put it into words. It’s that sense of great ease, relief and freedom which comes from realizing that it’s all manageable, everything’s all right: sickness is all right, pain is all right, even death is all right, because what we needed to learn has been learned, what needed to be done has been done, and then there is no more becoming and projection onto the world.

Look at that in your meditation practice. Look at the desire to achieve something in meditation, the desire to conquer and acquire, or the aversion, which is a kind of negative desire, the wanting to get away from or not to bother. When desire becomes frustrated you can experience a limp state, a sort of sullen, sulky feeling in the mind, but that’s not cessation of desire: you’re still creating negative kamma with it. In meditation practice we’re putting forth willingness, aspiration and effort. We meditate not out of desire but out of a kind of love. We cultivate a supreme, unsentimental loving quality toward our wilfulness, desires, irritations, resentments, resistances and moodiness. It’s there, present, encompassing them all.

Then, in the passing away of self, in its dying away, we learn to know the great heart, the great brightness, the great freedom. Life teaches us to be deathless, to rise above self. That’s the fulfilment of the human predicament. Just within what we’re given, with the system of having physical bodies and desires, we have all we need. We have the perfect enlightenment kit, the perfect key to deathlessness. It’s just this one, your one, not anybody else’s. This is your Dhamma door.

8 Ajahn Chah died on 16 January 1992. This reflection was offered during the time he was still incapacitated with his stroke.

9 Sutta Nipāta 5.15.

10 Sutta Nipāta 5.15.

11 Epigram inscribed in a Greek Orthodox Christian monastery in Mount Athos.

12 Indian proverb and traditional Sufi saying attributed to Jesus.