#### Resolved to Let Go

This reflection was offered on 10 July 2010 at Cittaviveka Monastery, a couple of weeks before entering the Vassa.

This morning I was talking to the community about making resolutions and commitments. It’s a big part of our practice, but we need to learn how to cultivate them in the right way; there’s some subtlety in it. You can make an intention or a resolution to look at where you’re stuck or where you’re getting habitual, stale or compulsive: ‘OK, let’s determine to do that – or to not do that.’ You get a feeling for where you’re blind, compulsive, swept away or resistant to things and you think, ‘Let’s check that out!’ You’re making some kind of resolution to stop or to look at it more clearly and then you’re looking at the results. It gives you a sense of establishing a foundation, a sense of direction and depth, because you start to go through the surface currents of the mind: its thoughts, feelings and opinions. You put a block on the basic inclinations of the mind, like the inclination towards sense pleasures, and say, ‘Let’s see what happens when I don’t do that.’ For example, you decide to give up music or smoking, or limit your food intake. Here in the monastery it’s standard of course – we don’t have music and don’t eat after noon – and you get so used to it that it’s hardly a commitment any more, it’s just ordinary. So, sometimes you decide to only eat once a day and see what that does.

You can check these things and also start to look into the attitudes you have. Sometimes you might get compulsive about how little you need or get attitudes of what is called  vibhava-taṇhā, which is not wanting to be with things, not wanting to be moved or touched, or experience anything – or the opposite: getting caught up in things. You look at your attitudes. You might not want to do this, not want to be part of that, not want to get involved with this; you just want to be left alone and quiet. Or you really want to get involved with everything; you want to have an opinion or get yourself into something. You see these kinds of tendencies and you look at what they’re about. You want to get involved with everything because you feel that otherwise you’ll be left out, sidelined or dismissed. Somehow you feel you’ve been made small or insignificant. Or you want to get out of it all because, ‘I want to be small and insignificant. I want to be left alone.’ These underlying currents in our lives are fundamental, because to a certain extent we are steered by them. They’re not necessarily unskilful but they can become compulsive. There’s a skilful sense of wanting to get involved with something because it brings up skilful mind-states. There’s a skilful sense of wanting to get out of something or not be involved with something because it brings up unskilful mind-states.

The Buddha said there are three points to check before we do something: ‘This is for my welfare’, ‘This for the welfare of others’ and ‘It leads to nibbāna,’37 which means it leads to letting go, to release, to non-compulsiveness; it leads to the mind’s becoming less feverish or gripped and finally towards peace, towards ceasing of this inner compulsiveness – however you want to define nibbāna. When something is for my welfare, it brings up skilful states in me, I feel respect for myself, I feel a sense of kindness, strength or calm in myself. If all these three checkpoints are present then you can recognize that’s as good as you can get it. But if it’s for your welfare and nobody else’s, you want to check that one out. Alternatively, when this is for everyone else’s welfare but not for your own, you want to check that one out too. And if it doesn’t lead to nibbāna, if it leads to becoming more and more involved, and you keep on wanting more and more of it, if it doesn’t lead to the ceasing, the quietening of the mind and it leads to the mind’s ongoing compulsiveness or fixations, then you don’t want to follow it. So there is this checklist: ‘my welfare’, ‘others’ welfare’ and ‘leads to nibbāna’.

You need to make any kind of resolution with that theme in mind so it’s not a blind doggedness: ‘I’ll do this no matter what!’ This is where it’s skilful, because in religious life – and I guess in any walk of life – people take up these incredible resolutions like standing on one leg for fourteen years or beating themselves with whips. Yeah … but does this do you any good? Does it do anybody else any good? Does it lead to any release? Well, maybe it does for some people but you have to keep checking it out, because often you get this sense of fixation upon a practice. It’s one of the forms of things we get fixated on.

The Buddha talked about four areas in which we fundamentally get fixated.38 The first one is the sense world, the pleasure in seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching (kāma). We are obsessed with it, always wanting more of it. Then we also get fixated upon what’s called ‘becoming’ (bhava): wanting to be in on everything, building up our identity, becoming more of a person, more and more involved – or the  vibhava: get less and less involved. The third area in which we get fixated is structural systems, standards, techniques, customs and views (diṭṭhi) – the ways we have of doing things. The fourth one is ignorance (avijjā) or the sense of self – that’s subtle. When you’re making resolutions, you recognize that these four basic areas are the kinds of things that can come up. You want to work with them.

I was not particularly resolve-minded, because to me it always meant being tied down to something meaningless. I looked around and wondered what people found themselves committed to: a nine-to-five job in Vauxhall Motors! I lived in Dunstable, so Vauxhall Motors was considered great. If that’s what you were doing with your life, wow! But that kind of commitment seemed a bit pointless to me. It didn’t seem to go very far.

When I was at school, we used to have to wear a school uniform. We had a jacket with a school badge on it, a little tie and a little cap. We had to wear these all the time. Even when we were outside the school walking, we had to wear this school uniform and if we saw a teacher coming along the road we had to take our cap off to salute the teacher. That was the thing! That was what schools were like in those days. So naturally I wondered, ‘What’s the point in doing this?’ The teacher wasn’t interested, we weren’t interested, but we had to do it. There probably was a point but I didn’t see it at the time. With this sort of thing we try to wriggle out of it as best we can. We couldn’t really completely flaunt it, but maybe we’d have our jacket on sort of scruffy, with the buttons undone, or we’d have our tie all crooked, or we’d put our cap on backwards. So we could be kind of complying with the letter of it. This is what commitments and resolutions meant to me then: getting tied down to something pointless, which is just boring.

Spirituality is always about freedom, space, release, openness and spontaneity, which is a nice idea. I kind of followed that for a few years, until one day I woke up with a hangover and realized my life was just following sensuality, desires and impulses, so I thought, ‘I’d better get my act together!’ I’d read all these wonderful spiritual classics –  Tao Te Ching,  Bhagavad Gita and The Way of Zen – when I was living on a beach in Morocco; I was a hippie then. It’s all about no constraints, formlessness and the true way; any way that can be named is not the true way. Krishnamurti said, ‘Any kind of system is tyranny.’ That sounded really great, but I didn’t know what to do. I had these wonderful ideas that rushed through my head, I would feel some tantalizing vision, but I didn’t actually have a practice to get there.

I went travelling and eventually I ended up in Thailand and started meditation. Here was a system of meditation: sit down there, stop moving around, and focus on your breathing. I couldn’t focus on my breathing at all – well maybe for a few seconds before my mind spun off – but I noticed that, within that alone, there was an intention to witness something. Even if I wasn’t doing it very well, at least there was an intention to get there. I started to notice: ‘There’s a sense of witnessing or watching’ and ‘This is what you watch.’ There is a sense of mindful witnessing, and there’s this stuff that can be looked at, which is all crazy: my mind. Establishing that kind of resolve, even when you’re not very good at it, means there’s something here to be worked with: ‘My mind is chaotic. I get a feeling I need to get it calmer or steadier.’ You get some sense of direction, even just by checking in with yourself in a clear and focused way.

Then I went to a monastery and was ordained as a monk, so it was clear what I did or didn’t do. I sat in a hut for three years on my own, with very little contact with anybody, no routines, no work – just sitting there, walking up and down, sitting there, walking up and down … The mind was bouncing off the walls all the time, clawing, going crazy, and I kept on pegging away at it and keeping that sense of resolve. Sometimes it worked: my mind did steady and stabilize for a while and that was gratifying. I realized I could do it. First of all, I’d sit still for fifteen minutes – that was like, ‘Big day, I could do that!’ – then I’d do walking meditation for fifteen minutes, then sit still for another fifteen minutes and then walk for fifteen minutes … that was an hour! Wow, that was a big breakthrough. I’d never sat down for fifteen minutes focusing on one thing before. There was something in there.

Then I started to develop things like sitting still for an hour, and even when the mind was crazy, there was some feeling of peacefulness in knowing it was just that. I had a resolve and the resolve became the centrepiece: ‘Right, this is what I’m doing. This is where I’m standing, and this is the weather. This is where I’m at, and this is just stuff visiting.’ There was a quality of discernment arising. But I then started to try to get rid of all the stuff, eliminate it all – the vibhava. I would sit there and try to stop thinking, stop fantasizing, stop remembering things; so there was always a fight, a struggle going on. I thought, ‘This can’t be right.’ It didn’t feel very good.

It was useful for me to live in a community because in that context, sometimes you’re trying to stop thinking and be quiet, but at other times you’re actually trying to think. If you have to act, work, serve and help other people in the monastery, stopping thinking is obviously not a good idea! People ask you questions and you’re responding, so you can’t take either ‘thinking’ or ‘not thinking’ to be the ultimate position, but you can rely on the ability to witness and to work with it. The point is not so much whether you are thinking or not, but whether or not you are embedded in the thinking. You step back and let thought move through without contending or getting fascinated by it. With this approach, I had a subtler sense of resolve and felt, ‘This is for my welfare: I’m getting a healthier relationship to the thinking mind. That affects how I speak and how much I put into things, so it leads to a more harmonious situation. I’m also starting to work with these compulsions and fixations of the mind.’

However, the technique itself became a kind of compulsion. There would be a real reflex of agitation if I couldn’t do my meditation. In this three-year session, I was doing ten to twelve hours of meditation a day and if anything happened in the monastery to disturb that, I’d start to get nervous and feel I wasn’t doing enough of it. I didn’t feel stable. I didn’t feel secure. It indicated one of the ways in which resolve goes wrong. We have a fundamental inclination for security or stability – at least I did. There was the need to know where I was and what was happening, the need to feel steady, and that was starting to affect the meditation. I wanted the meditation as something to hold on to. I was all right because I was doing it. Even if I wasn’t doing it very well, I was doing it, so that was ‘good’. But if something was preventing me from doing it, I didn’t know what I was supposed to be doing, so that was ‘bad’. I began to see this sense of what the Buddha called the fetter of attachment to systems and structures – the structure of the meditation system itself.

Occasionally during these three years, someone would invite us out of the monastery for a meal. I would feel quite lost, because I was not able to do things super slowly out there. I wanted to keep focusing on the breathing, but at the same time, I had to put up with taste, touch, sound and people coming and going. I felt quite lost. It wasn’t that the meditation was wrong or bad, but it started to reveal this search for something to hold on to. Normally, we hold on in order to be able to do things the way we like to do them or in order to give us a sense of being approved of, of being independent or of being our true self. But when these things get disturbed, when you can’t run your act, when you can’t do your ‘thing’ – whatever your ‘thing’ is – you start to feel rocky. At that time, my ‘thing’ was doing this meditation technique.

In the early days here at Chithurst, one time I was sitting out on the lawn in the afternoon. It was summertime and it was a nice, peaceful day. There was nothing much going on for a change, so I thought, ‘I’ll just sit and meditate.’ Once I got the idea of sitting and meditating I noticed these wood pigeons flapping their wings: ‘Oh dear, the wood pigeons are flapping their wings and I’m trying to meditate!’ Then occasionally I would see people going past and hear something like, ‘Oh, I saw Simon the other day …’. People were talking and I became agitated. I wasn’t agitated before I was meditating: I was sitting quite peacefully. But when I started to get the idea, ‘I have to meditate,’ this agitation came in. That was quite revealing.

Is this really the way to peace of mind? Yes, we can set up a structure that we can operate sometimes, but at other times it doesn’t quite work. So we begin to consider: ‘Well, what actually is this process of meditation about?’ Meditation is not just a technique, it’s the whole inclination towards having a clear intention and being centred, towards finding a quality of calm. We’re not deliberately going out listening to wood pigeons or running around. We’re gaining a sense of being able to let go of sounds, sights and of the agitation of the mind – and also to let go of the silence as well.

Essentially, with the practice, you’re establishing a sense of clear intention first of all. You know what you’re doing. You have a reference point and you can stay with it. You can practise resolution and determination with that; you focus your intentions on that. Then at some point the turbulence builds up: the turbulence of wanting to do something else or the turbulence of things that start to distract you. Are you responding to it in a way that is going to lead to your welfare and peace, or are you starting to find yourself hostile to anyone who’s moving around talking? ‘I’m going to shoot the wood pigeons because they’re bothering me!’ No, that doesn’t seem right! Where is the nibbāna element? You get a feeling for what the nibbāna element must be like: the mind is not fixated on anything; it’s not impassioned, not clinging.

I went to Amaravati when it first started in 1984. It was really crazy and pretty formless! It was a big place and we were trying to figure out how to make it work. We’d have meditation retreats there for the sangha. There were many people at Amaravati, so these retreats were a time when we’d finally settle down and stabilize. These retreats were happening in what was the shrine room in those days – now it’s the Retreat Centre shrine room. On each retreat, there’d always be what we called ‘the window wars’. Some people liked the windows open for fresh air. Other people didn’t like the windows open because it was draughty. So you’d be sitting in the shrine room and somebody would come in and open the window. You’d hear this kind of ‘Crrock!’ Then somebody else would come and close the window: ‘Claac!’ You’d sit there for a while and somebody would come in and reopen the window: ‘Crrock!’ So you’d hear these ‘Crrock, claac, crrock, claac …’ of the windows. Every time there was a change of sitting, somebody would open the window; somebody else would close the window. Somebody would come in and think, ‘It’s too hot!’ Then somebody else would come in and think, ‘It’s too cold!’ I could feel this build-up of irritation.

Some people’s view was, ‘It’s too draughty!’ Some other people’s view was, ‘It’s too stale!’ My view was, ‘Leave it alone! Just let it be the way it is!’ And even that was just another view I was attached to. So I thought, ‘What’s the way out of this one?’ You just hear the sound, feel a slight change in temperature, hear another sound, feel the temperature change again. We have the tendency to get seized by these phenomena, such as sounds, and interpret them as ‘people’ – ‘stupid people in fact, unlike me!’ After a while I wanted to machine-gun people because, ‘I’m being disturbed!’ It didn’t seem quite right somehow!

I took up a practice in the main courtyard of Amaravati where people used to drive in. I thought, ‘Instead of going off into the field, I’ll do my walking meditation right in the main courtyard where people drive in.’ I’d walk up and down and a car would drive in and somebody would say, ‘Excuse me? Where is such-and-such?’ ‘It’s right over there.’ Then I’d go back to my walking. Then somebody would say, ‘Hello Ajahn! How are you doing?’ I would reply, ‘I’m fine’ and walk up and down a

bit … Then I would hear, ‘Excuse me bhante, where do we put the food?’ ‘It’s over there.’ A builder would come along, ‘Where do we put the bricks, mate?’ ‘Over there.’ Just walking up and down, walking up and down … I would do that for an hour with that sense that I wasn’t ‘doing walking meditation’. At the moment when I would get interrupted, I would just let it dissolve, let it go – not in despair, but with the attitude: ‘The last moment was that and now it’s this. Just let it go.’ And when that person would move away, I would pick up the walking meditation again. That practice taught me to be more flexible around the focus, so that I could maintain a focus without this sense of, ‘I have to get this so that I can hold myself together, so that I can feel my mind steady.’ I didn’t like that attitude.

There are all kinds of ways in which this happens for us, aren’t there? When you live as a monastic in a community, depending on where you are, there could be all kinds of protocols around things. Each particular monastery has its own system about the way they receive the food or the way they do the chanting or the way they wear their robes. You might think, ‘This is it, this is right, we’re all clear. This is the Vinaya, this is the standard. This is good and impeccable.’ Then you go to another monastery and realize they’re doing it slightly differently, and they think, ‘This is right, this is clear.’ They may have some protocols that you don’t have in your monastery, so you may wonder, ‘What do they bother doing this for?!’ There are some places where they won’t boil water. You can have hot water but you can’t boil water. ‘What’s the point of that? Crazy! What are you trying to prove?’ In some places, they won’t have mirrors because you might look in the mirror and get infatuated with yourself. ‘Yeah, maybe it could happen … but come on, infatuated with this! You must be joking!’

You might get very particular about making sure people offer things in the right way. Is it right? Is it wrong? Who’s right? Who’s wrong? You realize there’s a lot of stuff that goes on around ‘right’ and ‘wrong’. Ask yourself: ‘Is this actually doing me any good?’ To what extent does it do me good? It does me good because I’m attentive, I’m focused, I’m clear, I’m trying to do something that the community does so that I’m living in harmony with people and I’m letting go of my opinions and views. When is it bad? When I fixate upon it, take it out of context, expect it somewhere else or if I find it is a source of contention, then it’s bad. You start to see the usefulness of views, systems and structures. You see them as a means of purifying your own mind, but you’re not picking them up in order to find fault with other people. These are things we have to work through, and it isn’t just for monks and nuns, it’s for everyone. It’s not just about particular points of monastic training, it’s a universal problem.

Sometimes in religious contexts it becomes most apparent. People often disagree over certain things, but if you are outside of their particular religion you can’t see any point in them. When Ajahn Amaro went to Egypt, he went to a Coptic Christian monastery. The monks there were very clear to say, ‘We are not Monophysites, we are Miaphysites!’ It’s a bit of theology. Jesus has two natures: divine and human. The Monophysites say those are united. The Miaphysites  say, ‘No, they are just unified, but not united.’ I imagine some strong words have been said on that topic!

You can also look at the kind of things people get stuck in around there: ‘What are you going to do at five o’clock? What are you going to do on Friday night? What are you going to do at Christmas?’ ‘I hate Christmas because I have to do all this goodwill stuff!’ ‘You’ve got to do it though. Not here for fun!’ Or you can look at the systems and structures that you set up: your nine-to-five day or the regular day. We wake up and go through the day until whatever the approved time is – ten, eleven, midnight – and then we get our six, seven, eight hours of sleep and we’re up again. People operate like that, but it isn’t actually the way a body operates. This just works in industrial countries where they want people to get out to work.

In non-industrial countries, people have a nap when they feel tired and they keep going when they’re not. They might lie down for two or three hours and then get up – it could be day or night. They go and do something and go on until they’re tired. Then they have a nap. When I was walking in India in 1990-1991, occasionally people would invite me into their house to stay for the night and I’d accept this invitation. There’d be a hall for the men, and women would be in another hall. There’d be five or six guys in a room and you’d get a bit of board on which to lie down. The light would never go off and people would be wandering in and out all night long, listening to the radio, doing things. Somebody would lie down and have a nap for a while and then he would get up. There would be no sense of ‘everybody is going to sleep’. They don’t do things like ‘lights out’. If you’re sleepy, you fall asleep, lights on or not. If you’re not, then keep going! When you’re tired in the day just take a rest somewhere. You would see people crashed out under a tree or under a truck any time – day or night. It doesn’t matter what’s going on. This is very destabilizing!

When you go to other countries and see the way people are operating, it can be very confusing. They’re not operating on the same parameters. You see this and you can think they’re stupid or primitive, or they haven’t got it together. You can see these reactions and fixations on things coming up in your mind and you realize, ‘This isn’t doing me any good. I’m not being very pleasant to other people and it’s making me more fixated. Why don’t I just let go of it?’ Then you start to see the boundlessness of possibilities instead of making your life narrower and narrower with fixed ideas such as: ‘We can only do this, and we can only do that. It’s six o’clock so I’ve got to do this. And I can’t ever do that. I can only do it this way and that way. I have to have these supports so that I can survive, otherwise I won’t.’ When you learn to be more open and flexible you realize you can manage a lot.

When I was at the monastery in Thailand, I was doing intensive meditation: it was a ‘system’ that I adopted. I was doing intensive noting, breathing in, breathing out, but the monastery itself wasn’t especially quiet. Every now and then they’d have a Dhamma talk blasting over a loudspeaker. I’d get annoyed with the sounds interrupting ‘me trying to meditate’. It’s a bit arrogant, really! It’s their country, their monastery and they put me up for free, and there I am, getting angry at how they’re living their lives the way they want! You don’t even notice how arrogant the mind can be over claiming territory. It’s an unconscious reflex of believing, ‘Things have to be my way!’

One time they had an eleven-day festival in the monastery. They were creating a sīmā, an ordination area in the monastery, so in order to celebrate that, they decided to ordain ninety-nine monks – nine being a very nice number in Thailand, the highest number. So they got ninety-nine men to become monks. It didn’t matter if they were a monk for a day or a week, just the idea of getting some robes for these ninety-nine guys would be extremely good fun. In Thailand, things have to have a certain fun to them, so to make it even more fun they also had a couple of movie theatres brought in. All night, movies were playing and people were selling food and stuff in the monastery. Of course, we had to go to the ordination ceremonies. They can only ordain three monks at a time, so that meant there were thirty-three ordination ceremonies in eleven days! At some point, you end up dragging yourself on the floor! One of the monks was the chanter for every single ordination – thirty-three of them! He was continuously taking things to keep his throat going. These ordinations went around the clock. You’d have a break for the meal and it would go on day and night. You’d go back to your kuti, lie down and hear this continual raucous of Western cowboy movies and music playing. Then somebody would knock on the door and off you go to the next ordination! So the idea of ‘me’ and ‘my peace and quiet’ and ‘focusing on the breathing in, breathing out’ …!

After a day or so of this I started to realize, ‘This thing is bigger than me! Why is this a problem? How do I find the middle point between the meditation (the internal world) and the external world, without being fixated on either of them?’ It doesn’t mean being vague, it means being really attentive to how the mind wants to rush out, pull in, or create ideas, opinions or complain: ‘Oh, there it goes! See if I can soften and release that.’ It’s very peaceful. It’s actually more peaceful doing that than having a tight focus. It’s subtler and it deals more thoroughly and radically with the places we are holding on: the need for stability, the need to have ‘my thing’ going or to get into some other thing instead, for example, ‘I’ll give up meditating, I’ll start reading instead.’ No, that’s not it.

We begin to see this incredible reflex to have something to hold on to. It’s not a conscious decision at all, but a real reflex. The idea of having nothing to hold on to sounds like, ‘What’s that?’ In some way, everything we hold on to begins to be a prop for our mind. We find ourselves defined by it. We’re good at it or not so good at it, we believe in it, we reject it, we support it, we have opinions about it, we convince other people of it or we apologize for it. Everything that supports us becomes an obstruction in a way. It’s not that we don’t need a support, but after a while, everything that supports us starts to be something we have to keep going, holding on to, approving of, tidying up, convincing somebody else of and holding against something that isn’t the same way.

You can’t have two opinions at the same time, can you? So, whatever you take a stand on is going to be in conflict with something of another opinion. If you want quiet, then noise is going to be a problem. If you want noise and chat, silence is going to be a problem. Whatever you take a stand on, whatever you find yourself supported by, eventually it becomes an obstruction, because it creates agitation, it creates the sense of, ‘I have to have this!’ or ‘Is this as good as yours? Which is the best religion? Which is the best meditation? Which is the best place? Which is the best system? Which is the best person? Is this better than that? Is this good enough? I don’t feel mine is as good as yours’ – this kind of fretting.

Sometimes we find ourselves looking at what we’re holding on to or what we find ourselves supported by and think, ‘I have to give that up! I shouldn’t have that. I’ll try this one instead.’ But then we can ask ourselves: ‘Who is it that needs support? What is it that needs support?’ Uncertainty needs support; it needs something. Fear needs something. Desire needs something. The need for stimulation needs something. These things are what need the support. Is it possible to release them?

Our apparent self becomes coloured with these tendencies. Our needs, our resistances, our fears and our worries shape and form ‘me’. Then ‘I’ want something ‘there’ to support them, something to get worked up about, something to get excited about, something to feel annoyed about, something to feel certain about. Everything of that nature is fragile, dependent, passes, breaks up and becomes a problem. So how do we find the stability we need? It is in that cultivation, in going through this rather uncomfortable but revealing process of sensing the unsupported at a subtler and subtler level. That may sound like falling down, but it is through this process that we reveal that which doesn’t need support. This is what the Buddha was pointing to in one of his rather cryptic poems:

‘When I came to a standstill, friend, then I sank.But when I struggled, then I got swept away.It is in this way, friend, that by not halting and by not straining I crossed the flood.’39

Of course, it’s no small thing. There is a process in which we try to find supports. We ask ourselves, ‘What feels good right now? What is the best for me right now?’ and then, ‘How can I make that fit with other people so that it’s for my welfare and for their welfare?’ Let’s look at morality for a start. It’s obvious: ‘Yes, that’s good for me and good for others.’ Let’s look at generosity, kindness, tolerance and sharing: ‘Yeah, that makes me feel good and it’s good for others as well.’ You start to establish something like that and within it you can see your opinions about people. Start to develop a little more compassion, forgiveness and rejoicing. See the different sides of things.

As you come into resolve you begin to see that there’s some sense of stability and there’s some remaining source of agitation. You start with the things you can trust and you see if that brings you some stability, some sense of, ‘I’m OK with this. I’m OK with you.’ If there’s something left that’s still agitated or tense, then you start to work with that. ‘Let’s meditate. Yeah, this is good, this is stable … but then I have a conflict when I can’t meditate … Ah, there is the agitation! There is the compulsion, there is the affliction. So can I have something that can embrace meditation and non-meditation as such?’ You need to go beyond ‘meditation’. Have a technique, but also move beyond that. Then there’s a sense of gradually widening and becoming more subtle.

You can consider one of the most chilling lines in the Buddha’s teaching: ‘Whatever is mine [whatever I’m supported by, whatever I hold on to], beloved and pleasing, will become otherwise, will become separated from me.’40 Your health, your vigour, your friends, places, intellectual clarity – whatever you take a stand on is fragile. Therefore, we need to look at these places where there is still fixation, where we are still in conflict with others, and ask ourselves: ‘Why do I need this? Why do I need to hold on here? What is it that needs to hold on here? Do I really want to be that? Do I need to be that – the fearfulness, insecurity, righteousness, whatever it is?’ So we are ‘emptying’ our definition of who we are and moving on to the unsupported, towards the supreme peace and stability that the Buddha pointed to – nibbāna.

37 Majjhima Nikāya 19.

38 Saṁyutta Nikāya 45.171, 45.172 and 45.173.

39 Saṁyutta Nikāya 1.1.

40 Aṅguttara Nikāya 5.57 and 10.48.