##### Honouring Life and Each Other

Take the time to allow the mind to touch and open up to the perception of death. As I have explained, death is a perceptual experience in the mind. We’re conscious that bodies die; we can recognize this as a cessation of physiological processes. It’s something we can objectively witness: degeneration, decay. But death as the sign, as the messenger (devadūta ), is a perception which gives us a feeling of ‘no future’, of separation, of not being able to hold on and control. Thus, it jars with the perceptions based around the sense of self as the one who manages things, who is going to do something, who feels he owns things and is secure.

You can notice this teaching in small ways. What happens when your body breaks down even temporarily? If you break your leg or your organs mutiny and refuse to function, what’s your response to your body? You probably have a sense of estrangement. When the body is working well and we’re able to use it to follow our wishes and aims, we perceive it as being ‘me’, but when it breaks down, it suddenly becomes ‘a thing’ to be dealt with. When it’s ill, it’s an ‘ill body’: it’s that damn leg, that rotten pancreas, lousy colon, filthy lung, stupid ear ... It’s no longer ‘me’. It becomes something from which we’re inclined to stand back. The jarring of that perception itself is not usually received with awareness. We tend to respond to it in an ignorant way; we don’t learn from it. We still assume that ‘we are’, ‘we should have’ and ‘things should be me  and mine  and able to be the way I want them to be’, so sickness often isn’t a teacher for us. Instead we rebel against it, ignore it, curse it and feel that me  and mine  are being unfairly treated.

Death is the final teacher, which says, ‘Stop!’ You can’t justify it, you can’t make deals with it and you can’t really complain about it. Death is beyond all that. It doesn’t fit into any values: it isn’t just the ‘bad people’ who die. Death can always come up with surprises. I heard of somebody who died of hiccups. It took him quite a while to die of that wear and tear on the system. So next time you start to have hiccups, worry! Somebody told me about a woman who choked on a peach skin. She was eating a peach and a fragment of peach skin lodged the wrong way. Usually when you swallow something the wrong way, you cough and splutter, and that shakes it out. But in this case the peach skin went down in such a way that it didn’t come out, so she died, choked on it. I heard of a young woman on a bicycle who was dragged under one of these thirty-two-ton juggernaut lorries, which ran right over her abdomen and squashed it out, and she recovered! They first managed to patch up her bones, and then they got the guts working but couldn’t get them back in her body. So her guts were in a little bag outside her body for a while, until eventually they managed to pop them inside again. She even had children afterwards. These examples show how death finds ways to puzzle our sense of reason by its decisions of why and how it should come, and whom it should come to.

We can make ourselves gloomy about death, but it’s not always gloomy. Sometimes it’s absurd. Even if you respond to it in awareness, it remains a kind of mystery. The only thing you can know about it is that it will always trip up any position, any self-view that you adopt. Some people live to be 110 years, others don’t make it past a week. People die of the oddest things, in grand ways and pathetic ways.

The perception of death – the recognition of our mortality – is very valuable. It keeps us on our toes. It’s saying, ‘Don’t take things for granted. Don’t even take the next moment for granted.’ Life is a mystery, a precious moment-by-moment mystery that stops in a moment. We can take the presence of others so much for granted. Even if we don’t always think like that, we perceive them as ‘my  person’: my friend, my neighbour, my wife. They are imbued with our needs, what we see them as and what we expect from them. They carry our hopes, our sense of security and belonging. They give us a sense of order in the world. When we allow this habit to cover everybody around us, we become very careless and heedless in the way we relate to others. We don’t really respond to them, but only to what we perceive or imagine them to be. The recollection of death helps us to live more mindfully and carefully in relation to others.

My first personal contact with this teacher happened when I was about thirteen or fourteen. A friend of mine was killed in a car crash, and I would go to that place where he was in my mind, that memory of him, and there was this strange numb feeling. Years later, when my father died, the experience was far deeper. At that time, I had been a monk for a couple of years and I had been doing a lot of meditation. When he died there was a profound sense of appreciation of that person for the way he had treated me in his actual life, for all the generous support he had given me, but also a kind of mystery: ‘Who was he really?’ I don’t think I actually knew that person. I related to his role as my father and to my perceptions of him, but I never fully took the opportunity to go beyond them. The qualities that my father represented in my perception weren’t related to dying. They were about security, strength, a refuge, a person who helped, the one who looked after me, someone to rely on, someone stable … and then he was gone! And I felt that shock. Then I realized that he wasn’t just my father, he was also a real human being, and that seemed to profoundly enrich my appreciation of him.

Since you were born, your father has always been your father, so you tend to assume that he is a man whose sole function is to be your father; that’s what he was born for. He’s there to hand out the pocket money and to provide free food and lodging. He is someone you can fall back on, a refuge-being. You don’t think like this but it’s very much the mood, the emotion that comes with your perception of him.

Perception is not thought, it’s a certain set of almost subconscious assumptions, our way of recognizing things. So when I would see my father, a certain kind of feeling would arise, a subtle feeling. For example, when you see someone, you may feel that ‘He is superior to me’ or ‘He is lesser than me’ or ‘He is someone I feel a bit apprehensive about’ or ‘He is someone with whom I feel a sense of trust and comfort in myself’. These are what we call perceptions. They’re not rational; you don’t think them. They’re about kamma, about the attitudes that are created through habitually reacting and relating in a certain series of ways. And as long as you live in terms of that kamma, then all you ever really experience are these kammic perceptions. You see authority-figures, comfort-figures, need-figures, excitement-figures, fantasy-figures, basically people who take on, for you, the fulfilment of the need you have to be somebody. Fathers and mothers particularly are seen in that way.

Once I stopped seeing my father only as ‘my father’, and instead viewed him as simply a man, I could realize that he had done an amazing number of good things. He must have had his own worries, doubts, headaches, problems, interests, fantasies, hopes, dreams and so on, and yet he did all this ‘fathering thing’. When I learned to appreciate him as a human being rather than just as my ‘old man’, as a kind of model, I also respected him more fully. I felt a great sense of respect, honour, reverence and gratitude for that person and how I wished that I could have seen him in that way before, when it was still possible to have related to the person and not only to his role as my father.

Of course, it was always certain he would die. Death is the most obvious fact there is, we all know that. Why don’t we take it into consideration? Instead of seeing each other as surrogates for our needs, people we bounce off of, we should value the mystery of each other’s presence in our lives and drop some of the perceptual projections we create about others. With the practice of mindfulness and attentiveness, we see things as they are. We let our perceptions of a person die before the person dies, so that we have an opportunity to live fully and mindfully in relation to that person in each present situation, rather than merely being caught up in the nether world of fantasy and projection. ‘Mindfulness is the path to life; heedlessness is the path to death. The mindful do not die; the heedless are as if dead already.’13 Through heedlessness, our experience is one of deadness, of inertia, of not having access to anything that is original, new, nurturing and regenerative. When we’re heedless we create a world out of our own regurgitated habits, needs, wants, hopes and fantasies, and then we project it onto others without realizing it. We tend to see and relate to each other in a blind and programmed way.

Ironically enough, death can actually wake us up from heedlessness, if we respond to it with awareness. We can investigate the feelings that arise when we are truly aware of it and recognize the transitory nature of this life, rather than taking it all for granted. How poor our lives would be if this physical realm were an immortal place! How destitute it would be! How dead it would be! Imagine if we were all immortal: we wouldn’t care about anything any more, would we? There wouldn’t be any sense of a need to do anything. What would there be to do? There would be no sense of caring for another. Why would it matter? If there’s nothing to be lost, what is there to be? What would there be to live for? If things were permanent, why bother to appreciate them? But although we’re not immortal, and even though beings are dying every day – it’s the most obvious, normal thing to do – it still comes as a profound surprise when someone near to us dies. Although we don’t think we’re immortal, our perceptions and attitudes almost suggest we do. We don’t appreciate the present moment because we believe there’s always going to be another one, so it doesn’t matter. We don’t take stock, we don’t value. We don’t put full attention into what we’re doing, because we believe that it’s just ‘one of an endless succession of actions’ and ‘tomorrow is another day’ and so on.

When my father died, the need for transcendence, for a real spirituality, suddenly became very clear to me. At that time, I had been practising meditation for a couple of years, and my motivation and ideas about meditation were basically that it was doing something so as to try to get the mind into a reasonable shape, to straighten and tidy it up. I was trying to quell a sense of disillusionment or world-weariness, to identify the problem, the sense of doubt or dis-ease. I was trying to find a way in which I could make my mind brighter, clearer and sharper, so that I could go about doing what I needed to do with a refreshed and bright mind. However, the death of my father made me recognize that there were things which no amount of improving conditions would change. Nothing would change that sense of loss, of separation; nothing could stop us losing that which we love. Then it became very important to me to not just live on the level of manipulating conditions by means of meditation or other techniques, in order to improve and appreciate them, but instead to learn to understand truth. What is human life about? What are we here for? What is this mystery? What is this strange life that can be suddenly removed? What are relationships about? I also understood that all these things were beyond my power of thinking. The power of life and death, the true order of the universe, was way beyond my grasp, beyond my ability to make it go my way. I realized the need to bow deeply to whatever that law is and not to try to make it work my way but to make myself work its way, because life and death are a mystery.

Consider that for each of us in our lives there will be a time when we say ‘goodbye’ to somebody and we won’t see them again – because they (or we) have died. There’ll be a time when you say, ‘Look after yourself. Bye now!’ – the kind of thing you say to the milkman, to the children going to school: ‘See you later. Bye!’ But there won’t be a ‘later’. How easy it is to assume that there’ll be a ‘later’ for us. We’re so certain that we can order and control our lives, but the more we bear death in mind, the more we realize the need for something in us to learn to obey life, to listen to life, rather than trying to run it and make it follow our wishes. We have to learn to respect and revere life in its momentary nature, to make each moment count, and not to cheapen it or squander it, not just through violence against it, but in the half-hearted, inconsequential millstream of it all. We’re very rarely fully with an experience, another person or with ourselves. It’s always: ‘Hi! Hello! Bye! See you later! Yeah! Right!’

The presence of death helps us to honour and respect life, to develop a true sense of reverence for it. That doesn’t mean thinking life is always a positive experience, but seeing it as all worthy of attention – appreciating that all its aspects have their own quality. As a result, our wilfulness, impetuousness, compulsiveness and bossiness die away. When we can respect life and genuinely be alive, there is a peaceful, clear and bright heart. We’re no longer heedlessly churning out projections and ambitions, living in the past or the future, and taking things for granted. When you live with a clear mind, you have the sensitivity which makes it possible to respond with compassion. So death also teaches us great compassion. It’s the leveller. It’s the one thing that we all meet on the physical plane. It’s our only certainty. We’re all brothers and sisters, fellow travellers on the way of life, and all the differences that our choosy minds can make over each other can be suddenly swept away by the awareness that we are all mortal. Then there is a feeling of respect for others: ‘May you go your way. This is the way you are, may you live it out.’ We honour each other. We put aside our response of: ‘Why aren’t you like this? You’re not like me. You don’t fit into my perceptions and values any more.’ Instead, we are able to allow others to be different. We recognize that we are only different in degree, and we all have to live out this ‘personality experience’, so we wish each other well in doing so. We can learn from this ‘personality experience’, while bearing its limitations in mind.

In our chanting ‘sharing of blessings’ we share the blessings of our life with those who support our transcendent nature: our teachers; those who support our physical nature: our parents; and then down through the list of friends, relatives, rulers of society, people who mould and affect us, and then all beings. You can extend the sharing of merit to all beings with whom you have contact, either physically or in consciousness, to all those who make an impression on you. When you honour and respect them all, that doesn’t mean you think they’re better than you. You don’t have to feel anybody’s better than you in order to respect them. You respect them because you recognize and respect their right to be what they are and to work through their positions, their roles, their personalities and their responsibilities; you wish them well in doing so.

Whatever wisdom, understanding or compassion comes to us, we reflect it and spread it around. We realize that, in this way, we’re doing very skilful actions for ourselves, in that the more we radiate generosity and kindness to others, the more we are able to live with sensitivity and see beings as they are. So it’s good for ourselves to share merit, as well as being good for others. Sharing merit clears away your own stale perceptions and attitudes. It’s the beginning of a truly awakened response to life. Through it, the results of our practice are regenerated back into our views of the world, and refresh them. Thus, our practice brightens our world; and when we view the world with brightness we tend to act and speak in the world in that same bright way.

13 Dhammapada, verse 21.