##### Learning from the Bitter Gifts of Life

This system of offering and receiving food, of having things given, is a beautiful experience. One receives the food as an offering and somehow, because it’s offered, by that very gesture, that very attitude, it is blessed. It becomes special, sacred. This is not about desire or self; it’s about the beauty of dāna , of giving, of generosity. One of the most constant blessings I have experienced in my life as a monk is being the recipient of dāna . By ‘dāna ’ I mean the generosity of giving, not the gift itself. I don’t see being a monk as a life where you think, ‘I’m going to get this, I’m going to get that.’ Sometimes the offerings are very humble, but when one is the recipient of a generous spirit, the generosity is not impaired by the humbleness of the gift. It’s purely dependent on the attitude of giving and the attitude of allowing oneself to receive.

This attitude is something to attune to, and not just regarding food. We begin our reflection around such simple things, but then we can consider the whole of this life. Did you make it? Did you create this world? We tend to think along the lines of, ‘This is my life, I do what I like!’ or ‘I’ve done this and that through my work,’ but in fact, we are given this opportunity, this birth. Did you decide to be born? Did you create a body? Did you engender consciousness? Isn’t it the other way around? Who owns this life, this opportunity to be conscious, to experience, to have a human birth, to have a mind that can reflect? These are all gifts, aren’t they? The sense of self is a pirate, a hijacker. It says, ‘This is me, my life, mine,’ but actually, all of this life is a gift, an offering.

We need to extend our understanding, our humility and our receptivity to appreciate that all the accidents, fortunes and misfortunes are gifts offered to us as opportunities for awakening. You’re offered the kind of mind you need to work with, the kind of body, the circumstances of your life. You might think, ‘Why does this happen to me? Why is my mother this way? Why …? Why …? Why …?’ Life may not offer what you want, but suppose you see it as an experiment. What happens if you see it all as having been dealt out to you as an opportunity to develop wholesome qualities of mind, to work against this self-view, to combat the laziness, the indulgence, the obsessiveness, the self-centredness and impatience that drag you down again and again into degeneration and despair? With this approach, you can even look at sickness, pain and separation from the loved as opportunities for learning. Through these experiences you can learn about the quality of wanting, asking, demanding, consuming, expecting – all that self-focus. You could say it’s a hard lesson, but these gifts of Dhamma don’t always come with nice wrappings around them. The process of liberation is all-embracing. The goal is sublime, supreme, so to realize it we have to consider, reflect and use our wisdom.

Don’t believe in self-view and the way it always tries to limit you: ‘I can’t … I don’t … I mustn’t … I don’t want … I can’t stand …’. You can always  stand it; you don’t want to, that’s all. We don’t want to bother, but we can. When you learn from the hardships and frustrations of life, when you approach them and take full responsibility for them, in the end you feel grateful, because suddenly you realize you’re not the limited self that you thought you were. You’re actually much grander and larger. I think this is relevant for meditation, for spiritual practice. As you realize that all that negativity, displeasure and dissatisfaction are coming from the frustrated self-view, you begin to have the aspiration to continue through the difficulties. You realize that it’s time to encounter the difficulties and face up to them: ‘This is what I’m given, this is the way it is. There isn’t any other way, so this must be exactly the right time to learn from this experience.’

I’m certainly very grateful for life as I live it, with the frustrations, restrictions and limitations of living in this monastic form. Most of it hasn’t been pleasant. As a form, it has almost always been either unpleasant or neutral, tedious to irritating, but it has taught me not to indulge, not to be moody, not to bear grudges, not to linger. It has taught me many good things, like being grateful and not being selfish, which I don’t think I would have learned if I hadn’t had such an unyielding teacher as the Buddha’s Dhamma-Vinaya.

Life, with its events and its timing, is a mystery to me. Whenever I’m about to go on retreat, I think, ‘Now, I can calm down, have a nice space and sort things out.’ But I usually find that a few days before the retreat begins, things I have to do, think about and worry over suddenly start coming up. I could think, ‘Why is everything always messing up my practice? It’s a conspiracy!’ And it actually is a conspiracy: it’s a conspiracy from benevolent forces who are saying, ‘It looks like he’s trying to get away again. Time to face up to this one! Indulging in escapist mentality is not going to get you very far!’

We have to open to the process of kamma and penetrate right into it, rather than trying to wriggle around it. By doing so, we are noble and honourable. We compensate for all the things we’ve taken from others and from the planet. We’re using the raw materials of life to produce something that will be of immense benefit, not just to ourselves, but to all beings. The world is very much in need of wise, compassionate, selfless beings.