#### Nicholas Halliday

December 2018 – Nāvādīpa3

Ajahn Sucitto once told me with a wry smile that humans had perfected just two things: calligraphy and tea. Having seen much of his artwork – some from the early days – and been honoured to perform a ceremony alongside him in the old tea emporium in Singapore, I can see that, though light-hearted, this comment holds a truth: the perfection of both calligraphy and tea are achieved through dedication and practice over time.

I’ve known Ajahn Sucitto for nearly a decade, since I began designing his publications. However, it was during the first three months of 2016, when travelling together through Thailand, Singapore and South Africa, that I gained a deeper understanding of why so much muditā  flowed in his direction. I recall a story-book’s worth of tales from just those twelve weeks, and so many which embody his pathos, warmth, compassion and connection with nature.

Ajahn’s own dedication and practice shone through this time in so many ways – from simple acts of everyday kindness to manifestations of ‘the serene heart’. I would often encounter him wrapped in quiet meditation in whatever floor space he could find, sweeping leaves from his walking path or brewing Oolong on the off-chance of a visitor.

We had just arrived in Singapore, fresh from weeks deep in the Thai jungle of Wat Dtao Dum, and were sitting on the plush carpet of our apartment, grateful for the novelty of hot water, electricity and chocolate croissants. We were unwrapping phones so generously offered by our supporters. All went well as we followed the setup instructions to the point where we needed to initiate the fingerprint recognition software. On request, Ajahn Sucitto rested his digits on the home button; the device duly stored the venerable identity and he was set up to unlock his iPhone with a single, elegant tap. We then began installing our Singaporean SIM cards, but something was clearly wrong: Ajahn’s phone would not recognize his fingerprints – fingerprints stored just moments before. No matter how he tried, the device refused to yield. I suggested licking the layer of Marmite off his thumb, but that didn’t work either. He reinstalled his prints, but again, nothing! On reflection, I encouraged him to view this as a positive – that his connection with the earth clearly prevented any meaningful connection with computers. Indeed, to this day, when Ajahn Sucitto attempts to interact with some of the world’s most advanced consumer technology, it refuses to acknowledge that anybody is there!

Some weeks later, in the closing days of March, as our minds turned to the approaching homeward journey, our benevolent hosts Kittisāro and Ṭhānissarā offered us the opportunity of a safari. We happily took it and, waking before dawn in the St Lucia Safari Lodge in the north-east of South Africa, were driven deep into the bush. En route our guides explained that the parched landscape was a result of the many months of drought – the usual rains had failed, the whole country was suffering and we were, therefore, unlikely to see much wildlife. However, we were reassured by the older of the two – a genuine poacher turned gamekeeper – that their years of experience would improve our chances of catching a glimpse of something.

The gentle glow on the horizon grew from dust-bowl pink to umber to amber, and then to a full surge of light, seemingly released only to impress and bring one to imagine how long-lost tribes would have seen such a dawn as evidence of the divine and bowed before it.

Then suddenly, just to the left, a few meters away was a huge black rhino, with a baby in tow and just beyond it a white rhino, all quietly munching on meagre tufts of grass. ‘We’ve never seen that before,’ declared the guides, ‘black and white rhinos together, and a baby. We’re very lucky to witness this.’ We lingered long enough for the sight of these extraordinary creatures to soak in, before bumping further along the track. Then, there on the right was a rhino carcass, shot by poachers some nights before for its horn, and enveloped by vultures, who, the moment we arrived, finished picking the carcass clean and scattered, assembling on arid crooked branches or rising on thermals above the bones. ‘We’ve never seen that before,’ declared the guides, ‘the final moments of a feeding frenzy. We’re very lucky to witness this.’ Over the next rise, a shelter of trees capped a high flat range, and above it soared an enormous Martial eagle. We stopped and all stood together on the dusty verge beside Ajahn Sucitto and watched in silence as the eagle’s circular path tightened, before it dived abruptly out of sight beneath the canopy. A moment later it emerged carrying a huge snake in its talons. ‘We’ve never seen that before,’ declared the guides, ‘a Martial eagle taking a snake. We’re very lucky to witness this.’

And so, with such sightings and declarations, the day unfolded. A parade of female elephants running at full speed beside our four-by-four, charging ahead and then stopping to feed: ‘We’ve never seen that before,’ declared the guides. Then we were surrounded by a twenty-strong herd, including a charming week-old calf, and being told to stay ‘perfectly quiet and still’ while the magnificent matriarch looked us directly in the eyes less than two feet away. ‘We’ve never seen that before,’ declared the guides. Every experience was announced as unique and surprising, and with each, I looked to my dear friend Ajahn Sucitto, who seemed to be enjoying it with a calm acceptance that this was all somehow normal.

While putting this book together for Sister Kittiñāṇī, I took a moment to read the other recollections and, not surprisingly, qualities such as respect, wisdom, vulnerability, humour, generosity and intellect are repeated, and around them are sculpted delightful and candid memories of friendship, respect and love. It’s clear that we are all the richer from time spent with Ajahn Sucitto. My final words must be a thank you for his support and understanding, especially when my own dedication and practice have been less than inspiring.

3 Nāvādīpa is the name Ajahn Sucitto offered for my canal boat, aboard which I currently live.  Nāvā translates as boat and dīpa as island or refuge.