##### Struggles of Life and Death

If you’ve ever been with a person, or even an animal, in the process of dying, you may have noticed that it can be quite a struggle. It can also be a struggle for us when we’re involved: we may feel a tremendous sense of helplessness. There can seem to be so much unnecessary pain and conflict. But of course, we see the process from a particular viewpoint, looking at it from the outside as it were, believing ourselves to be ‘some-body’ who is alive. We may see the struggle as painful, unpleasant, maybe even disgusting, and feel a strong sense that: ‘This is what happens to bodies and someday this is going to happen to me.’ Naturally, just because this is another living being, we feel that empathy. This is our common lot and there’s a painful feeling of fear, of apprehension. When the mind goes first, we can see the personality break up, change and begin to disappear. When our time comes, it would be nice if we were all able to lie down in a composed way, say a few final grand words and then, with a peaceful smile, drop across to the other shore like dewdrops slipping into the shining sea. Yet it doesn’t seem to be that way all the time.

I remember seeing a little two-year-old girl who died of severe burns. We sat around her dying body for about ten hours, just contemplating, watching and feeling. The mind is highly focused in such situations. The impression is so powerful that it’s almost hypnotic and you could go on watching for hours and hours. Something seems to be happening in the process of watchfulness, of being there, because it naturally brings the mind to full attention and concentration, and you witness the struggle, the conflict and the pain. Actually, these are all perceptions in your own mind, things you infer and read in from your own experience, which might be disturbance, agitation or anxiety. The usual reaction is to try to find ways to change the situation, to make yourself, the dying person and those who love them, feel better. But eventually, as you contemplate and stay with that experience, you start to come to terms with your own attitudes: your apprehension, resistance, fear, sorrow and anxiety about pain, conflict, dying, being overwhelmed and so on. When you practise in this way, somehow the perceptions gradually lose their searing quality. They’re not neutral, but you begin to see that dying is part of life.

The only thing we know that resembles the dying struggle is the birth struggle, the struggle to be born. What an amazing pain and struggle that is! Birth and death are rather similar: the struggle to be born, to take the first breath, to be incarnated; and the struggle to pass on, to lose incarnation. In other words, the doorways in and out of incarnation give rise to struggle. When you look at it, all the time in between also involves a considerable amount of struggle: picking up, putting down, falling over, starting again. Life is a kind of slow wrestling match. Yet, while we tend to see death as painful, sad and tragic, birth seems more like watching a race: somebody’s running towards the finishing line, gasping, getting out of breath and struggling, and you’re saying, ‘Come on! You can make it!’ ‘Ageing’, which stands for the whole period between birth and death, can be an interesting challenge with all its vicissitudes, but we wouldn’t call it ‘tragic’ because we can still imagine a future. We feel that there is a possibility of a happy ending, whereas we don’t tend to feel that about death. Yet the one inevitable thing we can know is that birth and ageing end in death. Being born is very much like being put on death row. There are some quite nice cells on death row, and most of one’s needs are taken care of, but the one inevitable thing about the future is death.

What happens after we die? We can’t really say for sure, but one thing we can ascertain is that there’s no one in the dead body any more. Dying can be a struggle, a conflict, but struggle and conflict are part of this sensory predicament, so there’s nothing shockingly unusual about them. We experience death as a shock because we have become blind and biased. The birth process and the sense of a future give rise to the sense of self. We feel we are a separate entity who is the recipient of life inside one of these body forms. These ‘entities’ don’t actually live life: they receive it, judge it, decide and give orders, and then the body obeys and does this and that. So the sense of self is the real source of the sorrow, the anguish and the desperation about death.

Rather than getting caught up in and trying to change the situation, which usually results in agitation, one of the most helpful things we can do is to develop an attitude of love. This becomes increasingly natural as we practise with pain, conflict and feelings of hopelessness and helplessness. In other words, we encourage awareness, dispassion and reflection in other people. We enable them to rise through the zone of pain and conflict, to die into it, rather as they died into life when they were born with the necessary struggle to leave the womb. Instead of adding apprehension and negativity to dying, we can take a positive, encouraging, ‘You can do it!’ attitude towards it. The encouragement is to be free from fear, free from the sense of failure that can arise at the end of people’s lives, free from the feeling of being rejected because death is such a taboo, and free from the feeling of being useless, unpleasant and disgusting. Any attitude, any practice we encourage in that way, will always be for the ultimate benefit of others.

For contemplatives, the nature of the practice that covers all this is transcendence of the perceptual world, of the way in which we habitually regard things. We tend to see the body and its actions as a self, a person, though nobody is inherently there. All you can see is that there’s a physical form. You can see actions and hear words, and you infer that there’s somebody producing them. Certainly, there are thoughts and physiological processes, which are all caused by other processes. The body is the result of reproduction, birth, food, water, air and life energy – it’s not the result of ‘me’. Actions are the results of the brain, the intelligence, the motivations and the psychological aspects, which pick up, learn and respond – all these are constantly changing. Bodies change slowly every day. Think of a person who is five months old, five years old, fifteen years old, fifty years old and eighty years old … Is it the same body? All we can say is that it follows a kind of pattern, but it can undergo profound change, not only as it ages, but also because parts can be cut off. In fact, as we’re probably aware rationally, not a single cell of the body we’re with now has been with us for more than seven or eight years. The mind too is very much subject to change. The personality, hobbies, habits, amusements and drives can change. We can be trained and changed. So who  is it?

The more we investigate and penetrate the perceptions, the more we come up against certain strong underlying tendencies – towards existence, becoming, having and holding. One may no longer be attached to jelly babies, rattles, motor cars or train sets, but there’s always a strong tendency to want to hold something: maybe it’s an idea, a space, a mood, a position of some kind, the possibility of the future or some sensual experience; we want to hold on to our ‘self’. There’s a strong wish and desire, like a magnetic pull, to be able to define ourselves, to have our way, to have personal views and be able to sustain them. You don’t really see these tendencies until you’re in a position where you can’t follow them any more, when you can’t be in charge of things or do what you want to do, or when you’re on your own and not getting familiar feedback from other people.

What does loneliness mean? You can feel lonely in a city of ten million people because you’re surrounded by people who don’t know you, who have no perception of you except as a stranger, as just another ‘somebody’. Then the only feedback you get is, ‘I don’t know you: you’re a stranger.’ You don’t get the feedback of, ‘Hello, Joe! How are you doing?’ Even that superficial kind of contact, that simple social gesture, can give you some sense of being, and when you can’t receive it you realize how much you are inclined towards it. Being with a group of strangers can be more alarming than being on your own, because when you’re on your own you can still pick up and follow a view of yourself: ‘Well, now I’m here I can do this, then I can do that.’ To be confronted with the perception of being a stranger can really be difficult; in a way, it’s rather like dying. We feel that people regard us as ‘somebody who’s dying’, ‘a stranger’ or ‘someone different’, and so we’re seen as upsetting, frightening or weird.

The Buddha pointed to grasping: not the things we grasp in them-selves, but the very fact of needing to grasp. He said that dependent upon this grasping is the sense of becoming, of going towards the future. Dependent upon becoming is the sense of identity. Dependent upon the sense of identity is the sense of loss of it, losing control, going mad, degenerating. And dependent upon that loss of identity are sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. Then with the cessation of grasping is the cessation of becoming, the cessation of the sense of identity, the cessation of the sense of separation, dying away from being somebody, and with that the cessation of sorrow, pain, lamentation, grief and despair.14

The Elder Sāriputta was the Buddha’s chief disciple and one of the great leaders of the Sangha. When he died, the Venerable Ānanda, who was not yet fully enlightened, said to the Buddha, ‘Since I heard about the final passing away of the Elder Sāriputta, my body has become weak, I feel disoriented and the teachings are no longer clear to me.’ The Buddha asked, ‘How is this, Ānanda? When Sāriputta died, did he take from you your portion of virtue, your portion of concentration or your portion of wisdom?’ The Venerable Ānanda replied, ‘Not so, Lord. But the Elder Sāriputta has been to me a mentor, one who roused, inspired and gladdened me. He was untiring in teaching the Dhamma, a helper of his fellow monks. And we remember how vitalizing, enjoyable and helpful his Dhamma instructions were.’ The Buddha said, ‘Have I not taught you that that which is born is subject to dissolution? What else is there to expect? It’s impossible to prevent anything that is born from disintegrating. Therefore, Ānanda, be a refuge unto yourself, seeking no external refuge. Let the Dhamma be your refuge; seek no other refuge.’15

Just before he became eighty, the Buddha said to the Venerable Ānanda, ‘I am now old. This body is wearing out. I have reached the term of life. Three months from now, the Tathāgata will take final nibbāna.’ Then the Venerable Ānanda pleaded, ‘May the Blessed One stay for a century for the benefit and happiness of devas and humans, out of compassion for the world!’ The Buddha replied, ‘Enough, Ānanda! Have I not always told you that all which is born is bound to pass away?’16

All sages have probably practised with pain and disease many times in their lives. They have found determination and strength in dealing with them. We have a lifetime to practise with physical pain, sickness, weakness and discomfort. Particularly as you grow old, you may have a number of trial runs on dying, a few warm-up sessions so you can get an idea of what it will be like. We should welcome these opportunities and life may offer plenty of them. From the moment we’re born, there’s the struggle to maintain selfhood: we’re trying to be ‘something’ at every moment; and the struggle with the sensory world: we’re trying to make it always comfortable, on the pleasant side, and keep the unpleasant, painful, disagreeable side away.

The sad thing is that so few people genuinely try to listen to life; the perception of self blots it all out. We feel ourselves to be a permanent self, an eternal being who remains ‘detached’ from life, someone who should not feel pain, discomfort or loss, a pleasant, agreeable person whose wishes can be fulfilled, at least to some degree. We cherish our ability to abide in a fair degree of comfort and security, and we wistfully fancy that this can go on indefinitely and that it’s our right. Yet when we learn to open and listen to life, when we can accept and practise with its discomforts and its losing side, the struggle can cease. Then we can find something far greater than the sense of self, something that can take us through this lifespan, and even through dying, in a very bright, wise and peaceful way: the Buddha, wisdom, awakeness. Through effort, practice and patience we can learn to let go, little by little, of the need to be, to have and to hold.

Even as he was dying, the Buddha was still in charge of what was going on. He asked a monk who was standing in front of him, fanning him, to move aside because the gods and the devas  had gathered to see the Buddha and this monk was preventing them from getting a last glimpse of him. He then gave instructions about what should be done with his remains. A man came to him and requested to become a monk in his presence. The Buddha granted his request. Then he asked his disciples if they had any questions on Dhamma. Having ascertained that nobody had any particular doubts or questions, he left his final teaching, ‘Vaya-dhammā saṅkhārā. Appamādena sampādetha.’17 (‘All compounded things are impermanent, subject to change. Strive on, keep practising with mindfulness.’) There’s a kind of non-conclusion about this teaching which is interesting. Some of the early translations read: ‘All compounded things are impermanent. Attain salvation through diligence.’ But the Buddha didn’t mention attaining anything. He just said, ‘Be very mindful. Keep practising.’ So we may wonder, ‘And then? What happens then?’ Well, the Buddha proceeded to demonstrate what happens then: what happens is that you die, so then he died. The Elder Anuruddha, whose mind was so sensitive that he could actually read the mind processes of others, followed the Buddha’s consciousness as it moved through the various states of absorption until, rather like a mist, it just evaporated.

You may think, ‘Where did the Buddha go? Do Buddhas live in nibbāna when they die? Do they go to heaven or not? Will they be reborn on earth or will they stay above forever, looking down on us and occasionally coming down to give us pep talks, or guiding us from afar? Or do they just not exist?’ Whenever one of these questions was asked, the Buddha would say, ‘Not a valid question.’ What he meant was that if you want to know what happens to a Buddha when he dies, you should first be able to say where the Buddha is when he’s alive. The Buddha’s body is just a body and his words are just words; they’re not a separate, permanent entity. When you go through all you can discern about a person, you can see that none of it can really be identified with that person, because it doesn’t last. You can watch thoughts and see their cessation, so you’re not a thought. You’re not a feeling, you’re not a body. Does that mean you don’t have feelings, thoughts or a body? No, there are thoughts, feelings and a body. So you can’t say that the Buddha either is  or isn’t  a body, thoughts, words, feelings and actions. Buddhas certainly manifest, act in certain ways, and have wisdom, blessings and compassion, but you can’t say they either are or aren’t. And if this is the case for the Buddha when he’s alive, how can you possibly start thinking about what happens when he dies?

We can see this in ourselves. Who are we? As we’re not yet completely awakened, there are some things we definitely seem to be. What we seem to be will be a source of conflict when we die, because then it will be taken away: our body, our moods, our feelings, our ability to understand and think, our physical well-being. What we are lodged in now will then be our source of sorrow. From grasping arises becoming, the sense of self, the feeling of losing it, dying from it, sorrow, pain, grief and despair. Yet we have an opportunity to practise in such a way that there is a body, but no holding it; there are feelings, but we’re not grasping at them. We’re not self-conscious, conceited or despairing about feelings. We know feelings are just feelings, thoughts are just thoughts. Then there’s a lightness to them. This is not a rejection of body, feeling or thought, but a non-demanding, non-obsessive, non-anxious and non-indulgent attitude towards them.

We practise internally as well as externally. We don’t blindly react to the bodies, moods and feelings of others. We can respond to the dying of others with non-attachment. Rather than giving in to the reflex reactions of anxiety and despair, a response of support, encouragement and kindness brings much more benefit. Wonderfully, when we’re in such a critical situation, we seem to have a stronger possibility of allowing that response to come through us. When none of our normal responses and reactions seem to work, something in us begins to become wise, as it were, and so dying can be a profoundly beautiful experience for both the person dying and those around. If it’s done with attention, wisdom and awareness, dying becomes an experience of truth, a deeper realization of life, of what it means, of who we are and what we’re not, a joyous experience. Sometimes it’s called ‘dying into life’.

With people we know well, very dear ones, this is a very challenging experience because it tends to bring up into full consciousness all the highly evolved perceptions we have around such people: not wanting them to be hurt, wanting them to feel happy, wanting them to be this way and not that way, wanting to nurture and succour – all that within us which is trying to see and maintain this as ‘a person’. There’s nothing ill-intentioned in this, but it limits us. That strong and natural emotional response binds us to the plane of sorrow. Those of us who have lost dear ones with awareness can recognize that. At that time, something in us seems to die as well.

When my father died, it was like having a tooth out. I actually had a tooth out at about the same time. Teeth are just there. You chomp away and scrub them every day, and when you lose one you find your tongue keeps going to the hole where it was and it feels strange, like a numb space. It was the same with losing my father, though of course that was a more profoundly emotional experience than losing a tooth!

I didn’t realize how much he was part of my life because I didn’t live with him and I had my own way of doing things. I had carried with me the memories of my father. They lived with me, but when I could no longer ground them on a living person I felt a strange, numb, empty feeling. This is what grief and mourning are about. They’re about noticing that space, and with it I felt a sense of wanting to live properly and rightly, but also a slight weariness with life, a lack of much interest in it all. It seemed that everything was just part of what has to happen. Eventually the balance was restored. Death has that sobering effect. It helps us to not be so reckless or compulsive, or to take things for granted.

Being with the dying, particularly those near and dear to you, calls on you to look at and resolve your emotional conflicts. One of the most painful, confusing experiences is not being able to help, not being able to do anything about the situation. Eventually you realize that the only thing you can do at that time is to practise with that feeling, live in the moment and do what you can. There’s no answer to death, no escape. All things are impermanent; be mindful, practise well. Practise with diligence, not because it’s going to halt physiological processes, but because there isn’t anything else to do. If we wish to put an end to death, sorrow, lamentation, grief and despair, it can only be done through this practice, for ourselves and for others.

14 This paragraph refers to Saṁyutta Nikāya 12.1.

15 This paragraph refers to the Cunda Sutta, Saṁyutta Nikāya 47.13.

16 This paragraph refers to the  Mahāparinibbāna Sutta , Dīgha Nikāya 16.

17 Dīgha Nikāya 16.6.7.