#### Ajahn Sundarā

April 2018

In the early years at Chithurst Ajahn Sucitto seemed to have unlimited energy and would frequently push himself to the edges of his physical endurance. He would be standing up all day, printing one of our first newsletters on an ancient printing machine, the smell of black ink oozing from his small workroom that later on became ‘the princess toilet’, near the back door of the main house. He could spend half the night absorbed in his calligraphic painting, although the daily routine and workload were intense. Then he would tell wonderful stories about his monk’s life experiences in the early days. Once, while attempting to dye his robe, he was fully expecting it to come out bhikkhu-colour, but instead, to his amazement, it turned out green! Or his moment-by-moment account of developing a positive relationship with the sewing machine as he attempted to sew a double-layered sanghāṭī  robe. He could bring the entire shrine room audience to the point of tears from laughing so much.

It was not very long after we became sīladharā that Ajahn Sucitto was invited by Ajahn Sumedho to help our fledgling nuns’ community establish our new way of training and discipline. With his well-known generosity of heart, notorious toughness and high standards, he taught us over a period of six years how to understand and skilfully use our training discipline. He had taken care to adapt the training to meet the needs of a female community following a renunciant, mendicant lifestyle in the twentieth century. On reflection, that was a mighty task, both for Ajahn Sucitto and for us. We were all – consciously or not – engaged in building what was perhaps the first community of female Buddhist alms-mendicants in the West. This involved understanding and quite often being baffled by ancient Asian cultural ways and conditioning.

Ajahn Sucitto contributed much to the birthing of our community by helping us to find a way of living and practising together. It was the beginning of something totally new. Without the sound refuge of Ajahn Sumedho’s wise teaching, and the skilled and patient guidance of Ajahn Sucitto, together with the supportive and dedicated presence of monks, nuns and lay people, I feel quite sure that the nuns’ community could not have developed so well or lasted so long. Without Ajahn Sucitto’s unflinching support, his Dhamma guidance and high standards of Vinaya, I wonder if any of us would have come out alive! As we shared a physically demanding lifestyle, a fairly intense practice of the Buddha’s teaching on ending suffering, and training in mindfulness, there were often exceptional physical and mental challenges.

Although at the time I did not always appreciate what a great gift this was for our nuns’ community, I now feel a great debt of gratitude to Ajahn Sucitto. He would always show loving, patient and kind spiritual support to the nuns, even though he sometimes appeared puzzled by us, by the female psyche and our ways of relating to the world and to ourselves. Yet he never gave up; though when asked once if he had ever fallen in love with a nun, he paused before admitting that falling in love had not been a problem, but that there had been occasional murderous thoughts!