#### Learning to Feel and Be With Oneself

This reflection was offered on 24 June 1985, the last evening of a five-day retreat at Amaravati Monastery.

Apart from the wish to understand ourselves, to feel a sense of clarity or inner firmness of knowing ‘this is so’, one of the motivations for mind cultivation is to learn to feel. Perhaps the two are not so different. Our habitual way of knowing things is not to have any feeling for them but to be able to retain a mental image, a thought, a concept or an idea. When we can think about something, we feel we know it, we feel we’ve understood. Yet we find a great feeling of inadequacy and hunger about that way of understanding. This is an aspect of mind development that’s highly emphasized in schools and education systems: how much information we can retain or have about things. When we talk to each other, we tend to relay facts or opinions or views. It’s like sending packages of thoughts across the space between us; we pick up that package of thought, open it up, take the thoughts out and feel we have communicated, understood and passed on information. We feel an increasing alienation from life when we just think about it and only relate in that way. There’s no tone, no real sense of response, no sense of vitality. Nothing is alive.

Personally, after fifteen or sixteen years of education, I felt almost completely dried out and desiccated, and I wondered why. I looked for emotional stimulation of some kind, to try to kick some life into myself and stimulate some emotion into the system, but I had never actually learned to feel in an open way. I wanted to have a package of emotional content to take out, but this process of learning to feel for things, to be with the unique presence of things, is a matter of inclining, of listening very humbly. We’re not dredging up an emotion or trying to feel something, but learning to be more attentive, with an attention that has no object, no purpose and no point. This attention is not trying to perceive or discover a particular thing. It’s just attentive; it listens to tone and suggestion. For that, obviously, the mind needs to be cultivated. We become very blunt and coarse when we expect, think and conceive of things rather than really feel for things.

It’s a great problem we come up against when we try to practise mettā (loving-kindness) meditation. We may say, ‘I don’t have mettā. It’s not something I can do. Trying to feel kind to myself and think “May I be well and happy” is silly.’ We’re thinking  about mettā and trying to have the experience of it rather than learning to listen, attend more, feel more, think less, know a little less, have a little less of an idea. All these things come from an openness of mind. Mettā can simply be non-aversion, not allowing ourselves to create critical thoughts, or keeping that tendency to find critical thoughts in check. When a thought ends there’s a moment of pause, a moment of space, isn’t there? When we don’t know something or we don’t have an opinion, there’s a moment of emptiness, of silence. At that moment we’re listening, we’re tending to the present experience, rather than creating something.

The practice of contemplation leads directly to a sensitizing of the heart. We might imagine emptiness to be an erosion or cessation of all feeling, but emptiness is actually the ending of needing to fill ourselves up with things. When you think, conceive and are full, see what happens. People are very skilful, talented, successful and getting along in life, but they lose their sense of receptivity. I was talking to a lady a little while ago who felt she could always get ahead, she could always cope, she could always manage, she could always do things. She could do all the things other people couldn’t do. She could endure the things other people couldn’t endure. She could take the things other people couldn’t take. She told me that she works on a farm and that one day she decapitated something like 160 chickens, and the thought just came to her, ‘How on earth did I manage to do that?’ Clearly, she wasn’t practising mettā or compassion.

We take suffering as a great misfortune. We take the things that stop us in our tracks as a great misfortune, but actually they can be blessings. While you’re getting ahead, succeeding and coming out on top, how much do you stop and listen? There is no need to, is there? When life is fun, who needs to be wise? When we contemplate dukkha (suffering) we begin to be aware of that. We get stopped in our tracks by misfortune, our inability to cope, our feelings of inner desolation. It’s all right really, it’s a sign that there’s a possibility of waking up. That’s why we call this truth of suffering ‘noble’. It’s a sign for a spiritual seeker, a sign of waking up, something we should contemplate. What is the sensation of that? What is the antidote to that? People who have not really followed through or understood clearly tend to try to replace dukkha with sukha, unpleasant things with pleasant things, unsatisfactoriness with some kind of satisfaction.

In meditation you’re seeing that even pleasant things are unsatisfactory. Even happiness is, in a way, not quite enough. It comes and goes; it tends to wane and leaves us feeling disappointed. The problem is actually the way we relate to these experiences. Like this lady killing chickens, you can take yourself as being a kind of closed object, like a lump of wood; you go around and you do this, and you do that, then you do this, and then you do that … You don’t want unhappiness so you try to get happiness. But the idea that happiness is something you can get  reinforces the idea that happiness is something you have to hold, and therefore something you can lose.

When we cultivate the heart, we’re actually not concentrating on the getting or the losing, but on the movement, allowing perceptions and feelings to go through us. We watch them change. We watch our fears, doubts, discontent and sorrow arise. Sometimes a great sorrow comes up. We become much more transparent, allowing feelings to go through us without holding on to them or pushing them away. This is a means of opening the mind, of sensitizing ourselves to the movement of things, to the change of things, so that other beings and the world around are things that move through us. We are interchangeable; it’s not a hard thing out there.

If you want to know what you look like, just look around you. This is what you look like. This world around you defines you: it’s your opinion, your way of seeing things, your location in space, your perceptions. What appears to be the visual world around you, outside you, is a picture of yourself. There’s a sense of interrelationship with things. The first stage of the practice is seeing all things as essentially interrelated. We experience being part of things, feeling for things and learning to feel for the unimportant things. When you do the body sweeping meditation, there are sensations of pleasure, pain, tingling, aching or nothing much: these dull, empty feelings.

How does your body-mind feel first thing in the morning? Learn to feel that rather than just thinking, ‘I don’t feel so good. I don’t feel very much awake. I feel I could use a stiff cup of coffee or stay a few more hours in bed.’ That’s what happens when we think  about suffering: we think of the antidotes to it, so of course if we don’t get them, this suffering becomes worse and worse, doesn’t it? We continually limit ourselves. But how does it actually feel? Are we prepared to go through the experience of waking up, the feeling of dullness, the feeling of hunger, the feeling of tiredness? What do they actually feel like? In meditation, how much do the unloved, grey, empty areas of your life come up for you? On this retreat we’re keeping to a routine, and we may come to a point when the interest, the stimulation, the sense of doing something new, of being somewhere else, of finding things, of becoming this and that, is all waning, fading away. We get to a kind of grey area, a plateau, and to cross it is a great stage in spiritual development.

I began to practise in a very committed and serious way. It was intense. I spent several years doing very little except meditating: sitting and watching the breath, and doing walking meditation, day in and day out, in the same place. It got to a point in my practice where everything faded out. I had this feeling that there was no point. I couldn’t go forward anywhere; there wasn’t anywhere to go forward to. I was just putting in time, going through the motions of sitting and walking, the motions of the day, with this bleak, dull, numb feeling, thinking, ‘How do I get out of this? How do I get across it? Am I supposed to try and push into it, try to concentrate more on it or snap out of it?’ It was like I was coming to the edges of the self. I saw the limitations of trying to find something new in my mind to play with. I was wearing out my fascination in things, including the mind and all the things it could do.

We have to learn to open up to the world around us. It’s one of the last things we do, actually. We normally have an unawakened relationship with the world around us. We pay attention to it just to manipulate it, to find things for ourselves in it. We even talk about living our life as if life is something separate from us. We try to get ‘on top of life’ or get ‘ahead in life’. The world of nature is something we dominate; we don’t feel we’re part of it. Planet Earth is a place down there, and we walk around on top of it. We don’t feel that we’re part of the earth; it’s that stuff underneath us that we wander around on. In meditation, you begin to see the results of this alienation. Eventually you become alienated from your own vitality, your own life. When there isn’t anything you can get out of meditation, when there isn’t anything you can manipulate about it and when any sense of vitality or relationship finishes, you have this dumb, numb, dull feeling. Where has the joy gone? Where has the twinkle gone? I want happiness! Where has the happiness gone? You may think, ‘Meditation is supposed to make me feel happy and to transform me into a more kind and loving person … Well, I need to practise more loving-kindness, but where is it? I can’t find it. How can I practise it?’ You can’t feel anything.

We start learning from the world by learning to be with the negativity of our mind, with the dullness of it. We have to start from there, with those endings. Rather than trying to feel a positive feeling, we take the time to be with ourselves and we start to learn to feel. When you concentrate and begin to witness the mind more fully, you see a strong aversion, which is the root of our alienation from things. We tend to reject so much of the world around us through fear, disinterest or dislike. If we can’t get something out of it, we’re not bothered with it. There is ignorance, dullness and unkindness; we don’t feel at one with it. So we have to learn to feel at one with our emptiness, our dullness. We look into the resistance, the sullenness, the resentment: ‘I don’t want to put up with this!’ or the feeling sorry for ourselves: ‘Why is this happening to me? I’ve tried so hard for all this time, and I haven’t got anything out of it! Nobody loves me!’ – these sorts of childish sounds come and go in our mind. We come to a point where we decide that there’s nothing to get out of this at all. This is the complete giving up, the complete letting go: not getting anything out of anything.

What does our mind do when it stops grasping? It actually starts to feel, just by itself. You learn to feel by not grasping. What do you do when your mind feels dull, negative or bored? If you look at it, you can witness that there’s a grasping there, an attempt to clutch hold of something. Then there’s the attempt to get out of it, the attempt to find a positive or happy feeling, the attempt to find a reason why that mood is there or a justification to get away from it and go somewhere else. There’s still an inner tussle and frenzy going on. When you feel sleepy or dull there are actually plenty of things happening. There’s a whole lot of trying to find, trying to get, trying to be still or trying to wake up – a struggle, an inner conflict.

We can decide to learn to be more patient with negativity, to learn to open up to it and witness what it feels like. A dull feeling, self-pity, self-doubt, the feeling of inadequacy – what does it really feel like? We learn to feel it, to witness, to experience those feelings more deeply. And from that feeling mode we begin to change our ways and our perceptions. It may seem a long way from kindness, but it’s the beginning of it; this is where kindness becomes a genuine thing. If it turns into self-pity, then you can see yourself trying to hold on to something again – to hold on to an idea, a hope or an expectation. Genuine kindness comes with detachment, from the practice of meditation, and by making the mind firm. When you feel a dull or bored feeling, notice how that tends to make your whole practice very soft, woolly, casual, sloppy and uninteresting. At those times you need to use a firm posture to bring a sense of clarity towards that ‘nothing much’.

I think that one of the most helpful things in my practice was having to be in a lot of situations in which I wasn’t at all interested or engaged. I had to learn to be open to them. When I was in Thailand, at the beginning of my monastic life, I had to go to ceremonies. I didn’t know what the ceremonies were about. I didn’t know the people, I didn’t understand the language and I didn’t know the chanting. Everything was very uncertain, and I just had to sit. I could feel a tremendous irritation because I felt I was wasting my time. I could be doing something important, something necessary, something that would be meaningful, useful, interesting or significant. I could be working out problems or meditating or doing something helpful, instead of sitting around and being another brown robe in the line. But actually, in the long run, it was very helpful because I could only carry on complaining inwardly for so long until I got the point that there was something there to work with. I would then realize, ‘Well, I think this is trying to tell me something.’

In meditation there isn’t anything to observe in particular, except the residual wanting to have, wanting to grasp, wanting to get – that feeling of selfhood. As our meditation develops, we call it ‘meditation without an object’ because we are not concentrating on any particular thing. There is the sensitivity to feel out what is balance, what is peacefulness, what is attention. And when we’re leaning into something, hanging on to, avoiding or looking for something, then we recognize those feelings. When they come up, we can see that it’s time to be more attentive and patient; it’s time to learn something. There’s something to be learned in all these experiences that we think are of no use and no point. There’s also something to be learned from our lifelong tendency to try to dismiss certain kinds of experiences.

For this lady I talked about earlier, killing chickens was a pointless experience: just chop it, cut it, get through it and get on to the meaningful thing – which would probably be thinking about how she’s going to cook the potatoes to go with them, or if she sells them, what she is going to do with the money, how the farm is going to grow, or whatever. But first she had to get through this particular chore: chop, chop, chop, chop … It’s not that far removed from what we do with our lives, really. When we wake up in the morning, we usually don’t bother about how we feel; we just get into the newspapers, radio, breakfast and go to work – we chop that ‘waking up’ bit. People you know, people around you, you don’t need to talk to them, you cut them out: ‘Wife … seen her before, same old face …’. You just give a few standard responses and grunts and then get on with the important things. You can go through a whole day like that, and get home at the end of it, stuff your face and crash out.

Who wants to know what hunger feels like? Who wants to know what feeling tired feels like? Who wants to be with that? Most people just want to stuff their face and crash out: ‘I don’t want to know what feeling hungry and feeling tired feel like! What’s the point in that? I don’t want to hang around and wait for a bus or wait for things. It’s pointless! Get on with it and get it done quickly!’ That’s the everyday brutalization. When there’s nothing to get out of an experience, a person or a situation, then most of the time we want to go to something else – something out of which we can get a sense of success, confidence or inspiration.

In learning to feel, we have to bring something forth. Things that are repetitive, boring and ordinary require us to bring something forth: the simple act of attention. It’s not easy to bring attention forth in this case, because we don’t have any reason in particular to do so. We bring forth attention simply as an act of love, an act of going towards something – not because we’re attracted by it, but just in order to be with it, to feel kinship with it, to feel at one with it. It means we have to go forth from our ‘self’ – that is, what we want to hold on to, what is pleasant or desirable, what we’ve decided to identify with – into something that’s strange, different, unappealing, something we don’t naturally feel attracted towards or want to be a part of. So it’s a giving, isn’t it? A learning to give.

When we’re looking for kindness, we’re usually doing the wrong thing. Kindness is only something we can give , not something we can get or have. It’s something we can always  give; there’s no limitation to it. Once you know what it’s about, you don’t find the world a disappointing place, because there are always opportunities to give a little bit, to venture out a little bit. The sense of self, of being the known, is an illusion; there is nothing but the unknown. There isn’t any self, so we have to go out towards everything because nothing here is ‘me’ or ‘mine’ or ‘my own’; it’s all strange, it’s all a mystery. Where these thoughts come from, where these sounds come from, where they go to, what this feeling is about, is a mystery. We don’t create it, we don’t find it anywhere; it’s just something that arises.

People around us are a mystery. How common it is to find conflict with each other! We are all ‘not-self’ and nobody will ever fit into the thoughts we have of them. Any thought you have of somebody is a personal creation, something that defines you . Any kind of perception of another person is actually a product of your own mind, isn’t it? And that other person will never really fit into it. They never do quite what you want them to do; they do surprising things. A person is something that breaks up your conceptual picture, so if you’re trying to hold on to one, it can be very frustrating, exasperating, confusing and difficult. ‘Why do they have to do it like that?’ ‘What a funny way to behave!’ ‘How many times have I said it, and she still does it like that!’ ‘Why can’t he ever turn up on time?’ ‘Why are people so hung up about being punctual?’

Fancy laughing at that. Fancy seeing the joke in that. Everybody defeats our opinions about them, don’t they? Human societies are always difficult to try and order because nobody fits into any opinion or view. As long as we are ordering our world around opinions, views and thoughts, it’s always a struggle. You have to have laws, policing and orders, tying people down with times and rules: ‘This is this kind, and you are that kind … you go here, and you go there.’ We’re thinking about each other all the time. Whenever you think about somebody, sooner or later you come up with something negative.

You can always find a reason why a person should be like this and why they’re not. You can easily think about people in those terms: ‘She would be all right if she didn’t do it like that, if she didn’t have that kind of habit or that kind of feeling or look like that or talk like that.’ We can come up with a hundred and one ideas of what others should be like and what we should be like. That’s the discriminative consciousness: cutting things up, denying things, seeing things in abstract terms.

We learn to feel because of suffering, because of that which has thwarted our ability to control, manipulate and cope with life – the indigestible portions, the things that stick in our throat. When we can no longer control and dominate things, we have to learn to feel them out: what exactly is this? We have to learn to relate to people, beings and things as they are. Feeling for people is not always pleasant, but it is fruitful. It brings a feeling of integration, of wholeness. We can have well-being even with an unpleasant feeling. A feeling of well-being can arise because our mind is composed on an unpleasant feeling. Our mind can let go of any negativity or aversion and can be made whole around an unpleasant feeling when we’ve learned to let go, to surrender to it. What comes out then is a feeling of ease, a lack of friction. Similarly, in the world around us: when we have learned to appreciate it (not necessarily like it), feel for it, be sensitive to its violence, distress and confusion, we have a feeling of integration, of having a place in this world. We feel part of it, not lost, alienated or dried out.

We develop kindness, compassion for others, a feeling of gladness at the well-being of other creatures, and equanimity or evenness of mind: serenity despite the changing nature of conditions, the ups and downs. These four brahmavihāras come up naturally as we purify the mind of its conceits, attachments and graspings. You can also evoke something that makes you feel kindness (such as people you like or respect), or something that causes you to feel compassion or gladness. So there are two ways of doing it: you can evoke it in a conventional way or you can develop it as it starts to evolve naturally in your practice. What you have to do to live life from the heart level in an integrated way is to make peace with conflict. You take that conflict into yourself until it’s accepted.

Life’s difficulties don’t become fewer, but they don’t have to be a problem. There is a saying attributed to Lao Tzu which defines a great man as someone who encounters difficulties but never experiences them. Problems are problems when we’re trying to find an answer to them or when we’re trying to get away from them. Problems are problems as long as we have the idea that there shouldn’t be any. But when problems, difficulties, obstacles and hindrances are taken as food – something that you learn to chew over, digest and take in – they become part of life, rather than something outside attacking you, something to be blamed. They actually become an essential part of your experience in life, and a way in which you can always grow larger. As long as we think about ourselves, about life and each other as all separate things, we remain very tiny and frightened. You can see the unfortunate results of people who’ve lived on their own for a long time and thought about themselves a lot: they have become highly self-conscious. Their power of imagination may be very strong, but as life goes on it becomes increasingly obsessive, and the sense of self becomes tighter.

Somebody who was working in a hospice told me that one of the most tragic things is to see dying people talking about their furniture, their china ducks on the wall, worrying about what to do with the mahogany wardrobe when they’re gone and still remembering grudges and grievances over things that happened over twenty years ago. Their mind is caught up with these minute physical things. These people have never learned to go ‘out’ at all: to go into the unknown, into where it’s frightening, strange and uncomfortable. The path of waking up, of meditating, of opening up the mind, will take you into places that are uncomfortable, strange and frightening sometimes. It’s for people who want to grow up, not for those who are looking for something to lean on, something to get lost in or something to do as a kind of hobby.

When you go on a retreat you have the opportunity to see this in a clear way, to get a good understanding of it. There’s nothing going wrong with the practice; it is exactly right on course. You might get a sense of uncertainty, or the mind going into strange states, internally jabbering and chattering away all the time, mumbling or falling asleep. Now is the time to encounter these states, not just to think about them or about alternatives. You need to learn to be patient, to give something to them, to brighten them up, to put some heart into your practice; that’s the direction now. If you practise skilfully in this way, at the end of a retreat, going back home won’t be a big comedown or a big change for you. Sometimes when people practise meditation they become so used to holding on to a refined object that they develop the ability to manufacture and hold a particular refined mental state. When they leave the retreat, their mind is still on a very refined plane, holding on to refined mental states. As the world is a pretty coarse place, suddenly all kinds of coarse mental states arise, and these people fall apart. They can’t handle crossing a road any more, or being in a busy city or town. It’s too much for them because they have learned only to see and hold the ultrasensitive in things.

In insight meditation you may be aware of ultrasensitive things and of all kinds of refined or subtle states, but you are not holding them. You’re just feeling their passage, their movement. You’re learning about the responses, and you’re keeping them clear, easy, light, mobile; there’s no hanging on, no pushing away. This is of tremendous benefit to your practice, in any condition, in any situation – busy or not busy. The world still evokes a sense of confrontation, a sense of it being unusual or strange; it still asks you to keep coming forth. However, your practice will actually benefit from and be sustained by conflict. Conflict will teach you; you’ll learn great patience. The world is a perfect place to learn enormous patience.

It’s not enough to say that things end; our attention has to be clearly with that reality. Along with understanding and reflection, you also have to develop a foundation of calm. This is the way these two aspects work: if you don’t develop any foundation then the mind is not prepared to witness, to be with, to contemplate whatever arises in the mind. But if you only develop calm for its own sake, you miss it again. We have to blend the two: the effort, concentration and attention, as well as wise reflection upon the way things are. The two are actually one path; they go together.