#### Standing on the Sphere of the Brahmavihāras

This reflection was offered on 1 September 1999 at Cittaviveka Monastery.

In our practice, we are developing the foundation of mindfulness. We are referring the mind to awareness; we are aware of the mind. That very reference enables us to recognize that there is an awareness of mind. What do we normally consider mind to be? What is awareness? What is mind? What is attention? What is consciousness? What do these different words mean? How can the mind look at the mind? The Buddha refers to the citta  affected by greed as ‘the citta  affected by greed’23 and the same goes with the citta  affected by doubt, the citta  when it’s contracted, when it’s bright and expansive, when it’s defiled, when it’s not defiled and so on. We can be aware of the boundary, of the defining characteristic that conditions the mental process. When we’re looking at the mind, we are looking at the pattern of how it has been affected, noticing the ripples in awareness. We can discern the rippling, the contracting, the expansiveness, the shaking, the afflictions and the positive factors – the various forms of mental patterns. The conditions of mind can be known as such; we can be aware of them and contemplate them. In a way, when the mind is released from conditions there isn’t any mind in the same way: it’s pure awareness.

The mind is the result of an activity, the result of being activated, being stimulated in some way. In the Satipaṭṭhāna  Sutta , we are encouraged to be aware of the arising of an activity and the effects of an activity. Effect is our reference point. Due to conditions, we experience something like a dull mind or a happy mind and it seems to be ‘a thing’. That activity conditions a certain sense of substantiality and permanence. We experience the mind as being irritated or happy and then it becomes ‘I  am  irritated’ or ‘I am happy’. We can see how this conditioning process first of all makes a mark, a ripple, an affect, an activity, then that mark is attended to and becomes a reference to a substance, an essence, an entity.

The first skill is to recognize that ‘This is an affect – this is the ripple of fear, joy, brightness, energy or dullness.’ The quality of noticing, which comes with the factor of  sati  (mindfulness), brings its effect. Sati  is not an unconditioned thing; it’s a conditioned thing, so it also has an effect on the citta . Our practice is a matter of making that mindfulness strong so that it acquires the strength of samādhi  (collectedness). Mindfulness is the intelligence of a reference point, and the quality of samādhi  gives it weight, power, strength and sustainability. Mindfulness and samādhi  work together. We need to have a quality of samādhi  to hold the presence of mindfulness in the mind and then we let it bear fruit. The practice of purifying the mind is being aware, holding to that awareness and letting mindfulness have its effect on the trembling or any other movements of the mind. This gives a sense of calm, equanimity and balance.

Mindfulness is the basic medicine that keeps referring, pointing and bearing a particular area or topic in mind, but there are other medicines. We can recognize what particular medicines or topics are useful for us. One topic that is often mentioned by the Buddha is the brahmavihāras: the ‘boundless’ – that which has no boundaries, which moves out of boundaries. The boundaries are ‘me’ and ‘you’, and ‘this’ and ‘that’. The brahmavihāras  take down those dualities. The boundless mind doesn’t hesitate; it doesn’t resist, tremble, fight, react or divert. It’s steady, abundant, exalted, lofty and pure.

The brahmavihāras give the mind a serene and bright steadiness, free from aversion and ill-will. Aversion is that which directly averts, moves away and contracts. Ill-will is that which adds a particular flavour, a kind of sourness. From these two we get such things as fear, despair, cynicism, hatred, bitterness, resentment, jealousy, guilt and so forth. All these are encompassed under ‘aversion and ill-will’. They are the ‘illnesses of the will’. The brahmavihāras are qualities that blow those things away. Essentially, the brahmavihāras are about establishing a particular sphere of awareness for the citta to rest in so that it doesn’t react to its own contractions. Just like when we place something into a bath of warm water, the water washes away and absorbs the afflictions; it takes the heat away, warms out the coldness, softens the rigidity and brings ease.

The brahmavihāras are very often dealt with under four headings:  mettā (loving-kindness), karuṇā (compassion),  muditā (empathetic joy) and upekkhā (equanimity). The Buddha instructs us to cultivate them with a mind that is abundant, exalted, unbounded, not contracted, free from aversion and ill-will.24 The brahmavihāras have these qualities in common. It’s useful to consider these qualities: we’re making the mind that way rather than just recognizing the quality of kindness towards a particular person or being, or the quality of compassion for a particular person or a mind-state. If we haven’t dealt directly with the experience of the citta – its nervousness, its restlessness, its anxiety – our experience or practice of karuṇā might in fact be anxiety, but we don’t really know that. We haven’t made the mind abundant, we haven’t made it free from ill-will. We still feel hurt in this way and that way.

Let’s consider the five indriya (spiritual faculties). First we have saddhā (faith), which is a quality of the mind that extends it beyond its norms. Then we have viriya (energy): the ability to sustain. Sati is the ability to register and bear something in mind. With these first three faculties we can extend, we can sustain, we can supervise and bear something in mind. Then we have samādhi, which is a general strengthening factor. When we bring more strength into our practice, then paññā (discernment or wisdom) arises. It’s good to consider samādhi as a mental faculty to bring to mind, rather than something that only occurs through focusing on a meditation object and developing the jhāna factors. We can develop samādhi as strength of mind, as amplitude of mind: we bring our mind’s vigour, sustaining calm and strength into our  sati. We back our mind up into the brahmavihāras and give it power so that it can stand against its fluctuations and tremblings. It has the power to hold these fluctuations, to calm down, steady and extend beyond its boundaries, its fear, its opinions and intolerances.

As we practise in this way, we may recognize that the brahmavihāras express themselves in terms of well-being or goodwill: ‘May this being be well. May I be well.’ We are bringing that tone, that quality of  mettā, into play: ‘May there be well-being.’ We are recognizing the love all creatures have of happiness. Every creature seeks its well-being. We recognize this common feature and how much we cherish it, how much every being enjoys its well-being. We need to find ways that help the mind relate to that and express it to itself – when in contact with people, with creatures, with things and with ourselves. How deeply we cherish and want our own well-being and happiness! Then, when our mind is complaining or agitated, we wish it well, knowing this is what it really wants. We are using that voice to express the quality of abundance and blessing. We are using the breath to expand the contractions of the mind, to blow out the creases and the dents.

Karuṇā is that which recognizes the helplessness of creatures. All creatures are vulnerable to sickness and death. All creatures detest pain. Ugly, vicious, nasty creatures detest pain and die. Sweet, lovely creatures detest pain and die. By thinking in this way we overcome the boundaries of our tastes and preferences. We look at the common bond: the seeking of well-being and fearing pain, rather than the black or the white, the short or the tall, the fat or the thin, the here or the there, this kind or that kind. We start to wipe out those discriminations and instead go to these universal qualities. This is what makes the mind abundant and exalted. The discriminative mode is highly complex; it can refine the particular, exact qualities of the things that we like best. We can discriminate between objects and people with extreme detail, and yet we can recognize our common bond.

The brahmavihāras, which include the spirit of non-harming, non-blaming, non-punishing and non-righteousness, are always described as being directed ‘to others as to myself’. The cruelty of the mind, which can simply be dismissiveness, labelling or pigeonholing people, is often vindictive, righteous, punishing and blaming in a legalistic kind of way – and we can do that to ourselves and to others. In working with our mind, we notice how it’s been affected, that is, the sense of feeling wounded, an inclination towards revenge, the holding of a grudge or an attitude of looking down upon others. Instead of following any impulses that these affects may provoke, we breathe out with the wish, ‘May they not suffer.’ May the mind check that weapon of violence and may our power of samādhi and the sphere of karuṇā stop it whenever it comes. Whenever we find blame and accusation coming up in the mind, we use this quality of karuṇā to check it and stop it.

It’s as if you were extending a force field around your body and mind, making it large and very thorough so that there isn’t a crack in it. Even if it’s small, it’s complete. Even if it’s only around your own heart, it’s complete and continual, so that whenever you fail, get it wrong or lose your temper, still, you have that complete boundary of non-harming, non-violence around your mind. You don’t violate yourself, you acknowledge faults and weaknesses and you see that this is the time to correct it, to set it straight, to make amends, rather than going into blaming. When you are meditating you can feel defiled or inadequate, you can feel yourself falling away, failing, blowing it or dithering, then this vicious mind affected by its frustrated pride and conceit starts to attack. Practising karuṇā gives you a standing place, a vihāra, a place of abiding. You establish that vihāra and you stay in it. Whenever you leave that vihāra, you come back to it. This is the vihāra of brahma and it’s in line with practising the brahmacariya, the brahma conduct, which is serene, extensive, not caught up with sensual delight and aversion, and which should take us to the brahmavihāras.

Muditā is the ability to express appreciation. We can consider this in the immediate sphere around the mind: the appreciation of every skilful mind-moment, the embellishing, lifting up, acknowledging and enjoying of it. Muditā is the faculty of appreciative joy, empathetic joy, the ability to appreciate. This is very important to recognize as a whole theme of practising: the uplifting of what is good rather than continual fault-finding. This is not to be naïve but to be actually practical, because you can only clean out the faults if you have a good place to stand. If you’re standing in the muck with a murky, discontented mind, there is no way you can really clean it out. Our agency is defective, so we need a place to stand, a vihāra. We appreciate whatever is good. We appreciate even just our willingness to do the work – the grubby work, the boring work, the work we aren’t very good at, the work that doesn’t make us look great. We are doing the work that has to be done and appreciating that, whether it’s just physical work or it’s the work of the mind.

Sometimes it can be easier to appreciate others, but we also need to appreciate ourselves. We develop that skill by learning to appreciate things such as people’s harmlessness. Sometimes we notice particular actions, but we don’t notice the refraining from actions. Much of our practice is about refraining from actions, and we tend to not notice the non-losing of temper. You may lose your temper once a week but that means that six days a week – most of the time – you don’t. So, attend to that. The Buddha gave the example of a bloody-handed murderer, saying that he spends most of his time not murdering.25 You can think, ‘Well, that man has murdered only ten people this week. There’s some good in him.’ But most of us are a lot loftier than that!

We learn to appreciate the joys of life. There are trials and struggles but we can appreciate the joys of Sangha life – the simplicity, the steadiness, the virtue – and the joys of our mind, however distorted it may be. We can appreciate the fact that we have this miracle of awareness, that we can reflect and start again. It’s a very forgiving practice if you go with it. These brahmavihāras are standing places and, as you stand upon them, you find you don’t have to stand on a view, a conceit, a success, a failure, a status, a position or an activity. You can stand on the brahmavihāras. They are steadier, more supportive and more suitable dwelling places for samaṇas.

Upekkhā is evenness of mind. We recognize that what we often take mind to be is simply cause and effect (kammaand vipāka). The effects give rise to causes; causes give rise to effects. If there is a cause, there will be an effect. What we see in ourselves and others is just this law. You are experiencing kamma formations or kammic processes, and there can be a sense of detachment and equanimity in the realization that the kammic processes refer to and stimulate themselves. We don’t have to pick them up. When we take a person in this way, we see that it’s the way they are and that they have to experience the effects. You can start judging them for being like that, but this is wrong view. You can just say there is an effect happening, but you don’t know what the cause is. Those causes can be all kinds of things that you can’t see or don’t know. So we are standing back from snap judgements. We realize that however much we may be affected by a person’s behaviour, that affect is in our own sphere and we have to work with that, and that person has to work with their thing.

We can’t avoid being affected. The mind has to receive affects; it’s a sensitive experience. What we can do is to not regenerate kamma. As in the case of Awakened Ones: they are aware of suffering, but they don’t get affected by it and add to it with mental and emotional pain. They don’t grab hold of it and make pain, problems, indignation, defence and judgement out of it. They see: this is where we are, this is saṁsāra, this is the plane of grief. We experience it, but we don’t have to be grieving over it any more.

Equanimity is certainly not a jubilant experience. We’re not saying everything is wonderful and great, because yes, there is suffering, but we don’t make a problem out of it. There’s the suffering of saṁsāra, but we don’t have to suffer over it. There’s a sense of ‘not happy, not sad’. We recognize sadness but we don’t psychologically engage with it. We recognize happiness but realize that happiness comes and goes, so there’s equanimity. We’re not engaging with the happiness, we’re not grasping it, and that applies to ourselves and to others.

Sometimes people confuse equanimity with indifference or insensitivity. When you are indifferent or insensitive you don’t even notice things any more; you are tuned out. Equanimity is noticing, sensitizing, being fully aware, being interested in being aware, being receptive. In that way, our awareness is extended with upekkhā. Upekkhā actually extends our awareness to its farthest extent because it overcomes any sense of doing anything; it goes beyond that. It’s a pure presence of being. We are not doing anything – not praising, atoning, forgiving or making something – so the mind is fully extended. And we are backing that up with samādhi: holding it, staying in it, enriching it, and finding out where the cracks are, where we get affected or startled. We examine: ‘What’s that? What haven’t I seen here?’ This is the way that  sati picks and refers. We examine that and recognize, ‘This too will change.’ This happy state will change, this sad state will change, this sense of everything being OK will change, neutrality will change, and recognizing that gives rise to upekkhā. But that’s not dullness, blindness or indifference, is it? It’s full and strong, and we stand and abide in that.

These brahmavihāras are very helpful cultivations for strengthening samādhi. Rather than strengthening it by focusing on an object per se, we focus more on the sphere within which an object persists in our mind. Objects here can be thoughts or feelings, and particularly mind-states, perceptions, scenarios and memories. We assess: ‘Are these held in a sphere of ill-will? Is the mind prickling and contracting under that particular object or can we make the mind stand in a brahmavihāra to receive it, to work with it?’ You use the samādhi factor to work on the relationship rather than the object, and that is very helpful in its own right – in dealing with the mind but also in the cultivation of samādhi. When the qualities of calm, suffusiveness and pīti begin to have their effects, instead of there being a sense of the mind watching an object, there is a more holistic experience. Then it becomes very important to be able to relate to a field of awareness rather than a point or an object appearing within it. We need to learn how to sustain attention through a field of awareness, and to make that field of awareness great, strong, bright, abundant and free from trembling. Then, of course, our samādhi in itself is strengthened, and both of these cultivations of jhāna and brahmavihāras arrive at the place of upekkhā. That’s their arrival point: a boundless mind that doesn’t waver, has wisdom and understands the nature of things.

As we practise today, we are going to the mind-door and acknowledging the shape of the mind. We know when it bends, when it buckles, when it wavers, when it trembles, and we relate to that. In cultivating the brahmavihāras, you may bring to mind an object in order to produce a particular mood or attitude. For example, you dwell upon the image, memory or recollection of a trusted guide or of someone you admire or love, in order to give rise to a sense of feeling cared for. First, that particular mood is suggested to the mind by the object, then the mind opens, relaxes and accesses that mood. You use an object that supports  mettā, karuṇā,  muditā or upekkhā and you contemplate that sphere of the mind. Then you can let the object go and see if you can sustain that sphere. If the sphere wavers then you bring the object back until eventually that sphere can stand on its own.

Then you can introduce objects that are more neutral or even conflicting, such as someone you dislike or are frightened of. You bring them into that sphere of brahmavihāras and see if your power of  sati and samādhi can transform the way your heart is affected by them. And you cultivate that towards yourself in the same way. You first acknowledge your good features and facets, then you remember a painful incident or a flaw in your character. You drop that in and see if you can relate to it from a standing place of brahma. When we look from the brahma realms, we can see everything as ‘causes and effects’. It’s not ‘a person’, it’s a cause, and that cause can be stopped; we can put that aside. This is the way to cultivate. There are mind-states, people, physical feelings, scenarios, difficulties with work, difficulties in the community, and we just go back to how the mind is contracting, trembling or reaching out. We practise with that.

23 Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, Majjhima Nikāya 10.34.

24 For example, as at Majjhima Nikāya 7.13, 21.11, 40.9, 50.14 and 55.6.

25 Saṁyutta Nikāya 42.8.