##### The Relational Sense

This reflection was offered on the evening of 21 November 2014.

Determining the Eight Precepts and the whole context of this retreat involves recognizing our relational experience. You might usually live on your own or with only one or two other people, but now, on this retreat, you’re living as part of a group of fifty-eight people. Hence, your relational experience has widened considerably. You may not think you’ll enter into a relationship with everybody else – in some ways this is a very pared-down relational experience – but you’ll certainly experience each other to some extent. You will be seen by one another, move around each other, share rooms and eat together. This is not a small thing, and for most people it can be rather strange and unsettling – not necessarily unpleasant, but very different from living on your own or with familiar people.

Let’s consider the sense of the large group which we’re going to be for the next ten days. If you took the walls of your home down, you’d realize that you actually live in a large group of thousands of people. We live in a connected way in terms of our government, infrastructure, the Internet; we are affected by decisions made in Geneva, Brussels, New York and Hong Kong; we work in corporations, institutions and so forth. We exist in a great ocean of human beings. So, in fact, a large group is a much more accurate description of where we live.

We have to keep challenging this ‘I’m a separate entity’ paradigm by which we tend to operate. If you were asked, ‘Where are you really?’, most of you would probably experience yourselves as living somewhere behind your eyes. This is the ‘me’ bit, somewhere up in the head, with all the rest underneath it. In other words, I don’t regard my head as being on top of me; I regard my feet as being underneath me.

The separated being, the trapped or caged person, is the model that we recognize in these finite physical forms. We have all probably experienced ourselves as encased in our personal history, our psychology, all those things that make us seem separate from everybody else. If you follow that trajectory, that line of experience – which is more and more isolating – it takes you to self-obsession, loneliness or grandiosity: ‘I’m the centre of the universe,’ ‘I’m the worst person here,’ ‘I need to be in control of everything,’ ‘I’m the person who lives behind my eyes, with a lot of buttons and levers in front of me making things happen.’ You probably don’t consciously think like that, but our energies and assumptions operate very much in that way.

Now, not only is this quite unpleasant, but it also gives rise to all kinds of unwholesome comparisons with others, as well as to selfishness, hostility, loneliness and separation from others. It’s a painful experience and it’s also inaccurate. You can’t really separate your mind from all the ‘language’ that you’ve learned, which has come out of the field of human activity, the psychologies, the culture, your education, your upbringing, the things you inherit from your parents and your siblings – all the things that have affected you in your life. There’s no line dividing you from all that experience. It’s almost like a vortex in a stream: it looks separate and organizes itself in a separate way. You can’t really draw a line in your mind between what you call ‘me’ and what you call ‘other people’. How would that line be drawn? What is so ‘me’ about my mind? When you hold the view of ‘my mind’, is there anything blossoming and releasing from that? Clearly, there isn’t. But there definitely are views, attitudes, nervousness, pride, fear and anxiety. You didn’t create ‘your mind’ and you can’t consider it as being a separate thing. It’s all these forces and energies that generate every experience you’re having.

This is also the case with the body: even if our eyes perceive it as clearly defined, we always see it as being within a space; there’s always something else around it. When you experience your body directly, you always experience it in relation to something: touching the floor, feeling affected by the temperature in the room, the pressure of your clothes, and you recognize that the body is always breathing air in and out. It’s porous, it’s connected. Your sense of the body always has to take in something that appears to be other than ‘it’. Our body cannot be experienced as a wholly separate entity and yet we think of it as such; we operate it as if it is.

The sense of separateness is a fundamental perception and a launching pad for our lives. But when you begin to question it, you find that most thoughts and emotions to which it gives rise are not happy or skilful ones: ‘What should I do?’ ‘What do people think of me?’ ‘She is better than me.’ ‘He’s disturbing me!’ These are not happy, easy experiences. Then you can ask yourself what really counts for you: perhaps being accepted, being happily settled in your space, feeling happy, comfortable and at ease with other people? These feelings are all about relationship.

Generosity is the first essence of the path and it brings happiness into our hearts. Obviously we can give material things, but we can also give in other ways, by supporting others, whether it’s another person or an animal, and meeting their needs.

Sīla means holding other people in regard so that I’m concerned for their welfare: I respect them, I don’t abuse them; I’m concerned that my speech does not hurt them, offend them or misrepresent them. When that sīla is there I feel secure in myself. By valuing others, I respect myself, I feel completely upright. Using manipulation or loose language with people doesn’t feel good.

Relationship is a crucial experience for us because it’s where our sense of well-being can be found. A lot of our suffering and stress comes from being in relationships where people have not fully realized this. They’re not following either the letter or the spirit of sīla – there’s miscommunication, wrong speech, wrong attitudes, they are not valuing each other and so on. Again, during this retreat, you’ll have to pay greater attention on a relational level in order to learn to flow along with fifty-seven other people.

The training in relationship goes further than behaviour: it’s also about using the presence of fifty-seven other people to recognize your defensiveness, your judgement of yourself and others, your comparing mind, your attraction and aversion to others. You can learn to recognize when you’re not taking others into account. Then you begin to relax that and come into harmony with yourself and with others. As we’re sharing this space, we’re like a cellular organism. Even on a subtle physical level, there’s a training in relationship which is not about putting out a display in a shop window: ‘Hey! This is me!’ It’s not a relationship involving just the person behind your eyes; it’s a relationship in terms of the whole body and how we are with each other: sensing each other, giving each other space, opening the heart. Something very beautiful can happen as you experience the challenges that arise when somebody snores or puts their shoes in the wrong place, for example. There can be a feeling of dropping some of yourself, some of your boundaries. Having to put up with fifty-seven other people is considered an advantage rather than a difficulty in our practice on this retreat. It’s a means of developing trust, self-respect and respect for others, of learning to cultivate an attitude of ‘I’ll give up some of my wants and go with the group.’ This helps each of us to relax some of that self-definition that can be so poignant, so tender, so awkward, so spiky and unsatisfactory. According to the Dhamma, our individual self-experience will never be satisfactory. We learn the hard way. We can try to use meditation to induce an experience where we’d be crammed with wisdom and good, happy feelings but, as we will see during this retreat, this is not what the practice is about.

It’s our sense organs that give us the impression we have of being separate beings. At the mind/heart level we’re affecting each other all the time; we’re like water sloshing around, merging and bubbling. But the external senses tell us, ‘She’s there and I’m here.’ In our practice we learn to operate in a different way: not through the eyes (the visual sense), but through the heart.

This relational sense becomes very significant when we come into more inner experiences of Dhamma through meditation, because so often what arises in meditation is: ‘Here I am and there are all these things happening to me. These thoughts and these difficult feelings are happening to me, but I’d like to have something more pleasant.’ The relationship here is simple: want/don’t want. When you cultivate renunciation by putting aside some of the external activities such as watching things, tasting things, reading, chatting and so on, you take away these external supports and forms of feeding the mind with distractions, so then when you go inwards it’s not comfortable. When you experience that discomfort, you might think, ‘I wish it wasn’t like this. I’d like an experience other than the one I’m having now. I like it quieter, brighter, clearer, richer, fuller; more of this, less of that.’ This is the besieged self, seemingly separate from its experiences, and its main way of relating is ‘want/don’t want.’ This is not a very sophisticated or even adequate way of relating to experience, so one of the main things to cultivate in meditation is not ‘want/don’t want’, but mindfulness.

Mindfulness spreads over the experience we’re having in the present. What is this? Is it body? Feeling? Mind-state? Emotion? Is this an experience of hostility or a strong memory? The Buddha says you can look at experience through four portals or windows. They are often referred to as the four ‘foundations of mindfulness’ (satipaṭṭhāna), although that very translation is questioned these days. It seems more likely that they are the four places where the Buddha recommends establishing mindfulness: the experience of body, the experience of feeling (pain and pleasure), the experience of mind-states (which may be emotions, but also refers to more sublime emotive states such as feeling unconstricted, radiant or spacious) and the experience of particular kinds of psycho-spiritual phenomena (such as joy, ill-will, sleepiness, restlessness or equanimity). You can look at your present experience in these four ways. Mindfulness doesn’t really do anything about it apart from naming and placing it. It’s neither wanting nor not wanting it and yet it’s clearly relating to it. Through developing mindfulness, that friction, the tugging of wanting and not wanting can abate.

Marvellously, once that tugging of separateness abates, strange things start to happen; things begin to release, flow and shift. Mindfulness doesn’t do it; it just happens through the releasing of the ways in which we tug, pull, clamp, resist or hold our experience. Instead of ‘I am this experience. I don’t want this experience. I want more of that experience,’ it becomes: ‘This is an experience.’ This is a very significant shift, because it isn’t based on the sense of a separate self who is having an experience. There is just the experience, with no one outside it who is having it. That’s what we call a ‘direct experience’. Of course, later on we can say, ‘I had a great time yesterday,’ but really that’s just language, when the experience has become something we can remember, write down or talk about.

Whenever we think, ‘I’m having an experience,’ the present experience is actually ‘thinking of having an experience’. It’s an experience accompanied by interest, curiosity or whatever. If the mind absorbs strongly into the sense of ‘I’m having a good experience,’ sooner or later along will come the thought, ‘I want more of this.’ If the experience is difficult, the thought will be, ‘What’s going wrong? Whose fault is it? How can I change it?’ There will be a tugging, a pulling, a holding. Mindfulness is not as easy as the word may seem, because the relational experience keeps slipping back into an ‘I/it’ sense. This happens all the time; it’s our normal condition, so it takes training to reach an honest, absolute sense of a direct experience.

The relational sense is the kernel of right view, which is expressed in various ways. One of its expressions is that there is a result of good and bad deeds. This means there’s no separation from our actions; an action isn’t finished once it’s performed. We’re continually formed and informed by the results of our actions, particularly mental actions: the results of our psychological activities, mental drives and impulses, mental habits and cycles of behaviour are forming us all the time. We’re not separate from them. What I bring to mind now, what I focus my mind on now is going to form me in the future; I’m not separate from it. So the non-separateness is another way of looking at relationship. Although the words say, ‘I’m heir to my kamma’, it’s actually much closer than that. It’s not that ‘I’ as a separate being ‘am heir to my kamma’ but ‘I am the inheritance of the things that have happened to me, the things with which I’ve been involved.’ If I look into my mind, there they all are, not just the obvious memories – the things I have done and said – but even attitudes, fears, anxieties, concerns, interests, passions. They have all formed me.

We have parents. That’s a simple statement and we might reply, ‘Yes, of course. So what?’ We rarely contemplate where this body came from – its genes, its cells. Who formed you, not just physically, but also in a primary sense of belonging and being? We don’t really notice that or know it clearly, because when we’re very young we don’t have any words to be able to do that. But we can notice that children who have lost a parent are often strongly affected by that loss. On the other hand, if you have a strong positive relationship with your parents, you’re more likely to grow up feeling more confident and assured in the world. This is borne out through studies on people’s behaviour. We don’t develop on our own out of nowhere, physically or even mentally.

We have an inheritance; we are formed through it and we perpetuate it in our contact with everyone we know. We are all constantly moved and affected by each other. We are phenomenally relational.

Take something like the human face: many facial muscles have no purpose other than to create signals. When your eyebrows move, they’re signalling. Your lips, your smile, your cheeks, your eyes, all give signals. Across cultures, down-turned lips are a sign of disapproval, while up-turned lips signify welcome. We’re constantly receptive to these immediate signals, and this way of relating to one another is fundamental.

We can take it even further and look at our sense of ‘being a body’. I think the standard model would be: I’m the person in my head, moving my body around – I’m not very aware of my back (unless it hurts); I’m mainly aware of my face with its sense organs, and all that is separate, in a way, from the rest of the body. This particular standard model causes huge amounts of damage to the physical body – back problems, disjointedness – because people don’t fully inhabit their bodies energetically. Our consciousness is restricted. We haven’t learned to relate fully to our physicality, and that’s a big problem because by losing that sense, we lose where we are. Instead, we’re in a virtual world of time, possibilities, potentials, appointments, destinations, opportunities and regrets, and these have no firm place in which to be. Not feeling fully integrated in the body is a major source of mental imbalance. We’re speedy, we’re running, we’re not where we are. We’re confused, we’re not grounded, we’re not settled in ourselves. When that integration in the body is absent, our emotional patterns easily capture us and throw us around. A person who is grounded and calm in the body has ballast, steadiness, the ability to feel an impact without reacting to it. This ability is developed through basic mindfulness training.

Of all the four satipaṭṭhāna, perhaps the one that needs the most emphasis is the body. Indeed, I’d suggest that everything can actually fit within that. And in relating to the body – not just as a person sitting up in the head with everything else operating underneath it, but feeling the senses, the sensations, the energies, the tensions, the nervousness, the relaxation in the body – you’ll find a very helpful way of establishing mindfulness and begin to release the mind through the body. As we all recognize, when we’re flooded with rage, our experience of the body definitely changes. When we’re overwhelmed with sorrow, the body sinks, the shoulders sag. When we’re flooded with fear, the body tightens up. When we feel warm and loving, the body relaxes and loosens. When we’re sexually aroused, too, the body changes. These are very strong and simple emotional currents that we can recognize in terms of what happens in the body. The more mindful you are, the more you will be able to track a very wide range of these emotional affects. Through tracking them you begin to have a clearer perspective on the mind-state, and on how to release it through going into the body. You don’t need to analyze why you’re thinking this or that. This way of practice is pure, direct and simple.

When he gave his teaching on the four satipaṭṭhāna, the Buddha said, ‘This is the direct way to nibbāna.’ And at the end of this sutta he suggests you can realize nibbāna in only seven days! To be honest, I’ve never practised those seven days solidly: there have always been times when I wasn’t mindful, when the sense of ‘I am’ took over. But if you were to hold this mindfulness steadily, I think you can take what the Buddha said literally: seven days are enough to rewire your attitudes, to let them change to something non-dual, non-separate, measureless.

So, forget ‘I am’ as a fundamental unit, but instead start to sense the relationship – for example: bored, interested, like it, don’t like it, want more of this, want less of that – and ask yourself what would help that relationship to be more supportive. Try to shift gently from ‘want/don’t want’ into a wiser and more compassionate response such as: ‘Oh, a difficult experience: now is the time for patience and compassion.’ Resisting difficult experiences is totally justifiable and understandable, but does it work? Does it do you any good? What about relating to them with patience, wisdom and compassion?