##### The World of the Five Aggregates

This reflection was offered on the morning of 25 November 2014.

‘This is the direct way for the realization of nibbāna, for the ceasing of suffering and stress, for the purification of beings’49 – namely the mindfulness that is framing and referring to experience in four aspects: body (kāya), feeling (vedanā), mind-states (citta) and what are called  dhammas. This fourth aspect is in relationship to the other three: as we sustain mindfulness on the body, feeling and mind-states, things such as ill-will, investigation, sense desire and joy arise. It’s a crucial and key aspect because as the awareness is with the body (or feeling or mind-states), it’s telling us whether there’s the dissonance of struggling and resistance, or whether there’s something more enquiring and investigating. In a way, these  dhammas indicate whether the relationship between awareness and its object is dysfunctional, antagonistic, not really there yet or if it’s beginning to settle.

The first culminating enlightenment factor is unification (samādhi), when things are completely settled. There’s no differentiation in the subject/object: no ‘me’ holding ‘it’, no tugging, no infatuations, no contractions. It’s just an open and steady state. The other culminating enlightenment factor is equanimity, which is the tone of that unification. The mind is very even, it doesn’t waver, it doesn’t go in, it doesn’t go out, it doesn’t grab an object. There isn’t the sense of ‘me struggling with it’ or ‘it getting on top of me’. When there is a differentiation in the subject/object, there is a splitting and a clashing. The ‘me’ sense becomes strong and is often besieged, struggling, afflicted or needy, and that feels very much like who I am as an identity. That experience is actually coming out of an unconscious relationship that’s distorted by a lack of deep penetrative insight, but the Buddha is saying that it doesn’t have to happen.

That doesn’t mean that ‘the real self’ gets extinguished. There isn’t a real self to be extinguished or a self to be let go of or an ego to be transcended – these expressions are just simplifications. There’s a relationship that needs to be fulfilled, and in that relationship there isn’t the creation of a separate self who is struggling with, controlling, on top of or underneath the experience it seems to be having. You’re not separate from an experience. How can you be separate from what you are experiencing? Yet that separation is the usual set-up, but when you think about it, it’s not really logical. There’s something weird about it, and yet it’s also extremely normal because we are all following the same pattern. We’re all singing from the same hymn book, so it sounds like it’s real. There can be functioning, understanding, clarity or humour, but the sense of ‘the person there who is trying to make it work’ or ‘isn’t getting it right’ and so forth doesn’t have to occur. There’s the ceasing of that which has arisen, which is being formed, concocted, created, constructed. There’s no annihilation of a real being; there’s the ceasing to construct a ghost and a puppet who always feels unhappy – not necessarily deeply unhappy, but something is always bothering him or her.

In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, the phrase ‘Independent, not clinging to anything in the world’ is an easy one to roll off your tongue, but it requires a bit of working out because we may not really understand the terms ‘independent’, ‘clinging’ and ‘world’. ‘The world’ is constructed by the sense-fields. The three-dimensional reality which ‘I am sort of separate from but on the edge of’ is a constructed thing. It’s particularly evident through the eyes which always place everyone else ‘out there’ and me ‘in here’. The play between the eyes and the mind generates this split and then ‘I’m trying to find my place in the world, or change it, or I feel overwhelmed by it.’ This world is actually all the six sense-fields, which are the external sense-bases: the eye, ear, nose, tongue and body, and the internal one, which is the mind, or more precisely, the ‘mind organ’ (mano).

There are two words for ‘mind’: mano and citta. Mano refers to the operating, organizing, doing functions. The citta is the mentality, the property of awareness, the knowing that things are happening. It’s the basic receptivity that resonates with and is affected by experience. Sometimes people use the word ‘heart’ for citta, but although it’s emotive, it’s not just an emotional faculty. The citta is that which can be brightened, gladdened, steadied and released. The Buddha is said to be one who abides with a purified or emancipated citta, a citta which is gathered into the Deathless.

The world is essentially constructed by the play between the external sense organs and the internal organ of the mind bouncing the inputs around, organizing them, considering them, comparing them, contrasting them, referring them, resisting them and so on. But one of the snags with that analysis is that we can easily come into a position where the external sense is ‘the world’ and the internal sense, the mind organ, is ‘me watching the world’, ‘me dealing with the world’: the world is out there and I’m in here; I’m the mind that is doing all of this knowing, watching, witnessing, pulling the levers and so forth. We may have a certain detachment but it’s a detachment that can give rise to conceit, indifference and a dissociation effect. We live in our heads.

Another analysis of the world is called ‘the five khandhas’. Khandha is a rather mysterious term meaning something like ‘conglomerate’ or ‘aggregate’. There are five khandhas and each of them is a conglomerate of factors, so the world is a conglomerate made up of conglomerates – bits and pieces sticking together.

The first aggregate is rūpa (form), which is the sticking together of the qualities of earth (solidity), water (harmony or cohesiveness), heat (temperature and vitality) and air (movement). The visual forms are easy to discern. You can look at the human body and reflect on what gives the body its shape. If you take a body and burn it down, you just have ashes that don’t cohere at all; it could be any old shape. The shape of body is contributed by water. That’s what sticks it together into a cohesive form. Without water, it would just crumble into dust. But of course, if it were just water it wouldn’t be able to hold any pressure; you would be oozing all over the floor, absorbed in the carpet! So there’s a certain amount of earth, just enough to create the right soupy, muddy quality that holds it. There’s a certain rigidity to it. And of course, the most rigid parts of the body that we experience are the bones.

The vitality or heat is an important element we can experience in our body. You can’t always see warmth through the eyes, but you can discern brightness, light and vitality. The last element is air or mobility. A living body is always moving, breathing in, breathing out. That’s the most obvious sign of it, but there are also subtler movements, such as the shifting of energy through the limbs. These subtler movements are part of the larger sense of what we mean by ‘breathing’. Particularly in the Eastern context, breathing is not reduced to the movement of the air. It’s also a movement of chi, prana or vitality. We can see these four elements blending and merging to different degrees, and that blending makes up the first aggregate of rūpa.

The second aggregate is vedanā (feeling). There are three kinds of feelings: pleasant, painful and neutral, and each of them is based on two fundamental bases: body and mind – so there are six kinds of feelings.

The third aggregate is saññā (perception), which refers to signs, signals, memories, meanings, felt meanings, the impressions we get from things. For example, ‘That strikes me as … interesting or bright or sad’ or ‘It seems like a cow to me’ or ‘It sounds like a bell.’ Perceptions are constructed and contextual. They create categories for experience. Often you assemble a perception to a whole range of things: if it’s metal and you strike it with a hammer and it makes a ringing sound, it’s a ‘bell’. We have a certain group-held perception of ‘bell-ness’. And as a sound changes, we can all agree that it’s not a ‘bell’ any more: it drops out of the ‘bell’ category into the ‘buzzer’ category or the ‘alarm clock’ category or the ‘chime’ category. And of course, you can subdivide these: ‘That’s not a bell, that’s a gong’ or ‘That’s a wind chime.’

Perception is just a relative understanding which groups together a bunch of experiences into manageable packets that we can relate to. In fact, everything is specifically itself: no bell is like another one. But that would be very difficult to communicate if we didn’t use words, wouldn’t it, so we have large topics such as ‘bell’ or ‘cow’. No cow is like another cow. There are Friesians, Jerseys and so on, and each cow has its own individual qualities as well, but we can use the category of ‘cow’. At a certain point, we might say, ‘That’s an ox.’ And then you can quibble over whether it’s really an ox cow or an aurochs, ‘When does a cow become an ox?’ and so on, but basically it’s a ‘cow’, it moos! When does a dog become a wolf? Let’s say you have a wolf and an Alsatian and you cross-breed them. You look at them and their offspring and say, ‘That’s an Alsatian … that’s an Alsatian with a bit of wolf blood in it … that’s an Alsatian with a lot of wolf blood in it … that’s mostly wolf and not much Alsatian … that’s a wolf.’ Where is the dividing line? Perceptions are really a matter of opinion. They are concoctions, and yet we act upon them.

Whatever the mind has constructed something as, we respond to it. The response is saṅkhāra and that’s the fourth aggregate. Dog: nice, pat it. Wolf: terrible, run away from it! Saṅkhāras are activations, mental formations, kamma, activities, impulses, the qualities of intentionality that jump up. This is a fairly easy way to handle this rather complex term. Saṅkhāras could be associated with loving-kindness, compassion, malice, greed or fear – all kinds of impulses can rise up. Out of the rising of feeling, perception and saṅkhāra, we have the experience called emotion.

The last aggregate, viññāṇa (consciousness), is the potential to receive impressions; it’s the messenger. Consciousness is a property that brings a basic entry of experience into awareness. If you are not conscious of something, it doesn’t happen. Consciousness occurs through the ears, eyes, nose, tongue, body and thinking mind. It receives things in different ways depending on whether it’s affected by fear or wisdom, and so forth. You can be slightly paranoid or edgy. You can also have impaired eyesight – for example, not being able to differentiate brown from green – or hearing difficulties, so you don’t get it. We can end up identifying with that and thinking, ‘I’m stupid or inadequate,’ but it’s all just a matter of consciousness, which is a conditioned factor. It has limitations, it brings what it can.

How is this then considered ‘the world’? First of all, consciousness cognizes a form – it can be visual, auditory and so on – and brings it into awareness. Then a feeling occurs, a perception arises, an activation occurs and consciousness is then bounced into further becoming. For example, you hear something, a pleasant feeling arises in the mind, it reminds you of a song you heard, you become interested and your consciousness then goes to, ‘Where was I in 1994? Oh yeah, I was in Paris having a good time. It reminds me of that song.’ So your consciousness has then bounced into ‘Paris 1994’, and there you are for a few microseconds until something else happens and the consciousness bounces to receive it. This process of consciousness being bounced along to keep picking up new messages and new signals is called ‘rebirth’ or ‘further becoming’ and is directed by saṅkhāra. Saṅkhāra keeps throwing consciousness on.

Some of this bouncing is extremely painful because when you have   these saṅkhāras, which are afflicted by ignorance and trapped in self-view, you’re bounced around the cage called ‘myself’: ‘He did this!’, ‘They never do that!’, ‘Why should I be like this?’, ‘How can I stop being like that?’ The energies of agitation, aversion, resistance and worry bounce consciousness around. Lo and behold, another perception arises in line with that and we give it another spin – and so on. Through this non-awakening or non-realization, there is an experience of being trapped inside the cage of the five aggregates.

Like a squirrel finding something rather juicy to carry inside that cage and nibbling on it, we’re occasionally having a nice time there. But when something comes in and disturbs us, we become ratty and nasty. We run around our cage again, thinking, ‘How am I going to get out of here? I don’t want to be in here!’ Then somebody comes and gives us a peanut, so we think, ‘I like it here. Don’t disturb me!’ That’s what feelings can do. When you have a pleasant feeling, you think, ‘This is really all right!’ But when it goes wrong, you think, ‘I want to get out! I want liberation! I want freedom! I want release! But ... a banana would do!’, and you settle down inside the cage again. But when you see the non-fulfilment of pleasant feelings and perceptions, however agreeable, when you realize that eventually you will have to face the unresolved stuff again, then you start to think, ‘There’s no point getting buried in this again.’ You’re going to have to really understand these five aggregates and let go of them.

The citta, the awareness property, is seen as not really within the five-aggregate system. It tends to be affected by ignorance. The unawakened citta is confused; it runs around inside the five-aggregate system, experiencing a self who is either finding some quiet or comfortable place inside this cage, or wanting to get out of it. That’s its default and it leads to confusion. You may wonder, ‘How do I get to nibbāna?’ The blunt answer is: you don’t! It only occurs through the release of the self within that cage.

The citta can feel very much embedded in the five aggregates, but it can be released from them. This release comes around because the five aggregates are not really solid at all. They are like the tracks of electrons around an atom. They are all conditioned, concocted, constructed, dynamic and fluid (we could say they’re all ‘saṅkhāred’) and they become reified or solidified by the degree of ignorance, fascination, resistance and aversion – in fact, by a defective relationship with experience. If we can bring perfection to that relationship, then these aggregates don’t have to solidify; they can be brought into being when it’s suitable – so we’re not in some spaced-out state – and they can also be rested. But whether they’re forming or not forming, there isn’t the sense of being them. The main point is that the aggregates are not fixed realities.

In meditation practice you can contemplate the five aggregates within your own body. For example, you can contemplate form by noticing the earth element. A common error is to assume that rūpa means ‘body’. Rūpa doesn’t mean ‘body’, it means ‘form’. It can mean any form taken in through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and it can even be a mental form. Fundamentally, it refers to an object that we can know and relate to; it’s experienced as having a certain consistency. But as we come to that object with our awareness, we begin to recognize that it’s not actually as solid and consistent as it seems. The experience of earth, right in our own mind-body, is actually changing. Where is the real element of earth? The bones are fairly rigid, other textures of the body are more fluid, but we can notice that the experience of earth is actually subtly shifting and changing in its intensities and energies. Sometimes your body may feel extremely spacey and formless. At other times, it may seem extremely void of vitality and fire and you feel like cold porridge! Sometimes there’s no flow left and you feel like broken glass or bits and pieces, dysfunctional or snapped; there’s no cohesion between the arms and the head feels like it’s separate from the rest of your body. When you contemplate these elements, you can really see that they’re not consistent or fixed; they’re shifting and changing all the time.

If you look at the body externally, you notice that a sitting body is rather different from a standing body or a reclining body. The body in profile has a different shape from when it’s facing you or from when it bends forwards. So which is ‘the body’? If you look at it distinctly from moment to moment, which is the real one? How high is it? Is it male? Is it female? Is it somewhere between the two? What colour of hair would it have? What about the eyes? What colour are those eyes? How big are they? You realize there’s no such thing as ‘the body’; there’s only a very general perception of it.

Before an autopsy, the body looks like a person laid on a slab, but it’s not moving. It’s not a person, it’s a body. When they take bits off it, at a certain point it’s no longer a body, it’s just meat. It’s quite a shift. The most wrenching moment is probably when they take the face off. The construction ‘this is auntie so-and-so’ is gone; when the face goes, the person goes too. There’s a body, but it’s not a person and pretty soon we wouldn’t even call it ‘a body’, we would call it ‘meat’ – various kinds of meat and bones. And yet it’s all there. Where did the body go? They just rearranged parts of it, and yet we would not attribute a person to that. We probably wouldn’t even consider it a human being any more.

So what happened? Change happened. And this is what happens all the time. Are you the two-year-old? The five-year-old? The eight-year-old? The fifteen-year-old? The twenty-eight-year-old? The forty-year-old? The sixty-year-old? The eighty-year-old? Which one are you? Really bear this in mind: change is the doorway of liberation. By sustaining mindfulness you’re not mesmerized by any facet of the change into thinking, ‘Oh this is the real thing! This is what we really are: we’re just a bag of old meat.’ No, I wouldn’t say that. That’s one way you can look at it, but you could also look at it as ‘a lovely person’ or ‘my nephew’ or ‘Susan’ or ‘the light of my life’ or whatever. A designer, a fashion person, a photographer and a doctor would probably see the body in rather different ways; they will have a different perception of it.

When we experience rūpa, along with it come perceptions, impressions and probably qualities of feeling and reactions. These five aggregates are mixing together. If you sustain attention and don’t get fazed by any aspect of the change, you notice that your mind stops injecting fascination, aversion, identification and comparison around that experience. That’s the practice, essentially. Even though this could be quite a complex analysis, the practice is actually looking at very simple things and being able to distinguish them: there’s the object of attention and there’s my feeling about it, my perception of it and my measurement of it. Those two things (the bare object and my additions around it) are different. Could that measuring quality, that differentiation, cease? What happens when it stops? Something seems to go very quiet, cool and open. This is what release is about. How does that feel? When you look at another being or at yourself in the mirror, ask yourself, ‘Who is that?’ and observe what you make out of it. Could that stop? What happens then? Stay there, stay with it. That’s a fairly simple meditation.

You notice arising features of the body, you notice passing qualities of the body. You notice arising perceptions and you notice perceptions as they cease. You notice the arising of feelings and activities, you notice what they are, you notice them cease. As you allow that process to occur, ask yourself, ‘What’s always here?’ You establish mindfulness so that you don’t flicker from that attentiveness, that coolness, that dispassion, and you are prepared to witness the ‘nothing much’, the rather disturbing, the interesting, the poignant, the frightening, the boring … and you stay with it. It’s arising, it’s ceasing and also there’s a sense of ‘what’s always here’ – the citta. You’re cultivating awareness of the movement of the aggregates.

You can’t concoct, decide, determine or have an attitude outside the aggregates. These activities are all within them. You can’t be somebody outside the aggregates because the sense of self is an aggregate. If you start forming judgements or opinions about your aggregates, whether you are them or aren’t them, that forming of an opinion is called saṅkhāra – that’s an aggregate. The aggregates don’t exclude any piece. However, there can be an increasing dispassion, openness, non-resistance and non-fascination with the aggregates, and through that the relationships of aversion, fascination, blindness and reactivity gradually cease. The citta becomes more apparent; you begin to see the light – rather than the colours.

Awareness (citta) and consciousness (viññāṇa) can sometimes be synonymous in language but they are different qualities. Let’s say there is a green wall; light bounces off the green wall and you see the colour green. In this analogy, the colour green represents consciousness. The light striking the wall is the citta, which has no property other than awareness – it’s not a colour. Consciousness is the manifestation of impressions: the reflected. Yet we could say that light is inherent in all that. It’s the light bouncing through consciousness that gives rise to perceptions and impressions. Consciousness is the finite aggregate through which the citta manifests. As we grow more dispassionate towards consciousness, less mesmerized by it, less averse to it, less frightened by it, there’s dispassion, cooling, relinquishment, liberation, the realization of the citta: awareness knowing itself.

We’re noticing the arising of the world, the ceasing of the world and the path leading through that – it’s another formulation of the Noble Truths. In fact, nothing is really destroyed apart from ignorance. We can see these aggregates as a problem (and they can be very problematic) but they’re also the natural creations for life in this realm. They give us functionality, language, navigation, locations, purposes and motivations, and can be purified. During his life, the Buddha had the purified aggregates as his potentials. He continued to manifest in terms of these aggregates. To say the Buddha is outside the aggregates is incorrect, and to say he is within them is also incorrect. He can manifest in these aggregates for the welfare of beings as long as the lifespan lasts and then when it’s finished, there isn’t a bouncing on of consciousness into another series of aggregates; they’re relinquished. That’s the trajectory of the practice.

As it’s said many times, the nub of the practice is being fully aware of form as form. Form is constantly forming, deforming, conforming, malforming, informing; shapes change. Seeing this, we get a sense of, ‘I’ve seen it all; enough!’ One is no longer mesmerized or taking a stand upon or against form. Form is just what happens and we practise likewise with the other aggregates.

It’s important to distinguish between rūpa and kāya. Rūpa can sometimes be translated as ‘body’ because that’s the most obvious place where rūpa manifests. Rūpa has the sense of a discernible object. In fact, the eye is often associated with rūpa (in the sense of a visual object) because it’s nicely clear and defined. There’s this thing here; it has boundaries around it. That’s one of the easiest ways to determine rūpa. But it can also refer to a bodily form or even an auditory form: a sound strikes the ear and there’s an impression of it, a perception of it, a feeling around it, and then the activations around it. Rūpa could also be a mental form: a thought sustained in the mind becomes a mind-object (or mental form) and then there can be a perception of it and you can react and respond to that. The aggregates cover everything. There’s no ‘person’ separate from them, so we keep aware of that tendency to take a stand. Taking a stand is saṅkhāra, it’s an activity and a clinging, an adopting of a particular set of theories, notions, positions, views or attitudes. That’s called diṭṭhi, which is one aspect of clinging.

The aggregates are said to be affected by clinging. Clinging is saṅkhāra, an activity. Saṅkhāra is both within and also whirling away, weaving and binding everything together, setting up all the reactions, all the stances, all the standpoints, all the opinions and counter-opinions. Again, we can simplify the practice right down to handling saṅkhāra, because that’s the one that bounces consciousness along to the next thing. If we could quieten saṅkhāra, tame it and master it, it wouldn’t do that – or at least it would bounce to somewhere nice, such as the blissful realms which arise through cultivation. So saṅkhāra has to be handled and cultivated; you can’t just switch it off. The practice itself is saṅkhāra because it has to do with intentions. The leading aspect of saṅkhāra is intentionality; it’s the impulse to do, the attitudinal impulse that is saying, ‘I’m up for that’ or ‘I’m interested in that’ or ‘My attention is swinging towards that.’ That movement of the mind is saṅkhāra and we can deliberately recognize it in our minds.

We begin by handling saṅkhāra, mollifying it and making it skilful, instead of allowing it to lurch along in its old habits. Intentionality creates kamma, it creates habitual ruts. The mind then goes down and becomes ‘myself’, which is also a kammic formation. Therefore, saṅkhāra has to be handled with great attentiveness and responsibility. What could be managed? Since there’s a huge inheritance in saṅkhāra – the ball is already rolling – we’re not starting on level ground; we’re starting already impelled, rolling along. How long does it take to turn an oil tanker around? How long does it take to shift saṅkhāra? It’s best to switch the clock off, because that’s another saṅkhāra, and not a very helpful one. It gets in the way. So just do it a moment at a time. Apply yourself to: ‘Could this be steadied? Could this be listened to? Could this be gently opened out? Could this be firmly restrained? Could this be shifted to a more skilful attitude and response, to a more skilful relationship with experience?’

In the Ānāpānasati Sutta the Buddha is referring to, ‘Calming the kāya-saṅkhāra, smoothing it out.’ Kāya-saṅkhāra is a saṅkhāra in the body and it’s associated with breathing in and out. It’s the activations that make us breathe. When we’re cultivating kāya-saṅkhāra, we’re actually working on saṅkhāra. It wants to rush off into the mind, so you bring it back to breathing and let it stay there so that your breathing experience becomes softer and more fluent. You’re soothing it, giving attention to it. You give up time, give up identity and open your body. As you’re breathing in and out, you’re discerning the entire body, feeling all the bodily experiences: the energies, the pressures, the channels, the openness, the fluidity, the vitalities. The quality of breathing in and out (the kāya-saṅkhāra) begins to steady and moves through the body, giving rise to a certain unification, a calm and subtle pleasantness called pīti and sukha.

The citta-saṅkhāras, received by mano-viññāṇa (mind-consciousness), are the forms within the mind: thoughts, impressions, attitudes, reactions, all the living, moving stuff that we so often take our mind to be. The body-saṅkhāra and the mind-saṅkhāra run together, so you can ‘breathe into your mind’. As you’re experiencing a powerful thought, a powerful feeling or emotion, you hold it and widen your attention. Within this experience of fear or worry, you’re not trying to change it but just widening the lens. How is the breathing within this experience? Then, how is the breathing right at the base of the belly? And how is the breathing as it sweeps up into the diaphragm? By placing the two together, without losing the mental pattern, you’re inclining the mind much more to the fundamental bodily pattern. The bodily pattern begins to pull the mental pattern out of shape. The mental pattern – say, of agitation – is probably going to be up in the top of your chest and your face and there is going to be a certain tightness in your body. When you come back to the fuller and more calmed body within that, the two energies meet and the body begins to gently release the saṅkhāra in the mind. You can’t really be angry and upset if your body feels relaxed and open. You can’t get it going. The body has to tighten up and contract to do that.

Let’s say something annoyed you in the morning. The topic of the annoyance was a five-minute conversation; that’s now finished. Yet the affected tone of annoyance is still there: you’re still feeling brusque and tetchy. You think, ‘If anybody else gives me flak, I’m going to give them what-for!’ The body pattern firms up and sustains that emotional pattern, even when the event that triggered it is over. You can remain in that contracted, defensive state all day long and when you see your partner or your friend you easily get grumpy at him or her or at yourself, because it hasn’t been released.

It works both ways: if your mental pattern is strongly encouraged towards patience, pāramī, kindness, generosity, grounding yourself when you’re calm, experiencing real, loving patience and forgiveness towards yourself, then that’s going to firm up as well and become more your ground state. Then, even when disappointing experiences happen, you get a little bit of affect but it doesn’t really matter: stuff doesn’t rock you so much because your ground state is much more confident, assured and comfortable. It’s not in any particular point in the body, but in the embodiment of kāya-saṅkhāra as it becomes more healed, that you get a firming up of the resources for freedom and confidence, for the elimination of stress, agitation and self-criticism.

All these things can seem extremely psychological, but even with events that happened years ago, here and now there can be the firming up that releases you from their affects. This is certainly something to give full attention to because there isn’t another way to do it. If you approach it in some other way, it will lead back to this eventually anyway. If you work it out psychologically, you might feel a sense of, ‘I feel better now’ and it will land in your body. If it hasn’t landed in your body, the release of the affects hasn’t happened yet. It’s really in the embodiment that any understanding, any degree of shift or change is grounded, held, sustained and becomes a foundation for your freedom. Otherwise, it’s just an inspiring moment, a good idea or a nice person, but it hasn’t been integrated.

The aggregates are everything: it’s the retreat centre, the mist on the windows, the light, the rain, the shrine, the nice food, the people looking after you, me, everybody – they are all part of the resource field, something you can open to. Is any of it carrying ill-will, pressure, fear, judgement or demand? Take in the wide qualities of the whole field of the retreat, so you’re not on your own somewhere in the back of your head or in the deep depths of your heart. When you contemplate the aggregates, there’s nowhere you can look where they can’t be found. There’s nothing you can touch that isn’t them. So it’s in ‘this world’ that we find the release from the world. And when our meditation becomes very open and full we can see where the resources are. Essentially, they are in the perceptions, energies and activations, as you begin to shift from distressing patterns to patterns that give you groundedness, contentment and relief. That’s the way it builds up from such small things to liberation. Once you get the ball rolling, if you sustain it, that’s where it’s going to go.

49 Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, Majjhima Nikāya 10.