##### Staying Present

This reflection was offered on 22 November 2014.

In practice, there needs to be balance between proactive applications and relaxation.

The proactive applications consist of creating something or placing the mind onto an object such as body or breathing. You can do that by lifting your attention with a thought: ‘Where is the body now? … Where is the breath now? … What is breathing out like now?’ You deliberately bring that thought up. That’s why we say it’s more active. When you’re walking, thought can be useful too. You could say, ‘Now I’m going to stand … and now I’m going to walk … which part of the foot touches the ground first?’ You’re lifting your attention onto an object so that it’s not continually snagging and being dragged into unhelpful memories, thoughts and feelings.

The other main approach is relaxing, giving things space, not applying pressure, which gives a sense of clarification. As we feel ourselves tensing up or getting tangled, we consciously let things pass, let things fade, simply with an out-breath and the very attitude of relaxing, softening. For clarity, your primary means would probably be using the mind like an eye: you’re ‘watching’ your body, thoughts and feelings. The watching sense provides a sense of space: you are standing beside what’s going on, rather than being thrown around in it. That objectivity gives you clarity.

So you’re using the body to lift your attention onto a supportive theme and also to relax the pressures and energies that come up when the mind is still swinging around looking for some ground, for something to feed on or settle in – when it’s caught up in that chaotic movement. You’re lifting the mind when it gets dull, raising it onto something clear that it can focus on. Before walking, you can ask yourself, ‘How does each leg move?’ And if you find yourself losing ground or feeling unstable, you can stop in the middle of your walking path and take the time for stabilizing, letting things rest, before walking again.

In times when the mind swings into emotional turbulence, our relationship with it may be benefited more by just listening, widening the listening sense. Both qualities of watching and listening have the sense of non-reaction and non-proliferation. Mindfulness curtails the proliferation, the creation of more mental stuff. And if you keep practising in that way, things will calm down and those qualities of ‘watching’ and ‘listening’ will be your fundamental modes.

When you’re on a retreat, you have alternating periods of sitting and walking, so look out for the sense of going into ‘automatic’, which is another way in which the mind starts to structure experience. You want to treat the beginning of every period as if it’s the first time. When you have this feeling of, ‘Here we go again, another one of these,’ then you’ve gone into automatic mode because it’s never another one: it’s always just ‘this one’. And that’s where the touching sense is important because that’s always very specific. The feeling of the body at this particular time is quite specific, and you’re sensing it, feeling it. You can stand and feel what it’s like to have a body, widening your attention over the whole bodily form. How is that? Is there someone separate from this? Who is that? Is it possible to relax that sense of separateness which is bound up with ‘what I will be’, ‘what I could be’, ‘where I was’, and just be a body standing in the coolness of the air? Let yourself feel it.

That helps us to undo these strong mental programs of time, identity, specific moods and feelings. We’re using mindfulness in the body to come out of these mental habits, clearing them. And in those moments of clearing, when there’s a greater clarity, settledness and spaciousness, when you don’t feel the turbulence and entanglement, ask yourself, ‘What’s always here?’ As the ‘dream’ finishes, what’s always here? We call it ‘pure knowing’ or ‘direct knowing’: this sense of awareness with no specific object, strategy, destination or identity – it’s just ‘this’. Then perhaps the mind starts to cloud over again. Practice is rather like that; it’s a very personal and individual process. That’s why the emphasis is on relationship: learning how to relate, how to be with yourself.