#### The Brahmavihāras as a Deliverance of the Heart

This reflection was offered on 12 September 1994 at Cittaviveka Monastery.

Tonight, I thought I would give a talk to encourage us all to consider, to remember and to investigate the cultivation of the four brahmavihāras  – that is mettā (kindness), karuṇā (compassion), muditā (appreciative joy or joy at the goodness of others) and upekkhā (equanimity, even-mindedness).

Today I was looking at a sutta where, at the time of the Buddha, some bhikkhus went on alms-round, and since they had some spare time they went to see the wanderers of other sects.18 There were many different kinds of teachers at the time of the Buddha and many wanderers of other persuasions. The wanderers these bhikkhus talked with in this sutta were saying, ‘The ascetic Gotama teaches the brahmavihāras  and we teach them too. We too say that you should spread kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity, so our teachings are very much the same.’ The bhikkhus didn’t agree or disagree and, after their alms-round, went back to the Buddha and reported to him what these wanderers had said. The Buddha replied that when wanderers of other sects speak in this way, they should be asked: ‘How is the deliverance of the heart developed by these brahmavihāras? What is the aim of such cultivation?’ In other words, what’s the intention behind it? Do we use it as a reflective teaching, something which enables us to enquire into the nature of the mind that’s practising? Why do we cultivate these brahmavihāras and how far does it go? What are the results personally? What’s happening to our minds when we cultivate in this way? This is what distinguishes the Buddha’s teaching from those of other sects.

Of course we would all agree that values such as kindness and compassion are good ideas, but many conflicts are created over these ideas, about the right way to be compassionate or the way to bring love and peace to the world. Love and compassion are easy things to ascribe to. The Buddha said that it’s easy to think about these values and even to practise them on an external level, but the point is to really understand how this practice is affecting us, how it’s changing us. He said that these four kinds of radiances are based on detachment (viveka), dispassion (virāga), cessation (nirodha) and complete relinquishment of the sense of self (vossagga). This is their aim, this is their direction, this is their result; they bring this around.

It’s different from saying that the compassionate practices bring around the welfare of other people and help to build hospitals, schools and so forth. It’s not that these things are wrong: we can perform acts of kindness and compassion – small and great – in ways that are externally useful, but internally we may not feel any different. We can still feel anxious, restless, sorrowful, frustrated, begrudging and very much caught in the ups and downs of success and failure. We can see people having compassion fatigue. Often the teachings of love are backed up by tremendous righteousness and hostility towards people or things we don’t regard as loving: we wish to eliminate that which is evil. We can be quite hard within ourselves, even with these very lofty ideals. We can be miserable, insecure and going up and down all the time, even with these lofty ideals.

I knew a vicar who had this compulsion to be kind and charitable all the time. He could never let himself be anything other than kind and charitable, so he just suppressed whatever emotional difficulties he had in his life and kept putting on a brave, smiling face. He felt it would be wrong to look after himself. Although he was doing this practice of love and compassion to all beings on one level, in fact it was killing him. Eventually he got to the point where he was so drained and depressed by having to be loving and compassionate to everybody that he couldn’t do it any more, so he asked if he could take a year off from the church and they said, ‘No. This is a lack of faith in God! You are supposed to be serving, so get out there and be loving and compassionate again.’

Eventually he started to crack up. He had more or less come to the point of a nervous breakdown when he decided to come and stay here at Chithurst for about eighteen months – with us Buddhists who are not necessarily renowned for our great charitable works. He found a place where he could begin to work on himself, and eventually he retired from the church. This isn’t to criticize Christianity but to say that there are mundane and supra-mundane ways of practising these things. The mundane ways are ways in which we affect things outside ourselves. The supra-mundane ways are ways in which we affect both outside and inside. In the Buddha’s teachings there are both the mundane and the supra-mundane aspects – it’s not just a mundane teaching.

This kind of cultivation is based on detachment, dispassion, cessation and self-relinquishment. These terms are pointing to the volition of our own mind – our particular drives and motivations. When we are attached, we feel very much compelled to do something. When there’s detachment, doing is no longer a compulsive thing; it’s no longer a wired-up, tensed experience but a feeling of freedom. When there’s dispassion, again the motivation or energy which comes out of the urge or the volition is now much more balanced. It’s no longer: ‘You have to hurry up and get this done, and make sure this really works.’ It becomes something more pure; things are done in a much more cool and equanimous way. We are no longer caught up with the need to achieve, to succeed or to make things work, be right, fair, equal or better. We can practise like that in our own lives so that the feeling of kindness is a feeling of well-being flowing out of us rather than a compulsion to make sure we look bright and turn everybody on.

When that happens, compassion is not anxious. When compassion conjoins with dispassion it’s purer; it’s a caring sympathy, a sense of connectedness to other beings. We are prepared to listen, we are prepared to see other people’s viewpoints, we are prepared to share and receive the plight, the suffering or the situations which other people are in. Compassion goes wrong when it becomes anxious. Anxiety is when you don’t want people to suffer, so you want to do something because you can’t bear that feeling in your own mind. For dispassion to arise there has to be the willingness to open up to the unsatisfactoriness of life – people and situations. The vibration of the pang that the world brings up can actually be stilled in our own heart rather than just drawn into ourselves. We don’t have to come up with panicky reactions or desperate, frustrated feelings to make sure we change the situation. When there’s compassion and dispassion there’s going to be suitable activity, but it’s much more holistic than just ‘me  sorting things out’. It’s a matter of being prepared to open the mind (both the intelligence and the emotions) to a situation, apply it and see what comes up, see what can be offered. That’s different from anxiety, isn’t it?

Cessation or nirodha  is a kind of furtherance of that. It implies rest. I think ‘cessation’ is a frightening word to many people, but if we think of it as rest, stillness, then we can see that there is a logical sequence from detachment, dispassion and then the mind at rest, still and at peace. Again, it applies the quality of volition. When we have something on our mind, our mind is not at rest. When we have something we feel identified with, then our mind is not at rest. We get identified with activities to make sure they are right; we carry them around in us. We identify with people. We can look at our mind and see the people we worry about or feel we have to sort out, or the things in ourselves we fret about, and we see how the mind is not at rest. Even when it’s not continually thinking, it’s always in a slightly tensed state. It doesn’t have a sense of well-being; it’s cramped.

Self-surrender or complete relinquishment is a step further than stillness and rest. As you try to cultivate stillness, consider: can you go further than that? Perhaps everybody finds their own definitions or ways of thinking about it, but to me it implies the freedom to move when it’s time to move and to stop when it’s time to stop. Feelings come and feelings go; it’s not as if we’re trying to hold on to the mind being completely calm and still. There’s a feeling of just letting it be what it is. There are times when you can feel an emotional response to things, and there are times when the mind is thinking and active because that’s a suitable response to that particular situation. It’s always due to a purpose; it’s due to that which is appropriate rather than an irresolution, something festering inside, a holding on or an accumulation of experience of ourselves. There’s an end of personal history, an end of personal meaning, an end of personal purpose. So when there’s nothing, there’s nothing, when there’s something, there’s something, and either nothing or something is OK.

I’m talking about these things in a way of trying to open up a field for investigation. I’m not claiming that I abide in these things as a constant state; these are things I aspire to. I find it helpful to bring up these definitions in the mind to see what I’m hanging on to, where I’m caught and how the mood of the mind vibrates. Usually, the vibration gets subtler and subtler down to a residual, tense, grudgy feeling, a feeling of holding on to things or a feeling of having to do something. That’s still not stillness, is it? During those times when there’s complete rest, then there’s perhaps the feeling of treasuring it and not wanting to give it up. We want to hold on to the stillness and not be bothered with things. These are ways we can reflect and notice the attachments – the subtler attachments and the grosser attachments – and how they happen. It’s through recognition and full, honest awareness that we can gain the confidence and the collectedness of attention to unwind these things. Of course, insight itself and the exercises like ānāpānasati  and so forth are also founded on these factors of viveka , virāga , nirodha,  and vossagga . You see them coming up time and time again, but in this particular reflection we can apply them to the four brahmavihāras.

Mettā is not something we do, but a particular mood where some of the agitation, tension and drive of the mind is relaxed or at least comes into a more harmonious form. It’s defined by the quality of well-being – one abides in well-being. The Buddha actually related that it could be developed into a quality of what he called ‘abiding in the beautiful’ as a deliverance of the mind from stress, self-criticism and self-hatred. How to abide in well-being rather than looking purely at how nice you are to other people? Is your niceness to other people coming from a feeling of anxiety? Are you always trying to placate people or trying to win them over because you are rather nervous and timid? Some people take mettā as a sort of campaign: ‘I believe in love, the power of love!’ and they slush it around everybody, whether they want it or not. There’s a kind of aggressive quality to it sometimes.

If any of you have ever been caught by an evangelist trying to hit you with his love, you probably remember it as a pretty ghastly experience. Often, they’re coming from an overpowering egotism and desire to catch you into their orbit. Sometimes people recognize this on a subtle level. You give ‘love’ so that you can get feedback. You turn people on and you get this contact high; it’s a way of taking power, taking over people’s emotions. Everybody likes the idea of love so we all are open to it, but it can almost be an emotional tyranny whereby you manipulate people: you win them over with apparent love and you gain power over them. It’s certainly something we can see in various spiritual teachings and teachers. People do get caught up in this stuff and buried by it, but it doesn’t allow them to abide in their own well-being. They tend to abide in the feeling of needing to be with the source of this love or needing to turn everybody else on, or needing to pump it out, or feel its emotional charge.

The Buddha’s mettā is based on detachment, dispassion, cessation and self-relinquishment. It has the quality of ease, of well-being, of feeling relaxed, and if we can’t do anything more than that, we are still cultivating mettā. In the Buddha’s understanding we are not talking any more in terms of people and things, we are looking at kamma, at energies. Where are you at? Do you live with other people or do you live with your own doubts and worries? Whatever you are living with, whether it’s your own moods, darkness, worries or frustrations, then that’s the world you practise  mettā  with. It’s not that you don’t practise  mettā  towards other people, but rather that you don’t ignore yourself either. You practise with whatever manifests in consciousness. So  mettā  can seem very undramatic externally.

Karuṇā  is a complete absence of cruelty, ill-will and anything of that nature. Cruelty is a strong word but we can certainly notice things in our actions, speech and ways of thinking that are dismissive, rejecting or hard and fast: ‘Cut them off!’, ‘That’s the way it is!’, ‘Shut up!’, ‘Watch your mind!’, ‘Let go!’ and so on. You can even use fairly good Buddhist terminology, but the actual movement of the heart is rejecting, dismissing; it’s not compassionate. I can see this in myself; the mind can move like that. It’s not always moving in terms of compassion because very often the mind doesn’t really see people as they are. It sees people in terms of my own aims, thoughts or feelings; it’s not open to understanding where people are coming from. It sees things in terms of ‘I want this to happen or that not to happen, or this to be that way.’ The mind can have its own aims and attitudes, and if things don’t fit in with them, then the thoughts are: ‘Oh, well, shut this up, cut that out, and let’s do this instead.’ There is a quality of dismissiveness and cruelty, whereas compassion recoils from that hard-line gesture of the heart, that black-and-white righteousness – towards ourselves and others.

We tend to think of compassion as involving somebody else, but here compassion can also be towards the things that we see as other than  what we are aiming for or interested in, or other than  the particular game we are playing at this moment. It’s a very important quality because it brings a great deal of flexibility: we are able to suddenly drop our own trip or our own values, or at least see beyond them. We are working with this quality of volition. Volition creates a field of attention and works within it. When we are preoccupied with our own world, this is the world of our own attention: our own aims, perspectives, values and so forth. ‘This is real for me, therefore I aim for it and I aim to do good in it. I try to not be mean or stingy. I’m trying to do the best I can in the world that I see.’ So there is volition: our trying, and attention: our world.

We can feel quite certain that we are doing good deeds, honestly trying the best we can, without recognizing that it’s in our own world that we are trying to do it. Maybe that world, that field of attention is a very subjective thing, pretty limited or slightly blinkered. Certainly, the stronger our volition or sense of direction is, the harder, sharper and narrower our attention will be. You can see something you particularly like or hate in tremendously fine detail because there’s a very strong urge, either to have it or to get rid of it. Because of that urge, your attention becomes highly defined, whereas the things you feel indifferent about are kind of fuzzy. You don’t really mind one way or another. For example, if you especially like gardens, when you come and visit Chithurst you will definitely see and enjoy the rhododendrons, the hogweed and the stitchwort, but you might not notice the bricks or the stones.

The other day I was talking to one of our friends about building our workshop and he was extolling the great virtues of handmade bricks. Instead of being shoved in a furnace, they are laid out in the sun for a few days and then carefully baked. He was saying that it’s very important to build a workshop out of these handmade bricks. I replied, ‘Yeah … but that’s because you are a builder. Most people wouldn’t even see the bricks. They would just see the shape of the building or the hedge around it, and if they were going to work, they probably wouldn’t see it at all. They would just walk through the door and get on with their work.’ He looked a little chagrined. When he goes into a house, he doesn’t see the curtains, he doesn’t see the garden, he probably doesn’t even see the people in it; he just sees the bricks! If you go to his house you can see some lovely brickwork inside his living room.

That’s how volition (kamma) and attention work together. Once we begin to realize that, and remember it over and over again, we can see how subjective it all is. The quality of compassion is a softening of our world, and, as the Buddha says, if you cultivate it, your mind is suddenly no longer so narrow. It’s infinite, it’s not finite. It’s not defined according to this particular trip or this particular preoccupation. Instead, if you fully cultivate it, you come to what’s loftily called ‘the sphere of infinite space’. When you hear those words you may think, ‘Wow! What’s that? Andromeda? The stars? Something vast out there?’ I think of it as the space in the mind. When is our mind spacious? Perhaps our mind is not spacious. Can we understand how it gets hemmed in by our own world? When we start to see other people’s worlds and angles, then suddenly the walls go down and we are much freer; there’s much more space in the mind.

Muditā  is difficult to translate. There is no easy English translation for it because it’s such an uncommon reference in our language, so we say something like ‘sympathetic joy’ or ‘altruistic joy’ or ‘appreciation of the goodness of others’. It’s all a bit clunky really. I like to think of it in terms of cultivating the quality of appreciation. Appreciation means we enjoy, we rejoice, we feel the feeling of ‘Oh, that’s nice, that’s pleasant.’ Yet this appreciation is not grasping and wanting to have things. We appreciate each thing and we leave it there. We appreciate them in their own such-ness, in their own this-ness. We appreciate them as they are. The mind is lifted up by them. This is probably something quite rare for people. When the mind is shut in we don’t even appreciate our own goodness, let alone anybody else’s, because we get so involved with trying to achieve aims and ends.

Muditā  is very significant and it’s actually considered to be a step beyond compassion in terms of the cultivation, the refinement of the heart. We tend to see compassion as being more important because with compassion we get things done, we help the sick, the poor and the starving, and that’s an important thing to do. Comparatively, the appreciation of the flowers or a good action may seem a bit like: ‘Well, so what? It’s not doing anything. You’re not achieving anything by having  muditā , but with compassion you get things done, that’s more important.’ That’s probably the value most of us have in our lives: doing .

In the Buddha Dhamma there’s something higher than doing. That’s not to put down the world of activity, functioning and achievement, but to say that actually, in terms of the movement of the heart, there’s something higher in which we can abide. With compassion, even though we are opening up to and bringing in other people’s worlds, there’s still the sense that ‘I’m opening up to it, and now I want to help you.’ We feel very much defined as ‘the other’ in this – even if it’s in a sympathetic way: ‘I am other than you and I’m OK. I’m listening to your problems or dealing with your pain, and opening up to that.’ Muditā  is much more selfless; it’s more a feeling of being supported by goodness. When you appreciate goodness, you feel lifted up by it. You’re not doing anything any more. You are in some ways being acted upon or being affected by something, so the sense of self is far softer.

Living the mendicant life is certainly a way to improve our chances of experiencing  muditā  because we receive so much support and goodness that it’s much more possible to recognize the goodness of people and abide in it. We’re actually continually living on it; we are living on people’s generosity continually. We live in a place where people come and bring forth their goodness. This is where people are probably the most disciplined, the most generous and the most well-intentioned. That’s where they bring forth their best, so we have a great opportunity to experience a sense of the goodness around us, and feel lifted up by it … But of course we don’t do it! Many of us are so hemmed in by our own stuff that we don’t really see it, but it’s certainly there. Muditā  is subtle, because in a way we’re not doing anything, but it’s higher than compassion because the sense of self-positioning is no longer fixed. When we’re experiencing compassion there is the sense that ‘I  am relating to you .’ When we’re experiencing  muditā  we feel part of and lifted up by the goodness around us, like a sea of goodness.

The qualities of both of these brahmavihāras bring around a recognition of unity: a unity of beings in their qualities of  dukkha , of suffering, and a unity of beings in their quality of aspiration and goodness. Consider which one of these qualities lifts you up further. Which furthers you? You can see that  muditā  is that which gives you this strong, greater sense of confidence, uplift and ease. When we say it’s higher we are not saying it’s any more insightful. ‘Higher’ doesn’t refer to a state of perfection, it’s just a finer, softer, calmer, gentler radiance than compassion. Muditā  is then something to recognize and cultivate.

The absence of  muditā  is marked by a quality called arati , which is sometimes translated as boredom or aversion, but really means something like grudge, resentment or self-pity – a continual fed-up feeling. It’s a sullen resentment rather than hatred. We feel put upon: ‘Nobody helps me … I never get a break … Nobody is on my side … Everybody else is doing well but I am not … Nobody looks after me … I have to do so much …’. In this state there is no possibility of experiencing  muditā , of experiencing the sense in which we are lifted up by the trees, the air, the elements, food, sunlight and by people’s acts of kindness – or at least by people’s acts of non-aversion: nobody is beating or flogging us.

The brahmavihāras  are reflections. We cultivate a mind that turns things over, thinks, measures and sweeps around in the heart. You can do these practices with the qualities of sustained thought and reflective enquiry until you reach the point when such things become unnecessary: when the mind can practise without sustained and reflective thought.

The fourth brahmavihāra  is upekkhā  (equanimity), and its quality is the sense of not craving or longing for anything. Longing for things is more than just wanting food or something fairly simple and sensual to experience. There’s also the craving for admiration, fame, respect, success, influence, positions, friendship and intelligence. You can see how deep it goes. If we think like this, then sometimes we arrive at rather painful realizations of how much things mean to us: to be liked, to be known, to be appreciated, to be functioning, to be achieving things, to be intelligent, to be good-looking … So equanimity is a very fine thing, it requires a great deal of humility. Ajahn Sumedho used to say that equanimity is a kind of humility. We don’t need things: ‘It’s all right when nobody talks about me. It’s all right when nobody notices me. It’s all right when I don’t know the answers. It’s all right when somebody else is getting the attention …’. Most of us are not always coming from that place.

How do we arrive at that? It’s through recognizing the empty nature of things, not just the physical things but also these objects in our mind, these mental formations, these  dhamma s of praise, self-position and so on. We see them as being empty. They are like a gesture of the mind; they have no particular substance to them. It can take a while to be brave enough to look closely at these things that we hold dear with dispassionate attention.

For example, I recognized in myself the urge to always be a good example, to try to live in a way that’s good – even without thinking it. You may not think I’m a good example, because of course it’s a subjective thing. It’s not something I have thought about that much and yet I feel I don’t want to look foolish, I don’t want to be looked down upon. I want to feel that I’m someone people approve of or feel uplifted by – it is a desire to feel worthy. But when we act on this urge in a mean or selfish way, then the mind is not free or joyful. We are driven on by the compulsion to be the best. You may be the person who eats the least, sleeps the least, talks the least, works the hardest or sits the longest, but equanimity is humility. When there is equanimity, you may be the person who sleeps and eats the least, but it no longer means anything; that is just the way it is.

A mind of equanimity is free from those kinds of bonds. It sees that there’s nothing really, just unresolved volitions creating objects that we feel we have to have and be. The Buddha said that if you cultivate this thoroughly, you arrive into the experience of ‘no-thing’ or nothing. Things are notional rather than real. When there’s nothing or ‘no-thing’, what happens to volition? What happens to the urge? What happens to the direction in life when there is nothing to achieve and nothing to get away from, nothing to become or annihilate? There’s a deep quality of peace, and that’s a peace that’s not held as: ‘I’m the most peaceful person,’ but a peace that’s shareable. We can let things move through our peace. We can let people and objects move through our peace because we know that there’s nothing – nothing to disturb or be disturbed by, nothing to have to hold on to. This is the abiding of the fully cultivated upekkhā .

In practice, one of the things that leads to upekkhā  is patience. Be prepared to wait, cultivate patience. Notice those times when your mind starts moving toward: ‘Get on with it! I don’t want to hang around being pointless!’ and then be prepared to drop that, wait and be nothing. Certainly, monastic life is set up for that! The point is to wait consciously rather than be held down, otherwise it just brings up frustration and resentment. Why are we doing this? It’s not because somebody else is telling us to wait. We wait for our own understanding. We become conscious of the movement in the heart, the surge of volition, the urge to do, to become, to hold, to have, to reject … with the most timeless waiting and patience with ourselves, with the world, with others and with whatever feeling is present. That’s what takes us to that place of humility. We recognize: ‘I can’t do this … I’m not achieving … I’m not meaningful … I’m not in a good state …’ and beyond that there’s equanimity and a dropping of self.

We could cultivate these qualities of mind for a lifetime. Even if we can address them in an hour-long talk, it doesn’t mean they can be achieved so easily. But at least if we understand where they are happening, what they mean, where they come from and what the goal is, then we can direct our mind to these practices in an insightful way. That’s the way the Buddha taught.

18 Saṁyutta Nikāya 46.54 – Ajahn Sucitto will refer to this sutta throughout this Dhamma reflection.