##### Experiencing the Whole Body

This guided meditation was offered on the evening of 21 November 2014.

We use mindfulness (sati) to create a boundary of attention, to establish a reference frame. We’re pushing aside experiences like yesterday, tomorrow, meditation, what I want, expectation, stillness, transcendent awareness and whatever, and we refer to just this experience of the body in and of itself. And it’s not the body as seen through the eyes or cognized as a thought or an idea – ‘I’m short’, ‘I’m tall’, ‘I’m male’, ‘I’m female’ – but just the direct physicality of experience. That’s the boundary of attention, and within it you have this process called ‘awareness’ (citta), the consciousness that is aware. What are we aware of? We’re aware of warmth, pressures and sensations. All this we call ‘the body’. Although the sense of creating a boundary seems to limit, all the sensitivity of awareness, which would normally be thrown out to a wide range of sights, sounds, notions, thoughts and so forth, can now be turned to the bodily experience.

We’re beginning to sense different kinds of warmth in the body: very warm here, less warm there; different kinds of solid: bony here, rather soft and fleshy here, rigid, tight, tense; different kinds of bodily impact: the pressure of the floor, the feeling of the back, the belt around the waist, the collar. Some impacts are quite strong, some less. There are sensations, energies, pressures, tingling in the fingers, movements of the belly swelling, breathing in and out – a whole range of experience in the body.

In this experience you could, and probably will, name some pieces as ‘leg’, ‘finger’ or ‘head’ but they’re really all part of the same thing. There isn’t a gap in that experience between head and hand, it just flows together. Open your boundary around the whole bodily form, as much as you can experience. You’re probably going to recognize that you need to encourage your awareness, not just to sit up in your head or in your fingers, but also to take into account that you have a chest, a back, legs and feet. See if you can encourage a fuller awareness of the entire experience of body: its span, location and its textures, its consistencies. Within that, how does the body feel most stable and settled? You’re not asking it to freeze into rock or to be completely still, but how does it feel settled? There are different ways you could feel settled. It could be by feeling free, awake or grounded, by feeling not obstructed and not tense.

The Buddha’s recommendation is that we take the spine as the leader in the organizing centre within the body. The spine is usually very much neglected, not noticed. Now can you sense it, starting at your tail bone, the base of the body on which you’re sitting? Can you touch that? Then, can you slowly run a finger of awareness up your back, along the spine, into your neck and your head? Can you get a sense of balance within this body experience? Let your spine act as a kind of central point of attention within the whole field of the body. The combination of these two principles of both covering the entirety of the body in one perception and establishing a centre is enormously beneficial for  sati and for finding balance. It results in the mind beginning to settle and clear.

As you become more familiar with this experience of the body and study it carefully, you can particularly notice the organizing experience of breathing in and breathing out that occurs within it. The body breathes involuntarily; there isn’t a person making sure it’s happening. How do you know the body is breathing? You feel the swelling, the distending, pressures, shifts, etc. There is that regular movement and it’s the ideal movement for calm because it doesn’t impose anything. It’s not something we have to do, it happens by itself. It connects to and infuses the entire body domain and runs along parallel to the spine: from the belly, diaphragm, chest, throat and head. So you track that, as if you were combing through the body to take out the tangles and the dull places. Spend some time just tuning into that.

At the end of this meditation exercise, notice the results: do you feel stirred or sleepy? These are not by any means negative; they’re just often the consequences of shifting gears, going from a very much ‘out there, do it’ mode to an internal settling. The mind-states start to break loose and drift around, the energies shift. Nothing is going wrong, everything is normal. As we begin to open out from the normal mode, which we operate as a separate self, it’s rather like everything gets stirred up and tends to become more mobile. It takes a while for it to clear. It’s then very important to sustain awareness in the present: ‘It’s this now.’ What’s the response? Steadying, supporting, calming, maintaining: that’s the most skilful response.