#### Nick Scott

May 2018

The announcement of our first ‘senior’ monk at Harnham wasn’t that auspicious. Ajahn Sumedho phoned Richard Hopkins to say he couldn’t send the monk he wanted to send as that monk had to go home to Canada. ‘So I’m sending you Sucitto, but it will only be for six months.’

We had offered to rent a cottage as a small branch monastery in the North of England, found one in a small hamlet in Northumberland and provided it with an inside bathroom and kitchen by working together at weekends. And now we were waiting, with anticipation, for our monks.

So who was ‘Sucitto’? Richard told me he’d been on the first meditation course led by Ajahn Sumedho we’d attended. But he hadn’t been one of the three young monks we had seen sitting at the front, bolt upright and not moving during the meditation sittings or Ajahn Sumedho’s talks. He was the other monk staying at Oakenholt who we only saw occasionally in the grounds, wearing oddly coloured robes – they were more green than brown – and he didn’t have the elegant deportment of the others. At the time I’d assumed they had decided that he wasn’t good enough to be on show at the front beside Ajahn Sumedho.

But I also knew that it was this ‘Sucitto’ who’d approved our cottage when he’d stopped off with Richard when travelling down from Edinburgh. A previous monk taken to see it had declared it uninhabitable, but Sucitto had told Richard, ‘What are you waiting for?’ I was intrigued with whom we might be getting. ‘Sucitto’ arrived with two others, a young and very enthusiastic Italian who had just become a novice and a lanky anagārika in white from Northern England. There being few of us supporting the new ‘monastery’, we got to know them all well: we had to bring all their food and anything else they needed, and to provide the transport. One regular ride was into Newcastle to lead the Wednesday evening meditation sitting. This had been going for several years by then, sustained by our small committed core, and we now looked forward to the positive effect having a monk would have on the numbers. We were misguided in our optimism. Our new monk liked to dwell on the Buddha’s teaching on dukkha (suffering) in his talks and few of the new people came back for more.

At least his appreciation of life’s difficulties meant he had no problem with the spartan state of their accommodation. I remember the delight he took in their first shrine built of rough stone. He was also happy to take on the back-breaking work of renovating the cottage while living in it, to provide something better for the future sangha. Not that he was particularly skilled at such work. None of them were. I recall being shown a newly installed door lintel – I was the ‘advisor’ but only because I was renovating a cottage myself. We peered up at it together from beneath. ‘But why is there POT carved on it?’ ‘That’s not POT, bhante. If you turn round you’ll see it’s TOP. They write it in the cement so you don’t put it in upside down like that.’

The main job in those first six months was the epic installation of a damp course. The old cottage, empty for several years, was really damp when they moved in. So the three of them set to with hammer and bolster, stripping the stone walls of the first metre of thick plaster and then drilling hundreds of holes for injecting the new damp course. The walls were thick and built of large lumps of local stone, including hard limestone and whin. As they were not that skilled, the long drill bits for the hired large drill regularly broke; even the drill broke several times. Virginia Deaper would be called upon weekly to take them back. Eventually the hire firm asked, ‘Who the hell is using this?!’

Austerity and hardship were Ven. Sucitto’s way back then. The most famous example was one I discovered by chance. It was the Vassa, the three-month Rains Retreat when Buddhist monks are particularly diligent in their practice. I had brought them their meal for that day. As I prepared it for serving in the kitchen, the young anagārika – now an abbot in Italy – approached: ‘Nick, would you mind also offering this cake my mother sent?’ I said, ‘Why? Surely you should keep it for another day when it would seem more special.’ ‘But then it would have to go in the bucket!’, he replied, his face crinkling with dismay, ‘My mother baked it specially.’ ‘What?!’

Ven. Sucitto, inspired by how Ajahn Chah sometimes had special curries all put into one large pot to stop monks getting carried away by the taste, had decided they would adopt the practice for the Vassa at Harnham – but only when the meal was not offered from outside. So we hadn’t known. When Richard told Ajahn Sumedho, he sent them a box of chocolates and Ven. Sucitto got the hint. Mixing several different special curries was one thing, but cake, curry, bread and whatever, stirred together in a large bucket with a wooden spoon, was another.

That liking for austerity didn’t just create good stories, it had another side to it which I particularly enjoyed and appreciated: Ven. Sucitto had a wonderful sense of the absurd, an ability to be amused at the world and its misfortunes that would have me rocking with laughter. He also had a straightness, a ‘Well, this is how it is and we have to make the best of it’ attitude that helped an over-optimistic and romantic guy in his twenties deal with life’s setbacks and difficulties and inspire him to keep practising with them. When he was replaced after those first six months and returned to Chithurst Monastery, and later Amaravati Monastery, I would seek him out whenever I visited. We all would. We’d become very fond of him. And he would get us laughing again at life and its difficulties.

We went on to spend six months together, walking around the Indian Buddhist holy sites and then jointly writing a two-volume book about it. At the start of that account, I relate the horrified reaction of others on learning that I was to be going with Ajahn Sucitto, known for his toughness and austerity. But actually I didn’t feel like that myself. I’d been pleased when Ajahn Sumedho had chosen him. It was his forthright honesty and commitment. I respected him. That in turn meant that although I often felt frustrated, I never got angry with him. His motivations were so selfless. And he held a standard for those six months which I could never have come close to managing for myself. As a result the Indian pilgrimage was the event in my life which had the most profound and beneficial effect on me.

Those same qualities are what made him such a good abbot. He was just what young monks in training needed: someone inspiring to look up to, who set a high standard, but who was also really compassionate. After the pilgrimage, I spent ten years at Chithurst as the Dhamma Hall project manager, while Ajahn Sucitto was abbot. Being close to him, I saw just how demanding that role could be: leader of a community of more than twenty, available 24/7, while also being monastery front-person and teacher to all the supporters. About once a month, we would get to have breakfast together and he would share some of his current problems. I would have to regularly remind myself that I was the only person he could share his burden with, so I was hearing a disproportionate amount of the difficulty. But even so, it was some burden!

Through experiencing that, I got to see how he, and, it seems to me, Ajahn Sumedho and Ajahn Chah, got to be the exceptional beings they became. They all shared a willingness to take that burden on, selflessly, diligently, despite it being something they didn’t want to do. And they all started with that propensity for practising diligently and with an austerity that we lay people can easily dismiss as ‘over the top’. They were very much like the early Christian monastic saints – those recognized without needing approval from Rome. One of them, Northumberland’s Saint Cuthbert, lived on a rock outcrop in the sea, off the monastic island of Lindisfarne, in a small stone enclosure from which he could only see the sky, but then agreed, reluctantly, to become abbot and eventually bishop in Durham, and is venerated to this day for his wisdom and compassion. It’s that surrender that’s key. Others get to that point and just want to enjoy the fruits of their effort.

In the monasteries in the 1990s, some of the monks and nuns were working with group therapy to deal with personal difficulties. Ajahn Sucitto was the senior monk supporting this and taking part himself. I recall one of our breakfast conversations where I pointed out how, in the East, many of the impressive old monks one met were actually quite ‘wacky’ personalities, but they’d transcended that personality, not tried to change it. He agreed. And to me, that is what has happened to that odd monk I’d seen wandering in the grounds of Oakenholt all those years ago. And, as with the early Christian monastic saints, we should now treasure him.