#### Contemplating Internally and Externally

This reflection was offered during the Winter Retreat at Cittaviveka Monastery, on Māgha Pūjā – 5 March 2004.

Tonight I’d like to talk about cultivation in a broad sense, particularly in reference to the conditional nature of meditation: the factors that support it, internally and externally. We integrate what we consider meditation practice to be into our lives. We cultivate the path that we’re generating and caring for, and we support the particular conditions that make the heart of meditation – or the focusing aspects of meditation – a lot more straightforward. But sometimes we can set up unhelpful conditions. Meditation shouldn’t just be a matter of willpower, plugging away at a meditation object, although at times it can of course be helpful to use will in our meditation. We apply ourselves to look at particular things that are difficult. We notice the supportive factors that aren’t present in the meditation and we try to find ways to bring them around. Some of them are internal, but many of them are external. In the standard text on the cultivation of mindfulness, the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta,29 the phrase ‘cultivating internally … cultivating externally’ is one of the continual refrains, and it refers to the body, feelings, mind and  dhammas.

I would like to read a couple of pieces from Venerable Analayo’s book on Satipaṭṭhāna. In it, he gives references to the Commentary on overcoming or inhibiting the hindrances. When you feel you can’t meditate or your meditation isn’t going well, there may be a whole range of hindrances, but which one is the leading one? What is the enlightenment factor that is not there? In the fourth foundation of mindfulness, these are the two real axes: you look at the negative factors and how you can inhibit, obstruct or remove them; and then you look at the positive factors and how you can generate or bring those to bear. You stand back from the meditation and look at it objectively. What is really happening? Maybe there is no calm, no joy, no energy or no investigation, or the quality of restlessness is very strong, or perhaps there’s a sense of dullness or ill-will. So you give an external, objective review rather than struggle with all this.

If we take meditation as just an internal quality then very often we’re actually in the hindrance; we’re almost reconditioning it. We’re in its spin because we’re being affected by it. Then it gets recycled. For example, when you’re in a state of restlessness you then feel agitated and unhappy; when you feel unhappy you then experience ill-will or sense desire and so forth. Sometimes you have to come out to a neutral ground: ‘Actually this is what ill-will is like. It feels like this in my body and it encourages my mind to move through these topics.’ You are reviewing it objectively rather than solely feeling the rancour or the distress of it. When you come out of the grip of a hindrance to a neutral place you can investigate: ‘What particular factors would allay this?’ The agility required to move to an objective perspective is really crucial in  sati and sampajañña (mindfulness and clear comprehension).

Now I will read the factors for overcoming or inhibiting the hindrances from Venerable Analayo’s book.30

Sensual desire:General acquaintance with and formal meditation on the body’s unattractiveness,Guarding the senses,Moderation in food,Good friends and suitable conversation.

Aversion:General acquaintance with and formal meditation on loving-kindness,Reflecting on the kammic consequences of one’s deeds,Repeated wise consideration,Good friends and suitable conversation.

Sloth and torpor:Lessening food intake,Changing meditation postures,Mental clarity/cognition of light [or looking at light],Staying outdoors,Good friends and suitable conversation.

Restlessness and worry:Good knowledge of the discourses,Clarification of the discourses through questioning,Being well versed in ethical conduct,Visiting experienced Elders,Good friends and suitable conversation.

Doubt:Good knowledge of the discourses,Clarification of the discourses through questioning,Being well versed in ethical conduct,Strong commitment,Good friends and suitable conversation.

So there’s one very clear theme running through, isn’t there? Apart from anything else, there is kalyāṇamitta (good friend) and dhammakathā (suitable conversation). These are undoubtedly external references, things you can go to; they are not internal things. They are the most obvious and paramount external factors in overcoming or inhibiting the hindrances.

Now, let’s look at the supportive conditions for developing the bojjhaṅgas, the enlightenment faculties.31

Mindfulness (sati):Mindfulness and clear knowledge,Avoiding unmindful people and associating with mindful people,Inclining the mind accordingly [towards the development of sati].

Investigation of dhammas (dhammavicaya):Theoretical enquiry,Bodily cleanliness,Balance of the five [spiritual] faculties,32Avoiding unwise people and associating with wise people,Reflecting on the deeper aspects of the Dhamma,Inclining the mind accordingly.

Energy (viriya):Reflecting on the fearfulness of the planes of misery [your hell realms and unfortunate states],Seeing the benefits of effort,Reflecting on the path to be practised,Honouring the offerings one has received,Reflecting on the inspiring qualities of the tradition that one is following, of one’s teacher, of one’s status as a follower of the Buddha, and of companions in the holy life,Avoiding lazy people and associating with energetic people,Inclining the mind accordingly.

Joy (pīti):Recollecting the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, one’s virtue, one’s acts of generosity, heavenly beings and the peace of realization,Avoiding rough people and associating with refined people,Reflecting on inspiring discourses,Inclining the mind accordingly.

Tranquillity (passaddhi):Good food,Agreeable weather,Comfortable posture,Balanced behaviour,Avoiding restless people and associating with calm people,Inclining the mind accordingly.

Concentration (samādhi):Bodily cleanliness,Balancing the five [spiritual] faculties,Skill in taking up the sign of concentration,Skill in inciting, restraining, gladdening and not interfering with the mind at the right time,Avoiding distracted people and associating with attentive people,Reflecting on the attainment of absorption,Inclining the mind accordingly.

Equanimity (upekkhā):Detachment towards people and things,Avoiding prejudiced people and associating with impartial people,Inclining the mind accordingly.

Again, there are two very strong themes that run through this list. One of them is an internal feature: inclining the mind accordingly. It means that first we deliberately have a sense of ‘I need to develop this particular enlightenment faculty,’ then we have the inclination to do something about it, and finally we look and consider what will actually enable that development. I can’t say, ‘Be happy, be joyful!’, but I can find out what will bring joy, ease or tranquillity around. The other theme that runs through this list is an external reference, and again, it has to do with the quality of the people we associate with. It’s a continual theme in that way. So you can see that these two internal and external references are simple ones, standard ones.

In meditation I can say to myself, ‘I wish I’d incline the mind towards calm – or towards mindfulness.’ Most of the time I forget to do that, so then when I incline the mind towards the breath I’m inclining it in a dutiful, hasty or hurried way: ‘Oh, I suppose I’ve got to do this!’ I don’t do it in a very bright, joyful, relaxed or calm way; I don’t do it in a way that brings a sense of ease. We can miss the right tonal quality that is necessary, such as a sense of comfort or reassurance, which gives us a feeling of contentment. We are encouraged to deliberately incline, not by saying the words, ‘Be happy, be joyful,’ but by bringing up the tones, the memories, the reflections and the attitudes that are in tune with that. Very often, when the mind is in the grip of a hindrance, the first thing you need to do is to step out of it. You don’t suppress it, but you move to the sense of an external, objective reference – for example, ‘This is restlessness.’

One of the main difficulties is the quality of delusion, which is one of the three root poisons – the other two being greed and hatred. Delusion is the most difficult one – because you’re deluded, you don’t know it. The mind is distracted, foggy, cloudy, and it often misses the point. Delusion produces wrong, deluded views, opinions and conceits, so we’re not really getting to the point of the irritation, the grief or whatever it is. Instead, the mind is conjuring things up that are directly distracting, justifying the mood or blaming someone for it. We recognize that we are missing the point because, when we do that, it just goes on and on and on forever. The deluding quality of the mind says, ‘You really have to think this through!’ You may absorb into how you’re going to do this or why they didn’t do that or how you never have enough of this … The mind will produce ample evidence to support these moods, and there’s generally a good grain of truth in it; it’s not completely fabricated. You can assemble enough evidence for it, but the point is: we are looking for liberation, not justice.

You need to come back to: ‘Wait a minute. I’m missing the point of how angry and upset I feel. What is happening in my body right now?’ Maybe the heart is pounding or the body feels tense. ‘Why don’t I walk up and down?’ To come through delusion you have to step out of the spin of topics, stand outside it and then start to objectively review: ‘What is the real core quality of this hindrance as an experience?’ There may be several hindrances – for example, ill-will, restlessness and doubt – but just take one. Let’s choose restlessness. What combats that? Something that’s steadying. If you’re not able to find that in the mind or in the breathing, you can stand or walk without putting a lot of agitation into it. You may find that’s something simple and steadying. Or you can seek a trustworthy person or a situation where you feel there’s friendliness, warmth, serenity or stillness. It doesn’t even mean you have to engage with it; you simply pick up the tone. For example, if I’ve been very busy with a business meeting where we discussed our concerns about the heating, the finances and so forth, and I feel agitated, I’d go to the Dhamma hall. ‘Oh, yeah, that’s what it is all about: the empty space, the Buddha, coolness, calmness, a sense of stability.’ When I pick up the tone of that, the mind comes out of the agitation.

The quality of delusion gives rise to the sense that you have to really get in there, think it through, figure it out and sort it out. Recognize it for what it is. Again, we go back to an objective reference. You might notice: ‘I’ve gone into the house, got halfway upstairs, remembered that I was supposed to be downstairs, got downstairs, remembered that I had forgotten something upstairs, went upstairs … I forgot where I put my keys, I forgot where I put my shoes … I bumped into somebody and I was very abrupt … Wait a minute! I think something is not quite right here! Mindfulness is not present. I haven’t been able to bear anything in mind.’ You’re contemplating your behaviour and reflecting; you’re looking externally without judging. Look at what that person is doing. What would you say about that? Is that a sign of calm or mindfulness? No, it’s a sign of agitation and restlessness. You’re not blaming, because there were certain causes and conditions that brought it around, but your awareness stops you continuing in that mode; you’re taking responsibility for it.

As we saw earlier, the quality of kalyāṇamittatā as an external reference is also very helpful. When you talk to somebody, suddenly you hear yourself speaking and you think, ‘Oh dear! I’m agitated. I didn’t realize that. There is actually quite a lot of ill-will when I’m verbalizing what happened.’ Kalyāṇamittatā is a specific sense of relationship that is not really involved. We tend to think that relationship is about getting involved with somebody on a personal level whereby we’re seeking or are interested in generating particular emotional affects. A kalyāṇamitta is for the purpose of Dhamma reflection, so it’s someone who is a good listener, a sounding board, one who can be objective and whom you trust. A kalyāṇamitta gives you either the presence of someone who is calm and attentive, where you hear yourself, or someone who may simply listen and say, ‘Ah … Hmmm … Oh … What do you think is happening right now?’ – just like a mirror. Of course, in our lives we’re probably a bit of both for each other. There’s some degree in which we can meet with objectivity, but I imagine most of us also have some sense of enjoying, being uplifted or getting involved.

I think we should recognize that whatever warmth there may be in involvement, there are also the pangs and the sorrows of it. The more deliberate and perhaps rarer thing to develop within relationships is that sense of steady objectivity, which is not a cold objectivity but a caring objectivity of a good listener. We use a kalyāṇamitta as an external reference because somehow we don’t really see ourselves. They could say, ‘Well, you say you experience a lot of drowsiness in your meditation, but do you realize … you actually look really ill to me.’ ‘Oh yeah, I suppose I am.’ We don’t want to take into account that perhaps the body is diseased or stressed or we’ve done a lot of hard work or we’ve been in very testing circumstances. A good friend is someone who says, ‘Well, there was this and that, wasn’t there?’ rather than, ‘Well, you should be mindful!’

It’s amazing that we don’t see ourselves very well. We don’t take these causal conditions into account because of the abiding delusion of self. There is no real full awareness that in fact, there isn’t an I who does things; there are just the particular conditions arising in the present moment. So as soon as you start saying, ‘I can meditate’ or ‘I can’t meditate,’ already you are missing the point. Nobody meditates, essentially; it’s just causes and conditions that are there or not there. We use the full scope of sati-sampajañña, internally and externally, a sense of reviewing: ‘What’s needed? What’s present? What’s absent?’ That’s why learning or reviewing these lists of basic stuff is useful as an external reference.

I would say that, because there’s quite often a feeling of stress, suffering, worry or agitation, or a feeling that you can’t do it, the most important reflections are going to be those that bring around joy, contentment and tranquillity. These are things that people seem to lack, by and large. We’re often quite good investigators, but the sense of contentment, well-being and joy is lacking, so we need to incline the mind that way. Here again the obvious external references are the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, the good friends, the people we’ve been with and our good deeds. If you’re inclining in terms of cultivating the path, then that itself is something to bear in mind. There are all your less inspiring moods and thoughts, but there’s this inclination towards truth, towards purity, towards being real to yourself; you’re actually owning up to what’s going on. When you pick up the tone of that, there’s a sense of dignity, truthfulness and honesty. To me this is steadying and stabilizing.

Some of us have the good fortune to cultivate the path in a community. There can be a lot of difficulties with that on the affective level – the disagreements and irritations that occur – but if we look at them and cultivate objectively, we get a lot of contentment. In the many years I’ve spent as a monk, there was quite a lot of disharmony, disagreements and things going wrong, because it’s the place where the stuff comes up, where the suffering, the confusion and the pains get revealed, and a lot of that gets projected and sloshes around; it’s quite stressful. But I can also recognize that, despite the great confusion, there’s always been good intent. I can’t say that anybody has come here in order to create problems, to be a pain and to be irritating. Everybody had good intent. The samaṇa training cultivates the qualities of duty, attendance and mutuality. It stipulates that whether you like people or not, whatever your mood is, you join in, you serve and help. I’ve found that very helpful. At first I thought it seemed a bit insincere, but now I’m very pleased I’ve spent years serving people. Whether they liked me or didn’t like me, whether they were confused or intimidated by me, whether I felt perplexed or whatever, still, I’ve supported people.

If I reflect on it that way I might consider my teacher, Ajahn Sumedho. I gave him support without stint for fourteen years, and still I like to do that. During fourteen years, if he asked me something, I would do it. If he asked me to go somewhere I’d do it, and I would look towards ways of attending. For about eight years, at Amaravati, most days I would go around to his kuti and massage his feet – he has a bad foot as you may know. I may have been working from 8 a.m. until 5 p.m., and then at 5.30 p.m. I’d go around and massage the Ajahn’s feet. It wasn’t like, ‘Wow, this is a great, fun thing to do!’, but just, ‘This is the thing we do.’ And that’s what I wanted to do.

In terms of living with this person, at first I certainly didn’t always feel easy and relaxed with him. Emotionally I’m quite awkward, a bit shy and withdrawn by nature, but it’s not as bad as it used to be. At the time I was very withdrawn, awkward and a bit tongue-tied, but I thought, ‘You actually don’t have to be that chummy, just go around and do it!’ So I’d go around and clean his kuti, wash his cups or just sit there and do something, and let the relationship come from there rather than having to get all warmed up and nice before being able to do these things. Actually, it was very good like that. I realized that, even if I wasn’t objecting to company, it was more the steady, calm presence that I was looking for: I could do good with it. It wasn’t complicated or esoteric; it was simple, basic stuff: clean the kuti, fix the toilet, write a letter … And doing it with a sense of ‘This is an offering.’ I feel very good about that.

I don’t congratulate myself, but when I reflect on it, a warm, joyful thing happens in the heart. I can pick that up and feel the quality of joyfulness. When the mind receives that it settles, shrugs off the worries and discontent and feels joyful and contented: ‘I’ve done good in my life.’ Whatever the mind can come up with around the self-view, such as: ‘I didn’t quite get enough of this … I wasn’t very good at that … I let somebody down here … I never got there on time … I didn’t quite make it as a monk … I wasn’t the greatest …’ there is the recognition that ‘I’ve done good.’ There has been the intent to offer support without asking for anything back.

I’m sure you’ve all done this. Sometimes, there’s something you don’t want to do. Maybe it’s not the most wonderful thing, or not the thing you’re really here for, or your mood is not great, but you still do it. And having done so, you remember it, recollect it, and through that you feel the sense that you’ve been honourable. There are people who are serving on this retreat. It’s probably not that quiet and even a bit agitating because you’re thinking and worrying about things you need to do, but you are doing good. You said you’d serve and you’re serving. You made that commitment and you’ve kept it. You can just take a simple thing like that. Step outside and look at the unskilful things you could have been doing, and be pleased, take the time to appreciate the merit of your life, incline the mind accordingly. Rather than picking up the meditation theme or the technique, check in with yourself. What do you need to incline your mind towards? What will bring it there?

We live in the simplicity of the requisites. There are plenty of other things we could want, but we have what’s necessary. We have the food, clothes, shelter and medicines that we need. That brings an ample quality of contentment. You can see how the mind is not trained to be content with the things we have, but always inclines towards better, newer, cleaner, finer, brighter and so on – particularly in a commercial, materialistic society. Maybe it’s a topic we don’t think about that much. Isn’t it nice to be out of the game? Isn’t it peaceful to be out of the game of attracting people, trying to look good, trying to impress people, trying to be a winner, trying to be a star or trying to be pretty or handsome, fast-talking and witty? Isn’t it nice to be out of all that rigmarole? Incline the mind accordingly.

We can also develop the external reference much more immediately, intimately. When we’re sitting in meditation, if we get embroiled internally, we can come out and reflect on how the body sits. Is the body sitting comfortably? Is it appropriate to be sitting? Is it straining the body? Is it something that supports the enlightenment factors? Or is it something that’s creating a lot of disturbance and agitation? There are other postures we can use: walking, standing or reclining. In the reclining posture, we can notice that the body feels different: the energies are different, the perceived texture, shape and density of the body shifts and changes. When we’re sitting there can be a subtle attitude of ‘I need to hold the body still – or to hold it up.’ When we’re reclining, the mind changes and the sense of the body shifts.

Consider the room you’re living in and this aspect of the external realm: the cleanliness or that which gives rise to clarity. When you go into your room, who do you think lives there? You look around … it looks like an agitated person is living here: socks over the bedside lamp, two books half-read turned face down, an unwashed cup with a tea bag in the corner … Is it the space of someone who has a quality of composure and clarity? In this way, we can begin to have some perspective on ourselves and determine what we need to develop.

We can also contemplate the body externally, how it is in its environment. A few days ago I was walking up and down in the courtyard and I didn’t have my woolly hat on. It was quite cold, but I continued, feeling the movements and internal qualities of the body and noticing: ‘It’s funny, there’s this kind of shaking occurring … but it doesn’t matter, I can just keep going.’ The body was shaking with cold, and I just kept going. But then I actually started to think, ‘I know I can do this, but this body is shaking with cold. It’s probably good to put some more clothes on.’ It has taken me quite a few years to get around to that, because I easily get very internal in my practice. I tend to bash my body because I don’t fully recognize its external features. Going internally is a strong feature in my mind. It goes in all the time; it’s a withdrawing kind of mind. It doesn’t go out to the world. It doesn’t take much interest in the external realm, including this physical form. For me walking outside is just a way of contemplating inwardly, but I then realized, ‘Maybe that’s why there’s a sense of stress or strain. You’re pushing it too hard, then the body gets sick or you break bits of it.’

To contemplate the body externally, you notice what it’s like in particular environments. How does the body feel when it’s sunny and warm? How does it feel when it’s cold and windy? How does it feel when you’re on your own? How does it feel when you’re with a group of people? There can be subtler, somatic affects in these circumstances. Perhaps you’re slightly withdrawn in a group of people; you’re somehow slightly self-conscious. Notice this. My disposition is to be quite self-conscious. I noticed this in London so I made the effort to come out of it and talk to people on trains. We need to come out of this slightly cowed state that being in the public domain can generate, because in it our minds can be defensive. We contemplate it: ‘Where is the tension now? Where is the stress now? Where is the brightness now? Where is the ease now?’

We contemplate the body externally – one’s own body and the body of others. You can consider these physical forms and also the aspects that bring around their sense of calm or steadiness. You can pick up these aspects. Of course, the mind can go to: ‘Funny hairdo she’s got!’ or ‘I don’t like his socks!’, but try to pick up the aspects that are supportive rather than follow the ways that the hindrances evolve around what you feel or think about people, or what you think they’re thinking. Attune and incline the mind towards supportive perceptions.

We also contemplate feelings, internally and externally. When you’re in a feeling – it can be mental or physical – its internal quality is characterized by the roll, the throw, the surge or the pressure of it. It’s very often where we tend to go. We’re being affected and moved around, so we need to come out: ‘This is feeling. This is how this particular feeling affects the body. This is how this feeling affects the mind.’ We notice that an unpleasant feeling causes the mind to move fast, shatter, scatter or tighten up. You’re looking at things in that sense, objectively. And it helps to take you away from the turmoil of the purely affective level of experience: ‘This is what happiness does. Unhappiness is like this.’

We contemplate the mind – or the mental states – internally and externally: ‘This is the heat of passion, the rigidity, the pressures or the flurry of mental states.’ You can feel the sense of being driven, heated up or pressed back and you can step outside: ‘This is what the mind is doing: running around, hiding, holding on.’ You can draw a picture of what it’s like. In The Dawn of the Dhamma,33 there is a drawing representing my mind that I did in 1976 after three or four months of meditation in a monastery: ‘the mad monkey’ – this kind of crazed ape with eyes going in different directions, the tongue hanging out, clawing at empty space. It was great. I really enjoyed that drawing and it was exactly what my mind was like: a kind of freaked-out ape!

It is helpful to be objective about the mind, so drawing a picture of it, describing what it’s doing and what it’s like can be a good support. Sometimes the mind is like a slug, isn’t it? Sometimes it’s like a shivering, little, wet mouse cowering in a corner. Sometimes it’s like a blazing dragon. Sometimes it’s like the sun and moon. Sometimes it’s like mist and rain. Sometimes it’s sweet, sometimes it’s sour. But rather than being in those affects, you’re stepping out: ‘It’s like that.’ You picture the mind, draw it. What would it look like? That’s helpful, because at that moment we step outside of the edge of the affective. Your intention is then no longer in the affect; your intention is just to know, to describe and to witness that affect. That external movement supports the quality of shifting your intent away from this edge where it gets captured by the mental state.

Of course, we can also see the mind of others externally: ‘This is somebody else getting angry. This is someone else feeling joy. This is someone else expressing gratitude. This is somebody else having sorrow. It looks like this. I know that; that’s what happens to me.’ But perhaps more accurately, it’s our own mind we can see externally. We contemplate the hindrances and the enlightenment factors internally and externally: ‘This is what doubt does. This is what joy feels like. These are the conditions that support it.’

When you contemplate the body internally you notice the warmth, the pressures, the heat and the tingling. When you contemplate it externally, it’s a form, a shape moving around in the environment. These are two very different experiences, so which one is ‘right’? You begin to see that it all has to do with cognition, affect and intent. What you intend is what you’ll cognize. You don’t often recognize it but your intent could be captured by delusion, fascination or ill-will so then you’ll cognize particular features that support that intent. The body can either be something that’s exciting and delightful, or repulsive and repugnant, a source of sorrow or a source of vanity, because the intent gets captured towards making it a source of pleasure or a source of displeasure. The cognitive affects supporting that are then brought up. What about if the intent is just to know it internally and externally: ‘Well, there it is!’?

You begin to free the intent from these cognitive and affective patterns. Then the body is nothing, really. It’s something and it’s nothing; it’s just a reference. There’s not much you can say about it – it’s just this. You could say it’s male or female, but that’s not really what it is, or relevant. You could say it’s big or small, but that’s not always relevant. So eventually it’s just: ‘There is this body.’ You’re clearing the cycle of affects and hunger for affects and distaste over affects. You’re dropping the affects, so the intent becomes very clear. The intent is simply to be present, to know. And that very quality of intent, that quality of knowing, becomes your meditation theme; that’s the core of the meditation. You abide in uprightness, clarity and dispassion, in the cessation of kamma, the relinquishment of affects. You don’t want to bother with them; you’re not messing around with them. If you incline the mind that way, then the intent of knowing stands free and the mind can settle, steady and stabilize within that development of samādhi. You can rejoice in it, feel contented with it. You can feel how simple it is, really. It’s a matter of using the will and the intent with wisdom and discernment, which are supported by the understanding of conditions, of kamma and of the good that we inherit: the opportunities that we have in our practice.

So when you have that sense of getting stuck into a state or a place – stuck in helplessness, for example – it means it’s time to shift, move around, come out and reflect. This is the supportive environment for meditation. Actually, the Buddha didn’t use the word ‘meditation’ but ‘cultivation’ of mind (bhāvanā), which included calming, gladdening and insight. So when we talk about meditation, it isn’t purely an ‘on my own, inside’ experience that we are talking about. In fact, that experience will always be limited and tricky.

Tonight is Māgha Pūjā so you can bear in mind that we’re still in a traditional teaching laid down by an enlightened being and carried out through thousands of disciples. It’s important to feel what we’re in, the goodness that we’re in. You can think of all the difficult things you’re in, the difficult kamma you’ve had and the difficult scenarios in your life, but also use the Māgha Pūjā to reflect on the goodness that you’re in, that you inherit, that you’re in touch with. We can now cultivate through the night.

29 Majjhima Nikāya 10; also  Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta, Dīgha Nikāya 22.

30 Reference from the Commentary: Papañcasūdanī I 281-6.

31 Reference from the Commentary: Papañcasūdanī I 290-9.

32 The five spiritual faculties are: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom.

33 Dawn of the Dhamma is a book by Ajahn Sucitto that includes an illustrated calligraphic version of the  Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta. Ajahn Sucitto offered the original drawings to Luang Por Sumedho.