##### Hindrances and Enlightenment Factors

This reflection was offered on the morning of 28 November 2014.

At the beginning of the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, the Buddha refers to the four establishments of mindfulness as being the direct, undeviating path for the attainment of the true way, for the disappearance of sorrow and grief (dukkha), and for the realization of nibbāna. We may gloss over these terms but it’s helpful to consider them and give them some directed and applied thoughtfulness.

Often we try to ‘attain nibbāna’ or something we call nibbāna, but that way of speaking is inaccurate: we don’t attain  nibbāna, we realize it – we attain the way. These two terms have some overlap, but they’re not entirely the same. There’s a different quality of citta. ‘Attaining’ is something we feel definitely: ‘This is it. I have it. I own it. I’m with it. Here I am on the direct way.’ That’s not nibbāna. Nibbāna is the end of the way. There’s nobody on it, so it’s a realization. Realization is a complete, holistic opening of the citta. The forms that encouraged us, disappointed us and challenged us, have all dissolved, just like the creases in a cloth when you spread it out, just like the folds in a map as you flatten it out. All those terrible troughs, all those wonderful peaks, are now dissolved: this is the realization of nibbāna. We rather like peaks and we dread troughs, but they all can be opened out and freed. Every peak is followed by a trough, I assure you. How can it be any other way?

What is ‘the disappearance of  dukkha’? Dukkha means suffering or stress, and all its subtler forms. I am suggesting that there’s a process which leads to its disappearance: an unfolding of that which can unfold, that which can open. What can do that? When you say, ‘I opened to something,’ what opened? It’s this holistic sense, isn’t it? Perhaps your thoughts paused, your directed energies relaxed, your fears disappeared, your holding back wasn’t there, your defensiveness wasn’t there, your sense that you have to hurry up and get it done wasn’t there. When those mental factors disappear something seems to unfold: a greater receptivity and full awareness. There’s less drag and drive or perhaps no drive: just a steady, open state. What can do that is the citta.

How do you sense the open citta? Instead of verbalizing the experience, try to understand it as it happens, to any degree. When does that become possible? When you feel safe, steady, trusted and there’s no particular thing you have to get to, if you can fully pause in that moment and take it into your body, be awake but relaxed at the same time, doesn’t it happen by itself? Yes and no, because it’s easier said than done. In some way something in us still holds on, sinks, spins around, gets fretful, desperate, haunted or driven. How do we touch into these areas that are confused, out of control and coated with ignorance? How do we relieve or unburden them? According to the conventional Pali Canon, it happens through a process of undoing all that needs to be undone. That can sound negative and we may even wonder, ‘What’s left after all that undoing?’ What’s left is the citta, but we shouldn’t hold it as an idea or as a state, because any name we give it will put some restriction on it. The Buddha lets it be; you will know it. It’s there all the time, and if we really dwelt in the heart of it, with clear presence and intelligence, then the fetters would drop away.

The path, the fruitions or realizations of that way, are sometimes termed ‘nibbāna’, which means that something isn’t happening. It’s a verb: something is not burning, not firing, not revving up. Nibbāna is called ‘the undoing’, ‘the blowing out’, ‘the cooling’: something is stopping. We can also express it with the word ‘Deathless’, which is an affirmative and refers to the completed citta. This gives us a little more of a positive slant on it. We tend to think nibbāna means that everything has to stop: it’s the annihilation, destruction, end of everything and we’re just empty shells floating in a void – that’s extremism. Another way of taking it is that we’re all going to be communing in some deathless state, having a ‘knees-up’ somewhere in Buddhist heaven – that’s eternalism. In both cases we are looking at it in the wrong way. We’re looking at it as if it were something personal; we take it as an emotion, as a thought or as a form of some kind. Yes, something has to stop: suffering does; and something has to arise and be firmed up: awareness does.

To me, the four satipaṭṭhāna seem to work as a map. It’s a complete map: not just a map of the terrain, but also a map of what your legs are doing as you are walking on the path. The first three domains of body, feelings and mind-states are things we place our attention on, and the fourth domain of  dhammas is what happens as we’re doing that. In other words, the first three domains are the territory and the last one is describing the kind of effects that occur as we cross this terrain: whether we feel exhausted or inspired, and how strong we feel – whatever the citta is experiencing. We use the metaphor of ‘path’ or ‘way’, meaning there is a progression here; it’s a movement. When you’re travelling, you have to know both your journey and your own strengths and limitations, and that requires a thorough attention.

The fourth satipaṭṭhāna deals with the processes that we come across as we are mindful of our body, mindful of feeling and mindful of mental states. We begin to notice things like ill-will and sense desire, which are called ‘hindrances’, ‘challenges’ or ‘obstacles’. This is the aspect of the folded-up citta: it’s tight, it fears, it’s confused, it needs, it wants, it has to have, it can’t stand for another minute, etc. It’s a very contracted state. It feels extremely painful. When we think, ‘I have to have something!’ our mind is filled with sense desire, and what we really mean is: ‘Because I have so little joy or juice in me, I have to have something to fill me up.’ I’m exaggerating slightly, of course. Another hindrance is the quality of torpor, when the mind contracts, loses vitality, slumps and shuts down. The mind can also be overcharged. It’s in a continual feedback loop, seized up in a hyper state. It’s restless, worried and it keeps conjuring up more things to worry about, more things to do. It’s an endless to-do-list that keeps reduplicating itself as you give it energy and attention.

The last hindrance is the sense of doubt, which is a lack of confidence. We think, ‘Why bother? Who am I? Does it matter? Is there anything? Is there nothing?’ This doubt is not just an intellectual lack of information, it’s a loss of faith and confidence in oneself. One doubts oneself profoundly and thinks, ‘There’s something wrong with me.’ And all the other hindrances confirm that: ‘You’re right!’ They all line up. The contracted citta is self-fulfilling. As it contracts, it believes in its contracted state of feeling inadequate, and because it’s holistic, it all folds in upon itself. In extreme cases, this doubt doesn’t just manifest as a wavering mind, it turns into deep depression. We might think, ‘What’s the point? I’m a failure. I can’t do anything right.’ When that really bottoms out, it’s not just a trivial spiritual affliction, it can be a vitality-threatening experience or even a life-threatening one. Nothing will do you as much harm as the contracted citta.

We also have what are called ‘the seven enlightenment factors’ (bojjhaṅgā). The first one is  sati (mindfulness): the ability to stay present, to sense, to be aware of what’s going on without reacting to it, with a sense of ‘that’s that’. Being able to name the hindrances is a step towards mindfulness. For example, we can recognize, ‘This is ill-will’ and not dwell in thoughts like, ‘He’s such an idiot!’ He may be behaving like an idiot, but our direct experience is ill-will. We are taking in our own citta’s state. Other people may act in ways that are stupid, inconsiderate, abusive and so forth, but right now the first thing you have to deal with is your own contractedness, otherwise you’re going to respond to them with rage, insults or fear. If that contractedness relaxes, maybe you will find yourself wondering, ‘Why did she do that? Maybe she …’. You will be a bit more open and able to look at that situation with a clear mind. You will be able to see the projections and proliferations (papañca) that happen when the citta is contracted. They make us believe that there’s a problem ‘out there’.

You gradually build up a reference of the experience of ill-will – or any other hindrance – as something absolutely standard. It’s a very simple concept: everybody has that, but we need to study it. Using mindfulness and investigation (dhammavicaya), which is the second bojjhaṅga, we look into the experience of a hindrance: ‘How does it feel in the body? What does it rest upon? Is it resting on a particular perception?’ A hindrance lands on a sense-base, like a sight, a sound or a touch, and, more significantly, it rests on a perception such as: ‘He’s such a bully’ or ‘She thinks so much of herself’ or ‘She took my seat! That was clearly my seat, and she took it!’ We carry perceptions and these perceptions become people: ‘There are some people in this room whose sole purpose in coming here was to deliberately take my seat!’ I’m exaggerating here, but at that moment, that person becomes a ‘seat taker’. You may even think that we deliberately bring ‘professional snifflers’ here or ‘door bangers’ or ‘people who insist upon using the toilet in the middle of the night’!

You may then be bristling into rage or sinking into despair. All this movement is swinging around and you can contemplate that. The body and mind get into a contracted and flattened state, and in that state you can’t see anything but the object of aversion. Most of your mind can be obsessed, with huge disproportion, about what one person said or did at one moment. For example, the other evening, when I was answering the questions some of you wrote, I looked at this particular question, said, ‘Huh!’ and put it down. The person who wrote that question might have perceived this as dismissal and thought, ‘He thinks my question is stupid! He thinks I’m an idiot!’ That kind of reaction – in this case, ill-will – can become the overriding experience. But who knows what really happened? Maybe I just picked up the question and thought, ‘That’s a really good question, but it’s better if I answer it tomorrow.’

Ill-will has two particular ways of operating. One is: ‘I feel aversion towards others’; the other one is: ‘People feel aversion towards me.’ The latter is called the ‘inner tyrant’ or ‘inner critic’. We imagine other people’s perception of us and proliferate around that. Of course sometimes people do insult and abuse us. When somebody attacks you, you usually tighten up to defend yourself; and you can stay in that defended mode, without even recognizing it, because the body holds it as a constant pattern. It could even be that you’re just defending yourself against lots of lights, noises and bangs, especially if you’re in a city. When you’re in a defended state, you feel tight and sense, ‘There’s ill-will around here. It must be from somebody else.’

There are times when we don’t feel comfortable, we don’t feel happy, we don’t feel welcomed – basically, we don’t feel open. There is anxiety, the sense of ‘something is wrong or could be wrong or may be going wrong … and I don’t know what it is,’ and we project that unconsciously. In the extreme, the defence becomes established as a particular pattern where you’re defending yourself against something. People can get so used to that state that it feels strange to not have it, so the mind keeps throwing things in to keep it there. This is the inner tyrant. We get familiarized with slightly defended states: ‘I’m all right. I’m doing my thing. I’m OK’ or saddened ones: ‘Am I OK here? I don’t know.’ Something keeps telling us, ‘There’s something wrong with you.’ As you have probably seen, these retreat situations highlight and open up these qualities; you’re criticizing yourself, criticizing others and so on. Even little things can trigger this inner critic.

For example, you come late to the morning pūjā. You’re the last one in and you criticize yourself for being late: ‘Everybody else hates me because I am late. The teacher thinks I’m slow, slack, laggard, lazy and useless!’ So the next morning, you get there on time and criticize yourself for being such an automatic conformist: ‘You’re just so concerned with conforming. You’re just a sheep, aren’t you? You’re a sheep in a herd of other sheep!’ The next morning, you decide to get there ten minutes earlier, before everybody else. Then you criticize yourself again: ‘You’re such a goody-goody, aren’t you? You think you’re better than everybody else. You just want to show off how prompt and keen you are!’ You’re wrong again! And from that state you can criticize others around you: ‘Look at all those laggards who turn up late!’ This inner tyrant can take just about any form.

Ill-will closes us. And when our system is closed we sense ill-will and hostility around us because the pain of closure is here. We feel ‘not safe’, ‘not comfortable’. When we become mindful of that, we realize the need to practise  mettā, which is the fundamental medicine.  Mettā doesn’t mean wishing, ‘May I love everybody,’ but rather, ‘May I understand the phenomenon or the activation (saṅkhāra) of ill-will.’ When ill-will is present, allow it to be, and feel inwardly the ability to relax. Feel comfortable and wish to yourself: ‘May I be free from harm,’ as you’re consciously breathing in and breathing out. ‘May I be free from harm. May I be able to operate as best as I can according to my own body-mind.’ Breathe out the pressure. There’s a little bit of nibbāna there: something has momentarily ceased. Take this into the body. This is how we investigate, how we develop this second bojjhaṅga. In line with that presentation, we could say that the enlightenment factors work on the hindrances. We don’t get rid of the hindrances and then add the enlightenment factors: the enlightenment factors arise because of the hindrances. They are the ones that meet those hindrances.

The third bojjhaṅga is viriya, which is sometimes translated as ‘effort’ but actually means ‘energy’. We are fully with the present experience and feel this is the important process to be with. We are feeling it, breathing it, getting our body energy into it. We talk a lot about energy – the breath energy, the mental energy, the energy of loving-kindness, etc. – as a certain sense of opening, spreading, bestowing or giving. When we give, when we share, when we open to something, when we love, it’s not really an emotion, it’s actually an energy, which is opening and spreading. We’re breathing into our goodwill, breathing into our body, and putting the two together. Our energy comes out of these contracted states and begins to fill up into a more healthy form. The citta starts to unfold like a collapsed tyre that you are gradually inflating. The crinkles of ill-will (or any other hindrance) start smoothing out.

We can use viriya to work with sleepiness. First we need to be aware of this hindrance and not be averse to it. We’re not blaming ourselves or the situation for it. Sleepiness is something that all human beings experience. Feel what you can feel: your back, your knees, the skin, and keep giving it energy – a steady, warm, good, supportive energy. Investigate the pieces that can wake up, even if it’s just your eyes or your belly. If you’re experiencing restlessness, calm the pieces that can be calmed. They will gradually release, both in the mind and on a bodily level: the tissues will start to unfold. We all know what deep stress and tension can be. If you want to explore that, try and get as tense as you possibly can. Tense everything: your eyes, your lips, your jaw, your fingers, your feet, your belly, your chest; tense it all up a hundred per cent so you know which bits are operating. As you breathe out, relax and notice which bits start to loosen up. You can track that as a bodily experience. When you are frightened or angry, it’s going to tighten, isn’t it? When you are happy, it’s going to loosen up. Sometimes we’re just working on the body-sense: breathing in, breathing out, breathing through the entire body and through the mental energy also.

The fourth enlightenment factor is pīti (rapture). It’s the hinge because it’s where what we’re doing begins to have palpable results. Pīti isn’t something we do, it’s something that happens. It’s not something we apply ourselves to, it’s something we receive. It’s a quality of joyfulness, of brightness, that is both bodily and mental/emotional. We feel open. The way pīti happens for me, in a very ordinary way, is when I wake up in the morning and feel, ‘It’s a lovely, bright day, with fresh air, dew on the grass, flowers, plenty of space; nobody is bothering me …’. Everything opens up. That’s not just a thought, is it? That’s more subtle than thought. As the citta begins to unfold from a driven, hounded, harried or needy state, pīti is what is experienced, but you don’t experience it through a thought. Vitakka is the application of a thought or an idea, and vicāra is feeling it, sensing it. Isn’t it lovely when tension releases, when your shoulders drop and you really can breathe out and feel a full in-breath that isn’t driven or pulled but just happens?

A very significant feature of pīti is that the hindrances are no longer getting in. They may be hovering, but they’re not getting in because the citta is unfolding. Also, some of our conventional identity drops away. A lot of our conventional identity can be about being very busy, organizing, managing the stress that we are giving ourselves and getting more stressed out about it, getting busy being ‘me’, with all my agendas, routines, histories, possibilities, obligations, requirements, needs, worries and so forth; and now, with pīti, we’re starting to forget some of that. Isn’t it nice to just be here breathing? The density of identity is often creating all kinds of structures and connections to manage its own stress, and that of course gives us more stress.

There’s a certain quality of innocence about pīti. It’s an embodied chest experience, a skin experience. Because the boundary is safe, the body opens. It’s really important to sense how samādhi is coming after this sense of pīti, because the way the common mind understands concentration is: ‘Tighten up your attention in order to get concentrated.’ Unfortunately that attitude can feed right into the contracted state again. We may become very attentive, but we don’t necessarily get pīti, which is associated with opening.

The process the Buddha describes starts with mindfulness, investiga-tion filled with buoyant energy – not effort or striving – and a sense of pīti. Then things are turning: you are feeling less heavy. If you can get in touch with that, you realize the hindrances are your whetstone, the thing you have to work with. You sharpen your enlightenment factors on that whetstone, on that grindstone. The hindrances are tough, but nothing else you can do is going to get you out of them. No situation or friendships are really going to get you out of them. You’re not going to come to an idyllic retreat centre where they’re all washed away from you. It’s more like you go to a retreat centre, thinking, ‘It will be nice,’ but after a few days of retreat, you start to think, ‘It would be nice if only it wasn’t for the bell, the routine, the people, the noise, the weather, etc.!’ The hindrances will come, so come prepared to meet them. The attainment of the way means that you recognize you have to meet those hindrances. There’s nothing going wrong. It’s the first frontier you could say, the first piece of the landscape. This is the way you are going to learn. However you shift things around to make them more manageable – and I’m not saying you can’t do that – eventually the only thing you can do is to try to sustain enough  sati to investigate and to turn your energy into something redeeming, benevolent and fulfilling. This already is plenty, actually. Through that, the contractions come out and the result is some sense of pīti.

It took me maybe ten or twenty years to undo lots of pressures, stresses, contractions, wrong views about meditation, bottled-up irritation, grief, depression, compulsions, urgencies, trying to get it right, inner tyrants – the whole thing. It doesn’t mean to say that I didn’t have times when I would say, ‘Oh, this is very nice!’, but they would all tend to come back again. Maybe that’s the way it goes. You get times when the mind finds its way through the hindrances, and then they come back again. It’s not just a one shot: you keep crossing that territory time and time again, until it no longer causes you doubt or confusion. Doubt is the hindrance that cuts the path away. You keep crossing that territory until you notice: ‘That particular hindrance is not present as much. Now, it’s not triggered by that. This thing triggers it, but that thing doesn’t.’ You start to notice and take joy in the number of times you are not caught in ill-will or sense desire. These two hindrances have a very broad meaning: they can refer to strong mental states but they have subtler forms too. They don’t pass away until there’s a profound degree of realization, but we can get breaks and at those moments we can touch into something more joyful.

Somebody wrote a question about devotional practices. How do those fit in? Devotional practices are for joy. They’re encouragements; they’re opportunities for rejoicing, celebrating. One thing that makes it possible to experience joy is knowing that ‘The blessed one is here. I have received his Dhamma. It has told me there’s nothing wrong with me. This is indicating the way out of stress. I’ve been given the way, the keys.’ There is joy to have even touched into the possibility of that. ‘I have been seen as a worthy human being who can try to cultivate the way. I have sensed myself in that. I have touched into the joy of being harmless. How wonderful!’ That’s what devotional practices are. We often use images, conventional words or flowers, incense and candles, but don’t get too mesmerized by the images; they’re just signs that you can use.

Why do we bow? Bowing involves the body, doesn’t it? It’s a movement of the body into a softness, into a ‘lay it down!’ Don’t try to figure out devotion and ask, ‘What exactly are you doing this for? What purpose do you see in placing your head upon the ground?’ From a heart level, sometimes it’s really the only thing you want to do! You just want to surrender and put your head down – this proud, arrogant head, with its conceit, its views and its ideas. Just lay it down! These ideas of ‘I am’, ‘I shouldn’t’, ‘people should think this of me’ and ‘why am I?’, just lay them down! But remember, this is not a command. There comes a time when that is really a lovely experience. Devotional practices are for that loveliness, for that celebration, for that  muditā. Muditā means taking joy in that which is good and really taking it in. The trigger of joy doesn’t have to be about me any more. Even in this conventional Buddhist culture, I don’t think people necessarily understand the practice of bowing. They just do it and get a real sense of faith and support from that. They feel in a safe place: ‘Now, I’m empowered. I have the Buddha’s teachings with me. I have the Buddha’s presence with me. Great!’

When you experience pīti, be mindful of it, sense it, survey it, and cool it so that it doesn’t get more excited. Sometimes when people experience pīti it can come in great rushing waves. Tears start coming and you feel like you are lifting off the ground. This may be incomprehensible to somebody who has never experienced it. If it comes on too strongly, you need to put your attention on the body or the back – breathing out, grounding. When the experience turns into something more contented, it’s called  passaddhi: the fifth enlightenment factor. We feel tranquil, calm and soothed. The citta unfolds a little bit more.

Samādhi, the sixth bojjhaṅga, comes when the sense-fields begin to quieten down. The sense-fields may seem like fields we can run out into, but actually they’re things that hold us in. They limit us. They limit our experience within sights and sounds. Once we begin to experience pīti and sukha, we don’t see them as fields any more, but as a cage, something that is limiting our experience. There’s a change of priority. There still can be impact: sight, sound, smell, taste or touch, but the mind wants to spread wider – and samādhi is what enables that. You may think that these meditation masters who sit in a manky old hut in a desolate forest are tough ascetics, but they’re actually sitting there feeling blissed out!

This experience of samādhi can be very transformative and quite astounding. There are incredible stories of people whose minds have opened to a profound degree, describing the sensitivities and the ‘world’ that this openness presents. In this unification of mind, there is centredness and poise. Its tone is evenness and equanimity (upekkhā), which is the seventh and last enlightenment factor. The citta is unfolded; there are no creases left. There are no preferences. There are no contractions. There is no differentiation in the subject/object. It’s all even; the citta has evened out. The realization of nibbāna implies that ‘things have gone out.’ That which we thought was real and solid has proven to be a shadow. Once a crease is gone, its shadow is gone. Nothing has actually been destroyed; that strange thing which seemed so real, so me, so energized, has simply opened out. But some shadows are very strong and seem so clearly there, don’t they?

This is the map, but consider it very simply, as the progressive unfolding of the potential for real beauty – pīti is beautiful – for real ease, for deep, spacious opening and poise. That evenness gives you huge authority over the senses because you recognize: ‘It’s this, it’s that, but it’s not bothering me. It’s not pulling me in. It’s not something I have to get.’ There’s the freedom of release.

I talked about relationship right at the beginning of the retreat because it’s what practice is about: we’re coming out of contracted relationships of liking, disliking, holding on and rejecting. Those are contracted ways of relating to experience, aren’t they? But  sati doesn’t partake in that. There is liking, there is disliking, but it’s just something that is happening; that’s not where I’m standing. I’m standing aware of liking and disliking and not following, not projecting, not proliferating around those energies. As a result, the hindrances starve. By being aware, mindful, but not following the proliferations, you withdraw their energy. You’re withdrawing the demon’s hostility by not giving it any.54 The demon loves hostility. It feeds on fear. It loves you to feel like you’re a wreck, but now you’re telling it, ‘No, you’re not having any of that. Here is loving-kindness instead. Here is an open body, here is presence instead.’ That makes the demon shrink. It’s not that you adore demons, but you relate to them differently.

When you face a demon, you may feel you want to tighten up, but see if you can work against that tendency. Feel less guilty and ashamed, less lost and confused. How does this work? What triggers this demon? What happens? What happens in my body? What does my mind start to weave out of that? See if you can reduce the proliferation. Slow it down, take it back a little and ask yourself, ‘Where is the real point of this?’ Often it comes back to simple things such as pain or feeling attacked. As we cultivate those satipaṭṭhāna we recognize: ‘This is a mind-state … this is a feeling.’ This is not so easy, but if you hold the mind-state and withdraw its energy, then your enlightenment energy will increase. You can’t get rid of the energy of the hindrances, but you can transfer it. Then, amazingly enough, you begin to be able to be with ill-will, just sensing it as a kind of buzzy, grumpy, edgy state, but it’s not jumping onto anybody; it’s just hovering. That’s very good! Now you can try to feel it more in terms of your heart, with loving-kindness and acceptance. You start starving it and using it. That energy then shifts to the enlightenment factors of investigation, energy and pīti.

Over time, you’ll even be able to come to a very strong trigger of feeling without reacting to it. You can probably do this in your body, at least to a degree: when you feel physical pain you don’t contract around it. Being able to practise with pain is a skilful thing, but it doesn’t mean that you are staying with it until your muscles rip! This is a workshop. We can’t really fix physical pain, but it’s much less penetrating than psychological and emotional pain. It’s just there and here I am with it. Now, can I change my relationship to it? In order to do that, you’re widening your focus, feeling the entire leg (if the pain is in the leg) or even the entire body with gentle goodwill. You’re widening, not contracting. You stay with the pain or discomfort for about five minutes. This kind of workshop is going to help when it comes down to the real business, which is the pain of the citta. The pain of the citta is something that’s formed. Its whole way of operating is very profound, so you really need the qualities of pīti and samādhi before it becomes possible to be mindful of it and to investigate.

In the Ānāpānasati Sutta, the first tetrad has to do with the body. The Buddha takes it through to the point where you begin to experience calming the body. The quality of pīti comes after that: when you’re in your breathing space, you start to feel some lift. Then, you’re thoroughly sensing the citta-saṅkhāra, which is what activates your citta: your mental feelings, your mental and emotional triggers. We require the fullness of energy and the fullness of heart to be with the citta-saṅkhāra before we can really ease into it and calm the grief, the fear, the agitation, the hostility, the sadness, the sense of never having made it, never going to make it, the failure, etc. Pīti is the sign that there’s a real capacity to do that. Before that stage, you just have to keep sidelining the present experience: ‘OK, there is that.’ You’re coming to your good place and, as that fills up, you’ll naturally find: ‘Now is the possibility to meet my place of despair.’ But don’t go into that until you have your faculties together. There’s no point going into your difficult places again and again, and sinking into the same overwhelmed state. First, you want to properly build up your capacity: don’t climb down until you have good legs!

A lot of our practice is just about building up the self-respect, the faith and the faculties for this process. It takes time, but there’s nothing else to do, and it is the true way. If we know this, if we feel the confidence that we’re on the true way, it will lead to a lessening of the burden, of  dukkha. These external practices of devotion, chanting, loving-kindness, helping and respecting each other, breathing in and out are all part of it. It’s holistic. The way is not a technique; it’s a way of living. Now is the time to gain some confidence in that.

As we’re coming towards the last couple of days of the retreat, you want to use this time not for simply getting into some nice, calm state, but for finding the places of certainty that you can take with you: ‘This is what I have to do to reorganize how I’m operating. I don’t want to come to another retreat in the same wrecked state again!’ You want to move on. The clearer you are about your trigger points and your faculties, the smoother and more progressive your experience is going to be.

54 The ‘demon’ here is a personification of the hindrances.