##### Standing Meditation

This guided meditation was offered on 22 November 2014.

Now, let’s practise in the standing position. Conventionally speaking, most of us live in our faces, and maybe even just in a little patch behind the eyes and the forehead. Now, having a few extensions built on your house, see if you can extend your domain down to your feet. You may not get every detail but you can sense the feet on the floor; feel the nice sensation there. The legs are slightly flexed so they are more active and receptive. Be aware of your chest and the upright spine and keep your eyes open. You can move around a bit to wake your feet up, so your stance is grounded.

I’d like to encourage a unified body. Many people are like a head with little underneath it. The body is often segmented. There are places where the tissues lock, tighten up, so we get the sense of being bits and pieces. One segment goes around your jaw, chin and shoulder area, so the head and chest can be quite tight. Another place where this segmentation occurs is your belly, and that cuts off anything below the waist.

Now can you come into your forehead and soften it? Can you relax your jaw? Can you extend your awareness down from your head into your throat, neck and shoulders, and deliberately loosen and relax your upper shoulders? See if you can sense the energy widening its span. Then extend your awareness over the trunk of the body including not just the front but also the sides – so you get the parallels of the body – and the back. Then include the abdominal area and continue to sweep down, without losing any bit, through the legs into the floor, particularly into the soles of the feet.

There are two areas there. You have the areas touching the floor: the toes, the balls of the feet and the heels, but also the area that isn’t touching the floor, which is the under-sole. The foot is like a mirror of your hand. The palm of the hand is very sensitive; it’s a receiver, whereas the fingers are active. Similarly with the toes and the soles of the feet. Once you feel settled and stable, see if you can give priority to the under-arch of the foot, as if you were listening to the ground through your feet.

Just as you swept downwards, you can then extend your awareness by climbing up from the soles of the feet, as if there’s a line of awareness drawing up through the legs, gathering in the lower abdomen and rising up the trunk of the body into the throat and the back of the head. See if the skull can be like a ball resting on a fountain, rather than a screw tightened down.

Sense-restraint is about prioritizing the centre: we’re centring our awareness rather than diversifying it into the sense-fields. It’s not about anaesthetizing ourselves. You’re sensing behind the eyes, around the eyebrows, organizing yourself much more around the bodily sense of these organs than around the visual sense. Then that centre becomes a little more felt. It’s subtle, it’s about balance and wholeness because it runs through the entire form; it’s quiet. Now check how you can sense the breathing when you’re focused internally.

While maintaining that inner centrality, you could then turn your body a little as you stand, feeling the sense of movement and also the freedom within your space: nothing is limiting or constricting. As you move, try to particularly sense what’s happening in your chest and in front of your body. There’s nothing here you have to defend against, so you’re opening, staying centred. Then you can check internally: is it time to sit down? You can stand a little bit longer if you wish. When you feel ready, come back to your sitting position, while continuing to feel that centre.