#### Right Effort

This reflection was offered during a ten-day retreat at Amaravati Monastery, on 19 April 1987.

We usually come on a retreat with ideas of cultivating the mind, training the mind and progressing in Dhamma. We put effort into things; we put energy into things. Energy becomes a problem when it’s not going the right way or when it’s turbulent. How we apply ourselves is something that requires a lot of understanding, reflection, maturity and experience. This whole topic of effort and energy and what to do with it – how to apply ourselves in a spiritual way – becomes a reflection. When it’s properly used, it’s one of the chief supports of practice.

We are sensory creatures; we have a sensory consciousness that is a matter of energy. It attracts, it repels, it moves. Life as we know it is a matter of energy, with things coming and going, experiences happening to us. As we begin to settle, we see that even when we are not trying to do anything, there’s still a continuous state of movement and flux: the metabolism of the body, the breathing, the beating of the heart, the flow of the blood, the movements of the mind – ceaseless movement.

Energy is a part of our existence; we need to learn what to do with it. We tend to dissipate energy or do unprofitable, useless things. We need to liberate energy from its habits, from pointlessness, from going in directions where we become frustrated or where we burn ourselves out. That transmutation of energy is what brings out the radiance of the spiritual path. Spiritual practice is not a flaccid, inert, wasted-out, worn-down, enfeebled thing, where you are too whacked-out to do anything else. In fact, the Buddha recommended people to begin practising when they are young, when there is plenty of juice. This puts you right into a paradox because most of our energies are seemingly not going towards calmness, reflection and composure. They are going out into food and sleep; they are going out into plans and expectations. They are going into making things, into endless, inquisitive thoughts, worries and problems. They are going into desires of one kind or another. We create enormous mind problems, don’t we? The energy gets stuck up in our heads all the time, trying to figure things out, then trying to stop figuring things out, then trying not to stop, and then trying to think about how we stop trying to stop thinking about figuring out whatever we are trying to stop thinking about!

When this energy is not going into kinks and knots, there is a great buoyant feeling, the radiance of someone who has matured on the path. There is the compassion of the Buddha, that quality of being able to spread and give the teaching, to live the spiritual life in a positive and encouraging way, because the energy is not being dissipated. The restlessness of the mind is not in itself something gone wrong; it’s just misdirection. If your mind is restless and there’s a lot of moving and creating, this is really all right; it just means you have a lot there to harness. You have to find a skilful means to make the energy uplift your practice, rather than become a burden you carry around.

What is important in the aspect of right effort (which is the foundation of mindfulness, of meditation) is this word ‘right’. Energy and effort are not unusual to us, but rightness, this quality of the Noble Path, takes a little bit of getting used to. We can start by considering: how do we experience conflict or suffering? The kind of effort we all know is ‘wrong  effort’; it feels wrong, unprogressive and painful. This Noble Truth of suffering, which the Buddha made the keystone of his teachings, is a very accurate guide. It’s the one you always go to when you have a question or a difficulty you want to solve. You can ask a question about suffering, for example: ‘Where is the conflict here? Why do I experience conflict with this?’, or ‘How do I become more peaceful? How do I become more enlightened? How do I become more loving and compassionate?’ When you look towards the Buddha Dhamma, you begin to see the answer to your questions.

These types of questions actually imply, ‘I experience suffering because I am not what I think I should be.’ We have an idea  of something such as wisdom, compassion or enlightenment, and we think that we experience suffering because we haven’t become that idea. Then we look at that and think, ‘How could I possibly be an idea? I am not an idea, am I? I am real! Something is real; there is a real sense of somebody being somewhere, doing something, but I can never find out exactly what it is. Well, that’s why I suffer: I’m trying to be an idea!’

Maybe love, compassion, enlightenment and wisdom are not ideas. Maybe they are actual realities, something you do  rather than have an idea of. You are actually being  wise, being  peaceful: it’s happening now . Rather than thinking about being peaceful, we start to bring up the reflection: ‘Is it possible to be peaceful with my doubt, with my sense of inadequacy?’ What does inadequacy do to you? What does doubt do to you? Why do you suffer with that? You suffer because things are not what you think they should be. ‘I’m not getting what I want. I want to become something!’ In Dhamma practice we’re actually being  peaceful rather than becoming it. We’re not ‘someone now who will be something else in the future’.

So put all of your effort towards opening up and establishing yourself now . The sense of inadequacy, of limitation, is to be overcome. It is to be seen through by making your mind go fully into this present moment. Often we experience inadequacy because something in us is hanging back. Something in us is saying, ‘Well, I don’t know, maybe … Will this work? Is this going to be useful? Will it hurt? Will I get what I want?’ When you are meditating, notice if something in you is trying to figure out whether you should do it or not. Doubt will prevent you from getting a sense of unity, a sense of establishment or concentration. You won’t get any sense of real calm. You will always be someone whose calm is more like the feeling of limpness. You can manage to tranquilize things but you are not really resolved, you are not relaxed into it because something in you hasn’t given up yet; it hasn’t let go. It’s still thinking, ‘Well, I don’t know about this. Is this the way to do it?’

The mind’s energies can always create comparisons and alternatives, can’t they? We can always compare where we are at now with a memory, a notion or an idea. For example, we feel pain and behind that pain is the wanting it not to be there, the feeling of, ‘It shouldn’t be there.’ There’s always some alternative our minds can create. When we feel restless, the notion of calm may come up. In any group of people, we usually compare ourselves instinctively with the others: better or worse.

One of the difficulties of any religious or spiritual teaching is that the thinking mind can turn every reflection into a doctrine. When this happens, you then think you have to become the teachings and embody all these lofty qualities of mind. You hear the word ‘wisdom’ and you think, ‘Oh, wisdom … I am not wise, I am pretty stupid really’ or ‘I don’t know everything yet.’ Or you hear the word ‘kindness’ and you think, ‘I’m not a very kind person. It seems a bit silly to me, sitting around being kind to myself. I can’t do that.’ There’s always the risk of making these qualities of mind into absolutes. Instead, allow yourself to be a little more reflective around your feeling of misunderstanding or your feeling of doubt. The transcendental path is possible. We are using these qualities of mind as a reflection  rather than as ultimate realities. What is wisdom? It’s being wise about things. Peacefulness is being accepting, finding a balance, having that quality to work with difficulties. Peace is not an inert, numb state; it is an exceptionally vibrant, sensitive state. In enlightenment the Buddha was not numb, voiding out into blankness. He had an exceptionally vibrant, sensitive mind that could adjust and balance.

If you look at the various teachings the Buddha gave, you may notice that wherever somebody was coming from, whatever their attitude or line of argument, he could always find a way to balance it out, to reflect back to them what would bring harmony. With his interlocutors following their own views, and him providing reflections, they would tend to come around and understand. The Buddha’s depth of wisdom is such that his doors to peace are numerous and can carry many people across from different angles, different perspectives.

In our own practice, we have to do this with the multitudinous experiences that we have. How many people have you been today? Quite a lot! You are not expecting all this variety of phenomena to become one thing, but the process of meditation and contemplation is allowing them to go. Some of them we have to step back on, some of them we have to back off from, some of them we have to guide, some of them we have to hold carefully, some of them we have to gently support or pick up … and where do they go? They all go in one direction: they go towards passing away. We can experience a feeling of ease or relief that’s not at all an annihilation of feeling or being, but a quality of living at ease with the process of birth and death, the process of becoming. By this I don’t mean the physical birth and death of the body. Every sensory experience of your eye comes and then it goes, it is born and then it dies. A sound enters your ear and then it goes. A thought pops up in the mind-consciousness, it’s born, it matures, it ripens, it spawns various offspring and then it passes away. We are in a world of birth and death and regeneration. It’s a continual process, isn’t it?

We’re calming the mind down and simplifying our view by trying to watch one or two phenomena at a time, like the breath or the process of thought. You just watch one experience and see: what does it do? What does something like the breath do? It begins, it matures and it passes away. Now, if you want the beginning of the breath to be the ending of the breath, that’s conflict, isn’t it? If you want the ending of the breath to be the beginning of the breath, that’s conflict. If you want it to be shallow when it’s deep, that’s conflict. So, in following the breath, we are simply looking, watching to see: ‘How is it?’

The quality of attention we give to something like the breath appreciates that there is no alternative: ‘It’s like this.’ There’s no conflict with that; there isn’t a something else it should or could be. ‘It’s like this’ is not an ultimate statement, because the next breath is slightly different. It’s also ‘like this’, but the this-ness of it has changed its characteristics. This one may be shorter or longer, or you may miss it altogether. What is constant is that everything is exactly itself. Our minds can be so sluggish that we are still caught up with the way things were . We are so alienated that we are still carrying around a whole bunch of ideas about the way things are, what we are and what we should be. We have this feeling of conflict or confusion because this ever-changing flow of life, as it is, doesn’t match up to them. And it’s not going to change; it’s not going to fit into our thoughts – not without a good struggle anyway!

This becomes apparent when you are calm and when you are looking at things in an unbiased way. With meditation practice you can make effort quite clear, supportive and unconfused. You see that you have a very simple thing to do and it is not a life-and-death issue; it’s just being with the breath, the walking or the feeling, as it is. Sometimes it’s a little more difficult to try to be with the way we feel, with the ideas and thoughts that come up or the mind-states, so we often start with the body. We put attention into the body, sitting upright, sensing the feelings in the arms, the tensions that can be released and relaxed. We are attuning ourselves to the rhythms of the body, because that is something we don’t make too much of an issue of. We don’t like pain, admittedly, but that’s not ever-present; it’s a visitor. So we start with the body because it’s a simple object that helps us get a good sense of how to flow with things.

This kind of ‘tuning in’ is the quality of right effort. It differs from wrong effort because wrong effort always comes from power rather than sensitivity and awareness. Wrong effort comes from a bias, a desire of some kind, a wish for things to be this way or that way. When we are not living in a spiritual, attuned, aware and sensitive way, a lot of energy is expended in efforts that are forceful. They are forced by anxiety, urgency, fears and desires of one kind or another.

There is also a quality of effort which is instinctive. It’s not wrong in that it is not being used foolishly. If something is attacking you, you find you suddenly have plenty of energy to get away; you don’t feel lazy and dithery, you don’t have any doubt in your mind. A tremendous amount of energy is liberated in the system in moments like that. I remember reading some of these instances of mothers who lifted cars off their children in a car crash. Imagine: a diminutive woman picks a car up in order to get her baby out from underneath! The instinct to protect is so powerful that it can bring an enormous energy into the body.

There is also the energy of nature, the natural attraction towards things. One of the challenges in meditation is trying to develop energy or bring attention towards something that is not particularly stimulating, whereas nature can readily bring up energy in us by directing us towards things that we find pleasant and away from things that we find unpleasant. The mind is under the power of nature. The eyes are under the power of nature. The ears can be attracted towards things, and can fasten and hold on to them quite tenaciously. When you’re hungry, you don’t have any difficulty at all in concentrating on eating.

In daily life, you can be munching away on your lunch break while reading the newspaper or thinking about something else and hardly even notice that you are eating! If you’re busy and engaged in things that really interest you, sometimes you forget to eat. But imagine I say, ‘Well, we don’t need any food during this retreat, I don’t think it’s important. Its more important to meditate, isn’t it? Let’s just meditate and concentrate! We don’t have to put up with all that eating and washing-up – all that waste of time! Just get rid of it because we are determined to be enlightened, so let’s just meditate, sit and watch the breath!’ If I suggest this, you might experience a certain amount of resistance or even aversion to me! You might even break into the kitchen! Certainly, energy will be liberated from the system in one way or another.

When you find yourself getting cravings for things and your mind is continually zooming in on stuff, it is important to remember that it’s not the particular thing in itself that is a problem or obsession. For example, you’re sitting here in the morning on an empty stomach, trying to do this inspiring chanting, but in fact you’re just thinking about toast and muesli. It’s not that you’re a toast-and-muesli addict; it’s just that when the mind is not interested in something, it easily finds sensory objects to be attracted to. That’s the mind’s nature. Something like eating food stimulates taste, doesn’t it? It’s the easiest way to feel some gratification. People often go out to dine just to pass the time. If you get bored, you munch on a bag of crisps. When the kids are wailing, you shove something in their mouth. Food is an easy thing to absorb into, especially on retreat, as we have ruled out music, sexual activity and even conversation!

I hope you are using this rule to abstain from conversation. Conversation is something to get drawn into, isn’t it? It stimulates the mind, it makes you tingle and buzz with ideas, thoughts and words. The refraining from reading is also interesting. You wouldn’t imagine that reading would be that strong of an attraction until there is not much else to do. I have seen people on retreats looking at the back of cornflakes packets, sauce bottles, washing-up rotas, anything! The mind wants to be tickled by something. If you have chanting sheets, you can look at them. Our energy and effort normally want to absorb into things. If we can’t absorb into something, we can feel a sense of loss and our energy goes around restlessly hither and thither; it can feel confusing and unpleasant.

Of course, the one distraction that is still legal is sleep – the ‘fourth refuge’! Our mind can create tiredness. When we feel resistant and negative and we don’t want to bother with anything, we can make ourselves feel tired. We are conditioned to sleep at a certain time. If we are having a hard time and our enthusiasm wanes, we start to feel a bit droopy and this can create tiredness. If you pay attention to tiredness you will see that it is quite a busy thing. The mind is popping away; it’s not going in the normal channels. When you are feeling tired, your mind can be quite active, creating lots of fantasies, notions and unsteady states, even though it might feel like you’re dropping off. There’s actually plenty of energy there. When we dream, it can be quite a vigorous experience; sometimes it’s much more interesting than meditating because you can really let it rip in your dreams, whereas in meditation you try to keep a sense of propriety about your mind movements.

Restless drives hither and thither occur because our energy is normally conditioned to be attracted towards or repelled by something. These drives are under the power of interest, desire and aversion. The energy of our system can be freed from desire and aversion, and right effort is the way to do it. First of all, we use effort to put aside what isn’t helpful. There can be a real vigour and sharpness in the way we put unhelpful things aside, in the way we determine to refrain from these things. It requires a certain sense of firmness sometimes. If you just let your mind flop around all over the place, you are not really being attentive, you are not unwinding, you are not bothering. You feel run down. That loose mind-state tends to dissipate your energy, so you need to refrain from that, and concentrate the mind when it gets loose and starts swaying. You need to decide that you’re going to practise putting your attention on the breath or on the meditation object, moment by moment. You firm up your mind when it starts to flop around and you do this again and again. That can bring a lot of vigour into your practice.

Right effort is the result of being more responsible, of learning not to let our energy attract, grab and hold on to an experience. Instead we use that energy to simply relate  to an experience. That’s the difference between the spiritual path and the inert path, or what we call the ‘worldly path’. Here ‘worldly’ is not meant in the sense of geographical world. It’s also not ‘worldly’ as opposed to ‘priestly’. The worldly path is the path that takes us out into physical things, into materialism, into birth and death. The spiritual path takes us beyond all that. Worldly energy is all about grasping, grabbing and having things. Spiritual energy is about responding to things skilfully. We learn to respond to our feelings appropriately. It’s a very full way to use energy; it requires everything we have. There’s no need to feel bored. There’s no need to feel there’s nothing to do or nothing to employ ourselves with. There’s a lot of need to steer, to balance, to firm up and gladden the mind, to be kind, to be generous and to open the heart. The right effort is the one that keeps putting aside and refraining from what isn’t helpful (the worldly path) and keeps picking up, holding and staying with what is helpful, what is fruitful and what is conducive to a skilful practice. This kind of effort is very productive because it is conducive to creating further energy. It is a brightening and gladdening force.

If you put effort into concentrating your mind, into firming it up, you will find that it’s certainly not easy. You have to keep doing it again and again and again. And you have to do it in the right way; you can’t do it in an angry or impatient way. You have to do it every time with great patience, with a sense of wanting to help, not with irritation or frustration, and not with the feeling that you are doing it in order to attain or become something.

Imagine you see a drunk wandering along the road and you want to help him to walk along a straight path to get to where he wants to go. You pick him up and he falls over sideways so you say, ‘No, come on, stand up!’ Then he falls back the other way. There’s no point in picking him up and pushing him to the other side and expecting him to stay there. You have to stand right behind him and guide him as he is swinging and swaying: ‘Oh no, not this way! Careful now … steady on … here comes a rough patch … easy as you go … slow down here … now, speed up here …’ so that it’s balancing. That requires energy, not power, force or an opinion saying, ‘It’s this way, not that way!’, but a continually sensitive and caring quality of mind.

This is the energy that gives you concentration – the one that leads to unification. This concentration honours and responds to the mind as it is. It’s not a dismissive concentration whereby you are holding on to something and ignoring the wavering of the mind, the uncertainties you experience or the feelings of discomfort or dis-ease. It’s the concentration that comes from taking all this into account and finding skilful means. Concentration of the mind is not just one-pointed attention upon a meditation object. It involves much more than that. This is why samādhi  or unification of the mind comes late in the path. It’s not just a matter of focusing on an object; there’s much more to it than that, otherwise you would get into samādhi  every time you watch TV or look at pin-up magazines! But that wouldn’t be sammā-samādhi, that would be naughty samādhi! The four unifications of the mind don’t come by gluing the mind onto an object. We need to investigate: ‘Why is it that the mind is wandering around? What is happening here?’ It requires a certain degree of wisdom, a sensitivity and a wish to help. You have to be patient with this; it is going to take time.

The fact that you came here on this retreat means you’ve realized, ‘Well, if I want to apply effort into cultivating the mind as best I can, I should put it into a situation where there won’t be too many distractions.’ Here, you don’t have to use too much willpower. If you were home, maybe you would be looking around thinking, ‘Yeah, meditation is important, but I ought to paint this and fix that. So today I will get it done, get it out of the way, and then tomorrow I will meditate. It will be calm and peaceful tomorrow. That’s it!’ And so it continues … After a while you think, ‘This is hopeless! There is no end to this!’ You need to be wise and see that there isn’t any end to the number of things that you can do, should do, ought to do, that really need  to be done. So it’s helpful to be in a situation where you can devote yourself to this exercise of unifying your mind.

To take care of the mind – the organ of our expression and our volition – rather than letting it get burnt out and dulled by endless activity, is quite a reasonable thing to do. When we are applying effort for unification of the mind, it doesn’t come about through ignoring things. Sometimes people imagine, ‘Well, if you meditate it means you forget everybody else and just ignore everything. You get away from it all. You go in your little hiding place, contemplate your navel and say nuts to the rest of the world!’ But that comes from people who don’t practise, obviously. My navel has never allowed me to forget about the rest of the world, not for one moment! It’s a completely unfascinating part of my anatomy. Almost anything is more compulsive and engaging than my navel. When you sit and you try to contemplate, what happens? The rest of the world comes tumbling in the back door, doesn’t it? You don’t get away from anything nor do you need to, really. You just need to be in a situation where you can apply yourself to make a refuge, a firm point where you can contemplate the world coming and going as it happens to you.

From this firm centre, you can contemplate the restless movement, the tugs, the pulls, the energy that the world consists of. We can see how it’s really just contained in our own memory, in our own mind. It’s ready to pop out at any moment. The future, the past, people and things: they are all just energy forms, aren’t they? If you unify your mind you don’t create the world. You are not rejecting it, but you’re taking the opportunity to not create it. A lot of our problems in life come because we are living in a world and we are simultaneously creating a world – and these two worlds don’t quite fit together. You are creating a world of, ‘What I think, my opinions and views, my idea of what you should be like, my idea of the way this place should be run, what the country should be about, what the government should be doing, what the weather should be like and how we should do this, that and the other.’ Only when you are not lost in your own creations, memories and projections, is there the possibility of seeing: ‘How is it? How actually is it?’ Only then can you apply the mind to clearly and calmly assess, ‘Well, this could be better. We could do this and that.’ But first of all, you need to learn how to receive your own world.

When human beings are led by opinions and views, by desires that come out of memory and habit, they often don’t listen well; they are not particularly sensitive. Religions can be exceptionally insensitive, domineering and crusading: telling people what’s right and what’s wrong, creating all kinds of ideas, punishing and repressing people ... Even when an idea sounds good, if we are using it in the wrong way, if we are not keeping our minds open, we are not actually responding to the teaching of a religious leader as to what love, goodness, justice or divinity is about, or to what overcoming evil is really about. If we just believe in teachings as ideas, our worldly energies get engaged and we tend to impose our own reality, or even crush and dismiss others. Worldly energies can be used for innumerable things: for so-called spiritual ends, for political purposes and so forth. They are always about grasping and imposing, and thus there’s always suffering in their wake.

Since the beginning of this retreat I have been encouraging you to create space around things. It’s perhaps a little bit difficult to get the hang of because it’s rather vague. It’s about the ability to not know, the ability to put aside an opinion, to not emphasize going places and getting things. It’s about looking at the resistance we have to the way things are, learning to open up to that and see what feelings are like. For example, we look at our sense of inadequacy and try to bring more compassion to it. We don’t bring power to it, we don’t try to change it, but we’re feeling more deeply, responding more deeply from the heart to how we experience our life, our mind and our body, day by day. It’s a little vague perhaps, but this space manifests from the application of energy towards relinquishment, letting go and opening up, rather than using the energy to grasp.

In your meditation practice, you may have noticed that holding on to something is rather difficult, unless it really fascinates you. The truth of the matter is that unless we are biased, compelled or urged by something, or drawn into something, we don’t grasp very well. We have to be pretty much fired up to get a good grip on something. We have to be really attracted in order to want to hold. When we put our attention on something like the breath, which is not an unpleasant experience, the mind doesn’t grasp it. The mind’s tendency is not to grasp; its nature is much more one of spaciousness. When you feel calm, when you feel at ease, your mind is quite spacious. Peace of mind implies there’s no need to grasp anything or become something; there’s nothing you need to get to. When we have moments of peacefulness, tranquillity and ease, there isn’t a need to hold. That feels like a state of truth, a deeper sense of being. We feel right and real. Know this for yourself. Our true nature is not one of holding on. This is just a dream, a state in which we’re engaged through the activity of the senses, which are compelled by attraction and repulsion, not by peace. Our senses don’t get compelled by peace of mind: they tend to relax.

This direction of using energy to let go, to surrender, comes from the practice of faith. Faith means openness of mind. It’s that in us which wants to say, ‘Go beyond,’ which inclines towards something further and starts to realize that this process is not going to be a further accumulation. It’s going to be a whole change of direction, a sense of relinquishment, of self-surrender – not of becoming something in the future, but of entering more fully into the present by putting aside our analysis of it, our categorization of it and our glib dismissal of it as being this or that. We’re looking into and entering into this breath, this thought, this feeling, this body. Have you really entered into your body yet? Do you know what the body feels like, how to support it, how to relax it, how to gladden it with proper attention? The thinking mind tends to suck all the energy.

Surrender is not a defeat, but an abandoning of something that is not profitable. This devotion, this sense of heartfelt attention, is something that is calming. We recognize calm as a more refined and sublime state than agitation; we incline towards that. So we incline our mind towards something that is calming by this devotional quality. Why do we use a devotional form here? It’s not that we are expecting this brass Buddha- image to do anything for us or to express anything by us bowing to it! We are using an image that’s a symbol of what we aspire to: peace, serenity, wisdom and compassion. We are using that as a reflection in the mind. We’re turning towards that image, remembering what that image means and surrendering our assertion, our pride and self-centredness towards something that’s sublime, peaceful and serene. Sometimes we even have a strong feeling of wanting to give up, of being tired of ourselves, of the restlessness, the fidgetiness, the querulousness and the pettiness that our thought-bound consciousness can get stuck in – these little grudges, jealousies and complaints.

In my own life, I’d always wanted to get into something bigger, something higher, something that would be worthy, but nothing seemed to be worthwhile, nothing really seemed to be worth going into. Perhaps there’s something we have to believe in first of all. But we don’t believe in Buddha, we don’t believe in something out there. We are using an object and an image to reflect inwardly. That in you which is wise: give yourself up to it, turn towards it. You know you can let go, you know there is something in you which can be patient because you are moral beings, people who can have an impulse and an instinct and say, ‘No.’ You can feel aversion or hatred but you can refrain from acting on it. That ability implies that you have a mind that knows how to let go of impulses and connect to something higher that’s not a matter of immediate gratification. It causes you a bit of self-sacrifice but you can do that; you have an intuition to do that.

It’s just a matter of knowing how all-pervasive Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha is, how immanent that is; then we can surrender to that. It’s right here: that conscience which is not deluded. When we know we are being lazy or foolish, complaining or petty, we try to not use energy to justify, blame or project it outwards, or to feel bad about ourselves, but we try to use energy to recognize those feelings and put them aside. We pick up wisdom, compassion, clarity, calm or a meditation object, something solid. For example, you can pick up the body, which is not a theory but the very presence of the physical form, and attune your mind to that. This is a quality of right effort. It’s the right use of energy. Then the mind is unified, it feels gladdened by that. You are not forcing the mind onto it; it goes towards it as a better thing to do. The mind begins to realize its true vibrancies, its true nature, its unity, its calm and its ability to pass through the pettiness of desire and the silliness of it, to a place where we feel self-respect and worthiness as human beings on this planet. This is something that we can learn from. We need to learn to really be human rather than just another kind of animal.

If you attune yourself to the rhythms of the body, to the rhythms of the day – the morning, the evening, the night, the time of rest, the time of wakening, the time of putting forth effort, the time of relaxing, the rhythms of the breath, the rhythms of walking – you find that there is a sensitive tranquillity that’s not just a dull blanking out, but a real calm that has rapture and joy in it. Meditation practice is a very joyous experience. The mind likes to be with the body, it feels good there. Even with physical pain, it works with it and sees, ‘What can we do with this? Can we contemplate the suffering of it or relax into it or adjust slightly?’ It feels gladdened by the opportunity to do good practice; it’s not another hassle or another burden. So make sure your path is always ongoing. As it goes on, you see results and feel encouragement. Then there isn’t any turning back. We just have to live out our life, live with the kamma of the sense-consciousness and the kamma of this world, and use it to develop spiritual truth, spiritual virtue and spiritual strength. There’s nothing else to do that makes sense.