## Definition of Technical Terms

By Ajahn Sucitto

Absorption (jhāna)Absorptions are degrees of meditative concentration. They are states of mind characterized by what is missing (such as hindrances, sense-contact or thinking) and what is present (such as ease). There are four levels of absorption. The first of these jhānas has the presence of bringing to mind, evaluation, rapture, ease and one-pointedness (these are defined below). At this level, the mind is removed from the hindrances (for as long as the absorption lasts). This jhāna may be developed to give rise to the sequentially deeper absorptions of second, third and fourth jhāna. Second jhāna leaves bringing to mind and evaluation behind and is supported by confidence, rapture and ease. Third jhāna cools the mind so that the rapture disappears and is replaced by equanimity and mindfulness. Ease is still apparent. In the fourth jhāna, the mind is so still that only equanimity and mindfulness are discernable.

There are also four successively more subtle mental states that can be accessed from the fourth jhāna: ‘the sphere of boundless space’, ‘the sphere of boundless consciousness’, ‘the sphere of nothingness’ and ‘the sphere of neither-perception-nor-non-perception’. These are sometimes classified as the fifth to eighth  jhāna.

It should be noted that absorptions (especially third and fourth) are comparatively rare among all but experienced meditators.

AffectThe conscious subjective aspect of feeling or emotion; the first resonance of the mind (citta) as it registers experience.

Aggregates (khandhā)The five aspects of existence, which are affected by clinging:

Form (rūpa): an object that consciousness brings to awareness; often, but not exclusively, a visual object.

Feeling (vedanā): an affect in terms of pleasant, unpleasant or neutral tones.

Perception (saññā): the act of recognition, and the felt impression or image that this act establishes in the mind.

Activities/programs (saṅkhāra): intention and impulse, the response of the affected mind, both immediate and irrational, and reasoned – see definition: ‘Programs’.

Consciousness (viññāṇa): see definition: ‘Consciousness’.

Appreciative joy (muditā)The uplift that occurs when the mind takes pleasure in the welfare, happiness and goodness in oneself or others.

Ardour (ātappa)A sense of focused aspiration; one of the three factors that are essential for establishing mindfulness in a purposeful way. (The others are mindfulness and clear comprehension.)

Becoming (bhava)One of the three ‘influxes’ (āsavā) – sensuality, becoming and ignorance. Becoming is the involuntary action of forming a solid identity out of changeable and impersonal aggregates – perception, intention, feeling, form and consciousness. In the analysis of the Four Noble Truths, becoming (and its twin, non-becoming,  vibhava) is also listed along with sense-desire as the source of suffering and stress.

Birth (jāti)The arising of a three-dimensional, self-recognizing entity. This can be in the sensual or immaterial domains, as a human, animal or spirit. The term can also be extended metaphorically to include a psychological ‘birth’ as ‘my identity as an ice skater was born in 1998’ or ‘This idea was born out of a group discussion.’ Also, see definition: ‘Dependent arising (paṭiccasamuppāda)’.

Bringing to mind (vitakka)Also rendered as ‘conceiving’, ‘initial thought’ or ‘initial application.’ This act of ‘naming’ an object is how the thinking mind forms a conceivable object to focus on.

Clear comprehension (sampajañña)An attention that, like deep attention and direct knowing, supports a wise apprehension of phenomena. It comprehends whether a mind-state is skilful or not, whether a hindrance or an enlightenment factor is present or not, and what causes either of these to arise or decline. Clear comprehension is one of the three factors that are essential for establishing mindfulness in a purposeful way, the others being ardour and mindfulness. It is supported by evaluation so that rather than just holding something in mind, it is alert and enquiring.

Clinging (upādāna)Also rendered as ‘grasping,’ ‘feeding on’ or ‘taking as a support.’ Although the word is stark and graphic, it refers to the mind’s dependency on sights, sounds and ideas (as well as on becoming, systems and customs, and assumptions of self-hood), even when these are not ethically blameworthy.

Compassion (karuṇā)The mind’s inclination to ward off pain and suffering in a clear and empathic way.

Consciousness (viññāṇa)The activity that brings an object into awareness through a sense-door. This includes mind-consciousness, which brings thoughts, emotions, intentions and perceptions – collectively called  dhammas – into awareness. Consciousness is then said to ‘cling’ to that object and take it as a support. An ‘unsupported’ or ‘unestablished’ consciousness (i.e. one that isn’t dependent on the senses or on any mind-state) is an attribute of an arahant.

Deathless  (the)The mind’s liberation from all bases of clinging. Also, see definition: ‘Nibbāna’.

Deep attention (yoniso manasikāra)Also translated as ‘wise attention,’ ‘systematic attention’ or ‘appropriate attention.’ It’s the attention that focuses on the causes and consequences of phenomena (dhammā) – whether they arise from or are conducive to skilful or unskilful states, for example. It helps to select a suitable object or theme for meditation, and an enquiry into cause and effect and the Four Noble Truths. Along with wise advice from another person, the Buddha considered deep attention to be a fundamental support for awakening.

Defilements (kilesa)Unskilful factors such as greed, hate, delusion, opinionatedness and lack of moral concern. Whereas the term ‘hindrance’ refers to five sticking points, ‘defilement’ is often used without any definite list, but to refer to any function of the mind that is led by unskilful factors.

Dependent arising (paṭiccasamuppāda)A description of the conditioned processes that support suffering and stress. As a map these are laid out as:

When there is non-seeing (or ‘ignorance’) (avijjā), this supports the programs (saṅkhāra) that infest consciousness (viññāṇa); thus consciousness operates in terms of designing (nāma) an object (rūpa) which occurs in one of six sense-fields (saḷāyatana); these fields are filled dependent on contact impressions (phassa); these contact impressions are registered in terms of feeling (vedanā), which arouse degrees of inclination (taṇhā), which in turn stimulates clinging (upādāna); this clinging binds phenomena into patterns that becoming (bhava) solidifies into the basis for phenomenal existence; this basis then supports further arising or birth (jāti), which must be followed by the process of ageing and death (jarā-maraṇa); this is the basis for sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair (soka-parideva-dukkha-domanassa-upāyāsā). But with the complete and dispassionate stopping of wrong-seeing, the programs stop … thus there is the stopping of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair.

Eightfold PathThe Fourth Noble Truth exposed by the Buddha – the way leading to the cessation of suffering (dukkha):

Right view (sammā-diṭṭhi): direct knowledge of the Four Noble Truths (definition below).

Right attitude (sammā-saṅkappa): the motivating attitude of non-ill-will, non-cruelty and renunciation.

Right speech (sammā-vācā): refraining from lying, from harsh or abusive speech, from divisive or malicious speech and from idle chatter.

Right action (sammā-kammanta): refraining from intentionally harming any living creature, from stealing and from sexual misconduct.

Right livelihood (sammā-ājīva): abstaining from dishonest and harmful means of livelihood.

Right effort (sammā-vāyāma): the effort of avoiding and overcoming unskilful qualities, and of developing and maintaining skilful qualities.

Right mindfulness (sammā-sati): the four establishments of mindfulness (see definition: ‘Establishments of mindfulness’).

Right concentration (or unification) (sammā-samādhi): the first four jhānas (see definition: ‘Absorption’) and culmination of all these eight factors.

Enlightenment factors (bojjhaṅgā):The seven factors that need to be developed for awakening. These are:

Mindfulness (sati)

Investigation of phenomena (dhamma-vicaya)

Energy (viriya)

Rapture (pīti)

Calm, tranquillity  (passaddhi)

Concentration (samādhi)

Equanimity (upekkhā)

Equanimity (upekkhā)The ability to be on-looking and receptive without adding emotional bias.

Establishments of mindfulness (satipaṭṭhāna)Also known as ‘the four foundations of mindfulness’.  These present an overview of how mindfulness should be brought to bear on four aspects of experience: the experience of body, of feeling, of how the mind is affected and of the mental processes (dhammā) that are relevant to awakening. This latter category comprises positive factors (such as the enlightenment factors) and negative ones (such as the hindrances). By bringing mindfulness and clear comprehension to bear on these, one learns how to support and further the positive and eliminate the grounds for the negative. Furthermore, the view of insight that mindfulness and clear comprehension provide reveals that neither the positive nor the negative are attributable to, or comprise, a self.

Evaluation (vicāra)Also translated as ‘pondering’, ‘sustained thought’ and ‘consideration’. It is the factor that pairs with ‘bringing to mind’ to give the thinking mind a reading of an object of attention. While vitakka names and points the mind to an object, vicāra handles, feels and assesses the object in terms of perceptions and feelings. This evaluation supports clear comprehension.

Felt senseThe preliminary affect of a perception as it arises. It is felt in an embodied way, as a ‘gut sense’; it is not clear, not verbal, and intuitive. It is a compound of subtle physical sensations and emotional tones, which underlie and often give rise to more clearly recognizable moods and hunches. It is detected by deep attention within the embodied process, and if lingered on and listened to can give expression (often as metaphors, images or memories) to unresolved issues or traumatic material that are stored out of reach of the thinking mind. Giving wise attention to this can assist the resolution of such phenomena.

Four Noble TruthsThe Buddha’s teachings can be summarized in terms of the Four Noble Truths.

The First Noble Truth is that ‘There is  dukkha.’ This truth points to ageing, sickness and death, as well as to birth, in order to highlight the sense of vulnerability that all sentient beings must experience. It also details the state of clinging to or depending on the five aggregates to be ‘dukkha.’ This gives us an idea of the range of meanings that ‘dukkha’ can cover – pain, sorrow, vulnerability, uncertainty, stress and unsatisfactoriness.

The Second Noble Truth – that ‘ dukkha has a source or origin’ – names the origin of suffering not as the factors of the first truth (which seem to be unavoidable) but as sense-craving, craving to be something and craving to be nothing. The last two (bhava-taṇhā and  vibhava-taṇhā) are the pressures that cause the mind to build up an identity in terms of time – ‘I was, I am, I will be’ – or by negating personal habits and history – as in, ‘It’s nothing to do with me, it’s just the way things are.’ The latter has a negative attitude towards life and is also the grounds for moral nihilism and irresponsibility. With this truth we are instructed that the root of the problem is the craving bound up with the five aggregates, a craving for a solid self.

The Third Noble Truth is that there is a ceasing of  dukkha. This is through the complete and dispassionate relinquishment of craving. So with this truth, we are given a realistic way of freeing the mind. Although old age, sickness and death cannot be avoided, the fear and distress around identifying with them can be cut off. This cutting off is the experience of nibbāna, a term which is rendered as ‘blown out’ or ‘unbinding’ and refers to the force of craving.

The Fourth Noble Truth is of the Path that encompasses all the skilful means (of which meditation forms an essential part) that contribute to the ending of  dukkha. It should be borne in mind that: a) meditation is only a part of the Path (and needs to be established on the ethical aspects of the Path) and: b) that Buddhist meditation is only for the elimination of  dukkha – not for psychic powers of any kind.

Goodwill  (mettā)Also rendered as ‘kindness’ or ‘loving-kindness.’ This is the mind’s inclination to provide support or nourishment for others or oneself in a clear and empathic way.

Hindrances (nīvaraṇā)They are obstacles to mental cultivation. They comprise:

Sense-desire (kāmacchanda)

Aversion and ill-will (vyāpāda)

Mental dullness, indolence and sluggishness (thīna-middha)

Restlessness, worry, anxiety (uddhacca-kukkucca)

Sceptical doubt (vicikicchā)

Ignorance (avijjā)

Also ‘unknowing’ or ‘obscuration.’ Generally, ignorance is of the Four Noble Truths. It is an energy that pushes attention away from the clarity of awareness. Ignorance is also the sense of ‘missing the point’ that angles the mind to the aspect of the pleasure (rather than skilfulness) of an object or process, and towards becoming and non-becoming (rather than to changeability). The dispelling of ignorance is the main aim of Dhamma practice. Mind (citta)Also rendered as ‘heart’, ‘psyche’ or ‘awareness’ – which gives an idea of the breadth of the reference. ‘Mind’ in Buddhist parlance is the affective-responsive system, an intelligence that receives perceptions from the external senses, feelings from the body as well as its own perceptions and programs. As it receives these it formulates affects, in terms of pleasure or displeasure. Thus we can feel pleased by a sight, not because of the eye, which is neutral, but because of the derived mental perception. Mind also has its own ‘organ’: mano (translated as ‘mind-organ,’ ‘intellect’ or ‘mind’), which, through attention, formulates concepts out of sense-perceptions. Mind-organ has no feeling and serves to classify, structure or give detailed information to the mind – future, past, self and others are examples of the mind-objects that it creates.

Mind is affected and feels various forms of happiness and grief, expressing this with images, moods and thoughts. Its evolved responses are our mental behaviour, ranging from compassion to aversion, from depression to elation, from patience and mindfulness to deceitfulness and delusion. The breadth and non-rational source of these justifies the use of the words ‘heart’ and ‘psyche.’

‘Awareness’ refers to the most fundamental property of mind, which is the ability to receive an impression. It is because of this that we can directly know an impression rather than add responses and interpretations to it. It is on this property of mind that mindfulness and liberation are based. Liberation can be understood as the freedom from negative, afflictive behaviour. More profoundly it can mean liberation from  dukkha.

It should be understood that the Buddha did not postulate a liberated mind as having an immaterial, eternal existence (as a soul), but rather that this affective responsive experience can be laid to rest.

NibbānaVariously translated as ‘blowing out’, ‘extinguishing’ (as of a fire) or ‘unbinding’ (as of clinging). So it is not a state, but awareness with no basis for greed, hatred and delusion. The two common ways in which the term nibbāna is used are first as the extinguishing of defilements – so that the mind can operate in a pure and unfettered way – and second, as the ceasing of the aggregates. The appreciation of the latter rests on the understanding that the aggregates have no lasting or real existence; they are the framework compounded by the mind as a basis from which it weaves an insecure reality. The removal of defilements will bring dispassion and release in terms of how we function. Then, with the ceasing of the substructure of the aggregates, at the end of a lifespan, there is no ground for further birth.

One-pointedness (ekaggatā)The factor of absorption that arises dependent on bringing to mind, non-involvement and evaluation. It occurs in meditation when the quality of ease has calmed rapture and the mental energy; the energy of focusing and the bodily energy are in harmony. The resultant merging of mind and body is experienced as a firmness in awareness, which is hence not penetrated by sense-impressions.

Programs (saṅkhārā)The collective, formative and energetic intelligences that rise up in response when the mind is affected. The first response is called ‘contact’ (phassa); it registers an impression and formulates it into a ‘knowable’ felt perception such as ‘smooth’, ‘hot’, ‘agreeable’, ‘irrelevant’. This contact then activates ‘intention’ (cetana) and ‘attention’ (manasikāra). Together these focus on the perception and feeling, derive a ‘felt sense’, interpret it in personal and linguistic terms and respond to it. These programs operate through three intelligences:

Emotional, intuitive and wish-forming (citta-saṅkhārā)

Verbal (i.e. thought and speech) (vacī-saṅkhārā)

Bodily (i.e. somatic and internal ‘gut’ responses) (kāya-saṅkhārā)

Rapture (pīti) (also ‘uplift’, ‘joy’)The positive state of a gladdened mind that is accompanied by a bodily energy such as a flush or a tingling. It can be based on beauty, or on powerful uplifted emotions. In meditation, rapture is based on the removal of the five hindrances and is said to be born of non-involvement. One of the factors of absorption and of awakening, it gives confidence and energy to the mind.

Spiritual faculties (indriya)‘Authorities’ that support the mind’s spiritual inclination. These are listed as:

Faith (saddhā)

Energy (viriya)

Mindfulness (sati)

Concentration (samādhi)

Wisdom (paññā)

When fully developed, this same list is entitled ‘powers’ (bala).