#### Stepping Back into Wisdom

This reflection was offered on 6 June 2012, during a retreat at Gaia House, in Devon.

Today we will look at the question: ‘How can we develop wisdom in and through meditation practice and in our lives?’ Wisdom is a very broad term. We can certainly have a sense of admiration and devotion for many teachers, but the Buddha is exceptionally articulate in being able to define things from many angles. The Buddha wisdom is the ability to describe, define and differentiate, ‘This is this, that is that. This fits with that, that works with this. When this arises, that arises. When this doesn’t happen, that doesn’t happen.’ Wisdom is the ability to analyze or witness the whole hologram of our experience and to recognize how the dynamics work – and dynamics are what most of us are struggling with.

How much embodiment is necessary? When you emphasize the body, sometimes you miss the analytical consciousness. When there is too much analysis, you can miss the heart. When there is too much heart, you miss the body. When you get almost skinless in terms of your emotional processes, then what is needed is a simple body lump, a structure, something solid that you can hold. We recognize our whole experience as being holistic. Practice is a matter of finding balance and trying to bring things together, whereas our tendency is to go into one particular place. Often the irony or the sadness of it is that we tend to go into afflicted places. That’s the bit that is calling, ‘Help! Help!’ and pulling us in. Whether it’s physical pain, emotional pain, psychological pain or life pain, it’s pulling you into it because it really wants to be cured, it wants to be helped, and the wise and difficult thing to do is: don’t go into it! It’s not a matter of denying, but if you purely go into the pain, then you lose touch with the big picture, you lose touch with the wholeness. You go into the fragment, the split, the wound and you lose touch with the healthy flesh. Your attention goes into the pain, and the power and energy of attention reduplicates it.

Attention is a strengthening quality. Whatever you put your attention on will be heightened and energized, will bring more power into it. If you focus your attention on a pain, it’s very likely that the attention by itself will heighten that pain, will make it more acute. This is why a lot of the wisdom is just learning how to flex the attention, how to maintain a broad focus rather than tunnelling in, which is what our minds tend to do. When you have a splinter in your finger, there’s only one part of your body that’s there: ‘I am the splinter!’ The rest of it – the feet, the ears and so forth – is gone. I’m exaggerating a little bit, but one part screams for attention and it really becomes heightened. Yes, you have to get that splinter out of your finger, but the answer doesn’t come from the wound. The cry of help comes from the wound, but the answer doesn’t come from the wound. That’s why you go to a doctor: they are sympathetic, but they’re not wounded; they’re not feeling the pain, they’re not drawn into it. They can see, ‘OK, this is the problem. I think I can do that’ and they pull the splinter out.

The wisdom faculty is that which differentiates and is able to say, ‘That’s there. The physical pain, sorrow, distress or whatever is there. It’s not that I’m not sympathetic to it, but it’s there,’ rather than, ‘I am the pain. Help! What can I do about it?’ When we become the pain, we also become all the energies that resist it, fight, struggle, feel overwhelmed or helpless in it. All that comes up in it, it’s called papañca. It proliferates itself, it goes viral. This is something you want to really understand and be wise about. It sounds a bit hard, but it’s not unsympathetic. You don’t want to go into the pain, but it doesn’t mean you ignore it or deny it; you objectify it. Sometimes it is actually wiser to say, ‘This is too much; let’s put it to one side for now.’ Most likely you’re capable of doing that with your bodies. You can say, ‘Now I’m going to stand up. I’m going to get a nice soft chair. I’m going to lie down.’ There’s so much you can take, then it’s just stressing and reduplicating.

The real essence of the Buddha’s teaching is the Four Noble Truths. We’re talking about suffering, stress, unsatisfactoriness, incomplete-ness, loss, aloneness and vulnerability. The suffering industry is booming; it’s a big bag. Wisdom is the only faculty that really resolves that. It doesn’t work on its own, but it’s the primary factor that resolves suffering. There are different kinds of wisdom. The highest, most developed form of wisdom is called vipassanā (insight wisdom). It’s the insight that becomes possible and available when we’ve built up resources to understand the nature of pain as a stuck vortex pattern rather than a self or something that ‘I am’. We are then able to see the causes and conditions that are continually recreating that pain – which are also not self, me or mine – and the dissolving of those conditions. We can use the word ‘insight’ in a colloquial sense – anything that causes enquiry into conditionality is insight – but the perfection of insight and wisdom is in understanding the causal and conditional nature of suffering, and how causes and conditions can be released or no longer created.

What do you do with physical pain? Of course, you can move around, but as we begin to learn, we realize that the body is a pain body – that’s its nature. There are only three kinds of feelings you can have: painful, pleasant and neutral, so if you look at that statistically, what does that break down to? At least 33.3% pain on average! The other side of it is that 66.6% isn’t pain. But when that 33.3% hits, it seems to be 100%. When you feel physical pain, you can widen your focus beyond the area that is painful. You include the painful bit and the non-painful bit and you extend your attention as widely as possible. That’s what I call ‘widening your attention’. It doesn’t mean you’re losing awareness of the pain, but now you’re widening attention to include the non-pain. You rest your attention primarily on the non-pain, because you don’t need to attend to the painful stuff: it will speak to you by itself as a way of making itself known. Then the quality of the pain doesn’t capture and draw in your attention. It doesn’t capture your psychology into, ‘I am this. I am overwhelmed. I can’t stand it,’ which is what it tends to do when you focus in on it. You stand at the edges of the pain, holding it.

If you want to work with this, you need to develop two particular skills. The first one is to understand the mental or immaterial reactions, those pulls that make you feel, ‘I can’t stand this! It’s not right. Why is this happening to me? What can I do about it?’ You keep acknowledging all that agitated, mental stuff, widening it, acknowledging it, and you say, ‘Yeah, but it’s this now.’ This is what equanimity is. Equanimity is primarily inclined to the feeling realm, including mental feeling. It’s the ability to widen over a whole span of feeling, to hold it with sympathy, but without getting involved, contracting or being pulled into it: ‘It’s like this now. It can’t be any other way. There’s no other way it should be than this.’ Now, does this cure pain? No, but it can cure suffering. Instead of agitation, the perturbation, contraction and feeling impacted by the pain, there can be a sense of, ‘There’s this phenomenon in the body.’ You can use the pain to teach you something about equanimity, about widening attention and about acknowledging and releasing the psychological stuff. We can release the ‘me’ senses that occur around the pain: the wounded victim, the overwhelmed, the ‘stuck with’ and so forth, which is what tends to occur with residual pain.

I have had long-term pain, quite debilitating sometimes: I lay on my back for days on end with back pain. Over the years, as I have worked with the pain in my body, it has taught me humility. It has taught me that I can’t push my body and have it my way. It has taught me that all those controlling attitudes, ‘fix it’, ‘sort it out’, ‘this shouldn’t happen to me’ are just suffering. It doesn’t sound like suffering, it sounds like the answer to suffering. It sounds like that which is going to help me out of suffering, but it isn’t. It’s the craving and the wanting bringing their activities into play. With the release of that craving and wanting, there is the humility to say, ‘There is pain’. The pain is global, it is universal. Every sentient creature is in pain – not a hundred per cent in pain, but certainly, that is a feature of our lives. And with that release, something else arises quite spontaneously, strangely and in an unbidden way: the relinquishment of self, of aloneness and of the sense of being stuck with this – and that is compassion.

As you have probably recognized, sometimes when you’re having a struggle and somebody else is having a struggle, when you get together and say, ‘Yeah, it’s really tough! It’s a struggle!’ suddenly you feel better. It’s a bit like that, but on a far fuller scale. When suffering increases, along with the sense of me and mine – ‘It’s just me. I’m terribly this. This is my problem. I’m the only one with a sore throat, bad knee, dodgy back, broken discs …’ – you look around and think that everyone else is all right, but they are not. They are sitting there thinking everyone else is all right! Put your hand up if you experience any kind of pain. Oh! It’s everyone!

When you hold pain with equanimity – equanimity is not indifference – it brings the primal sympathy there, which is the ability to resonate with something. And in order to resonate with the pain, you have to have it there. It can’t be ‘you’. It has to be something that you can  resonate with rather than be. It has to be some sense of receiving a sympathetic impression, but if you’re totally welded in it, you can’t get the sympathy. That’s why it’s sometimes difficult for us to feel the sympathy with ourselves. We can have  mettā towards spiders, dogs, other people and if we stretch it a bit even towards nasty people, but we might not know how to have  mettā towards ourselves. We come up with a few corny old phrases, but it doesn’t really work until we’re able to put our stuff out there on the table and realize, ‘Gee! I suffer a lot!’ We can also differentiate, objectify, ‘I did that; that was pretty good!’ We generate  muditā towards ourselves: ‘ Anumodanā!’ We’re able to differentiate something that we can get a reference to, that we can sympathize or resonate with. When it’s all held as ‘self’ and ‘mine’, the primal sympathy can’t resonate. This ‘self’ thing is the main problem, the source, not so much of pain, but of suffering.

The use of wisdom is essential because it differentiates: ‘That’s that’. And it does that by the process of viveka (lifting off or disengagement). Certainly, viveka is not a shutting down or a denial. It enables us to come a little bit off topic to get the overview. Viveka is one of the factors through which wisdom is developed, because with it we can see things much more clearly. The doctor can see the wound because they are not in it: they are with it. And the difference between being in something and with something is the crucial difference. When the pain comes up we are, most of the time, in it and we even somehow have the intuition that by going into it we’ll find a way to solve it. We’ll get in there to sort it out. We’ll analyze, we’ll get right down: ‘Now what’s the problem here?’ And all the time we’re actually ripping the wound open, making it flare up. If we could solve the pain by going into it, we would have solved it by now. We tend to go into our psychological or emotional pain again and again, hoping to find out what this is really all about, and the wound just keeps flaring up.

It might sound strange and paradoxical, but compassion involves a stepping back. As we step back, we step back into wisdom – not into indifference. Wisdom flourishes or is encouraged through that  stepping-back process, both in meditation and in daily life. That’s what wisdom does: it’s the ability to distinguish this from that. Ordinarily you can develop wisdom in many ways. There’s the study wisdom, which means you’re able to look at and understand maps of Dhamma. They give you an overview and enable you to learn the ways to differentiate and to see different qualities and factors, so that next time you’re challenged you can recognize, ‘Oh, that’s that one!’ Even that conceptual wisdom is an aspect that supports the differentiation process, but of course what we’re looking at more fully in meditation is direct wisdom, which is non-conceptual. Listening to talks, remembering terms and concepts to use, meditation exercises and so on is like learning your scales on a piano before you can really play. You have to plonk away at it.

The other thing you can do with physical pain, in order to help the differentiation process, is to visualize it. Is it like rocks grinding you up? Is it like fire burning you up? Is it like knives slashing you to pieces? Is it like being twisted with a rope of some kind? Is it like somebody cutting your leg off? Is it a thumping pain, screwing pain, something winding itself into you, a slashing pain, needling pain, crushing pain or just slow increasing pressure? Which kind of pain would you like to have tonight? You have them all on offer! Now, this is not an exercise in masochism, but it can help us to step back. When you feel that ‘Something is tearing my leg off,’ then it’s up to you to decide, ‘Well, actually I think I’d better move my leg!’ Of course, you don’t want to rip your knees and your ligaments, but if you want to practise with pain, you can first choose a pain in your shoulders or something you can’t relieve by moving your legs. You may say, ‘Well, let’s spend a few moments with it. I can always bail out when I want to,’ and imagine what it would look like.

In a way, you’re getting into it more fully, but you’re not getting into it at the feeling level, because the visual consciousness doesn’t feel things. The only consciousnesses that have feeling associated with them are the body-consciousness and the mental consciousness (the affective consciousness). The visual consciousness doesn’t feel. The auditory consciousness doesn’t feel. The olfactory and the gustatory consciousnesses do not have feelings associated with them. Visualizing something tends to take the pressure off the feeling because you transfer what was being felt into what is being seen and that tends to ameliorate the intensity of the pain. When the intensity of the pain isn’t grabbing you so much, you can see it and you also start to notice subtler qualities that are there, such as impatience or ill-will. Some pain is not caused by a pressure in your body; it’s psychosomatic or tissue memory, you might say. Your system has been stacking hardness and uncomfortable things and when you visualize the pain, tissue memory comes up and it can say something quite profound to you.

For example, one of my pains showed me something about my unforgiving nature. I was not permanently unforgiving, but there was an unforgiving, unloving quality, a ‘not really giving’ quality and somehow this pain communicated that in some strange, intuitive way. As soon as that happened my heart opened and the pain disappeared. In some ways, that’s a demonstration of how some of this pain can transmute into compassion and release. The important thing is that you don’t go into it. You hold it carefully and if it keeps sucking you in, try to put it to one side, focus on other parts of your body or move your body around or find places in your body which feel comfortable.

If you’re dealing with psychological or emotional pain – painful memories, painful senses of yourself – you can come out of its intensity by trying to bring your attention back to the world of sense contact: ‘It’s a nice day today. People are pretty nice and I’m getting through. I’m OK.’ You come out of the wound and you also recognize your basic health. All of us have a basic health, otherwise we would certainly be psychotic. Our ability to recognize, to discriminate, to make ethical decisions, to discern skilful from unskilful, to do all the things that we are more or less taking for granted on a retreat: this is a sign of our fundamental health. But of course nobody is totally healthy: we all have little bits that have contracted. So we go to the health and if that involves coming to action, to thinking it through, to remembering, so be it. It’s certainly a fallacy to feel that you have to stay in some kind of deep state or what seems to be a deep state: ‘We’re not thinking, just feeling pain as pain.’ No. If you don’t lift out of it, there’s no wisdom there. It’s probably just re-traumatizing. The lifting out of it is almost like opening your eyes: ‘There’s nothing dangerous in front of me, it’s OK. Behind me is OK. Breathing out is OK …’ and we come out of that. This is a function of viveka and supportive of wisdom.

Wisdom is one of the ten pāramī. On an everyday life level we can also develop wisdom as a faculty: digging-the-garden wisdom, going-shopping wisdom, cooking-the-food wisdom. It’s mostly operated through another function called ‘skilful attention’, ‘deep attention’ or ‘wise attention’. We recognize: ‘What do I get myself into? What do I work with that causes skilful states to arise? Or at least that causes unskilful states to decline or doesn’t feed unskilful states?’ Wisely, we protect ourselves. Wisely, we guard ourselves. Wisely, we care for our well-being by refraining from unskilful actions and by developing good friends, generosity, resolution, patience and things that will give us a sense of dignity and self-respect. This is basic sanity, nothing esoteric: wisdom.

All these processes are saṅkhāras: they’re dynamic, they’re activities. The nature of activities is such that the more you repeat them, the more they build up a structure. We could, for the sake of explanation, differentiate between ‘structure’ and ‘dynamic’ as if they were two separate things, but in reality there’s only dynamic. The body, which could be seen as a structure, is actually dynamically arisen through reproduction, cellular growth and so forth. There’s nothing absolutely fixed and solid in the universe. Everything is dynamic, but some things are in a slow enough, stable enough dynamic to seem solid. What we do with skilful dynamics such as wisdom, patience and generosity is to repeat them. We run through them so many times in our daily activities that they begin to acquire a quality of structure. They begin to firm up, to crystallize. They become soft structures. They’re not as rigid as dogmatic ideologies but they become innate, soft structuring for the mind.

It’s very important to develop this sense of wholesome, supple structure, to intimately generate it in ourselves. We can of course be encouraged and inspired to be wise, patient, generous and so forth, but by itself that is not a generation of structure. That’s borrowing somebody else’s structure  – it isn’t you generating. You really have to generate it yourself, otherwise all structure becomes something that ‘I’ve got to do’, ‘I’ve got to be’, ‘They want me to be patient’, ‘He says I’ve got to be wise’, ‘She keeps telling me to be kind.’ When those dynamics feel like they’re imposed rather than generated, they become alien structures; they’re not intimate. This is certainly the case with ethics for example. It’s a difficult thing to cultivate in some ways, because a lot of ethics is what we call ‘top-down morality’. For example, you don’t know why but if you don’t shut up you’re going to get a smack. You can’t always explain, you can’t figure it out. The idea is that through modelling and through remembering external structures you generate your own. But as we come into maturity, we often feel a lot of rebellion against structures.

Certainly, during my teenage years, I wanted to chuck structure away, throw it out of the window, because it was always something that somebody else told me to do. When I was at school we had to wear a school uniform and the thing we wanted to do most was to rip it to pieces! So we found ways of rebelling by doing the buttons up wrong or having our cap on backwards or doing a funny knot on our tie. We would do anything to somehow just about conform with the system but put our own twist on it and show, ‘I’m doing mine!’ There was a lot of rebellion against structure because structure was always seen as alien, as ‘other’, that which constrains me rather than that which I have grown in order to cultivate and protect my well-being.

The same thing applies with wisdom: all the ideas, all the books, all the self-help manuals, my giving you talks and so forth, all of it can be heard through that same place of, ‘Somebody else is telling me what I should be, what I should do, what I should think and how I should behave.’ Structure has eventually to be self-generated or intimately generated so it’s actually a living self-structure. This process of wisely attending means you ask yourself, you feel it out for yourself. For example, how does lying feel? You linger with it long enough to sense the cause, the impulse, which you perhaps didn’t really notice – it just rose up – the feeling of it and the result of it. If you lengthen your attention span (that’s another aspect of widening) to witness what the whole thing is about, that’s how you get wisdom. You see: ‘That came from some blurry, instinctual place; it jumped out and it landed there and that’s the result, that’s what it feels like.’ It’s important to stay long enough with something.

A retreat situation is protected enough that we can feel our own unwholesome attitudes and mental states in the freedom of our own minds. Nobody is going to read our mind – all our naughty thoughts, malevolent instincts, spitefulness, jealousy, greed, craving, lust and all that. So, let’s have a look at it all, or a bit of it: ‘Where does that go?’ We are widening the span with the paramount quality of equanimity. There doesn’t have to be a self, there doesn’t have to be some indictment of ‘me’. This is just a process: ‘This is what aversion or jealousy feels like. This is how it rises up, this is what it creates and this is where it goes. This is how it creates self and other people, and then it comes to this place.’ We’re running through some of these programs a little bit at a time. It’s the same thing with physical pain: you witness it, you’re not involved with it and then something in you sees: ‘It’s that.’

I’d like to mention another thing in terms of the development of wisdom, which may sound strange: if you want to be wise, be a little more stupid! Don’t have an answer. Linger a bit longer before you come up with the response. Most of us probably know how we should be. We can do the ‘I should be’ script quite clearly. When our wounded pieces come up, the old ‘should be’ darts right in there pretty quickly and tells us what we should do about it. Mostly, it puts us into our head. We think, ‘Oh, well, this is this particular thing happening and what is needed here is more of that. I should do this. I should be like that.’ And the more you study the Dhamma, the better you get at doing that. You use all these long jargon terms. You analyze the problem and come up with the answer pretty pat. So, if you want to be wise, be a little more stupid. Stay with that ‘beats me’ a little bit longer. Pause from the clever, wise and astute response, because it’s in the pausing that you can find the fine balance of meeting: staying with, not in – staying beside the problem but not in it, not fixing it, not answering it.

In the pausing, there’s a quietening, a certain relinquishment of the activities to fix, change or understand, and with the quietening and releasing of these activities, something emerges. Pause, listen, stay with it. Wait and trust what emerges by itself. It can be that something in you shifts, something moves to a felt sense. The release of suffering is straight through the heart. You don’t release it by going up into the head and understanding it. You have to be surprised by it. You have to not know it so it can touch you and move through you, straight through the heart. That’s the release of suffering.

The understanding comes after the release. You may get the skills and the understanding of how to angle yourself into that holding space, the kind of qualities of attention that are needed. You may understand that and have cultivated that, but I would say that at the place of meeting you don’t know what to do and you’re not worried about it. You’re equanimous and you’re open to what will emerge by itself. That which emerges is truly not self. It’s not so much what emerges that matters but where it comes from. Sometimes what emerges could be something very simple like, ‘Let go.’ Well, haven’t we heard that one before? Sometimes something shifts, but it doesn’t come from our conditioned understanding, it comes from somewhere quite fresh, quite new, quite ungenerated, unconditioned, uncreated, unformulated. The release of suffering is through the Unconditioned. It’s an unconditioning. It surprises us. This is how wisdom works: holding the space, knowing what not to do, pausing and letting whatever emerges from that careful holding space arise.

Isn’t this where real inventiveness, real genius comes from? Somebody goes, ‘Oh! That’s it! Eureka!’ – the ‘eureka moment’, the light bulb flashes. They didn’t know, they were looking at a problem and suddenly the solution popped up. Friedrich August Kerulé understood the structure of benzene from some intuitive image he’d had in a dream of a snake with its tail in its mouth. Einstein got his understanding of relativity from hearing that somebody had fallen off a roof in Berlin and that fellow said that while he was falling through the air he didn’t feel the pull of gravity. He didn’t feel anything until he hit the ground, then he felt plenty! So somehow, something goes, ‘Boing!’ It’s often out of left field. Something comes up – a face, an image, a phrase, a feeling, a mood, a tone, a colour, a vibration, a sound – seemingly out of nowhere. That is the door opener. You didn’t do it, you didn’t create it. It’s the wisdom that is born by release, the herald of release. It’s not something that is mine, that I can have or prepare.

It’s very important to learn to let go of something. Now, actually, if you let go of something, that is all well and good but that isn’t real letting go. It’s a kind of relinquishment which is good and skilful but it isn’t letting go in terms of the Third Noble Truth. In the Third Noble Truth, nobody lets go; it just happens. I might say, ‘I have spent four days without a cup of coffee, so I’ll just let go of that now!’ … or whatever it is. You feel that wanting it and then you put it down. That’s good, but the letting go of objects is something we do. The letting go of options is something we can do, but the letting go of suffering isn’t something we can do, otherwise we would have probably done it by now.

Letting go of suffering is something that happens. It happens when we have given up. The sequence of how wisdom is developed starts with viveka (disengagement), then virāga (dispassion), nirodha (resting or ceasing) and finally vossagga, which means complete giving up, complete relinquishment. That’s the trajectory, the development of wisdom. It doesn’t mean getting more intelligent or smart or having more ideas. The development of insight wisdom is on that line. None of these sound particularly wise, do they? But wisdom is not a concept; it’s the ability to handle – concepts, bits of string, macaroni, babies, etc. You can handle concepts (that’s conceptual wisdom) but the wisdom isn’t in the concept, it’s in the ability to handle. This trajectory gives us a sense of the quality of the handling.

At first we might not think we are suffering. We think it’s something or somebody else’s fault: ‘The situation around me is unpleasant and people aren’t being as nice to me as they should be, but I’m not suffering. These inconsiderate people I live with don’t give me the treatment I need, but there’s nothing wrong with me, I’m fine.’ So, at first we see the problem as being the world out there, what happened to us or whatever. Then, as we come out of this ‘blurred together’ sense, we realize, ‘Actually, I am suffering’. Then we may feel shame: ‘I shouldn’t be suffering after all these years. I don’t want to be suffering! How do I stop suffering?’ When you’re a professional healer it’s even discrediting to suffer. It’s not just painful, it’s also a sign of, ‘You didn’t really do it, did you? You’re selling snake oil and it doesn’t work!’ It’s not just painful, it’s also ignominious.

The sense of handling starts with viveka: disengaging our involvement in the suffering and holding it in a wider perspective, getting the whole picture. We recognize that there is suffering; there is a sense of agitation, it’s stressing. At that point, the storyline of why, who, what I should be and so forth has stepped back and there is an experience of grief, frustration, pain, hurt or whatever it is. We can just see it as ‘It’s that.’

Virāga means that we start to withdraw our emotional pressures, our excitement and agitation with it. We start to become less emotionally involved in it and with that we begin to see the impermanence, the flowing and changing quality of vedanā (feeling), of thought pattern and so forth. We are moving towards equanimity rather than towards the old, ‘How long is this going to go on for? I can’t stand this! Surely this shouldn’t be happening to me! What did I ever do in my past life?’ There’s a calming and a cooling of the emotional energies through an increasing sense of the realization: ‘This is a phenomenon; everybody gets this.’ There is more acceptance of that suffering. You recognize that this process of feeling lonely, lost, betrayed or whatever has a kind of moving, flowing quality to it and you can witness, hear the cry of it without getting bogged down in it. You keep your sense of being the listener, being the witness, being the watcher of that. The more there is that sense of virā ga and viveka, the more that quality of self and identification decrease. The development of wisdom is towards a diminution of identification (the ‘in it’, the ‘being it’).

Nirodha is ceasing or resting; it’s when you have come to a complete pause. Then the whole experience starts to clarify because you’re not putting any more volitional energy into it. As the trajectory of understanding a phenomenon as it actually is develops, the sense of self declines. The ceasing of identification is the key. It means that a piece of suffering can now move on. As long as we say, ‘I was hurt by this and that, but so what? Everybody suffers. I’m bigger than that. It doesn’t really matter. I’ve gone over it!’ then suffering hasn’t gone through the heart; it’s been compensated for. Sometimes we might feel ashamed: ‘I shouldn’t be suffering. I shouldn’t feel hurt. I’m a big boy now, that shouldn’t bother me … yeah, but it does!’ As you practise, the sense of self in the suffering – and that ‘shouldn’t be suffering’ – is  relinquished. With that, there’s a sense of openness to feel the feeling as a feeling. Then it can move. The ceasing of the sense of self is what allows suffering to move and it moves straight through the heart. Sometimes there’s a shift of some sort.

Relinquishment is the final development or the final ripening of wisdom. It’s the understanding that there never was a self – you don’t have to keep generating a self who is liberated. As soon as you’ve overcome a bout of suffering and think, ‘Well, I have sorted that one out. That was easy!’, then you set yourself up for the next bout of suffering. You know you’re preparing the ground to do some more. Relinquishment is an openness to allow the process to continue. This is how that movement develops. With the cultivation of wisdom there’s an increasing capacity to differentiate, to see some of the details in an objective way: this causes that, this generates that, this supports that. We see suffering in detail but no longer in the sense of self. We contemplate it as it actually is. That’s the wisdom that supports the process of release. This is how you develop wisdom in daily life; this is how you develop wisdom in meditation. Wisdom actually only goes one way, and that’s the way it goes.