##### Reflecting on Kamma

Considering the significance of death from the spiritual perspective of awareness gives us a way of appreciating this natural, normal process. We can see it more fully as being a teacher. It can take us away from the appearance of belonging to this physical world, which is a place of struggle and demand, a place of consuming and being consumed by the forces of nature. Then we begin to see that there are several signs involved in death. One of them is impermanence, the fact that things come, change and go. This is a challenge to the instinct for security, possessing and controlling. Another sign is the sense of separation, which challenges our ways of implanting our ideas and views in the world. We tend to see the world as belonging to us, as fitting into our ways of thinking. For example, we have a very strong need for company, for the perception of something ‘out there’ to bounce off of,  for a response. Death challenges this.

Why is there this search for security? Why this need to belong to something, to be held by something? The drive towards security and belonging comes from the basic self-view, which is a separative view. Rather than seeing ourselves simply as physically organic processes, self-view tends to make us see ourselves as set apart. We want to be different, to be a defined individual. We want to be able to get away from things we don’t like, to be able to choose, decide and determine. We don’t want to just be part of the flow of nature. Once that bias towards being an individual and having one’s own way is established in the mind, there’s always going to be a sense of separation. Illogically, we attempt to overcome the separation by increasing the sense of self and trying to make it take over the world. As a result, the forces of nature become enemies or problems.

One aim of religion is to find the universal connection, to end the separation. In practising Dhamma we are looking for refuge, but we don’t end the sense of separation or find refuge by trying to make things go our way, or by finding things that suit or gratify us. Rather, it’s by letting go of the search for self through gratification that we realize the universal connection, our true refuge. When we contemplate the mind, we see that things arise and pass away in it. There is complete continuity and interdependence of thought, feeling, sound, silence, etc. Whenever we stop resisting, craving, grasping, rejecting and favouring the phenomena we experience, there’s a sense of the wholeness of everything. The darkness and the light, the movement and the stillness, the pleasant and the painful – all are part of the seasons of life. They are the colours, the flavours of this sensory world. We realize the wholeness.

The meditation teachings talk about impermanence, but what is it that knows impermanence? The more continuously we recognize separation, impermanence, change and mortality, the more this recognition sees these things as part of a whole. Because there is passing away, there is arising; because there is birth, there is death. They all fit together. You can’t say that things arise permanently or permanently pass away. They have a wave-like quality to them, they rise and fall. Our tendency is to look for the constantly new and arising. We look for something else to happen, something to go to, something to have. There is a strong bias against seeing things pass: that’s not so exciting.

Notice the seasons of the year. When you contemplate autumn and winter in your mind you can find that they are calming. There’s something slightly melancholy about autumn: the leaves going to ochre, brown and yellowy-gold colours, the foliage falling away, the skies louring. In winter the trees are bare and there are fewer animals around. It’s quiet and still; there’s a certain sadness. Then in springtime everything suddenly seems to be bursting. We see bright colours, growth, movement of creatures and things showing life; it’s attractive. Then comes summer, and then again the fading away of the autumn and winter: on and on like that – the cycles of birth and death.

You can contemplate the seasons and see that because we are incarnate (having a physical form) the whole system of our life is bound up with birth. There is a strong instinctive inclination towards ‘birth’, towards this pull of wanting to become somebody, to do this or to get that, and a more stilling process with ‘death’, with the ending of phenomena. We like babies; we’re interested in growth, youth and progress, rather than decline and fading out. There’s a strong fascination with sexuality and procreation. They’re magnetic, attractive, interesting and exciting. To most people, the idea of living a celibate life would seem rather bleak, loveless and without feeling, because of the way we are programmed. And yet autumn is one of the most valuable times of the year, with its seeds and fruits; winter is a time of calm and rest. If it were spring all the time, animals would burn themselves out. If you tried to live as though you’re nineteen for fifty years, your body would wear out, your system wouldn’t be able to handle it. You’re not supposed to have youth and birth permanently. Your system is not built for it. It’s perfectly built not only for birth, but also for ageing, and in due course, for death. Death is like giving it all back, resting from incarnation, letting go of the elements – the time to offer the body back to the elements.

Birth and youth are about separateness, physically and psychologically. Before we’re born we’re just a part of our mother’s body, but birth is an act of separation. When we’re young we’re still very much an appendage of somebody, but as we grow up from being a little baby into being a child, then a teenager and so on, there comes an increasing sense of the need for a separate ego. We want to cut the connection, the umbilical cord, and to have our own way. That’s the process of growing up, with its struggles and rebellions. Then, as we grow older, there gradually comes a need to no longer be separate, but to find companionship, settle and be stable. And finally, in old age, our interest in things fades and we go into rest again.

So if there is a problem, it’s really birth, not death. You attach to birth, you’re trying to be separate, and at the same time you fear separation. You want to be an individual, and yet you want other people and things to belong to you, to your separateness. But when you contemplate the energy of birth, the desire to become and to own, this constant wanting to be born into this or born into that, you can also see the frustration that goes with it.

Another learning process involved with reflecting on death is looking at the process of kamma. What is the result of your life? In the autumn, what fruit is there? You probably feel a sense of regret when you think of unskilful things you have said or done, but you can also experience regret as a result of wrong view. When there is attachment to birth, you always feel there could have been wonderful things to do that you haven’t done, or possibilities and potentialities that you haven’t realized. You can think negatively of things that have been disappointing, frustrating or difficult in your life, and thus you experience a kind of regret or sadness about yourself. This is the result of self-view, of kamma, of activities based on self, when life is about getting, having, experiencing, becoming, doing and so on. We tend to measure ourselves by these things.

The nature of life’s energies is to change and fade, and reflection on death gives a chance to recognize all those forces and have a change of heart. We can consider that one of life’s most important abilities is to be able to put things down, to let them go, to let them drop like the leaves in autumn, rather than always be searching for a new spring, a new arising. Autumn is a truly important season, the time of fruits and new seeds, the time when the results of birth can be tasted and re-sown. In the autumn, in the dying, in the changing, we put aside the unskilful kamma, the grasping, the anger, the greed and the restlessness – all the hot, rising energies that go hand in hand with me/mine attitudes – not by rejecting them, but with regret and forgiveness. This is a wonderful preparation for conscious dying.

Dying and death evoke stillness, letting go, liberation from conditions and going back to the source, returning home to the refuge – rather than being thrown out in the cold, torn away from the womb of life. Even just as a physical process, death itself is often experienced as peaceful, as letting go. People who have had near-death experiences speak of them as being experiences of great joy and light, of great warmth and at-home-ness, a great blessedness, even transcendence. Sometimes they speak of their reluctance to be dragged back onto this shore again. Dying is the critical time when we have to undergo a change of heart that suits its season in our life. From birth, becoming, separation and the sense of self, we move to cessation, harmony, being at one with things, witnessing kamma rather than creating any more.

It’s often said that at the moment of death, much of life is recalled and reviewed. This also happens in meditation. When the Buddha sat under the Bodhi tree just before his enlightenment, he reviewed his past lives. You can imagine the enormous power the Buddha must have had! Trying to review just one life is enough of a carnival, so to review many lives …! Reviewing this life is not usually something you do deliberately; it just happens. What does that mean? It means that the traces of kamma don’t end with the action itself; they stay after you’ve said your word, after you’ve done your action. Even with mental kamma, especially if you have strong, habitual, obsessive thought patterns, the traces are there. The seeds of everything we’ve done, said and thought are left in the mind. In meditation and in the autumn of our life, when our seeds ripen, when our fruits fall off the tree, a lot of this stuff comes back to consciousness.

Many people have a habit of constantly seeking birth, becoming and separateness. They are so attached to ego trips of one kind or another that they manage to keep this habit going right through until the last twitches of life. At the age of eighty-five they’re still into birth, becoming, getting and doing, so they don’t really have enough time to attend consciously to the dying process. The result will be very deep kammic impressions, which will strongly affect the creation of the next life. The seed of a fruit regenerates a plant dependent upon what type of plant that fruit has grown on. However, if we meditate on kamma, we begin to liberate the sense of self that is created around it. We contemplate the actions, the moods, the feelings that come up, and allow them to speak to us without justifying, blaming, criticizing or worrying. We let them have their say. This is the clearing of kamma. We listen to its fruit and allow it to be reviewed, because if it’s left unattended it will regenerate. So meditation is like a conscious dying process, a dying away of self-view.

The Buddha’s teaching about suffering is a guide. It’s a reminder that the sense of annoyance, frustration, loss or uncertainty that we may experience is not something to be shoved away, but something to be understood. It’s when you review your past experiences in meditation, when you reflect on kamma, that you begin to understand it. The unenlightened being feels, ‘I shouldn’t suffer! I don’t deserve this!’ For example, when I fall ill, I think, ‘Oh, how annoying!’ When someone says something unkind to me I think, ‘That’s not fair!’ When my car breaks down I get out and kick the tyres, ‘This shouldn’t happen to me, I want to go somewhere!’ When failure or disappointment comes it can seem like an affront, something that’s gone wrong with life, but the being who wishes to awaken realizes, ‘There’s no reason on earth why things should go my way.’ These difficulties are opportunities to have a change of heart, to let go of the impatience and the demands, to purify kamma, so that we’re using our life to make amends for grasping, impatience and selfishness. And of course, the fruit that comes from this is a deepened purity of heart.

Consider: what if this is your last day? Think of the people you know who have died. What does that mean to you? Is there something you wish you had said or done – or wish you hadn’t said or done? What is the kamma involved with other people? What is the kamma involved with yourself? Do you have a sense of loss, shame, regret or incompleteness? What do you feel you have left undone, within yourself or with others? If you consider these things with a sincere wish to resolve them and let them go, if you honestly regret them, you’ll find that the effect of that kamma ceases.

It used to be considered very important socially to have proper mourning, proper rites and rituals, but I don’t think people know much about this nowadays. Funerals are often so abrupt. Rites and rituals enable you to recollect the person who has died. You let their presence sit in your mind. Then you search: ‘Is there something that needs to be said internally? Is there something to regret?’ The mourning time is an occasion to work those things out, to resolve them in consciousness, not a time to feel sorry for yourself. Regret is not about feeling sorry, it’s about understanding the roots of unskilful action. We fully recognize that we have done an unskilful action, we open up to it with complete honesty, and then we forgive ourselves and resolve to start anew.

The reflection on death can form part of each day, viewed as a lifespan of one day. What do you take from one day to the next? At the end of the day, do you have a chance to stop and look around? What is left lingering? Are there grudges, irritations? What kind of demands have you made on the world? Have you used others for your own welfare? Have you done things that you regret? In meditation, we honestly recognize all that, we bring it to the level of ‘Buddha’. Rather than going into the emotional plane of wringing our hands and feeling guilty, we consciously look at those things and use them as another chance to understand what is unskilful, and then we vow to begin again. This is redemption. This is what life can teach us.

Every evening in the monastery we chant: ‘Kāyena vācāya va cetasā vā. Buddhe kukammaṁ pakataṁ mayā yaṁ. Buddho paṭiggaṇhatu accayantaṁ. Kālantare saṁvarituṁ va buddhe.’ (‘Whatever kamma I’ve created in terms of body, speech and mind that has been offensive or wrong in terms of wisdom, in terms of Buddha, I sincerely regret so that I may try in future to act more skilfully.’) We recite this referring to the Buddha, then the Dhamma and then the Sangha. Of course, you can just mumble the words as devotional trappings before you start the practice, but if you know what they mean and what they’re pointing to, you can take this little section of a chant as a basis for reflection.

‘All that which has been wrong in terms of Buddha’ refers to every time you were heedless, inattentive or careless. Maybe you were not directly malicious, but you let the mind run recklessly away. Where does the mind go when we’re inattentive and heedless? It goes back to me and mine, doesn’t it? When there’s no other program running, that’s the default setting. We may think we haven’t done anything particularly wrong – we were just being normal. But ‘being normal’ all too often means being selfish, self-conscious, greedy and grasping, in ways that we might condone or that are acceptable socially, but not acceptable in terms of ‘Buddha’. Whether socially approved or not, they leave traces. Careless action and speech such as offending, gossiping, quarrelling, embarrassing people, lying, exaggerating, using people, sexual carelessness, carelessness involved with drugs and drink, heedlessly killing creatures, can leave very strong kammic traces. Even just carelessness in terms of mind leaves its traces: when we let the mind wallow, obsess, linger, flap around loosely, be sullen or grudging, instead of training and supporting it.

These are things we want to recognize consciously in that reflection at the end of the day: ‘This is the end of the day, this is the sign of death. If I die tonight, what do I leave undone? What am I taking with me?’ Then we can consciously recognize and sincerely regret and forgive our carelessness and heedlessness, so that hopefully the next morning there’ll be a little more of a sense of knowing what responsibility means. Responsibility is not a heavy, guilt-ridden, anxiety-inducing thing. It’s the sense of being careful, of caring for things. We care for our mind, are careful with it; we don’t let it run into the mire. It’s a precious thing, an enlightenment vehicle. It’s not something we should just use to enhance self with. It’s a beautiful, sensitive instrument, but we often use it merely for greed, hatred, ambition and grudges.

Kāyena vācāya va cetasā vā. Dhamme kukammaṁ pakataṁ mayā yaṁ. Dhammo paṭiggaṇhatu accayantaṁ. Kālantare saṁvarituṁ va dhamme.’ (‘By body, speech and mind, whatever wrong action done in terms of Dhamma, in terms of truth, I wish to recognize and regret it so that in the future there may be more skilful practice in terms of what is right.’) What is right is not ‘what suits me’ but what is proper, what is for the welfare of the whole system of which we’re part: our family, our society, our world, our planet. We ask ourselves, ‘What is right?’ Rather than seeing things always from the viewpoint of what suits us, we follow the right way: right view, right action, right meditation – the Eightfold Path.

In terms of Sangha, the reflection means honestly beginning again with the sense of using this human form for its highest ends, directing its energies towards what is best for the welfare of all. In this way, we release ourselves from the bitterness of death, so that death becomes simply rest.

In your meditation consider again what you are carrying around. Consider also the demise of others to whom you were close. Probably all of us have been touched by death in some way or other. What does that mean to you? What does that departed person mean to you? What kind of response does that thought bring up into your mind? Perhaps things you remember about them, things you have not resolved, things you’ve not forgiven them for or things for which you’d like to be forgiven. Bring up the image of that person in your mind, and let your mind forgive them and ask them for forgiveness. Thus, you’re learning to use the sign of death as an antidote for birth, rather than an antagonist to it. Death is the remedy, the chance for us to purify some of the excesses, some of the wrong views and recklessness of birth, becoming and self.