##### Here, Now – Meeting in the Blessing

This reflection was offered on the last morning of the retreat – 19 May 2017.

We’re tuning into the flow of events and taking that pause moment. We’re conscious of the flow of external events and how the mind grabs it – planning, packing bags, cleaning the room, catching the six o’clock train … tomorrow … tidying up, sorting that out, getting ready for this and that … ‘Ajahn so-and-so is coming over’, ‘I have to speak to Sister so-and-so’ … Just take a pause. There’ll always be time for that. There’s the flow of events, and there’s the pause. It’s not that difficult to do, but it’s difficult to remember – the pause button. There can be a softening from that rush forward or flutter. What’s here now? What’s always here now? We’re opening to the Deathless by directing the citta away from the khandhas, from the world that we construct so effortlessly, yet exhaust ourselves with. We turn away from these compulsive constructions – which we barely decide to do: they just happen – and hit the pause button on them.

Constructing the world and the future is a reflex: ‘It’s important … You have to … It’s necessary … Don’t wait!’ Pause, open and direct the mind to here, now. Feel the warmth of your body, the rhythm of your breathing; listen to the flutter and scurry of thoughts. We call them ‘the unbalanced spin dryer’. When you put wet clothes in a spin dryer and they’re not centred, the spin dryer starts going: ‘klunka, klunka, klunka …’. Then you switch it off and it goes: ‘klunk … klunk … klunk … hhiiioooou!’ This is called ‘the five aggregates’. Pause, switch the spin dryer off … breathing in, breathing out.

It’s not that we desperately want to be calm or that we expect life to be steady, peaceful, harmonious and have no edges in it. It doesn’t have to be externally calm. If you remember where that pause button is and you know the opening that can occur just with that, then it’s all right for life to be busy. But in my opinion, we have to get our finger on that pause button many times a day. If you do it ten times a day for fifteen seconds, is that difficult? Simply ask: ‘Where am I now?’ You feel the push through the mind, the energy rushing in your body, the tightening in your belly, the scurry of thought … and there they are. You’re turning away from that, and behind that, here, now, there’s the unconstructed, the unconstructing, the non-constructed.

‘This is peaceful, this is sublime: the stilling of saṅkhāras, the relinquishment of all attachments, the destruction of craving …’60 – the craving to get it finished, to get it done, to go to the next thing, to make sure we get it right … the craving to become clear and complete in the future. We hope we will be clear and complete in that wonderful future … that never happens! We wait for things to be settled, finished, tidied and just sweetly cruising along – the golden future that never happens! Do you see the hook? ‘Just run a little bit faster, and you’ll get there!’, ‘Shrug that thing off and you’ll get there!’ That’s craving. Nobody gets there; everybody’s there already. Don’t buy into the powerful messages of the constructed world, the messages you see around you. Everybody’s playing that game. The media is playing it, advertisements are playing it big time, really revving up that golden future … at the end of a contract: ‘Free access for only £39 a month!’ That sounds believable, doesn’t it? Just pause: ‘What is this?’ Pause … here, now.

Leaving Amaravati – what leaves Amaravati? The khandhas (aggregates) – sensations, feeling, perceptions, energies and sense-consciousness – leave Amaravati. They arrived, they have to go. That’s the message of the aggregates. There can only be separation, regret, things unfinished, parting from friends, separation and death. In brief, that’s the journey of aggregates: to death, to the sense of separateness and leaving things unfinished, incomplete. Everybody dies incomplete, in terms of the aggregates. ‘There are things I haven’t done, things I wish I’d said …’. It’s never finished.

These reflections are little slogans or images that you can bear in mind, if you like. Saṅkhāras are these onward propellants, energies, activations, formative tendencies, the constructions that say, ‘Move on, and you’ll get this completed’ – but it doesn’t! Saṅkhāras don’t finish until you stop them. They only end when you stop believing in them. If you follow them, they don’t end. They go from this to that, to this, to that, on and on … that’s the dream journey, isn’t it? There’s always another thing to do, another thing to sort out, another thing to acquire, another thing to check, another thing to clean and tidy up, something to prepare for the next thing … that also leads to the next thing … That’s the way it is. We got into that by being born.

There’s also the citta, but it’s often obscured, not apparent, not traceable; we can’t see it. All we see are the aggregates. Everything we detect with our senses – our thoughts, energies and feelings – is the movement of the aggregates, so we need to turn away from that, and bring the mind back to here, now. Try to remember these two words and practise them. It can be a little slogan: ‘Practise here, now.’ This is something you can do for ten seconds, but do it often. Do it after breakfast and after the washing-up. Do it when you park your car, then when you close the door … when you open the door and sit down … Here … Here. This is the way through the body.

Here is the sense of location. You have this rūpa (bodily form), which you can see with your eyes and feel with sensations, but you also have this embodied aspect of citta, which is the sense of here. When you contemplate that, you ask yourself, ‘Where is here?’ Is it Amaravati? Is it my house? Is it my feet? No, it’s behind all that. The here is a kind of locational quality that has no particular manifestation, because wherever you are, you’re here, right? It has no specific location in terms of the manifest world, yet there’s a sense that you come into it. You experience groundedness, balance and the ability to step back from the momentum of the aggregates: ‘Oh, it’s like this. And here is where it always was.’ Practise that here.

Turn away from the form-body, the rūpa-kāya. Remember death. This is something to reflect upon at least once a day, perhaps in the evening: there might not be a tomorrow. Things aren’t finished, are they? Now is the time to ‘finish’ them. Now is the time to say, ‘Oops … Sorry! … Finished.’ The regrets, the grudges, the momentum – now is the time to finish them, to let them go. Now is the time to take your blessings with you. Reflect on the death of the body, its breaking up. When you see a corpse, at first it looks very similar to a living body, but it’s dead: it’s not the same. The citta has left; the body is no longer vibrant. That very quality that we thought was a body with its glow, its vibrancy and its potential, is gone. It’s just meat. Bring up an image like that. It’s not so easy these days because people like to hide them.

When I was in Tibet a few years ago, I went to a sky burial. They don’t have enough earth to bury bodies and not enough wood to burn them, so they have to drag them out in the open and let the vultures eat them. When you go to a sky burial, you stand in a stone precinct and there are a couple of guys with butcher’s aprons on and big hooks in their hands – like meat hooks. Then a little cart with two bags on it comes up the hill. They push the bags off the cart onto the ground and rip them open: two bodies. You look at one of them and it looks like a naked person sleeping. It’s fresh, not deteriorated at all. The butcher walks up to it and puts a meat hook in it and pulls it around. He pulls out a big knife – about fourteen inches long – and starts slashing it … and you’re going: ‘Ahh!’ Something hits your guts. ‘It could have been my aunt or my cousin.’ Slash! Slash! You look around and there’s a man up on the hillside waving little flags, which are trying to keep the birds back, trying to restrain them. Eventually the birds get so tumultuous that they put the flags down. Then a wave of vultures comes down the hill, like a tsunami, and these two bodies are buried under this huge, pulsating wave of feathers and beaks. Occasionally you see a little bit of a foot flying through the air … There’s an incredible tumult … and then they’re gone! You look … There’s nobody there – in just ten minutes!

Wow! Look at this body here … it’s vulture food! What was all that? How many times do people look in the mirror and think, ‘Oh! Look at my double chin, oh dear! Look at these wrinkles! My hair is going grey … I need to put some powder on my nose …’. How much energy goes into that? People try to push against the relentless tide of age. Age is waving its influence: the wrinkle, the greying, the sagging. And there are all the social things that we infer: too fat, too tall, too short, too spotty, nose wrong, ears wrong, eyes wrong … all that kind of stuff … for vulture food! Don’t worry, the vultures won’t mind! With the perspective of a sky burial you think, ‘Oh wow! What was all this about?’

Remember death. Now, it seems impossible. Death is a theory; it happens to other people. You don’t really get it … until perhaps you stand next to a dead body and suddenly your body gets it. You feel your body getting it in the guts. It knows, something knows: this rūpa-kāya is just a shell. Use it wisely. Use it for grounding, use it for establishing here. Use it to bring forth your intentions into skilful actions: that’s using it wisely. That’s keeping it tidy. That’s how you fashion your body. You don’t bother with other things. You have a body that fashions skilful intention and deep presence. You can sit in it and it can discharge stress. You feel grounded and present, and you can get some perspective on the mind.

This is one of our daily recollections: ‘The body is of the nature to die.’ It’s of the nature to undergo this profound change, so it’s something to reflect upon many times. It’s inevitable. Those who have reflected on it repeatedly have no fear. That is what this reflection does: it ends the fear and nervousness. You got born – that was a struggle; you’ll die – that’s a struggle. But you can do it, you can get through. Have no fear.

When we were reading the dedications for the chanting yesterday, we heard that somebody died at four years old. Living in a monastery, we hear this every day. Every day the notes are coming: ‘My son, twenty-five … My wife, together for thirty-five years … My dear father … My mother …’. A baby died in the womb, so the mother has to give birth to a dead baby. Death doesn’t have a time: it happens any time, any day. There’s no age on it. It’s not on the other side of the golden sunset. We need to bear this in mind, and it’s not to create misery. If you bring it to your citta time and time again, if you pause and reflect, you will come through the wanting to dismiss it or shrug it off: ‘Oh well, I’ll deal with it when it happens.’ You first come through the disorientation of ‘What am I going to do about tomorrow? What about my dog?’ Then you come to a place of surrender and peace. You get a sense of the real value of what you have been cultivating. When the tumult of the aggregates settles, you begin to sense, ‘Oh, here is openness, here is radiance, here is peacefulness, here is strength.’ It was always shrouded by this world of appearances, but when the appearances are dropped, we are able to see more clearly.

There is another interesting reflection that I picked up from Luang Por Paññāvaddho: ‘The citta is real, but it doesn’t exist. The khandhas exist, but they’re not real.’ The aggregates are insubstantial, they’re smoke and mirrors – powerful, dazzling, stinging, poignant, cloudy, overwhelming – and yet, where did they go? They shift suddenly: we’re happy one moment, miserable the next; healthy, then sick; praised, loved, adored, offended, insulted … Nothing shifts as fast as that. It’s called ‘existence’ (bhava), the realm of becoming. What’s ‘real’ is that which is always unchanging, here, now. That’s called citta. You can’t quite find it, but it can know existence as what it is. There’s tremendous fearlessness in that.

There is another reflection we are called upon to bring to mind. I’ll go through it fairly quickly. I’ll try to lob on one or two impressions and you can turn them over. Kamma means action: intended action or action that the citta has been activated by – when the citta has been jumped into. It can happen either through your own choice or through the choice of others, so it’s not necessarily you who did it all. It could be through social influences. Something pushed a button and the citta jumped in. Somebody told you to do something and you jumped into it. Still, the citta made a decisive jump; the saṅkhāra rushed out. This is kamma, action. The story of action is that we become it, we’re filled with it. Something drags us into it, pushes us into it, rushes us through it and proliferates into it. That’s the result, which is called ‘the acquisition’ (vipāka). That which has been acquired becomes our space, our ‘self’: ‘I am one of these … This is my nature … This is my character … This is my life … I’m only this … I’m always this … I never will be this …’. That’s the acquisition and it’s dog-eared, fixed and believable.

You might believe: ‘Because I’m just this, I can never really be awakened. I’m just living in Neasden. Who got enlightened in Neasden?’ Well, it could be a niche for you! Even the Buddha Gotama comes from some dumpy, little place. They try to make it sound like a big deal, but I think it was a bit like Shropshire, Calabria or Nebraska (if you’re American): somewhere out of the way, a little nook, some nowhere place. The Buddha’s father was elected head of this nowhere dump. They called him ‘Mahārāja’, but it was in the Neasden of India – another no-account, a little, petty princeling. Fortunately the Buddha didn’t stay with that impression! He ended up dying under a tree in some other little dump: Kusinara. Ānanda said, ‘Oh, please, don’t die here! There are great towns you could die in. Don’t die under a tree in this dump!’ But the Buddha replied, ‘That’s fine …’.61

So the Buddha was a nobody who wasted his entire life – only in terms of the aggregates of course! He was shuffling around India, sometimes without food, living in rags, sleeping on the ground … In terms of the aggregates, what a waste! But he didn’t believe in it. What do you believe in? Who do you think you are? You associate with your town, your country, your parents, your body, your job, your marriage – that’s acquisition. You don’t have to fight with acquisitions to relinquish them; you just need to recognize: here, now. The relinquishment of acquisitions certainly needs pause. Then you ask: ‘What action is appropriate?’ You bring forth your faith, your purity. There’s a chance in this lifetime to bring forth skill for your welfare and for the welfare of others. Bring forth the good, the generous, the loving, the peaceful, the steady. This is not a vision of big things; it’s a matter of handling your body and speech, let them go forth, and hold your energies clearly. It’s called ‘the kamma that leads to the end of kamma’ – and it leads to the end of acquisitions.

We’re not doing things in order to become somebody. We don’t do things in order to be a success. We’re doing things for the purity of handling the doing energy – the saṅkhāra energy. We’re bringing it forth steadily, clearly, honestly and patiently, because this is what we acquired in coming into birth. Whether it’s just opening a door, pausing, waiting or offering a service, when you hold it clearly, that’s the purity of kamma. There’s no sense of what I will be, what other people will think, whether I’ll become known or I’m just a nobody: it’s just pure action. We’re asked to remember this possibility. Do your action – whether it’s the movement of your body or the forming of a speech – at the right time and the right place. Say what is necessary. That’s the kamma that leads to the end of kamma because there isn’t the acquisition. Instead there’s space and the feeling of beauty. It’s not the annihilation of saṅkhāra, but a careful stilling. There’s a certain beauty, a blessing that is given to the world. So handle your actions, however small or great – a thought, physical movement, a project. Stay with it, and remember: it’s never exactly right. There’s always a way you could imagine it could be better, but don’t do that. Then you get the result or the ‘non-result’, the sense that something beautiful has occurred.

This is why the Buddha is called ‘the Blessed One’. Although we can say that the Blessed One abides in deathlessness, in stillness, he lived a pretty busy life in some respects. They say he slept two hours a night. Maybe that’s an exaggeration, but he slept minimally. The rest of the time he was walking, teaching devas in the evening, teaching the brahma gods, presenting Dhamma verbally and non-verbally: through actions, gestures, space, silence … He was always manifesting for the welfare of the devas and humans. He offered his blessings through handling these kamma-forming actions, these saṅkhāras carefully and selflessly. So stay with your blessing, with your capacity to bless. This is a special kind of kamma in a world that believes in frantic action: development, progress, results, promotion, performance, more, quicker, faster … This is the kamma that leads to more and more acquisition … until the mind cracks up! But the kamma that leads to the end of kamma is the Eightfold Path: right action, right speech … right now.

Reflect on this, consider this, because we’re not going to be sitting still for much longer. We will act. Don’t neglect the actions of tidying your room, getting in your car, taking a moment to pause, expressing goodwill … Give it quality. Deepen the quality. Then you’ll find that your mind isn’t rushing on, because you’re satisfied where you are. This is the blessing. And the more we all act in that way, the more we pick it up. That’s why it’s such a blessing to abide in the presence of people who’ve trained and experienced that – such as all of you. We pick up something through our skin, through our nerve endings, about composure, grace, deference, pausing and gentleness. You begin to pick it up and you feel better as a result. You don’t experience a rushing on, push, shove, grab or blur, but a sense of steadying. Then you’re holding the Dhamma. I personally feel that, when we have received so much, it’s a natural duty to give, and there’s one thing we can give all the time: presence. It’s probably the most important thing, because people pick it up. ‘How come he’s not getting wired up? How come he’s not angry? How come she’s softer, steadier, not flustered, not reactive? Hmm, what’s that?’ You’re teaching. You’re teachers. That’s a responsibility to live it, and it’s for your own welfare, isn’t it?

There’s a lovely saying from the Christian saint St Francis to his disciples. He said, ‘Teach the Gospels ceaselessly. If necessary, use words.’ By your deeds, people will know the teachings. Be someone who abides in the skilfulness of their pāramī and their deeds – for your welfare and the welfare of others. This is something to remember, to reflect upon, to purify. Then the door to the Deathless remains open. As conditions change and the aggregates move on their ways, take the blessing with you, and be someone who can offer it. It’s so needed: the steady heart, the kind touch, the blessing quality … more important than many things.

Let’s close with another image. When I was in Tibet, I was on my way to a pilgrimage on Mount Kailash, which is an amazing place because it’s dedicated to the sacred; nothing happens there except that. En route we pull up at some nowhere place – most of Tibet is nowhere. We get out of the land cruiser and sit by the side of the road to eat our little bit of food. Then we notice a little line of people coming down the hill. They look like a ball of rags with a head sticking on the top of it – an incredible sackcloth, layers and layers of grey, brown, ragged, greasy rags moving down the hill. They’re coming down and they look at us. They look at me and their eyes light up. Then one by one, they come forward, bend over and touch their shoulder: they just want a touch, just a touch on their shoulder. OK! When I touch the shoulder there’s this kind of dust coming off the rag. They look up and their eyes light with joy. One by one, they’re coming down … And they bring the babies down … OK, touch the baby. Take it away. Another one coming down … A whole line of villagers coming down … And every time I bend up, they look up with their eyes lit up with joy.

After a while, the person I was with started crying. He couldn’t handle any more – such vulnerability! People at the end of the material world … and they weren’t asking for money or food, they just wanted a blessing! Their eyes lit up to have a blessing. And where is the blessing? The blessing is when we fully acknowledge our own vulnerability, our own death, our mortality, our pain, uncertainty … We acknowledge it purely, without wavering. And we acknowledge it in another, purely, without wavering. Then the boundaries disappear, and the sense of citta comes forth. The boundaries of the manifest – the skin, the clothes, the hair, the status, the name, the position – are seen to be just rags, of no real value, of no real worth. When those are seen through the citta, it rises up. That’s where you meet. The meeting is the blessing, and something rejoices in that.

There’s this whole dream-world of appearances, of comings and goings, friends, confusions, disappointments, struggles and so on. Yet the moment that drops, the comparisons drop and the blessing comes forth. This is really what we need, in my opinion. This is what the citta needs. We keep our requisites minimal. It’s always a responsibility to handle that stuff so that it doesn’t take over. Don’t let it create fever and confusion. Handle it so that it’s just enough – just enough rags to wear. And meet in the blessing.

Who knows when my eyes will see you again. We can come and go, but we meet in the blessing and we stay in the blessing every time we pause, drop and open. That’s something to take with you.

60 Majjhima Nikāya 64 and Aṅguttara Nikāya 3.32, 9.36, 10.6 and 10.60.

61 Mahāparinibbāna Sutta, Dīgha Nikāya 16.