## Preface

The inspiration to compile this celebratory volume in honour of Ajahn Sucitto’s seventieth  birthday came from the hearts of a number of his appreciative students, both monastic and lay, in particular Sister Kittiñāṇī. Ajahn Sucitto has spread the Buddha Dhamma to a vast range of audiences for well over thirty years, so it seems most fitting to use this natural milestone of seventy years to honour his teaching career. In addition, it is an opportunity to express gratitude for the wisdom, guidance and good example that have come from being in his presence and hearing his voice, for so many of us, for so many years.

Although Ajahn Sucitto has compiled numerous books of his own teachings, such as Dawn of the Dhamma, Kalyāna, Introduction to Insight Meditation, Meditation – A Way of Awakening, Meditation –  An Outline, Kamma and the End of Kamma, Pāramī – Ways to Cross Life’s Floods, Clarity and Calm, Unseating the Inner Tyrant, Samādhi is Pure Enjoyment and others, they have all focused on specific areas of Dhamma practice, drawing the attention to particular facets of experience and spiritual training. These individual jewels each have their own value and beauty, but, another intention behind this current publication is, in contrast, to display a varied casket of gems of Ajahn Sucitto’s teachings, embodied in his wise reflections as they have evolved over more than thirty years.

It is hoped that gathering together this broad range of talks that Ajahn Sucitto has offered over several decades will provide a representative compendium of his words that his many long-standing students can easily refer to and be reminded of. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, it aims to offer a multitude of helpful and inspiring perspectives to new readers, spiritual aspirants and all those whose hearts are seeking an end to suffering.

❖   ❖   ❖

It is a sign of the respect and admiration in which Ajahn Sucitto is held that it was felt appropriate to begin the book with a number of Recollections expressed by his fellow Dhamma-farers, led by Luang Por Sumedho. For Ajahn Sucitto has not only been a source of guidance and inspiration for the vast numbers of lay people he has taught on retreat, or who have visited Cittaviveka Monastery over the last decades; he has also been a major source of wise reflection and an exemplar of the spiritual ideal for his fellow monastics.

The reader may notice that many of these Recollections refer to Ajahn Sucitto’s ‘Mahā Kassapa-like’ relishing of ascesis – the bitter practices of monastic training – particularly in the earlier years of his monastic life. However, it is striking that it is rather his ‘Sāriputta-like’ wisdom, as manifested in the lively thoroughness and intricacy of his Dhamma teachings, that has shone the brightest light into the lives of so many of us. As expressed in many of the Recollections, Ajahn Sucitto’s wisdom is multi-layered, astute, never repeating and ever-fresh in expression. It is this brilliance of the light of embodied wisdom that has touched so many so deeply.

❖   ❖   ❖

By way of introducing the Dhamma material gathered in these pages, the reader should note that all the teachings were given by Ajahn Sucitto as extemporaneous talks. These are not scholarly papers but Dhamma-desanā, ‘demonstrations of the Dhamma’ arising from the living interaction between the audience and the teacher. All the talks transcribed here were offered to people on meditation retreats or to members of a monastic community, usually during a retreat period. The book’s voice thus assumes the reader will have some degree of familiarity with Buddhist terms and concepts. Accordingly it is not a book designed to meet the needs of those completely new to the Buddha’s teachings and meditation, but hopefully those unfamiliar with the terminology will be able (with the aid of the Glossary and the Definition of Technical Terms), to glean great benefit from these pages regardless.

The reader will probably note that Ajahn Sucitto’s style of teaching is largely analytical and non-anecdotal, but that it has nevertheless become more and more grounded in the embodied nature of Dhamma as the years have gone by. As Kittisāro strikingly and touchingly puts it in his Recollection:

‘I’ll never forget his exclaiming to me, “Who took the body out of Buddhism?” So he dedicated himself to practising conscious embodiment, mindfulness of the body. He began to balance un-relenting effort with embodied ease, and the results are impressive. I’ve seen the blessing of embodied practice transform Ajahn Sucitto from a clumsy, awkward, top-heavy genius into a calm, radiant, grounded, poised, balanced and graceful presence.’

❖   ❖   ❖

The subject of ‘embodiment’ in Dhamma practice brings into the picture the fact that, physically at least, Ajahn Sucitto has resided at Cittaviveka Buddhist Monastery on and off for over thirty years, including twenty-two years as its abbot. He has lived in the forest, in the buildings and on the soil there; he has drunk the water and breathed the air of that part of the English countryside for much of his adult life; he soaked these very stones with Wykamol to stop the dry rot; he decided that that tree should be planted there; he chose to raise a stupa for Luang Por Chah in that spot …

Ajahn Sucitto’s life as a bhikkhu and as a teacher has thus been intimately woven together with the fabric of Cittaviveka, and is therefore in some ways inseparable from that location. Many of his more recent teachings acknowledge and celebrate the practice of Dhamma as a relational process (e.g. The Relational Sense p 266 & Refuge p 185), so it is significant that his life has been interwoven with that place; not forgetting that in its very name is the message that the inner ‘cittaviveka’, ‘the serene heart’, is a psychological abiding-place of non-attachment. Just as in past centuries the bricks and stones that form the walled garden at Cittaviveka were set by the mason like this, and the house and garden were designed like this, so today our minds participate in the effects of those choices – embodied in the bricks and stones, the placing of the pine and chestnut, the box-tree by the woodshed – and those choices affect the mind like this. The past exists in relation to the present; the observer exists in relation to the observed. Similarly Ajahn Sucitto’s brilliant, jewel-like teachings were laid down just like this – were established in our hearts like this – so this volume aims to plant those teachings in the broader experiential field where they can settle and weather and continue to bless through the ages – just as do the stones of the house, the waters of the Hammer Stream that runs between the nuns’ cottages, the oak-beams framing the Dhamma Hall, the kutis in the forest …

In the same vein, as a demonstration of and reflection on this emphasis on embodiment in Ajahn Sucitto’s teachings, it was thought fitting to include one of Ajahn Ṭhitadhammo’s beautiful illustrations of Cittaviveka as the front cover of the book, together with his reflective Commentary upon it. Ajahn Ṭhitadhammo has lived at Cittaviveka for his entire monastic life; he has therefore dwelt under Ajahn Sucitto’s guidance for over twenty years. His graphic style of profound balance, coupled with complex but unentangled intricacy, with the earthy and the sublime intermingled, is in many ways a perfect evocation of those same qualities in the teachings contained within this book. His drawings are like an Ajahn Sucitto Dhamma talk transposed into graphic form.

All those who are fortunate enough to read this book are invited to take the Dhamma teachings contained here to heart and embody their spirit in thought, word and deed. And may that embodiment of the Dhamma be a living reality that frees the heart from all suffering.

Amaro Bhikkhu Amaravati Buddhist Monastery February 2018