#### Presence

This reflection was offered on 10 November 2008, during a ten-day retreat at Amaravati Monastery.

The qualities of great heart are warm-heartedness, compassion, joyfulness, love and warmth for other people. Anukampati means ‘to resonate with’. It’s often translated as compassion but it also means that you share the happiness of others. You feel gladdened by other people’s good fortune. You see the good in others and that lifts you. You see the good deeds and the lovable qualities of other people and you feel cheered. You have compassion when you see other people’s vulnerability. You have equanimity: the ability to bear with, stay with other people and yourself through the ups and downs. These qualities apply ‘to others as to myself’; it’s holistic. You see your own lovable qualities, appreciate and value your own good fortune, and have a sense of care, conscience and concern over your vulnerability. You look after yourself, you are compassionate towards yourself. You don’t put unnecessary pressures on yourself out of some sense of duty or thinking you ought to. With equanimity, you realize that sometimes you just go through stuff and it’s important to not lose faith, to not give up on yourself or on others. These are the tremendous resources of great heart.

In social situations, often there’s a kind of pressure to attend to others and not to oneself. If you’re in a caring profession for example, you may get what’s called ‘compassion fatigue’. Of course, there are many people who need help or support – the list is endless. Then compassion becomes worry and it gradually drains you of the necessary qualities of good heart. Compassion is not just an intention, an aspiration or being sensitive; you also need to have a resource and this is what presence gives you. Presence is the root and that’s what replenishes the life force. If you don’t have presence, you’re just running on principles and ideals, but you’ve run out of the basic juice. This is dangerous because if you’re running on that, then even when your tank is empty, you still think, ‘I’m not doing well enough; I should try harder! They need me!’ You get these fixed programs in your mind that take you into auto-destruction.

That’s the kind of scenario we see in society. Society is collective but not intimate. There are hundreds of people but they don’t really know you and you don’t really know them. This is risky, because society is not connected to your real, true presence. It is connected to you via a function or a name or a role, but not connected to you in your presence. For example, your job is your function, your role and your position, but it does not connect to you in your presence. If you’re feeling sick or you don’t feel up to it today, you’re still supposed to be there, it won’t work without you, so you override your feelings. We can do this to a certain extent – that’s the way it goes – but you don’t want to be stuck in override as a program and feel guilty that you’re not doing enough. If this sense of guilt and shame is there you will continue to override your limitations, so it’s very important to understand some of these compulsions that get programmed into us.

On a retreat, we’re in a collective situation. Be conscious of the good aspects of a group: the sense of solidarity and companionship. We’re all in this together and helping each other, that’s part of it. There are also the bad aspects of a group: ‘I have to keep up, I have to make sure I’m there on time. I have to do my bit for everyone else no matter what. I have to drag myself to another sitting.’ I’d really like that you do not feel under obligation. Obviously, sometimes you can work a bit harder – yes, go for it! You’ll find your way. But watch the particular pattern that means you lose your presence in some feeling of obligation to a collective thing, because the point of this retreat is to gain your presence, not to use the retreat to lose your presence in order to be ‘a good meditator’ or ‘as good as the next person’ and so forth. Really trust that, even if you can’t do it as well as you think you should. Keep lowering the bar until you get to a place where you can feel some joy and courage in your practice. You feel you’re rising up to your practice rather than dragging yourself up. If you put the right qualities around it, if you feel the whole situation is on your side and reaching out for you, then your practice is going to grow, that presence is going to grow.

It’s very important to understand that when the needle flicks into red it’s time to say, ‘Wait a minute, what’s the cost of this?’ We need to trust and come back into ourselves. We notice: ‘This is where I am. This is what I can do’ and we feel confident in that. A lot of people run on override for years, even decades, and this loss of presence means the heart is not safely held. It’s like it has no skin around it, it has no ground. We run on good intentions or sometimes on sustained, moderate panic, a sort of scramble, and it’s not good for anyone.

The four qualities of great heart are called the brahmavihāras: seeing the lovable, that which is good and beautiful in ourselves and others, and appreciating that (mettā); understanding the limitations, the vulnerability of ourselves and others, and offering care and protection to that (karuṇā); celebrating, rejoicing in the good of ourselves and others (muditā); and sustaining presence, not giving up on ourselves and others through the ups and downs (upekkhā). We are holding an umbrella over whatever happens, saying, ‘OK, I’ll bear with this,’ rather than getting worried or upset about it. A lot of life is like that. It’s going up with a bit of down, down with some up; we don’t know what’s going to happen tomorrow. Equanimity is the big one – it covers everything. Eventually you become more serene about it all. All these qualities allow you to sustain presence. With them, you don’t lose your presence – this groundedness, this sense of confidence, of assurance.Presence is the first thing that goes, then we panic or get overwhelmed, frightened, shocked or bereaved and we lose our ground. There are strong emotional currents. You don’t necessarily lose your emotional side but you lose the steady, nourishing and loving quality. You get hysterical, panicky, short-tempered or you go numb. Then all that’s left is thinking. In our practice, in meditation, often we can find ourselves coming to places where some of these senses of loss open up: you get feelings of loss of affirmation or loss of certainty.

Fear is one of the fundamental ways in which we lose presence. As you know, you get fear in your guts and that’s where presence is. When you have a good strong presence, you have a nice belly feeling to it. The gut is often underrated as an organ of perception. It doesn’t get the kind of headlines that the heart and the brain get – poor old gut! But if you look into the Far Eastern spirituality, everyone has guts: they have haras and Buddhas with big bellies. Zen people roar from the hara. The gut is king there, because it’s about the sense of presence. When you lose it, you feel this kind of uneasy tension in the guts – this is fear. You feel queasy, uncertain.

The Buddha said there are five fears, five categories of experience that cause us fear:34

The first one is fear of death. We know we’re going to die, but we may wonder, ‘When will that happen? How am I going to die?’ When you hear a big bang or a crash or you get a shock, fear of death usually kicks in. Nowadays there’s a lot around: terrorism, violence, robbery, car crashes and things like that. Sometimes nothing much is happening but there’s a sense that it could be. For example, when you are in a big crowd of people or a situation where people are getting upset, you feel nervous in that domain. Even when the situation has passed away, some of that nervousness is still lingering as a kind of potential.

The second one is fear of pain: fear of being physically hurt and of course emotionally hurt. There’s a huge amount of possibility for being emotionally bashed, abused, scarred, betrayed, dumped, belittled and talked about behind your back – these kinds of situations where you’re losing your sense of self-respect. So there’s this kind of fear: ‘Will I be hurt by other people?’

The third one is fear of loss of resources: the loss of your wealth, money, house and so forth. You fear the economic crash: ‘Is the pound going to crash completely? Are they going to come and snatch my house from me? Is the oil going to run out? Are we all going to be running around in skins?’ It can be very worrying. Often the thing that keeps you going in work situations is the need to get your wages and the fear of losing your job: ‘Who is going to look after me if I lose my job?’

The fourth one is the fear of disgrace, of being ostracized by the group. We’re a flock, herd creatures and one of the traditional punishments for human beings is to ostracize, imprison or send to Coventry. You think it could be quite nice being left alone. Being left alone in a benevolent, trusting way is very pleasant, but being dumped isn’t so nice at all. We’re wired in our genes to experience that rejection by the family, by the mother, the father, the husband, the wife, the friends, the group, by society. It’s a very hurtful experience, so there is the fear of that.

The last one is fear of losing moral balance, being overwhelmed by unskilful impulses, the fear of violent passions. It doesn’t just mean fear of going clinically insane but also fear of losing your balance, being pushed over the edge into committing gross misdeeds with the consequences of that. It’s good to be aware, and wary, of that!

To summarize, there’s the fear involved with the social realm: fear of being rejected by the group or by the other, fear of people losing their respect or love for you. There is the fear of losing your own centre, your own inner poise, your own balance, your own control. And there is the fear of physical things: death, violence, pain, loss and so forth. All these fears make us tight. When you feel fear, you get this kind of uneasy sense in your guts and one of the reactions is to tighten up, to try and hold it. People have strong control systems, locks, padlocks, security devices, insurance policies, pills to keep them steady, to make sure they don’t lose it one way or another. They vote for politicians who say they’ll blast the hell out of anybody who comes near our blessed land. This is very prevalent, isn’t it?

A country like the United States is really frightened of being invaded by Iraq, which is about as likely as us being taken over by the Faroe Islands! They justified the invasion of Grenada in 1983 as Grenada representing a threat to the United States! Grenada’s population was about 90,000 at the time. This little speck of rock in the Caribbean had to be invaded because it represented a threat! It doesn’t matter how ridiculous it is because all you have to say is, ‘Threat! The others are going to come!’ for people to tighten up and lose their reason. When you lose your guts, you lose your reason and you lose your heart. You lose the sense of, ‘Oh, they’re just like me. They’re the same as me. They get upset like I do, they get worried like I do, they want happiness, they want to look after their kids, they want to have enough food to eat like I do.’ It becomes them: ‘Lock them up! Beat them up!’ When people push the fear button, this kind of unreasonable behaviour happens. There are racial prejudices, fear of foreigners, fear of being picked upon by others and so forth. This is a problem we can all experience.

These are definite things that are triggers for human beings, whatever our character is. The latent tendencies are still there. They may not be happening right now, but you just need to push a few buttons and they will come. Remember how, in the 1930s, the Jewish population of Germany was very happily integrated, completely integrated. Nobody thought of them as Jews, they were just Germans. Then this political shift happened that suddenly turned them into outsiders. It can happen like that. Now you can do it to Muslims. They weren’t Muslims before, they were just Pakistanis or interesting people who had different customs and suddenly you can flip that and they become potential terrorists!

What’s going to happen to me, a guy in robes? When I go to America, I go through the customs, and because I have robes on that immediately makes me suspicious. So I have to go into some cubicle and hold my arms up and they blast me with air guns to check if I have some sort of bomb or something underneath, because I look a bit weird. Everybody’s weird if you look at it!

One of the great mudrās of the Buddha is called the abhaya, the fearlessness protection. It’s the mudrā with the Buddha holding one hand up, with the hand open. It’s a blessing, but it’s also what the Buddha represents: great heart, which means deep-rooted, unshakable presence, vast compassion and vast kindness. With that, the great heart is our protection from fear because for a start, when you don’t lose your presence, you’re not going to go insane or get overwhelmed. You’re not going to get pushed into crazy behaviour, so you keep your own dignity, you keep your own sanity. That’s the bottom line, that’s the one that you could guarantee. Loss of wealth could happen, death will definitely happen, as well as pain. But if we have this great heart then we don’t lose presence with these experiences.

The Buddha, even in his sickness and passing away, did not lose presence. There was that sense of unshakable deliverance of the heart. This is what the Buddhist practices are there to generate in us. We already have the seed, the bodhi seed. We just need to keep going to it time and time again, caring for it, nourishing it, encouraging it, gladdening it, enjoying it, appreciating it and making sure we don’t overstrain it. Then it becomes strong. This is what the Buddha is promising us. He says that if you do this then your passing will not be in fear, will not be in loss. Your passing will be serene.35 One of the qualities of the arahant is that although they experience physical pain, they don’t experience mental pain. There’s no feeling of being pinned or oppressed by sensations, or by praise, blame, gain, loss, disgrace and so forth. Their sense of heart is not based upon the worldly  dhammas, it’s based upon their own ability to be present.

If you develop and sustain that ability to stay present, then you will find that the loveliness of the heart becomes more apparent. The joyfulness, warmth and ability to be grand, generous, forgiving and compassionate come from this presence. This is how the flower unfolds and blooms. We need to remind ourselves of our possibilities, to not hold back, to see and encourage the signs that will help to bring forth these qualities in us. We don’t have to be held in, fearful, nervous and embarrassed. The seed or the root of all this is presence.

As we practise together, try to find out if you have triggers of compulsion that stop you from being present. Where do you find yourself losing it? Where do you lose confidence and self-respect? Is it in performance? Do you think you’re not doing as well as you think you should do? Do you think everybody else is serene, steady and you’re all wobbly? It always looks like that, doesn’t it? There should be somebody in every retreat who looks like a complete disaster, who drivels, falls on the floor and trembles all the time, so everybody else can think, ‘Phew, at least I’m not as bad as him! I’m OK, I’m one up from that!’ You need to put that sense of apprehension aside. One of the nice things about a retreat is that you recognize that everybody is rocking around a bit. You’re pretty much in the same field. You don’t have to lose yourself in that kind of social pressure.

When you’re experiencing your own emotional unsteadiness, painful memories or uneven mind-states, there might be the fear of losing balance. Our basic practice is generally to find a meditation, or a way of stabilizing, that’s accessible. For example, you can do standing meditation – the only pass mark is not to pitch over and fall on your face, so you can do that – breathing in, breathing out, walking and just keeping within the format of a retreat, staying in the site. You’re finding yourself sort of stabilized within that. You’re holding it and you can allow the other things to blow through. It really is just a matter of allowing stuff to blow out. You keep in mind your meditation theme (the body, breathing in, breathing out) and keep coming back to that when you can. Gradually it will stabilize so you get a sense of being able to find yourself.

There are these times when you are on the edge, when a strong feeling comes up and it’s deeply unsettling. It may relate to your household, your social circumstances or people around you that you feel some mistrust or dis-ease with. This is the time to see if you can hold that in mind and just keep breathing through it. If you go into it too much you’re going to spin out, but you don’t want to seize up and tighten up to try and control it. So we need to find out how to be with that which is potentially unsettling, alarming, concerning and just breathe in and breathe out through that, let the energy move through that. All of us are in situations where there’s something unresolved, something inconclusive, something that could go wrong, something that isn’t finished, somebody who’s not having a good time, somebody who’s sick, uncertainty about the future, about other people and about ourselves. We bring that to mind and accept the presence of that disturbance, that uncertainty, that sense of risk and loss, and breathe in and out with it.

You’re turning the energy back where it can spin out. It’s in this particular fringe area where you can develop the great heart, because you have the ability to embrace the contradictions, the unresolved, the awkward and the wounded in your life. As you do that from a place of great compassion and equanimity, you don’t lose presence in the world of suffering, stress and uncertainty. This is really a major theme in Dhamma practice. It’s called the experience of aniccatā (impermanence), which sounds nice and clinical, but it actually means that things are uncertain, inconstant, unreliable, unsteady, unknown, not definite; they could go wrong. We don’t really know whether it’s going to work out or not. That’s the bit that really gives it some bite. Do you really think things could be certain? Do you think tomorrow is certain? Do you believe in that?

Look at the world. In the monastery, every day I get a little note in the bowl, for instance: ‘Please chant for so-and-so who was eighteen and died yesterday’ or ‘For so-and-so who died of meningitis at nine years of age.’ You could think, ‘Nine? My goodness! He should have lived to be eighty-five! Nobody dies until then, do they?’ The other day a woman came and said that her twenty-eight-year-old boyfriend just killed himself. Twenty-eight! Why did he do that? She didn’t know, he never said anything and the next day he was dead. Twenty-eight and given up already! What was going on? He suddenly lost it. One day it’s solid, three-dimensional, here we are, and the next day, poof! There was a Sri Lankan woman who came to the monastery the other day. She had some scars on her face. She had been in a bus in Colombo and a bomb went off. A hundred people were killed and her face was full of glass. She was getting a little bit of eyesight back. One day you’re sitting in the bus thinking about going shopping or going to see your niece or something or the other, planning a little fantasy and then suddenly, boom! Where did that go? Where did that future go?

These are obviously violent possible extremes, but for all of us a lot of things are uncertain. New things can arise that we’d never thought of. How do we live with this? We acknowledge it, accept it and breathe through it. OK, who knows tomorrow, but today, now, we’re breathing in and breathing out; we see the real value in that. It’s one of our recollections, isn’t it? Every night you think, ‘Maybe I’ll die tonight.’ So breathe in and breathe out, do it really well now! The Buddha was talking to a group of monks and asked them, ‘Do you develop mindfulness of death?’ One monk said, ‘I do it every day.’ Another one said, ‘I do it every time I eat.’ The last one said, ‘I do it every time I breathe in and every time I breathe out. I think this might be the last breath.’ The Buddha replied that the first two monks are heedless and sluggish in their practice, but the one who contemplates death at every breath is heedful and keen in his practice.36 When you breathe in like it’s your last, you certainly breathe in!

The idea is not to cause you a sense of continual anxiety but to realize you just do not know, so make this breath count, make it full, don’t lose presence now. Presence is all you have, really. But you do have it and it is all you can have. The rest of it you can’t have. It can pass through you for a while, possibly – all kinds of stuff could. The only thing you certainly can have is the most valuable thing, the thing that will get you past death. That’s the only thing you can have and you have it right now. Why don’t we invest in presence as a priority and see what other bits we can build up around that: some friendships, some comforts, some happiness. When we get the priorities right we will live freely, confidently and without regret.

34 Aṅguttara Nikāya 9.5.

35 Saṁyutta Nikāya 55.27.

36 This passage refers to Aṅguttara Nikāya 6.19.