#### Luang Por Sumedho

Luang Por Sumedho was interviewed by Ajahn Asoko on 11 August 2015. The transcription of that interview has been edited into the following text.

Before I went to live in the UK I travelled with a group of Thais from Ubon to visit Doi Suthep in Chiang Mai. During that time Ajahn Sucitto came to visit me; it was in December 1976. I’d heard of him, but I’d never met him before. I told him that I was going to live in England, and because he’s English I invited him to come to London and drop by. I had a good impression of our first meeting, but it wasn’t very long.

The second time we met was at the Hampstead Vihāra in London. Ajahn Chah, Ajahn Khemadhammo and I had arrived there on 6 May 1977, and one day the next year Ajahn Sucitto turned up. His father had passed away, so he had come back to England to attend his funeral, and then he came to see me. At the time Ajahns Ānando and Vīradhammo were with me at the Vihāra. I had the same very good impression of him as before, so I determined not to let him go. I thought, ‘We’ve got to keep this guy.’ I always had a good feeling about him, from the beginning up to now.

At that time we were in the process of selling the Hampstead Vihāra. We had to get the money from the sale to pay for the place at Chithurst. When that was accomplished, in June 1979, we all moved to Chithurst. There were Kittisāro, Sucitto, Vīradhammo, Ānando, myself and Araññābho, a British monk, who appears in the BBC film The Buddha Comes to Sussex; but Araññābho didn’t stay very long, he disrobed. So that was the beginning of the sangha in England, and the first branch monastery of Luang Por Chah in the West. I also became an upajjhāya then.

During the first five years we made Chithurst House habitable. We had to refurbish and rebuild it, but first we had to tear down a lot of the inside. The more plaster we tore down, the more horrible things we saw. There was dry rot. You wouldn’t believe the kinds of hideous mushrooms and fungi there were! They were really ugly. Ajahn Sucitto, who’s very artistic, would draw pictures of the dry rot like some kind of creeping monster. During that time he also started doing an illustrated calligraphic version of the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta1  for me. Ajahn Sucitto’s mind is very creative; he could create artistic images and symbols. I don’t think he ever trained as an artist, it’s just part of his genius. It took him four years to complete. When it was finished he gave it to me, but I thought it belonged to the ‘Amaravati historical museum’ so I left it at Amaravati.

Ajahn Sucitto was also the one who started the Forest Sangha Newsletter when we were still at Chithurst. He used a grubby old printing machine, almost like a child’s, where you get the ink all over you. He produced these newsletters faithfully, though they were always a bit grimy. But they were very good because he’s an exceptionally good writer, and he’s also a poet. He has talents that I really appreciated because I don’t consider myself a writer at all and he’s got a superb command of the English language. I always like listening to his talks because they are interesting. He has a very good intellect and he’s very reflective and thoughtful.

At one time Ajahn Vīradhammo and I shared one room, Kittisāro and Ānando shared another room, and Ajahn Sucitto and a Swedish monk named Lakkhaṇa shared another room. The rooms were all close together, on the first floor in Chithurst House, so you could hear Kittisāro and Ānando going on joking, laughing all night long, while in the other room where Ajahn Sucitto and Lakkhaṇa were, it was dead quiet. So I had a bright idea: I moved them around. I put Ajahn Sucitto with Kittisāro, and Ānando with Lakkhaṇa, and that balanced them out.

Nick Scott and a group from Newcastle would go on retreats with us in Oxford at Oakenholt and they wanted to start something up in the North. When we got the Harnham place, it was Ajahn Sucitto who took it on in 1981. He stayed there for a few months to start the place and then came back to Chithurst.

We then established the Sīladharā Order. Obviously we couldn’t ordain bhikkhunis, but I felt there was some need for women to have more acknowledgement than just as eight-precept maechees. This was my American mind at the time. I got permission to do this and asked Ajahn Sucitto to take on the training of the sīladharā. I felt he would be good at that and he was quite willing to do it. They were originally eight-precept maechees, but when they became sīladharā they had ten precepts. They had to learn about samaṇa-saññā, so Ajahn Sucitto tried to devise a Vinaya that would work for them, according to the Vinaya scriptures, the bhikkhuni Vinaya and the sekhiyavattas. He was trying to provide a form under which they could live together, agreeing rules of etiquette and relating to monks. None of us really knew what to do, including me; it was something completely new. So Ajahn Sucitto would meet with them almost every day, I think, and try to work something out. I think he did quite a good job, considering that it was something he’d never done before.

After five years at Chithurst, Ajahn Sucitto came with me to start Amaravati in 1984. Amaravati was founded because our community at Chithurst was growing fast and the nuns only had a little cottage and a few kutis. When we went to Amaravati the nuns took the staff quarters, and this gave them quite a nice place to live, with a garden and some space. Also I wanted Amaravati to be more of a centre to attract people because it had the facilities to receive large numbers. We were also trying to protect Chithurst from being caught up in too many activities. I thought Chithurst would be a good forest monastery, but not particularly a central point. Amaravati was nearer to London, easier to get to, and it had the Sala, twenty-two buildings, a lot of bathrooms and several kitchens, things that could be adapted for use by more and more people. So the idea was to protect Chithurst, not to compete with it.

Ajahn Sucitto stayed at Amaravati until Ajahn Ānando left Chithurst in 1992. It was a very difficult time because Ajahn Ānando had problems and left abruptly. This was a big shock, and Chithurst was left in a mess. Psychologically it was very traumatizing. So I asked Ajahn Sucitto to take on the duties of abbot at Chithurst. He was a very brave man to step in.

Ajahn Sucitto is a natural ascetic and he frowns on luxury; it utterly offends him. I remember one time – this is a funny story – I took him to Thailand with me. We were staying at Khun Kesaree Bulsook’s. Quite often when we went to Bangkok we’d stay at her place. Ajahn Sucitto had heard stories about this quite luxurious kuti she had built near her house for monks to stay in and that she would provide great quantities and varieties of really delicious food. On this occasion, she had a large following of women who helped her cook and the floor was covered with all these marvellous dishes. I had the impression Ajahn Sucitto was really determined to dislike the whole scene. He was sitting next to me with a stern look. The ladies were looking at him but he wouldn’t look at them. We started passing the food and he’d toss it into the bowl. Khun Kesaree and her friends were wondering if he was all right; they wanted an acknowledgement from him. When all the food had been passed around they took it away, and then they brought a bowl of very good quality ice-cream for each individual and started passing it around. They brought it in at the end of the meal, so it wouldn’t melt. Ajahn Sucitto just put it down as if to say he wasn’t going to eat it, but I whispered to him, ‘They want you to enjoy it.’ Sometimes we can be very idealistic about being ascetics or not indulging in sensual things!

One of the pleasures Ajahn Sucitto sometimes used to give me was to come to my kuti at Amaravati and make me some tea, and then massage my feet. Even with expert instructions from him, I never could compete with him in tea-making.

A lot of the books with my talks wouldn’t have been published if Ajahn Sucitto hadn’t edited them, so you can thank him for all that. I think Ajahn Sucitto should be good at retirement. He has so many talents. He always wanted to write, but he’s a very committed and responsible person so I guess he felt he had to carry on with his many duties. He would take on responsibilities without complaining because he was meeting the need at a time when there weren’t many monks, especially monks who had experience in leadership positions and being abbots.

I admit there are many things I don’t understand about Ajahn Sucitto. He’s an enigmatic character. Sometimes I find it quite difficult to understand his reactions to things. He’s always been an extremely good friend to me, as far as friendship goes among monks. I have always felt he respected and trusted me, and was a friend. I’ve never had any kind of personal conflict with him. I always admired his talents. I even find him loveable because of the way he walks with his nose up in the air and a vacant look on his face. And bearing in mind the different problems that arose during those years in England, I always felt he was supportive of me, which I still appreciate to this day. I have a great affection for him personally and I trust him. He’s someone who has integrity, and whose opinion and character I can rely on.

1 The Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of the Dhamma is the Buddha’s first discourse after his enlightenment. It was given to the five ascetics at Sarnath. In it he expounds the Four Noble Truths. The illustrated calligraphic version made by Ajahn Sucitto can be seen in his book: The Dawn of the Dhamma