## Acknowledgements

I would like to express appreciation to all those involved with the preparation of this commemorative book.

Firstly, to Luang Por Sumedho, who agreed to be interviewed in order to share his Recollections of Ajahn Sucitto; Ajahn Vīradhammo, Ajahn Kāruṇiko, Ajahn Sundarā, Ajahn Candasirī, Ayyā Medhānandī, Thaniya, Kittisāro, Nicholas Halliday and Nick Scott, each offered written contributions of their own Recollections.

Ajahn Amaro took time from his full schedule to proofread all the texts; Ajahn Ṭhitadhammo offered the cover illustration and its comm-entary; Ayyā Jayati helped with proofreading and with fine-tuning some sentences.

Lynne Drayton and Khema (Jan Carroll) read all the texts and offered very useful feedback. Jayasiri (Sash Lewis) helped with editing the Recollections and some of the texts; Shauna Gillan and Pamela Kirby helped with editing.

Sharron Chan and the many volunteers of the Lotus Volunteer Group provided significant assistance. Notably, Wendy Parker helped with the transcriptions and proofread all the texts; Piyumi Jayasinge helped with the transcriptions; Kate Upton, Caroline Moss and Louis Cross helped with editing and proofreading; Robert Mathers helped with proofreading, and Ariya Schaas proofread the entire book.

Nicholas Halliday prepared, typeset and designed the book.

In addition, there were many others who contributed in different ways.

I also wish to express gratitude for permission to reproduce extracts from the following publication:

Satipaṭṭhāna – The Direct Path to Realization, by Venerable Analāyo, published by Windhorse Publications, reprinted with the kind permission of the author.

The final expression of appreciation must be for Ajahn Sucitto himself. His teachings, offered with wisdom, skill and humour, and arising from decades of dedicated practice, have been a great source of inspiration and support for many people.

May this collection, published in celebration of his seventieth birthday, bring immeasurable benefit to all those who read it.

Sister Kittiñāṇī Amaravati Buddhist Monastery December 2018