#### Ayyā Medhānandī

3 May 2018 – Sati Saraniya Hermitage, Canada

Ajahn Sucitto was always, and continues to be, the noblest kind of teacher: wise, witty, kind and generous, one who embodies the Buddha’s teachings in remarkably refined and uncompromising ways. He became our hero when we learned about his fearlessness in the face of bandits in the forests of India. I dare say that serving in England as a Dhamma parent, while in his forties, to a group of a dozen or so contemporary nuns, called for courage of even greater proportions.

I first met him when I arrived at Amaravati from Burma as a young nun in 1990 and he had the rare duty of acting as ‘Mother Superior’ of our fledgling nuns’ community. He was truly a benevolent parent who provided both sanctuary and protection in the storms we weathered together. Like a giant tree with enough space between its branches for the sun to shine through, he gave shelter, while allowing light for us to grow and glimpse the vast skies beyond. Through his own unwavering commitment to the Path, Ajahn Sucitto became a mirror to us, reflecting both our goodness and our foibles with exceptional kindness.

Despite his many other responsibilities as a teacher and leader of the whole community, he met regularly with our group of nuns. For him this sometimes meant witnessing the less polished nuts and bolts of our perceived suffering. Ever formal and stern, yet respectful and sensitive, he would truly listen, hearing us out. When we lacked faith, he had faith in us; when we were troubled, he steadied us with calm and discernment; when adjudicating contentious situations, he balanced our reactivity. He could tease out the truth in the most fraught moments, and tenderly, even playfully, point out a creative way to dissolve our tension.

During one period of instability in the mid 1990’s, many monastics, including some elder monks, were disrobing. There was great concern throughout the community. To reassure us, Ajahn Sucitto invited the nuns to meet with him and Luang Por Sumedho. After some Dhamma reflections, we shared an unforgettable moment when Luang Por declared, ‘Ajahn Sucitto and I will never disrobe.’ Seeing the expressions on the faces of our two leaders empowered us and restored our faith in the Sangha. They were our pillars. We felt their unshakable determination and devotion to the Path.

Not only was Ajahn Sucitto a pillar of the community, he also took a hands-on approach to leading us. He would work with us energetically for hours during the day, and in the evening he would deliver a stunningly erudite and heart-penetrating Dhamma talk. Whenever we were with him, whether at work or in formal occasions, he inspired us. We loved his unabashed honesty, dry humour and wisdom; his grace, joyous austerity and clarity. Deftly and artfully, he would bring out the best in us – the courage to face our pains and the endurance to seek out the Dhamma that would take us beyond them.

Over the years, Ajahn Sucitto has invited me to teach retreats with him. On several occasions he could see that teaching in front of my ‘Mother Superior’ was a cause of anxiety. Though he had dozens of retreatants to look after, he still took time to champion and encourage me, and he gave me the key to let go of fear so that I could find my Dhamma voice. This was Ajahn Sucitto’s way with everyone. A tirelessly patient mentor, he never gave up on us. Though he could be fierce, time and again it was out of compassion – like a mother protecting her innocent and ignorant child from an unseen danger, he would rescue us from our self-disparagement or fear. He would fluff up our feathers when we floundered and delight us with the riches of his teachings. Such a spiritual friend, the Buddha said, is one hundred per cent of the Path, the treasure of a lifetime. Worthy of homage and perpetual gratitude, his presence in this world is an immeasurable blessing.