#### Ajahn Sumedho, My Teacher

This recollection was offered by Ajahn Sucitto at Amaravati Monastery on 26 July 2014 – the day before Luang Por Sumedho’s eightieth birthday.

Tonight I’ve been asked to give some reflections about my time with Luang Por Sumedho. I don’t normally offer a lot of anecdotes, partly because memory distorts things and so it can only offer a fragment of the truth. But reflecting on my teacher gives me a sense of connection and of what I have valued most about him. In my opinion, the things that we learn and really take to heart come not from books, but from other humans.

This particular person has been a major feature in my life for nearly thirty-eight years. That’s the longest time I’ve known anyone, apart from my brother – but I’ve seen more of Luang Por Sumedho than I have of my brother! So it’s a very powerful presence. That’s what I’ve been with, learned with, bounced off, been confused by, been inspired by, been received by, been welcomed by and sometimes been ignored by – or seemingly so! He is someone who embodies integrity in terms of Dhamma-Vinaya and that’s something I have been learning from.

My memories and perceptions of him remain as fragments that I put on my shrine – the shrine in my mind. They trigger a feeling of inspiration. It’s really important to recollect our teachers, both ordinary teachers and Dhamma teachers, as well as our parents, because they are all carried into our citta  and become part of it. We’re not really separate. Our mind is like a stream that’s absorbing influences from other people. There’s a lot of weird, strange and painful stuff, but then occasionally you get something that gives you a very strong current, something that deeply moves you. This power of the Dhamma manifesting through a particular person is so precious and so valuable, but it’s important to hold it in the right way.

As Luang Por himself would say, ‘Luang Por Sumedho is a perception in the mind’ and ‘There’s no real fixed person there.’ Perceptions of  people are impermanent formations that arise in our minds, and yet they can have huge guiding influences in our lives. We store up the perceptions that we find beautiful and we contemplate the ones we question or still try to make sense of. In this way we can intimately absorb the skills of our teacher and fellow practitioners. And hopefully, as we live our lives, we’re also giving skilful and helpful impressions to others, who can take them on. The field of human manifestations of Dhamma is a valuable resource to share in.

An aspect of Luang Por that comes to mind is that he’s big. Not just physically: if he comes into a room, his energy and presence fill the room – there’s a lot of nothing, or a huge amount of a something that’s not just a person. He gives a strong impression and a lot of powerful things seem to happen around him. Yet, as I occasionally have the privilege of going to his kuti and seeing him individually, he’d say, ‘I haven’t done very much’ or ‘I don’t have very much to say. I haven’t got much to teach. There’s nothing to make a big deal out of.’ And in a way, that’s also true. But that personality is the channel through which tremendous pāramī  manifest. And we definitely need that personal form. Try living with a book and see how good that feels after a few years! When you’re feeling really miserable or disillusioned with the practice, go and talk to a book and see what it does! Try asking a book to build a monastery. It’s not going to do it, is it?

Another thing about Luang Por is that he has tremendous valency. Valency refers to atoms and signifies how many others they can bond with. Hydrogen can only bond with one other hydrogen atom. Oxygen can bond with two, and Luang Por Sumedho is like uranium – which takes 128! A lot of people can have access to him and find something they can connect to. He has the ability to represent something good and true and accessible to a wide range of people. In the monastic community, we have people who used to be students, dancers, school teachers, etc. Luang Por has the tremendous capacity to present something that’s universal and multifaceted, and yet not lose contact with his primary inspiration: Luang Por Chah, the Forest Tradition and Theravada Buddhism in Thailand. He keeps maintaining integrity to that. He has the ability to send down a taproot and is able to branch out without losing the connection to the earth. I don’t know anyone else who has done anything like that.

As regards branching out, he could relate to many forms of practice. He established a strong connection with Master Hua, the Chinese Ch’an Master – and that was one of the primary conditions for the establishment of Abhayagiri Monastery in California. He used to attend a lot of interfaith gatherings. Then there was the Dalai Lama, as well as the Zen and Tibetan monks with whom he taught a Summer School in Leicester for eighteen years, as well as Christians, and contemplatives of no specific faith like Douglas Harding. And how many of the community assembled here were penniless students when Luang Por Sumedho came and gave a talk to their local Buddhist society or meditation group and were inspired? And now, fifteen or twenty years later, they’re Ajahns too!

When we talk about Luang Por Sumedho, we also acknowledge the origins of the Nuns’ Order. Of course it came with Ajahn Sundarā and Ajahn Candasirī – you can’t deny their pāramī  – but there wouldn’t have been a Nuns’ Order without Luang Por Sumedho. Who else made the connection to Thailand? Who else gave that its ground? With the Nuns’ Order, I did a lot of the detailed stuff. But the pattern with this and many other sangha developments was that Luang Por would establish the basics and then attract others who’d do all the detailed stuff, like Ajahn Munindo, Ajahn Vajiro, Ajahn Amaro, Ajahn Jutindharo, Ajahn Attapemo. We all did a lot, but without him there wouldn’t have been any basis or ongoing support for the details.

One can say much the same with George Sharp and the English Sangha Trust. They’ve done a lot. What was happening before Ajahn Sumedho? Nothing. The vihāra  was empty. The notion was that it was impossible for bhikkhus to live in Britain. The last bhikkhu, around 1972, said, ‘You just can’t do it in this country. It’s impossible.’ Then one American bhikkhu turned up in Hampstead and pulled it all together. By doing what? As he said, ‘I didn’t come to teach Buddhism or bring it to the West. I’ve been invited to receive the four requisites4 and continue to practise the Dhamma-Vinaya. That’s it.’ And he let the rest happen around that without any particular agenda. Throughout all the various things that Luang Por tried out and explored, he’d always come back to that fundamental point of practising the Dhamma-Vinaya and deepening into it. And the beauty of this is that it wasn’t exclusive. He could investigate mystical aspects of Christianity or Nagarjuna, and he’d take that in, absorb it, connect it back to the taproot of direct practice. He didn’t get lost, he didn’t spin out. He stayed firmly rooted in the ground of training as a Buddhist monk and relying on Dhamma-Vinaya and on direct experience.

I take leave to say a few words about myself, to give you an idea of where I’m coming from and why he means what he does to me. I had taken on bhikkhu training, not with Luang Por Chah but more or less by accident. I was travelling and getting bored with the world, running around and doing this, that and the other. I realized I needed to sit down and find something meaningful to do. So I landed in Thailand, which I didn’t know much about at all. I’d read roughly one paragraph on it and it sounded good. The Buddha was cool as far as I was concerned. When I was in India I tried to get involved in something spiritual but just couldn’t connect. There was always stuff you had to take on: belief in a guru or belief in some cosmology. My mind was much too rational and cynical for that. But when I was in Thailand and saw some meditation being advertised, I thought, ‘I’ll go to that. At least it’ll help me get my head together.’ So I went, and pretty quickly realized that, as I could watch the mind, I wasn’t my mind, and that I needed to do more of this.

I spent three years there altogether and was taught in the Burmese satipaṭṭhāna  system. I stayed in a little hut for three years. There was no conversation, no tea together, no eating together, no pūjā . We were allowed to go piṇḍapāta , but in silence. That was the event, and then it was ‘back to your hut’. We were following an intensive meditation practice in which you’re supposed to make a mental note of everything. So when you hear a sound, you note ‘hearing’; while lifting your hand, note ‘lifting’. You do everything very slowly, noting: ‘Intending, about to lift, lifting, moving, touching, feeling something, placing.’ There’s a voice in your brain reporting on everything that’s going on. I did this all day for three years. I was not in a good state. I got very intense! I don’t say that’s the way it is for everybody or that’s the right way to do it, but that’s the way I was doing it. One thing I did in order to get really focused and mindful was to take an alms-bowl, fill it with water until the water stood above the rim of the bowl, and then try to pick it up and walk without spilling a drop. You try it! The meniscus of the water stands above the rim of the bowl, so with just the slightest tremble it’s going to flow over. That was what meditation meant to me: extremely intense concentration on a point.

In the middle of this I was sent off to a monastery in Chiang Mai to do a super-intensive period of practice for six weeks. Some time in the middle of that the monks there knocked on my door and said, ‘Oh, you have to come, you have to come!’ ‘What? I’m meditating.’ ‘No, you have to come and see Sumedho!’ ‘What’s Sumedho?’ ‘Ajahn Sumedho is coming to town. You must go see him.’ ‘Oh. Sumedho? Who’s that?’ They replied that he was an American monk who lived with Ajahn Chah. I’d seen a single photostatted sheet going round about Ajahn Chah which talked about how austere his monastery was, so I thought, ‘Oh my goodness, I’m intense and miserable enough already and I’m going to meet someone who’s been doing this for ten years and is austere as well. This is not going to be much fun.’ I imagined someone like a Marine sergeant, but also tight and emotionally shrivelled. However, I felt I had to go because I was these monks’ guest and they’d been so nice in offering me a place to stay.

They took me to a house where Ajahn Sumedho was sitting on a big chair with Ajahn Pabhākaro sitting next to him on the ground. So we went in and we paid our respects, the Thai monks had a chat, and then they disappeared. Ajahn Sumedho said, ‘I’ve been asked to come here and give a talk, but nobody’s turned up.’ So there I was with Ajahn Sumedho, and I spent three uninterrupted hours with him.

I can’t remember now what we talked about, but that wasn’t the point anyway. There was a huge presence of something very warm, open, simple and steady. I hadn’t experienced anything like that before. He was firm, grounded and yet modest and courteous. They brought in some tea and he insisted on pouring and offering me a cup of tea first before he took his own. He didn’t have to do that. This was around December 1976, and he said, ‘I’ve been asked to start a monastery in Britain.’ ‘Oh, yes?’ ‘Yes, somewhere in Somerset.’ ‘Well, good luck!’ I couldn’t imagine a Buddhist monastery in Somerset. It seemed too remote and traditional. Anyway, at that point we said our goodbyes and went our separate ways.

I went back to being intense, but the meeting had initiated a question in my mind. ‘What’s that person? Where has he got to? Hmm. There’s more in this than just the meditation technique.’ Then a year and a half later my father died and I felt I had to go back to Britain to sort out my affairs and be with my mother for a while. My teacher then had a connection to Ajahn Paññāvaddho5, and there was a farang  network of monks who passed things on the grapevine. The word was: ‘Sumedho’s in London.’ I was given his address with the advice to look him up. That was another little gift.

So I came to Britain. That was extraordinarily difficult because I’d been three years in solitude without speaking, apart from reporting briefly to my teacher. I went from sensory isolation out to a non-Buddhist country, trying to manage legal and family details while dealing with the death of a parent. After about six weeks I felt completely lost. My intensive noting wasn’t much good on that level. I remember going out somewhere and standing in the rain, trying to get grounded, because I was just so blown away by it all. I think I might not have stayed as a monk. It was very touch-and-go. I just couldn’t see how this Oriental tradition could relate to twentieth-century British society. Then I knocked on the door of the Hampstead Vihāra on Haverstock Hill and the door opened. It was quite a small vihāra  and this big figure almost filled the door frame. ‘Oh, hello.’ He recognized me and invited me in. My perception was: ‘Ajahn Sumedho is the door.’ The door opens, and you walk in.

The bhikkhu community there comprised Ajahn Vīradhammo and Ajahn Ānando; Ajahn Vajiro was an anagārika then. I think there were two or three other anagārikas and three sāmaṇeras. Ajahn Vimalo was around as a lay person, with his lovely sense of humour and spontaneity. The vihāra  was a very human scene. We were doing things like eating together, talking with each other and going out. I thought that this was wonderful, coming out of the tight box of my intensive practice and sensing that being a bhikkhu is something liveable! We were going piṇḍapāta  on Hampstead Heath. Before then I’d really just been a person meditating wearing robes. I hadn’t been a bhikkhu. Then I thought, ‘This is new, this is fresh, this is interesting, this is alive. This is not something you’re doing with your attention, this is something that wraps around you and carries you. It’s lived, and you can share it. I’ll stay with this for a while.’

I’d only decided to come to Britain for perhaps six weeks, but then I asked to stay for the Vassa. The Hampstead Vihāra, although it was a refuge, was cramped. I think Ajahns Ānando and Vīradhammo, who were very junior then, were suffering from being stuck in London. Fortunately we went out to Oxfordshire for the Rains Retreat, as a devout Burmese family, the Saws, had offered us a place in their country house with lots of land. We stayed in various rooms and huts that they’d built in order to do retreats. During that Vassa our group was Ajahn Vīradhammo, myself, Ven. Araññābho, three sāmaṇeras and a few anagārikas. People were going through their ups and downs, because when people take on the holy life it’s a radical overhaul, and all the things that normally hold people steady – our relationships, our ability to go places and our other various comfort zones – are taken away. People start to have strong mood swings. Getting up early in the morning, sitting still for a long time, being with the same routine and same people day after day … these things mean that difficulties start emerging. People become moody, collapse and argue with each other.

None of us had developed the skilful monastic etiquette that Thai monks have. They are gentle and spacious, and they know how to do things politely. We were rude, direct, raw and ugly! There was Anagārika Jordan who later became a monk, who was larger than life, and there was Anagārika Shaun, who became Ajahn Jayasāro. We were all relatively untrained. I think Ajahn Vīradhammo (the next senior to Ajahn Sumedho) only had three or four vassas , so there was no sense of there being a stratum of senior experienced people holding it together. Luang Por himself had twelve vassas  at that time. There he was, starting in a country that he’d never lived in before and that didn’t really know what Buddhist monks were about, with a bunch of newcomers. And it was all resting on him in a very uncertain situation. We didn’t even have a monastery; we were just guests in somebody’s house. We had morning and evening pūjā  every day and daily work. I think he gave two talks a day throughout the entire Vassa. Every morning a talk, every evening a talk, and it was always the same steadying tone.

One thing that I’ve noted about Luang Por is that he’ll pick up a particular theme and return to it again and again and again. There was the sense of steadiness and continuity: repeating the message, because you don’t really get it in one go. You get the words in one go, but his offering was to bring you back to the same point again and again so you really got the message. That Vassa it was, ‘All compounded phenomena are impermanent, arising and passing away.’ Letting go, that was the theme. So there was all this stuff bubbling up inside people: ‘That’s another impermanent phenomenon, arising and passing away.’ Through all the ups and downs, ‘It’s another impermanent phenomenon, arising and passing away.’ He was unwavering. I said to him one day, ‘Don’t you get bored with all this Buddhism, don’t you get fed up with it all?’ – I was pretty ugly and direct too! And he looked at me and said, ‘No, that’s another impermanent phenomenon!’

The beauty of it was that in those days there were only half a dozen of us. We could all just bundle into his kuti and have tea together. We’d go piṇḍapāta  together, rubbing up against each other all the time. He was the one thing that we all could rub up against and receive something from. And he’d just take it and take it, and stay steady, and laugh, and stay steady. I’d come up with things like, ‘Why can’t we drink milk in the evening though we can eat cheese? This is silly!’ His answer was: ‘It’s a crazy world.’ He wasn’t defending, he wasn’t justifying, he was just laughing at it: ‘Crazy world!’ You were becoming tangled up and infuriated, and he’d say something and suddenly you could see what you were doing. All right, another impermanent phenomenon – let it go. I picked that up and tried to do the best I could to follow it.

We had an alms-round every day, and it was tough at times because I only had sandals and in the wintertime there was thick snow. I remember walking three-mile alms-rounds (with no donors, of course) through two feet of snow with freezing feet. But somehow I was carried by the discipline and his continuity and steadiness: ‘You just do this. It doesn’t have to make sense, you just do it.’ He was very strong on going beyond the justifying mind that would always want to bend things round. The teaching was simple, but the presence and the ability to absorb the various amounts of conflict and silliness that were going on, without wavering, was something else. So I decided to make an adhiṭṭhāna  to stay and try to help. I thought, ‘There are three hundred thousand monks in Thailand; there are only a few in Britain. I’ll stay here and help out.’ So I did.

During 1978 the forest at Hammer Wood had been offered, but there were various pieces of legal procedure to be tied up. I went down with Luang Por Chah and Ajahn Sumedho and we looked around this forest. There was nowhere to live. The property in Somerset had been snatched up while everybody discussed whether it was worthwhile having it or not, so when Chithurst House became available George Sharp thought, ‘This one, we won’t talk about it. I’ll just get it!’ He got some flak for that, but he got us somewhere to live. So the next year we bundled down to Chithurst House and tied up the legal arrangements around Hammer Wood. Suddenly we had this place and it was wonderful, spacious … and a mess – a complete ruin! For all the time I was there apart from morning and evening pūjā  and all-night sits on the Wan Phra , we worked. Ajahn Sumedho gave talks every day. While all the mopping up and grubby work happened around him, he maintained the central axis of Dhamma.

The first year we were there his theme for the Vassa was, ‘What is it that Buddhas know, that unenlightened beings don’t know? Everything that arises passes away and is not self.’ He repeated this almost every day and you’d think, ‘He said that yesterday! So what?’ But then you’d find out that you hadn’t really penetrated the fact that everything arises, passes away and is not self because you’d taken something very personally, become stuck on it and hadn’t let it pass away. So with that kind of teaching, living in that situation became a practice. That’s the difference between a teacher and a book. With a book you just turn the page to the next idea. But a teacher puts out the reminders that act as a Dhamma mooring post while life washes over you. You keep checking that same teaching out against the flow of life as it hits you, and you contemplate whatever you’re holding on to, such as some sense of what you think you are or should be.

The first four nuns were living in one room in the house – four of them, trying to realize that everything that arises is not self! The rest of us were all crammed in little rooms with the rain coming in through the roof. Then Ajahn Amaro turned up and fell through the floor into the basement and broke his arm. All that was not self either. We didn’t go piṇḍapāta  at first. Luang Por didn’t want to do that because he was concerned that the conservative mind-set of West Sussex would get alarmed if we made too public a presentation. Some neighbours had already made negative remarks. So we had a meeting in the village hall where he tried to present the sangha, and he brought the English sangha members along so he wouldn’t say things that might offend the sensibilities of West Sussex. A BBC film entitled The Buddha Comes to Sussex  was created after this meeting.

We worked from eight in the morning until five at night; then we’d have the evening pūjā . On the Wan Phra  we’d sit until four in the morning, get up at six and then go back to work! And I was learning the Bhikkhu  Pāṭimokkha  at that time as well. There was a lot of energy around. Luang Por seemed to generate faith and energy. During that time he was also going out to just about anybody who invited him to teach: Women’s Institutes, Buddhist Societies, White Eagle Lodge, Theosophical Society … whoever. He was making contacts and presenting the image of the bhikkhu as being someone who was what he  was. He wasn’t hammering Buddhism into them, but just being his own presence and speaking very directly and humorously. He was on a TV programme called ‘The Gods of War’, where various religious leaders were interviewed about their attitude towards war. So Ajahn Sumedho said, ‘We don’t do that sort of thing.’ Somebody asked, ‘What about that Vietnamese monk who poured petrol over himself and set himself on fire?’ Ajahn Sumedho replied, ‘That’s personal, that’s his choice. Fortunately they don’t expect me to do that.’ He was always bringing it down from the doctrinal, the ideological, to the human quality. And I think that’s the thing that people really welcomed: someone who wasn’t just mouthing the official line but talking as a human being, and always with a smile or laugh after it.

Ajahn Sumedho would take on just about anybody for training – and there were some very strong characters! He’d also push us out. I think I’d been in Britain two and a half years, just past my fifth vassa,  when he said, ‘Go and teach a ten-day retreat up in Northumberland.’ So I went up there. Then the local people wanted to start a vihāra , so Luang Por said, ‘Well, you go up there and start it.’ I only had five vassas!  I went up there with Ajahn Chandapālo, who was an anagārika then, and Venerable Thānavaro. We were just the three of us, working in this freezing cottage up in Northumberland, which is now a very beautiful monastery: Aruna Ratanagiri. There was no book, there was no ‘this is what you do’; there were no guidelines. There was just practice: do the morning and evening pūjā , stay simple, do the work, stay as a community. That was it.

Then we started Amaravati, and that again was a huge leap in the dark. He took a group of us there, and the nuns walked from Chithurst. It was set up to be their centre. He wanted to have a retreat centre, events for families and a place where many lay people could come and practise, because Chithurst didn’t have the permission to hold large, residential events and it was too small. So we went up there and found a place which was like every other place we’d started – freezing cold and derelict – and started working on it. Here’s where he seemed to gain further confidence in his vision of practice. His theme was, ‘The doors to the Deathless are open.’ He still chants that when he begins a Dhamma talk: open up, bring everything in, we’ll take it on. We just followed and did what we could to support the energy and persistence he had, both in teaching and also in his own practice.

A standard day for Luang Por Sumedho would be: get up at two o’clock, work out for an hour or so on his rowing machine, take a shower, have a cup of coffee, meditate. So by morning pūjā  at five o’clock he was incandescent. He said, ‘You really prepare yourself for the morning pūjā .’ This is his favourite moment of the day. He’d structure his day around coming to that morning pūjā  as if he was going to meet the Buddha. He would be there, often giving ‘stream-of-consciousness recollections’, reflecting on Dhamma out loud as it was arising in his mind. We’d let it wash over us, and whatever bits landed opened us up. It was a very open channel, with him letting it flow. That was probably the main event of the day for him. And the example was: prepare  for the morning pūjā ; you’re going to meet the Buddha, you’re going to meet the Dhamma. It’s not just, ‘Here we go again, another day …’ but a rising up into the Dhamma, setting things up for a day of practice.

After morning pūjā  we’d do our chores. Then Luang Por would give another reflection over breakfast, and we’d sit there with our various mind-states. Sometimes, I must confess, I’d be looking at my tea and thinking, ‘I wish he’d shut up so I can drink my tea.’ But he kept going. And eventually I’d think, ‘Let go, it doesn’t matter,’ and  just be with it. He’d carry on all day, see people after the meal and continue until the evening pūjā . Then he’d go back to his kuti at nine or ten o’clock  and retire.

He had the attitude of making himself available. He’d prepare his body and mind to carry things through for the resident community and anyone who turned up. That took huge generosity and patience, because there were some crazy people turning up, and they’d ask him crazy questions. He’d sit there and listen. A husband and wife were having a quarrel, and he’d sit and listen to it – her side and his side. He’d give advice. I’d be thinking, ‘Why bother with these people? Tell them to sort themselves out.’ But he would say, ‘I’m just throwing out seeds. Some time in a future life they might have a recollection of meeting a Buddhist monk who received them. That’s good enough.’ He was prepared to throw out seeds to whomever, so they’d have some sense of having met a Buddhist monk who was ready to listen without being righteous, and offer help. He’d do that for just about anybody who turned up – and he’s still like that! We had to start to guard him because we realized, despite that channel, there’s a human being there and we want to protect it. So you’d say, ‘Luang Por, please, let’s retire and take a rest, because you’re eighty years old now!’ What an immense sacrifice he would make!

With all that, he’d still make a point of going back to Thailand at least once a year to pay respects to Somdet Buddhajahn6 and the Sangharāja7 and, obviously, go to Wat Pah Pong when Luang Por Chah was still alive. When Luang Por Chah passed away he’d still go every year, to stay connected, to bring up any topics which needed discussion and listen to concerns. He’d do that for his own practice, but also to maintain that connection for the Sangha in the West: to indicate that we haven’t split off, we’re connected, we want to listen, we want to learn, we want to maintain our sense of kinship so that things can develop properly. He says he’s retired, but he’s still making connections in Thailand and bringing people over. This year, he brought over the successor to Somdet Buddhajahn, abbot of Wat Saket, so that he would see our sangha in Britain and respect what we’re doing here – so that we can feel connected.

Luang Por was widening his accessibility to just about anybody who came along, but he also stayed very true to the core lineage. As with a tree, what you see is the trunk, the leaves and branches growing upwards. The tree is growing bigger and bigger, but every time it grows upwards it also has to grow deeper and deeper roots to balance it, otherwise it’s not going to last. You don’t see the roots under the ground, but they are as large as the amount of the tree that’s above the ground. This kind of practice isn’t mystical; this is work. It takes patience, generosity and energy. It also takes equanimity – and there’s no such thing as a smooth path to equanimity! To develop equanimity doesn’t mean everything’s going to be wonderful. Equanimity means you have to experience the rocky stuff, the disappointments, the praise and the blame, the success and failure, and accept it all.

I remember the year when Ajahns Ānando, Kittisāro and Pabhākaro disrobed. They are all people whom Luang Por had nurtured and with whom he had a strong sense of companionship. So there was a feeling of trying to hold something together while people were breaking down in it. That’s always part of Sangha life – not just physical death, but also the disillusionments and conflicts: senior people growing disillusioned (not just juniors!), quarrels within the community and struggles over leadership. If you’re the leader of the community you have no choice, you will always get the blame no matter what you do. That’s just the way it goes; it’s not a rational thing. If you’re going to be a leader you’re going to suffer, because you can’t control things. You’ll feel a sense of responsibility for everyone, but you realize they’re not going to be the way you want them to be or able to do what you want them to do. Some will leave, some will stay. Of course there’ll be good ones and inspiring ones, but you’ll also see ones who become disillusioned or find fault with you.

Sangha life is turbulent, and we manage to contain it because of a very important example like Luang Por’s. We could become ideological about the rights and wrongs of meditation, but he offered simplicity and commitment to openness and presence. Because he loved the holy life so much, he was very warm-hearted, but also quite tender-hearted. He’d be profoundly affected by people becoming disillusioned with what he thought was so beautiful and valid, and which worked for him. But he came through it and eventually said, ‘I recognize people are just working out their kamma. Some will do monastic life for a lifetime, some will only do it for a year. They’re doing what they can. And you have to let it pass. You have to let it fail and fall apart sometimes.’ That’s equanimity. Take Amaravati, for example. When Amaravati started people were naturally complaining and criticizing because it wasn’t what it should be, and he’d say, ‘Well, we try, and if the whole thing fails, so what? It’s been a good experiment. It’s been an interesting attempt. We try, and it works for some people and for some people it doesn’t. We still do it. And if the whole thing folds up, well, never mind. The Dhamma persists.’ He’d always have that attitude.

I remember when Ajahn Ānando was organizing a tudong  on the South Downs and inviting everyone to go. I said, ‘Well, I don’t know whether I should go. Surely we need to be responsible and look after Amaravati and make sure it’s running.’ Ajahn Sumedho replied, ‘Look, if you want to go tudong , it’s good. We’ll just hang a sign on the door saying “Gone tudong . Come and sit here if you like.”’ He said, ‘I want to be able to run it like that. It’s not super-tranquil, it’s not well organized. You’re not guaranteed to have brilliant teachings every day. It’s like this. It’s an open door. If you want to be open and you want to practise, it’s here. But don’t bring your expectations.’ So he practised with equanimity as to whether people liked what they found or were disappointed by it. Not that he didn’t feel anything, but he was able to maintain awareness of those feelings as ‘that which arises, passes’, and ‘being the knowing’, which was another one of his great mantras: ‘Be the knowing, abide in awareness, the world is like this.’

When Amaravati was still developing, on many evenings local hooligans would drive up in their cars, screech around the courtyard and make noise. Sometimes they’d smash the donation or post boxes, or scream and howl, ring the bell and so on. We’d say, ‘How could they do this?’ And Luang Por Sumedho would say, ‘The world is like this. This is the way it is.’ We tried all kinds of things. We had a night vigil where we’d take it in turns to walk around the monastery to intercept people. One monk had the bright idea of having a ‘potato brigade’, whereby you were given a potato and if you saw a car parked, you stuffed the potato up the exhaust pipe, so that when the driver tried to drive the car away the engine would fill with exhaust and break down. We were all armed with potatoes on these vigils.

One time the hooligans pushed over a bronze Buddha standing in the courtyard. This was the day before Vesak. We came out the next morning and there was the Buddha-rūpa lying on its face in the dirt with a massive dent in its shoulder. I looked at it and was so upset, ‘How could people do this?’ Luang Por said, ‘The world is like this. Wanting it to be another way is suffering.’ He had that ability to catch the points where you’re about to blow up or get wound up about something. He would prick the bubble. There were many incidents like that, and to me that was the most helpful thing.

Luang Por never prepares a talk. His interest in studying is limited but he’ll just pick a particular phrase or one sutta and reflect on it again and again, and distil things out of it. But then you see the results in the actuality of daily life! This is a strong characteristic of the forest teachers, particularly Luang Por Chah and Luang Por Sumedho. Just as you’re getting absorbed in something or irritated by something, that’s when he’d point to it. I’ve been asking a few people what their recollections of him were, and one monk mentioned that at one time he was involved with a building project. Ajahn Sumedho came up and just took hold of his arm, squeezed it and gave him a big smile, ‘Hello.’ That’s it. You’re getting into your little bubble and then, ‘Hello, here we are,’ and you could feel the mental landscape suddenly change.

In those early days you could still gain access to him easily, and I was privileged to be able to serve. I like serving; it’s nice to be able to support. I’d go and massage his feet every day. I’ve never massaged anybody’s feet before. I’d get hot water, bathe his feet, massage them and squeeze his swollen foot. We didn’t talk very much, but it was good to feel that I was doing what I could for my teacher in this simple human way. That’s a memory on my shrine, too. I can’t put a word to it, but it’s there, along with many other recollections of what was so special.

When you live with Luang Por Sumedho or in monasteries that have known his presence, you take it for granted that this is Buddhism and it’s set up for you. Maybe you don’t reflect on how it got there. Where would it have been without him? How do you think this temple got here? He didn’t build it, but he pulled in the energy, the intelligence and the finances to make it happen. How do you think you’ve been able to come from all these different countries in the world and be granted permission to stay here? How do you think you can go to Thailand or go to another twenty monasteries in the world and be immediately accepted? You go to America and they say, ‘Ajahn Sumedho’s monks, they’re the ones you can trust. They’re really solid.’ How do you think that happened? He made the connections. Where does it all point to?

We’re gathered together for this being, this non-self presence, to use his eightieth birthday as a recollection. Who knows who this person is? It’s an impermanent formation, but I think it’s huge pāramī  that brought this special occasion about. Where would we be without that? I don’t know where I’d be. It wouldn’t be as good, I’m pretty certain of that. And just consider in your own life, all of you who’ve come here, I’d say you’ve been part of something unparalleled in Western Buddhism. How many other monastic foundations are there? Where do you think all this came from?

So this is what I recollect – this amazing development that’s happened for all of us. It’s something we’re part of and can carry in our minds and hearts. I hope you all have some anecdote for yourself, some occasion when you heard something he said or noticed something he did, and thought, ‘Ah-ha!’ Maybe there was only one thing, but it’s an important one. Just take those one, two, three or four things and ask: ‘Where would I be without them?’

4 The four requisites are: clothing, food, shelter and medicine.

5 Ajahn Paññāvaddho was a British monk who ordained as a bhikkhu in 1956. He stayed in the London Buddhist Vihāra for five years, before he went to Thailand. In 1963 he was accepted to stay at Wat Pa Baan Taad monastery with Ajahn Maha Boowa and stayed there until he passed away on 18 August 2004. He was a much respected teacher and practitioner, and his life greatly benefited people from all over the world.

6 Somdet Buddhajahn was the acting Supreme Patriarch of Thailand, as well as a good friend and mentor to Luang Por Sumedho, having met before Luang Por’s entry into the Sangha.

7 Sangharāja is a title given in many Theravada Buddhist countries to a senior monk who is the titular head either of a monastic fraternity (nikāya), or of the Sangha throughout the country. This term is often rendered in English as ‘Patriarch’ or ‘Supreme Patriarch’.