##### Breathing Through the Four Elements

This guided meditation was offered on 25 November 2014.

To contemplate the four elements, first get an overall impression of your body. Don’t focus on any particular detail, but simply spread out into the whole experience of how you know you have a body: that kind of substantiality, that sense of an extended living mass.

The element that’s most clearly associated with breathing is air. You can feel that repeated flowing movement which we call breathing. It doesn’t really matter where you feel it, simply notice where it’s most thoroughly and easily felt. Feel the completeness of each breath: through the flow of the exhaling to the end of it, through the flow of the inhaling to the end of it … Be aware of that flow of air within the domain of the body, which is perhaps more akin to earth – it’s relatively solid. This flow of air pushes, massages, opens and spreads the experience of body. At the end of the out-breath, you may notice that things seem to solidify for a moment and come into stasis; the earth element becomes more dominant, then it changes and loosens. That flow, that movement, is not really a thing, is it? You can call it a ‘thing’ like you call the wind a ‘thing’, but it’s actually not a finite thing: it’s a process, a movement through the earth. Give your awareness over to these two aspects of rūpa playing together, balancing. The air predominates, then the earth, then it changes back into air again: stasis, movement, stasis, movement … You can trust this; this is where you are. And you can, of course, adjust the focus and notice that same pattern in your chest, your throat, your head or your abdomen.

You might also notice a kind of vitality or energy. Sometimes your breath has low vitality. At other times, particularly at the end of the breath, it feels strong and clear, it has energy within it. At the completion of the inhalation, energy builds up. At the completion of the exhalation, energy gathers to draw a breath in again. This is the fire element. It has a warming and vitalizing effect. You can look out for that quality in any part of your body: vitality will be there. If you focus on it, it will even increase and there will be a certain shining quality, particularly in the head. It’s a very important element: it can soften, it can heal. When you sense the body, feel the vitalizing effect of breathing. If you take it in – in your chest for example – you can have the sense of it spreading a little bit as you breathe in. The breathing comes in and perhaps your chest becomes a little more charged. Then when breathing out, it becomes cooled. You’re feeling the vitality of that. Perhaps you can encourage some of the tissues to soften, to release, to let go a little more, just like you’re massaging something. You can pick up this sign by bearing in mind your throat, your shoulders, your head or any other part of the body and sensing breathing. The part of the body you’re bearing in mind doesn’t have to be necessarily associated with the respiratory tract, because the energy moves wherever you bring attention to.

The water element is the property that allows experiences to resonate, ripple and travel through the entire form. Here we might imagine the sense of the body being like a pool. All these different affects occur in it: tensions, swirls, still places and so on. Instead of cutting off or rigidifying around difficult places, we breathe into them, feeling the energy of the breathing travelling through the entire form. You can ask the body to loosen a little bit in its tension, to soften, to widen. You’re breathing, sensitive to the entire body, and whatever intention of goodwill that you want to bear in mind, you carry it through the body. Notice its effects. This is the beauty of the water element.

If you can pick up these elements and get a sense of how they blend, you have a quality of balance: the earth, the firmness (without getting seized up and rigid); air, the movement of breathing (without getting blown away and spun out – it’s contained); the vitality of fire, warming; and the suffusiveness of water. If there is too much water, you lose form; if there is not enough of it, you become rigid. These elements are all blending together with breathing in and breathing out. Your bodily experience can become the play of these elements in harmony.