# The Four Foundations of Mindfulness

Ajahn Sumedho

This recording was made for this project by Luang Por Sumedho, kindly supported by Ajahn Asoko at Amaravati Monastery in July, 2021.

Question. We were talking about how we cannot create mindfulness because we cannot create consciousness. But the path is about cultivating and using wisdom, with the four foundations of mindfulness? How would you describe what that is all about?

Ajahn Sumedho. The common use of the phrase ‘cultivating mindfulness’ refers to a special thing that you cultivate. But mindfulness is quite natural to us. If we were never mindful, we would die. Even a newborn infant is mindful when it is hungry, when it is sleepy, when it needs its nappies changed. The newborn is consciously aware of discomfort or hunger or fatigue. So, you don’t cultivate. In Buddhist terms when we talk about mindfulness, it’s about using mindfulness with wisdom. And that teaching is very precise. In the teaching of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, the first foundation, mindfulness of the body, is about awareness with wisdom. Mindfulness with wisdom is when you are looking at the body not in terms of whether it’s good looking, whether it’s male or female, or whether it’s young or old. But it is about looking at the body as it is. It’s like this. The four postures are like this. Whether you are sitting, standing, walking or lying down, you are usually not mindful of the actual reality of each of those postures, such as sitting is like this.

You are sitting but you are thinking about plans for the next month or the next year. You are thinking about problems with your friends or relatives. You are not mindful of the body as such, you are not really observing. You are not being the witness, not being aware of the body as it is sitting. The reality of sitting in the present moment is like this. The reality of standing, walking, lying down or being mindful of the breath, is like this. Who is mindful of the breath unless it is hard to breathe? Who is mindful of the breath unless you are practising a traditional kind of mindfulness of the breath practice (ānāpānasati). In mindfulness of breathing, you are being aware of just the exhaling or inhaling of your breath. You are mindful of it. You are not judging it. You are not wondering if you breathe well or don’t breathe well. You are aware, it’s like this. Mindfulness of the body is using wisdom to look at the way things are, rather than just operating from habit patterns.

When you are sitting down, you are thinking about something else. When you are eating your food, you are worried about your job or your marriage or whatever. When you are standing, you are getting bored, just standing, waiting in line. You are not just aware of standing but you are lost in your emotional reactions. If you are waiting in a long line to get a vaccination, then you can be getting bored or restless or impatient. When you follow those emotions, you are not mindful of those emotions. When you are standing, sitting, walking, lying down, you are just operating from emotional habit patterns.

The second Foundation of Mindfulness is feeling; pleasant, painful or neutral feeling. Any ordinary unenlightened person is aware when they are feeling pleasurable physical feelings or when they are having painful ones. But they don’t see it with wisdom. If there is physical pain, you want to get rid of it. If there are pleasurable sensations through the senses, you want to keep them. You aren’t aware of that wanting; wanting to be rid of feelings or wanting to keep feelings. You are just operating from habit patterns, and you are not aware of those habits. You are operating from habitual conditioning. So, when you feel pain, you try to get rid of it. And that’s without being aware of what you are doing. And you are not mindful of pain itself, such as physical pain when it’s present. You are not mindful of sensual pleasure when it’s present. You are just indulging in the pleasure of sensual delight.

The third Foundation of Mindfulness is about mental states. Somebody insults you and you get angry. You know you’re angry, but you’re seeing it from the perspective of personal judgement. It is someone else’s fault that you are angry, or you get angry too easily. You make it into a kind of personal possession. When there is wisdom, you begin to see anger as something that arises and ceases. When you see that, you are developing mindfulness with wisdom that sees things as they are. Because anger is not personal. It is not a real person that is angry. It is a condition that arises according to other conditions, and it ceases. It is the ignorance that is personalizing anger. By blaming your anger on somebody else, you can get more and more angry even when that person isn’t around.

In mindfulness of the Dhamma, you see things in terms of impermanence. You see things in terms of the conditioned realm, and that everything conditioned is impermanent. Because of its impermanence, it has no satisfactory quality to it. It changes. So even sensual pleasure, as enjoyable as it is, is not permanent. You can’t sustain sensual pleasures permanently because they change according to other conditions. Seeing in this way, you are cultivating wisdom along with mindfulness.

When you’re mindful crossing the street, it is because there is danger. That is obvious in crossing a busy street. If you cross the street heedlessly, you’ll get hit by a car and you know that. You are mindful when you are rock climbing because you have to be aware of where your feet and hands are. The physical danger is immediate. Why do people do all these dangerous sports? Joy riding, speeding, athletics in general or even playing basketball? So in playing football or basketball, you must play the game properly. To be a team member, you must be mindful of where you are, where the others are, where the ball is. So that’s why people like to play sports. Because it’s an exercise in mindfulness and it gets you out of yourself. If you are playing basketball, you are not worried about paying your electric bill. Even though that might be a problem in your daily life, when you are playing basketball or climbing a rock cliff, you give up worrying about the future and are mindful of the present conditions. But that’s mindfulness that we have due to circumstances, not out of wisdom.

So, you are aware of external dangers. But you’re usually not aware of internal dangers. You tend to see them in terms of personal qualities. Or you are completely unaware of what your body is up to or unaware of what your physical feelings are. How many people just suppress their feelings? Trying to suppress pain or physical discomfort, take drugs to get rid of or lessen the discomfort without realizing that pain is a condition that arises and ceases. So, with wisdom you are always reflecting on the way it is. Not just the fact that there is pain, but you are observing pain, you are witnessing. You are mindful of the reality of pain when it is present.

The fourth foundation is Mindfulness of Dhamma, the way things are. You are using the Dhamma teachings as we have them from the Buddha. Where consciousness is functional in an ordinary person’s life, you don’t reflect on it. You know you’re conscious, but you don’t understand it. If you pass out, then you’re unconscious. There is a subconscious. And there is dream consciousness. And when you’re dead, consciousness leaves the body.

So, we have all these perceptions of consciousness in a kind of mundane, worldly, ignorant state. But with consciousness of the reality of here and now, it takes mindfulness; being aware of itself, consciousness mindful of itself. Because consciousness isn’t a condition that is born and dies. Out of ignorance we tend to be attached to conditions that begin and end. And that is lacking in wisdom. We don’t have wisdom, even though we’re fully conscious individuals, we don’t understand it, we have no perspective on it. We just have habit patterns that we are addicted to and that we operate from. We react to conditions, we experience them through reactivity, not through wisdom. The Four Noble Truths are teachings pointing inwards. We are not trying to find nibbāna externally. You don’t have to go to India or to an ashram. You begin to look inward. You begin to be aware of consciousness as consciousness.