# When the Last Breath Comes

Ajahn Amaro

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on November 6th, 2021. He kindly edited it to be more suitable for reading.

On November 5th, 2022, Luang Por Liem was 80 years old. The main ceremonies were at Khok Chan which he has been developing in his Thai home village for many years. At Abhayagiri we were also celebrating him reaching 80 years. Ajahn Ñāṇiko read a piece about gratitude that Luang Por Liem wrote during a stay at Abhayagiri in 2009. In English, kataññu is gratitude. Katavedī is the natural response of wanting to do something in return. It’s not so much a debt, but a response to having received some blessing or some wonderful gifts or being grateful for how things have been. It is the natural outflow of the heart to do something in response to that. Not quite a debt, but a natural responsivity.

So, in thinking about gratitude, a part of gratitude is forgiveness. Many Thai people gathered here today have been coming to the monastery for many years. When the name Abhayagiri is written in Thai, abhay in Thai means forgiveness. So right from the get-go when Luang Por Pasanno and I were here, sometimes when Thai people came to visit, they would ask, ‘Why is it called Forgiveness Mountain? What needs forgiving?’ And we would reply, ‘No, it means fearless.’ Abhaya means fearless, we would tell them the name is Fearless Mountain. As can be the way of things, being misunderstood to mean forgiveness is a good misunderstanding. It’s not the intended meaning, but it’s a good meaning.

I feel that gratitude and forgiveness go together. Gratitude is a natural response to receiving blessings and good fortune and being blessed with opportunities. And forgiveness is needed, when you’ve been carrying around a grudge. You may have a negative feeling or a resentment or you have been hurt by somebody in your family or when you were growing up. You may have been hurt in your workplace or by what the government has been doing, or by some other beings in the world. Forgiveness is as much a part of our tradition as the gratitude which Luang Por Liem wrote about. So, forgiveness is very much a way of life. When we practice, we often think about keeping the precepts, sīla, and we think about generosity, being one who offers gifts for others. But forgiveness is very important. It is a quiet member of the important Buddhist qualities.

This morning a layman left the monastery to return home to care for his mother. He had been here for two years. We had a little ceremony of asking for forgiveness of Luang Por Pasanno and the Saṅgha. That is how we part company. So, when I am leaving to return to England, I will be asking for forgiveness from Luang Por Pasanno and the Saṅgha here. They will probably ask forgiveness from me. It’s a little ceremony that we do to clear the slate, to let go of any kind of grudge. And I feel that this is a really important part of our practice. It’s so easy for us to carry people around who have hurt our feelings, ten years ago, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, or seventy years ago. We carry people around for decades. Somebody who was cruel to us, somebody who hurt us, somebody who took advantage of us. And by the time we get to being fifty, sixty, seventy years old, we can be carrying a lot of people. To forgive is to let go, to recognize that as human beings we make mistakes. You might have been hurt or damaged by someone or some institution, emotionally or even physically. It doesn’t mean that you’re glad that injury happened, but you’re ready to not carry it around. You are ready to let go of that injury, that hurt, that ill-will in your heart. This is a practice that the Buddha encouraged very strongly; to not nurture hatred. ‘Hatred is never conquered by hatred. Hatred is only ever conquered by love; this is a law ancient and inexhaustible.’ Dhammapada, Verse 5.

So, this monastery is called Abhayagiri which means Fearless Mountain, but also Forgiveness Mountain. That is a good reminder for us to notice when we are carrying other people around. When we are carrying those negative feelings. ‘May all beings be happy except for him. Never! Never forgive.’ That’s what we can do. Sometimes when you are teaching loving kindness meditation, ‘May all beings be happy except that one and that one.’ And we carry these people around like a stone in our shoe. It is a painful presence. The Buddha’s encouragement is to recognize that painful feeling and to forgive, to let go.

This is also called abhaya-dāna. The other day I was saying that keeping the five precepts is a way of practising abhaya-dāna, a giving of fearlessness. So similarly, abhaya, the giving of fearlessness is a way of offering forgiveness. The word ‘give’ is there in the middle of ‘forgiveness’. That’s not an accident. The English word ‘forgive’ is a kind of giving. You are giving space for people to be imperfect. People are not all arahants; they are not all enlightened. They are not always guided by sīla, samādhi and paññā. They are not always guided by kindness and generosity. People are often guided by greed, hatred, delusion - they are guided by the force of habit. Sometimes they are doing things out of a sense of duty. They feel it’s their duty. They are doing the right thing, but it’s harmful to you anyway. ‘I’m doing this for your own good. Whack!’ When I was a child, often the teachers would say, ‘this is hurting me more than it’s hurting you,’ just before they hit you. I don’t know if any of you have been schoolteachers, but sometimes out of a sense of duty people do things that have harmed us. They do things that have hurt us, and we can carry that around.

I feel it’s very helpful to notice who we are carrying around who have hurt our feelings, have wounded us, or have done things that are hurtful to those that we love. And again, we are not trying to pretend that we like that or think it’s good, but this is the way the world is, and more hatred will not make things better. More negativity will not make things better. So, we include those who may do harm when we chant the sharing of blessings. ‘May all beings who are friendly, indifferent or hostile. May the highest gods and evil forces. May all beings receive the blessings of my life.’ You share your good kamma with those who wish you harm. Not because you are glad that they do that, but because more hatred is only going to make things worse.

The capacity to forgive is a wonderful ability that we have as human beings. We don’t have to carry each other around. We don’t have to nurse that negativity, to nurse that wrath. In a famous Scottish poem, a woman is waiting for her drunk husband to come home. She is standing by the door with a rolling pin. ‘Nursing her wrath to keep it warm.’ Looking after her wrath, waiting for him to come home. ‘I am not going to cool down, I am going to stay angry and wait until he comes in.’ Nursing her wrath to keep it warm.

When we carry out these ceremonies of asking for forgiveness, by body, speech and mind, through those three doors, we say, ‘If I have said or done anything that has been hurtful to you, I ask you to forgive me.’ And then the elder says, ‘I forgive you, please forgive me also’. Even if you are a senior person, or a teacher or a parent or a grandparent, or the elder Ajahn, you still do not assume that you can’t do anything wrong. Even with the best of intentions, we’ve said something or done something that was annoying or difficult for the people around us. We might not know that, but as a senior Ajahn, we ask, ‘Please forgive me also’.

We might not be aware that the way we’ve spoken or acted was painful for them. Or we’ve asked the person to do some job that was difficult for them. So, we say, ‘Please forgive me also.’ And the person who is taking leave says, ‘I forgive you.’ We can take the refuges and precepts in a mindless way. And we can go through the asking of forgiveness ceremony in a mindless way, in an inattentive way. These ceremonies have power and value if we are paying attention - if we mean it. If we don’t mean it, then they won’t work. It’s like a tool. If you want to chop the carrots, you have to pick up the knife and apply the knife to the carrots, otherwise the carrots won’t get chopped. So, we apply the tool. And when we apply it, we say, ’That was painful. My sister or my father, they hurt my feelings. Or my boss, my schoolteacher, my partner, my wife, my husband, they caused this hurt, they caused this pain. I acknowledge that it’s painful, but I forgive them. I am not going to carry that person around. I’m not glad that it happened. Maybe I’ve still got the scars, but I am not going to carry that around. I am not going to nurse that wrath, that hatred, that aversion. Then we find a peacefulness, an ease within us.

I teach retreats on dying and death. I think the Covid pandemic has made the contemplation on death, maraṇa-sati, much more alive, no pun intended. The pandemic has made death much more real. People here are sitting outside in the breezeway, instead of being inside together because of the danger of the Covid illness. So that has been a stronger presence in our life. We don’t know when we are going to die. We don’t know if we are going to catch the illness. None of us knows. But I feel in this situation, the Buddha’s teaching is even more important than usual because it gives us perfect tools to deal with that. To recollect that death is not somewhere over the hill. But it is close by, it is near, so pay attention.

One of the practices I like to teach when I am leading retreats on dying and death is what I call a death rehearsal. It’s a kind of death contemplation. It only works if you are not the one ringing the bell. I would say to everyone, ‘Okay, we will sit together for an hour and when the bell goes, that is the last hour of your life. We all have one hour left to live.’ So, I set that as the picture. Often, I have people lying down on mats in the hall so they can more easily imitate lying on a deathbed. You’ve just got that last hour of life and you’ve got the time it takes for the bell to fade out to be ready.

There are four things I encourage people to contemplate that I thought I would share with everyone today, because they involve both gratitude and forgiveness. The first one is the recollection of the people you are grateful for, recollecting those who have helped you. Your parents, your teachers or even the difficult situations that we learn from and are grateful for. So first we recollect the people and the events in your life you feel gratitude for. The first recollection is the cultivation of that quality of gratitude. How much your parents helped you. How your mother was always there to lend a hand. How there were people who did so much for you. That one schoolteacher who really looked out for you, and you say, ‘Yes, she was so good. She was so helpful. She saved my life.’ To consciously recollect the people and particular events that you have gratitude for. One is consciously cultivating gratitude.

The second one is looking through the people you are still carrying around. The people with whom you’ve still got the grudges, the grudge list, the grudge report. The people you are still carrying around, ‘May all beings be happy except for her and her, and him.’ So, recollecting those people you still have resentment and aversion for. To bring those people to mind. You’ve only got half an hour to live; do you still want to be carrying them around when your last breath comes? So, to bring those people to mind. To consciously recollect the painful things that have come from them and then to let go. To relax and say, ‘They did that, it was very stupid of them. I don’t know what they were thinking when they did that, but I don’t need to carry it around anymore.’ Let go, people make mistakes. The mind can be guided by greed, hatred and delusion. That’s what happens. Even arahants make mistakes and do things that can be hurtful to other people. That’s the second of these practices, to let go of those resentments.

The third practice is to look at your own life and the things that you regret about yourself. All the mistakes you made. The things you said that were hurtful. The times when you were dishonest or unkind. The way you caused hurt to other people. This is forgiving yourself; it is a bit more challenging. Westerners find this very, very difficult. It is easier to forgive other people than to forgive yourself. Go through your memories to consider, ‘Well I was seventeen at the time. All seventeen-year-olds are a bit crazy. I definitely was not an arahant at the time, so of course, foolish things were done, and people got hurt. Damage was done. There are scars.’ Even things that have been quite significant and important in your own life and in other people’s lives, the hurt that you have given to others, recollect all of that in the heart. And say, ‘Well I am not glad that I did that. It’s painful when I remember it, but I don’t have to see it personally. I don’t have to see this as me and mine, I don’t have to see it as this is what I am.’ The mind was taken over by lust or by fear or by aversion. It was carried away trying to impress my friends and damage got done. That was the cause. That was the effect. And then to forgive yourself. Again, we are not pretending that it didn’t happen. This is something that can be known. It can be understood and let go of.

And the fourth one is very challenging indeed. This is remembering your own goodness. Often when we think about our lives, we can remember the painful or embarrassing things we have done, but to recollect your own goodness, not to be proud about it. ‘Oh, I made a huge donation there, starting a monastery, that’s really good kamma. I must have piled up a huge mountain of merit; what a lot I’ve got.’ It’s not to be proud or stupid or inflated, but in Pali, this is called cāgānussati and it is one of the recollections the Buddha encouraged us to make. To recollect your own goodness. To acknowledge the merit that has come through your actions, through your speech, through your efforts in life.

This can be difficult to do. Particularly as Westerners, with our Judeo-Christian upbringing in this environment, you should never be proud or pleased with yourself. That’s conceited, that’s inflated. That’s harmful, it is obstructive, you shouldn’t think that way. But the Buddha encouraged us to recollect that goodness. Not to build up a sense of attā, a sense of self; not to build up I, me and mine around it. But to recognize it was a beautiful thing that you did. It was noble. It was helpful. Real beings were really helped by you having done that. Yes! Good! Sādhu! As I said, this is going to be a difficult practice to carry out. Sometimes it’s easier if I was Ajahn Ñāṇiko and I was trying to recollect my goodness. I would imagine Ajan Ñāṇiko as my friend, and I would be very happy to praise him. If he was my friend, it would be very easy to praise him. How wonderful, how helpful. But if it is ourselves, ‘Oh no, it’s nothing, it wasn’t anything special. It was a small thing.’ We put ourselves down very easily. But if it was our friend who had helped in that way, being kind, being generous, and being always available to help others. Then we would say, ‘Sādhu, how good, how marvellous.’ So, to recollect your own goodness. To bring that to mind and to not build a self around it - to let go. This is good, this is beautiful, let go of that as well.

So that is a practice of death rehearsal: recollecting things we feel grateful for and glad about, recollecting things we feel bad about, things that are painful, that need forgiveness. And whether it has to do with gratitude or forgiveness, we let go without building a self around that.

The Buddha gave some advice to his relative, Mahānāma. Mahānāma was the ruler of the Sakyans and he was sometimes called to the bedside of people who were dying. He asked the Buddha, ‘Sometimes when I am called to the deathbed of people, I am asked to give advice, what should I say to them?’ And the Buddha gave a series of pieces of advice saying, ‘Ask someone, as they are dying, are they still attached to their home, or family or business? If they are, encourage them to let go of that anxiety about home, family, business.’ Then he went on, ‘If they let go of their attachment to home, to family and to business, then aim the attention to being born into one of the heavenly realms: the realms of the Four Great Kings, the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven, the Devas of the Thirty-Three; the Tusita Heaven, the Devas of Delight; even the Brahma world. But why settle for the Tāvatiṃsa Heaven, why not aim for the Tusita Heaven? Why settle for the Tusita Heaven, why not aim for the Brahmā world?’ And then he says an interesting thing. ‘Instead of aiming for the Brahma world, why not let go of the impulse to be born at all? Better instead to focus the attention on the cessation of identity, sakkāya-nirodha. Focus attention on letting go of everything, on letting go of the intent to being born again at all.’ The Buddha makes the comment that if someone let’s go of everything in that way, if they fix their mind on that cessation of identity, then there is no difference in the mind of that person as they die, between their state of liberation and that of a monk who has been an arahant for 100 years. It is one of the very few places where the Buddha speaks about a layperson being an arahant.

But I feel this is very good advice for us. We have the Kaṭhina day, a festival day which is a joyful time. And I don’t expect any of us are going to die today. But just in case we do because none of us know what the future holds, I would encourage us to take these four recollections to heart. Forgiving the wrongs of others, feeling grateful for the blessings from others. Forgiving our own wrongdoings and celebrating the good things we have done. And then letting go of it all. And when that last breath comes, if this is our last day, to not be carrying anything around. To not be owning anything. To be ready to establish the heart in complete peacefulness. The Buddha said that nibbāna is a place of no thingness. A place of non-possession where the heart does not own anything. It is not lacking anything. It is unburdened, it is unlimited.

When the heart is unburdened, unlimited in this way, there is the recognition that the citta, the heart, the mind is not a person. We tend to identify with our body, our personality, our name and our story. But when there is that letting go of everything in this way, then the mind knows the person, knows the feelings and the thoughts that are passing away; but that which knows the person, is not a person. The citta is the Dhamma, it is not a person. It knows the awake heart; it knows that quality of awareness. It knows the personal, the thoughts, the feelings and the sensations. It knows the world around us that is arising and passing away. But it is not limited by that; it is not identified with that. It knows the world, but it is not limited by the world. This is the quality of the awake heart. We can take that away from this day, along with the merit (boon), from the offering of the Kaṭhina cloth. That Kaṭhina offering which, as Ajahn Ñāṇiko said, is the most superlative merit that comes from any material offering. Along with that we can take away these reflections. To consider the qualities of gratitude and the qualities of forgiveness. To consider how when the heart lets go of everything, it is free of identification with all things. That is where the great peace of nibbāna is something that can be realized. That quality of freedom, of ease and peace is the most precious thing that you can take away from this great six-day long festive occasion.