# Breathing Intelligence

Ajahn Sucitto

This is based on a reflection offered by Ajahn Sucitto on June 19th, 2021 at Cittaviveka Monastery, UK. It is part of a series of recordings, ‘At Home with the Homeless: Ajahn Sucitto Locked Down’, offered as a way of connection and encouragement in the time of the global pandemic lockdown.

Summary: Cultivation of citta is the highest kind of learning we can undertake. The breathing body is our means for learning, for directly experiencing our kammic configurations. It provides a basis so when difficult states arise, citta can remain open and stable and move through them.

This cultivation – bhāvanā, the cultivation of citta or heart – is the highest kind of learning that one can undertake. This has to be remembered. Learning means you don’t quite know; you will find out. You have to explore and feel your way – just like when learning anything else; but this learning is more mysterious ­- and deeper – than the learning that your thinking mind undertakes.

The thinking mind is often considered to offer the highest kind of learning – but it’s always learning about things. When I think about something, I stand outside it and mentally ‘look’ at it. When I think about myself, I stand outside myself. When I think about practice, I conceive ideas about practice, I read about it in the book or on the screen, I listen to it in the talk … This is learning about practice, isn’t it? It’s telling us something – the way a map does. A map can be good and useful, but it’s still a map. It can show you where to go, but it can’t tell you how the ground feels and how to walk on it. Yet this kind of learning – knowing your ground by walking it – is the kind of learning that supports liberation. Liberation can’t occur on the map; it’s a matter of direct felt experience, it’s not about anything. It’s here in the ground of your living and changing experience where the obstructions and releases occur; it’s on this dynamic ground where skills have to be cultivated. But, because we normally operate through conceptual knowledge, directly knowing and working at the ground of liberation can be confusing for beginners.

Conceptual knowledge, even the conceptual knowledge of the Buddha, only goes so far. Even the Buddha can only give you the signposts because the ground you’re going to cover is yours. It’s very intimate and not like anybody else’s. It’s in the sensitivity of your body and mind, and this sensitivity is configured by the way life has shaped you. So, no one else can walk it. What can be taught however, is that there is a ground that you can walk, there is a way of walking it and certain principles to bear in mind – virtue, calm, clarity, honesty, persistence, resolve, goodwill, mindfulness. On a more personal level, be alert to whether you feel safe and comfortable, and what it’s like to be free of pressure, obligation, comparing, and self-consciousness. This atmosphere of welcome and integrity is essential as you enter the changeable territory in this body and mind.

A supremely useful theme through which to investigate this territory is breathing. By ‘breathing’ I mean the flow of energy that can be felt as you breathe in and out. Everybody breathes, so it’s not that difficult – it’s universal, but at the same time it’s never exactly the same for one person as it is for another person; it’s not even the same every day for the same person. We say we breathe every day, but sometimes it’s short, sometimes it’s irregular, sometimes it’s slightly constricted, and so on. But however it is, it moves within your body, opening it and moderating its internal form. And it regulates your emotions and energies. Breathing has an intelligence to it: it changes in response to fear, tension and trust. It’s an embodied intelligence, it doesn’t tell us about things, it directly experiences and responds to emotional states, psychologies, and attitudes as they play out in the stirring, tension and releases of our bodies. Even more crucially, the enlightenment factors and the four establishments of mindfulness are all directly experienced in this breathing body. That is why the Buddha made mindfulness of breathing his primary meditation, the only one he gave detailed instructions on. It’s what you need for liberation. It brings you great fruit and benefit precisely because it is so direct and intimate.

In the deepening process that we call ‘meditation’, the citta, the awareness associated with feeling, emotion and impulse, has to be brought in line with these enlightenment themes – of which mindfulness is the leader. This process begins to take place as with the support of steady mindfulness, the breathing becomes more fluent, complete, and easeful. As this fluent and comfortable effect spreads through the entire body, happiness arises. This is the blend of the enlightening factors of rapture and ease.

The involuntary arising of these indicates that the breathing body can lead where our personal wishes can’t take us – to happiness and ease without external stimulation. These are liberating, enlightening qualities because they help to free the citta from the stress of its primary attachments. Attachments? We may have all kinds of preferences: we may like watching movies or going to dinners; we may be talkative, or we may prefer to be quiet and get nervous about being in crowds. When these take hold and bind the citta, they are attachments. Basically attachment means holding on, and that means tightness and stress. So when you experience attachments in your breathing body, you experience them in terms of constriction or tension; or in terms of the mind dozing off or running out into fantasies – to escape from letting go. At times, there is the fidgetiness of having to be busy trying to make something happen, and wondering about this or the other. At other times the energy gets pressurised. There’s also attachment as stuck attitudes and compulsive behaviour – such as feeling we should be doing more, a ‘do it’ mental program of trying to push things along. In terms of the fundamental energies of those habits, attachments and hindrances are experienced as constrictions, agitation, forcefulness – or stagnation and despondency when that mental program can’t push any more.

Such energies can also form the basis for personal characteristics, or life messages. One ‘message’ for example may be the underlying sense that life is about being busy. That may be the blueprint of your energy in terms of the world around you, and it’s compelling. With such a blueprint, the unsettledness of the world makes you feel unsettled. So you have to make things work, you’ve got to push to get things done, there’s no space, and not enough time. From this pattern and program arises the view – an abstract notion – that time is a mechanism that directs you and tracks you; you feel you have no options. Attachment to this view supports any message that ‘The world is fixed in this way, people are fixed in that way, the scenario is like this, there’s nothing I can do about it.’ That’s external. Then internally we might experience a similar locked message: ‘I’m like this, I have these habits … I can’t change.’ This compressed state becomes compulsive and establishes obligation: ‘Be sure you do this, don’t let others down, you must always be this, don’t be spacious, don’t pause, have something ready before it happens, get things done quickly!’ In that fixed world and fixed self, we lose the freedom, agility, clarity and flexibility of the citta. It’s unbalanced, not at ease.

This view and the energy play out in terms of the approach to mindfulness of breathing: one feels that as, ‘I have to make this breathing work, I have to try to get concentrated. What are the steps I have to take to be mindful of breathing?’ In this way, psychological pressure gets added onto something that’s not psychological at all. Breathing is just breathing. It’s embodied, and that’s why we refer to it – in order to manage and get release from the psychological energies that our mind has established through personal history or social pressure. These support agitation, contraction – and seeing (and needing) more things to do. This energy gets felt and leaves its reflexes in the breathing body – and by affecting the citta, it affects our view of the world and ourselves.

In order to come out of such reflexes, you can’t adopt their strategies. You can’t adopt the strategy of ‘what to do next’, of preparing for the next breath before it happens. Nor can you adopt the strategy of ‘I should be this way’ – because those strategies come from the same reflex that you’re trying to release. Trying to meditate, to get concentrated, may be a well-intentioned idea, but the direct energy of it carries the same message as ‘I have to get to work to get things done.’ The energy that lies behind the words is not supportive for liberation. Nor did the Buddha advocate that message. He didn’t teach, ‘You have to be mindful for every moment.’ He taught, ‘Directly know you’re breathing in, directly know you’re breathing out.’ Know what’s happening, not what you have to make happen.

When you’re tuned in to that instruction in a way that is conducive and settled, the training is to notice the length of the breathing. You don’t have to stretch it or achieve a certain length, just relax so that the breathing feels unrestricted and complete. That will allow energy to quieten down. As this happens, the breathing will tend to become shorter. That is, as your breathing becomes complete and full, the breath rate slows down and breathing shortens by itself. You don’t tell it to. You train to enter with a sense of openness and encouragement. There can be the wish to fully feel the long or short breathing as, ‘May this be well, may this be complete,’ but it’s not, ‘It has to be …’ ‘How can I make it this way?’ You’re not expecting anything but just allowing the inhalation and exhalation to change. As psychological pressure and distraction ceases, energy calms down, and breathing shortens.

Like any other learning, we start as beginners and gradually, intelligence becomes more awakened. We’re awakening the citta, the awareness that reads things in terms of feeling, to be the leader – rather than the thinking mind. With this awareness, you begin to feel and recognize the patterns, the programs, the habitual psychologies in direct and impersonal terms – such as ‘constricted’, ‘hasty’, ‘agitated’, ‘overdoing it’, ‘casual’. You’re noticing these particular patterns of energy, and their stress. They are added, not natural. When the breathing body comes out of these patterns, it is at its most complete and easeful, and released from the psychological conditions that have trapped it. As the breathing body opens out of these conditions, the citta begins to experience direct presence rather than ideas and notions about what I am and should be.

In fact, as we sense more directly the future doesn’t occur. Or rather, if it does occur, you experience it as nervous energy associated with anxiety or expectation. You can experience your personality in the same way: when you’re around other people, you might ordinarily get agitated or self-conscious: ‘I’m supposed to be doing this. Am I doing it right?’ That’s a program, not a real person. And when the breathing body opens up, it doesn’t support these programs. Instead, if these habits do occur, then just notice, ‘The breathing body is constricted, has become narrow and tight.’ Or, ‘I’ve lost touch with my body.’

Keep working at it, encouraging that citta-based knowing. It can know what you don’t know. A lot of the time, people don’t even realize they’re nervous or anxious because their busy preoccupations prevent them from seeing what’s going on. This may mean that they don’t feel sad or depressed, but that may be because their citta is held in a tightness that stops that emotion from being felt. This is common. People can live for many years or even a lifetime without realizing they have an underlying sense of guilt or inadequacy – because they’ve been too busy to notice. Meanwhile that busyness is constricting their breathing body into a shape whereby it doesn’t experience the fullness of what’s in the citta.

Unfortunately, even with meditation, you can do constrictive techniques where you don’t have to notice the insecurities or the uncertainties, or the awkward unpleasant bits – so you don’t realize you have them. The presence of internal discord isn’t necessarily because you’ve done terrible things; some of this is because terrible things have been done to you. Because of social performance programs, it’s quite common to feel insecurity or unworthiness. Then people often have a ‘doing’ compulsion built in because the ‘doing more’ energy helps to compensate for the feeling of inadequacy. You’re the person that cleans up after everybody else has left; or prepares for everything before other people come … Because that’s how you feel comfortable. Except it’s not really comfortable: you don’t experience involuntary happiness and ease through being compulsive!

We don’t notice some of these patterns because we don’t get outside them. The personality is created by social contact; and the personality can’t get outside of the psychologies that have created it. So we have to find a basic intelligence that’s not about the person, but at the same time is more than an idea or principle; something directly felt and intimate. Well, your breathing body is more intimate than the personality. In the breathing body, you can feel those senses of insecurity and uncertainty, but if you establish the right basis, you don’t tangle with or become them. Instead, they’re known as energies and views. This understanding doesn’t add a judgement that ‘You shouldn’t feel this way.’ Or a reaction such as ‘Stop feeling like that! Something’s going wrong – what shall I do about it?’ You may get bound up in all kinds of psychological activities that sound good – but the question is: Is the energy right? If the energy isn’t right, the view isn’t right, it’s bound up with self and identity – and the citta tightens up. So with an inclination and a cultivation towards ease, instead of the view: ‘This is a hindrance – stop it!’ you directly understand, ‘Now, there’s a hindrance, a problem, a difficulty, which means now is the time to pause, deepen and relax that energy.’

You relax not into the hindrance, but into the body. Relax down your legs and into your feet. Relax out through your skin – so when you can feel a tightening, relax out into the space around you, relax down your back. By doing and sensing this, you counteract the normal tendency, which is when difficulties start occurring, our inherited psychologies start happening … and we get tight to deal with them. Identification takes over, and the person grabs hold of the practice – and creates the knot that binds the difficult energy into a personal problem. So, instead, find the reference point of the entire body breathing, the entire skin wrap and living presence and let that widen, soften and release the constriction.

The breathing body is called ‘a body among the bodies’. (Majjihma Nikaya 118). It’s not the body that you identify with as a visual thing; nor is it the physical anatomy. It doesn’t have the boundaries that the anatomical body has. The anatomical body finishes with your skin; the breathing body doesn’t. The breathing body that the citta feels is an energy form that extends through the skin; it doesn’t have a sharp boundary. But it’s definitely here, it’s not somewhere else. It has an innate stability that is not the stability of ‘me holding it together’ or pressure, but the innate stability of direct presence. Just as your anatomical body has bones, the breathing body has an energetic structure to it which is stable and open in its released state. It’s not something you, the person, have to create. The person activates the citta, their heart, to attend to the breathing body and what the citta notices is the energy body. If that is constricted or agitated or imbalanced or stagnant the trained citta works to release these patterns by returning to the whole body. This is something that you can encourage.

Once that intelligence and reference are established, the citta is increasingly able to practise without somebody telling it what to do. It even becomes independent of your words because it’s directly experiencing its openness and stability, Again, in contrast to what we might imagine, when difficulties arise, the developed citta doesn’t move away from them, but touches and handles the difficulty rather than retracting from it. It touches its difficult feelings and emotions. It starts to soften and open through them because these difficulties are bound up in it.

Now the average person – you and I – says, ‘Yes, I want that which is comfortable and true and right.’ We don’t want what’s wrong. We don’t want even the bad thoughts, the unpleasant emotions, we don’t want nervous reactions. ‘That’s wrong, I don’t want it. I want to be the comfortable, steady person.’ Of course, you do! But this creates a division which doesn’t resolve the difficult, unskilful states. We step outside them but don’t resolve them.

To use the example of a balloon: when you blow the balloon up, the balloon is smooth, open, stable and light – then maybe something presses it and it slightly contracts. The way to get that contraction out is not to work out what’s wrong but just to keep opening through the contraction. It’s rather like, ‘Blow the balloon up again.’ Similarly, when we feel the mind starts getting agitated, rather than saying, ‘Stop being agitated, calm down!’, the citta feels the energy and ‘breathes’ through that. If the awareness, that sensitivity of citta is kept intact, unwavering, and covers the breathing body, its balloon has no holes in it. The energy supports awareness, and if awareness stays intact its openness and stability take care of themselves. That is, we keep trusting those qualities and giving them attention and affirmation, instead of making the personality do, plan, and try to organize under the judgements of right and wrong.

Right and wrong can be useful terms – but problematic if they’re merely abstract ideas. Because what directly happens when we hold the idea that ‘something’s wrong with me’? Things start shaking, we get busy and agitated, ashamed, flattened and lose confidence. Now, it’s not as if there are no obstructions, but the attitude is to feel their energy, contact the breathing energy, extend through the entire body. The open energy will discharge the hindered energy. Of course, we want to get rid of things that are disagreeable, unskilful, and unhelpful; that’s true, intellectually. But in terms of how to do it … Release from the unskilful doesn’t occur through saying, ‘Go away, stop it!’ It occurs through the citta opening out of the grip of the unskilful.

It’s rather like bringing the light into the room and the darkness disappears. You don’t have to throw the darkness out or call it ‘dark’ or say, ‘I shouldn’t be dark,’ you bring the light in, and the darkness disappears. This is very much what we’re doing here. Once you have that sense of a stable, open presence, you bring that into those qualities, forces and energies that contradict it.

This citta work is supported through breathing, and if you free your breathing, you have access to a life force, an energy and sensitivity that’s working through your most sensitive places in your body, your awareness, your heart.

This understanding can lead our cultivation. You have to keep practising it because if you just hold on to the open state, saying, ‘I like the open state, this is when I’m really good!’ – you don’t stay alert. Recognize that every day, new contacts will occur that invite old habits to arise. So the open state is continually refreshed and made wise through being brought into the world of our experience as it happens.

So bring the open state into the world of busyness, agitation and uncertainty. Through this compassionate entering into and breathing through the kammic world, you will learn what you didn’t know and couldn’t imagine. And you’ll find that you do have options. Once you breathe through the world, you realize the world you normally get stuck in is conditioned by your own constrictions. You notice and keep giving attention to the qualities that you have not seen through – to the need to be busy, to the sense of inadequacy, to the comparing mind, ‘I’m not as good as he or she is.’ If you get mesmerised by these, they will keep reinforcing self-messages. Instead give attention to the view and energy of release. Then you can witness these obstructions as āgantuka dukkha – the dukkha that comes as a visitor. When the unwanted visitor arrives at your door, what you should do is open the door – in order to let them pass through.