# Preface

My introduction to the Dhamma began formally with a temple stay in Bodhgaya in 1979. However, through my childhood I had deliberately sought out quiet places in Nature, often in the forest, and would settle down to sit there, absorbing the serenity they offered. After India, I attended different Meditation Retreats and found them very beneficial. I would go on retreat and feel really good. But after a week back home that ‘good’ feeling diminished. I hadn’t assimilated any teachings sufficiently to apply them in a grounded, consistent, and practical way. I hadn’t realized the path was a whole lot more than wanting to feel ‘good’. A whole lot more than being about ‘me’.

In my residence and training at Abhayagiri Monastery in California, I developed more proficiency integrating the Noble Eight-Fold path into daily life. The path of Right View, Right Intention, Right Speech, Right Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort, Right Mindfulness and Right Concentration. In monastery life, I valued a place where Dhamma practice was seamlessly woven through the days; informing, guiding, and teaching me. There was a strong emphasis on using investigation to understand my suffering, stress, and dissatisfaction. Community life gives one a lot of material to work with! The duty within the First Noble Truth is to understand suffering. Then by paying attention to its causes, the work of relinquishing those causes becomes clearer. To become better at identifying and then changing, personal patterns, ingrained habits, tendencies, distorted perceptions, and unskilful interactions. To become better at understanding where the expressions of greed, anger and delusion are at work. To become more skilful using a toolbox of practices for the relinquishment of those expressions.

One can experience encouraging results from that approach. Through the application of Right Effort: seeing that wholesome states are increasing, and unwholesome states are decreasing. There could be less frustration, confusion, conflict, judgement, and doubt. There could be more kindness, clarity, perseverance, patience, simplicity, generosity, and trust. The witnessing awareness developed with mindfulness highlighted more and more of the attitudes and behaviours that caused stress. Through diligently allowing this awareness to be the guide, one can see and start to let go of obstructions to a calm and clear mind. In that way the Third Noble Truth, the cessation of suffering, may become more evident. The core teaching is to know and let go.

I lived in a community of devoted practitioners, Buddhist monks in the Western Ajahn Chah lineage. I lived and worked alongside Debbie Stamp, who helped to start the monastery and has been in service to it for many years. Luang Por Pasanno, who was the Abbot through my residence, is a gifted teacher and an impeccable role model. I found his teachings to be succinct, accessible, and immediately applicable. They were offered with humour, compassion, and humility, drawing on experiential wisdom from his fifty years of monastic training.

After weeks, months and years as a monastery resident I acknowledged how much the ethical guidelines, renunciation and lifestyle eroded personal preferences and tendencies. There is very little that one gets a lot of choice about. Commitment to the daily and weekly schedule means what you do, where, when and how you do it, are decisions made by, and in service to, the whole community. Protocols and processes respecting the monastic code of conduct also become internalised guidelines. As time passes it all becomes less about me and more about ‘us’. That perspective means that the more self-oriented inclinations become easier to notice and, over time, relinquish. Daily practice and teachings support developing an inner refuge offering stability and discernment, regardless of the ups and downs inevitably encountered in meditation or community. Many helpful contemplations, anecdotes and practices are shared that support navigating the journey. This collection of teachings is simply a sample of what is on offer.

Mindfulness has made its way into many aspects of Western life. Many people benefit from bringing more presence and focus to their lives. Many of the Buddha’s wise teachings show us that there is more than mindfulness. The Buddha taught that mindfulness is one factor within groups of factors. One group of factors constitutes the profound Noble Eightfold path; the path that needs to be developed to liberate the heart. The factors work together as a team and do not stand alone.

There are other groups as well; the Factors of Awakening are mindfulness, investigation, energy, joy, tranquillity, concentration, and equanimity. Mindfulness has very essential foundation practices, such as ethical conduct, generosity, loving kindness, faith, and integrity. Like the ground floor of a high-rise building, all foundations need to be firmly embedded and sturdy before another storey is added.

This small collection of teachings may serve as an introduction to the breadth and depth of mindfulness and Dhamma practice. The wise teachers are some of those who are residents or who visited Abhayagiri Monastery over the years I lived there. My hope is that a topic, a teacher, or a paragraph, may touch you, may encourage you, may arouse a curiosity to explore further. I offer it with a heart imbued with gratitude for all I have been fortunate to receive in the Ajahn Chah lineage, and for the kindness and support of many friends.

Beth Steff