# Mindfulness and the Seven Factors of Enlightenment

Ajahn Sumedho

This recording was made for this project by Luang Por Sumedho, kindly supported by Ajahn Asoko at Amaravati Monastery in July, 2021.

Question. You talk about mindfulness, consciousness as something that is not created. Understanding that, how does one use mindfulness in the context of the seven factors of enlightenment?

Ajahn Sumedho. The seven factors of enlightenment are: mindfulness, investigation, energy, joy, tranquility, concentration and equanimity.

Well, mindfulness, sati, is the first factor of enlightenment. Of the seven factors, it takes precedence. Then the next factor is dhamma-vicaya, which is investigation. Without consciousness, there wouldn’t be anything. Sati is just another name for conscious awareness, for conscious mindfulness. Dhamma-vicaya – investigation – is to look into the way things are in terms of the Dhamma. Not the way you think they are, or the way you have been told they are. And not the way you believe that they are. Dhamma-vicaya is investigating the reality of here and now. Sati is here and now. Consciousness is here and now. And the posture of the body is like this. Inhaling is like this. Exhaling is like this. You are not investigating these four foundations of mindfulness (body, feeling, mind and dhammas) intellectually, but you are using mindfulness combined with wisdom. The investigation is really using wisdom with mindfulness.

The next three factors of enlightenment are energy, viriya; joy, pīti; and tranquility, passaddhi. These are the results of that kind of practice, the results of that kind of endeavour. Seeing the way things are leads to a sense of well-being, a sense of joy. Then passaddhi leads to happiness, that leads to concentration, samādhi, and then equanimity, upekkhā. With mindfulness and with investigation and the right amount of effort, you are attentive, you are not forcing anything. So, equanimity is the last one which is a kind of steadiness of samādhi. It is not a kind of samādhi you get through effort by concentration, but by investigation. These are the seven factors of enlightenment.

Notice that the word ‘sati’ is translated as mindfulness, as awareness; but what is aware? If there is no consciousness, there is no awareness. If there was no consciousness, there would be no space, there would be no forms. It is consciousness that allows things to manifest in consciousness. And then there are the forms that we have as human beings: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching and thinking. We see things in a personal way. That is not dhamma-vicaya, that is just conditioning. What you’ve been told you are and what you think you should be, your attachment to memories of the past or your hopes, and your attachment to fears and expectations about the future.

There is a lot of fear in people’s minds because the future is uncertain. We were just discussing the predictions for planet earth by 2030, which isn’t that far off. When you think about that, it is worrying. Worrying is the habit of thinking about the possibilities of disaster or of death. You frighten yourself with these imagined scenarios that you can create in your mind while you’re sitting here thinking about the future. Or when we talk about the past, about memories of your childhood, about how you were brought up, about your relationship to your parents. That’s all memory. Is that a person? With investigation, memory is a mental formation, saṅkhāra. It comes and goes. It has no soul, no essence, no core, no heart. But we can live a life with regret, guilt and resentment because of the memories that we tend to be obsessed with. We can live just dwelling on the memories of miserable things that we resent. But with investigation, we are aware that it is just memory. It is not a person. It is not any reality in itself. It is compared to a soap bubble, or to foam on the sea that has nothing integral, no heart, no essence, no core to it. It just comes and goes according to conditions.

And with concentration and equanimity there is trusting awareness. You get to a place with mindfulness and investigation, where there is nothing left. There is no past, there is no future. There is only the present awareness that is like this. In Thailand, they call it chit wan or empty mind or apperception or equanimity. Because when there are no mental factors operating, you are not attached to mental factors like memories or future hopes and fears. What is left is the here and now, which is always like this, peaceful and happy.

These factors are not conditioned through concentration practices, but through investigation, through looking into the nature of the Dhamma. How do you do that? What is the Dhamma? How do you look into it? Well, the Dhamma is apparent here and now, it is timeless. Memories are all about time. Your conditioned belief at that time is your reality. In Buddhist circles they say the only certain thing that we have is death. Well in terms of the body, that’s a truism. These bodies just get old. Every year they get older. By 2030, I will be ninety-six or I will be dead and that’s the body. But the here and now is timeless because you don’t create it. It is not a mental formation, and through investigation, you begin to see it in terms of Dhamma rather than in terms of your personal, religious or cultural conditioning.