# Nurturing the Seeds of Dhamma

Ajahn Sundarā

This talk was given by Ajahn Sundarā on April 22nd, 2015.

This year I spent January, February and March in Thailand. It is a country where I have previously spent a few years and where I feel a deep appreciation of the practice of the Dhamma as it is taught in the Forest Tradition. I went on the trip not really planning anything, except for the first eight days. I went to the memorial gathering for Luang Por Chah at Wat Nong Pah Pong. I spent some time with a teacher who I met 18 years ago when I spent two years at his monastery. I went to one of his many monasteries located in a mountain area of central Thailand, near Khao Yai National Park. It is a very beautiful area. Ajahn Sumedho was living in a monastery about a 10-minute drive from there. I travelled to different areas, to Chiang Mai, to Chiang Rai, and I spent time in Bangkok. I knew I wanted to pay respects to my teacher, and I knew that Ajahn Gunhah was a very good teacher to be with. It was an extremely pleasant period for me, to reconnect with the sanity of the Buddha’s teachings as offered in the Forest Tradition. I personally feel that it takes one back to the words of the Buddha, to the experience of the Buddha and what he meant by the Path for a monastic. I am a monastic, so this is a particular situation in which I experience my commitment to practice.

What is noticeable when you go to a Buddhist country is that you keep meeting people who are really dedicated, interested and engaged in practising, monastics as well as householders and laypeople outside the monastery. Being in a Buddhist country, I experience being upheld, in a different way from my experience of being upheld in the West. Here, in the United Kingdom, you are upheld in a Western way, which is also a powerful way. But in Thailand, what you particularly observe is an immense devotion and immense faith in the path of practice. There is a way of using the mind which is quite different to the way Westerners use their minds. There is that aspect of faith, which is a very powerful part of our mind, and devotion is another very powerful aspect of the mind. They are aspects that are below the thinking waves of our thought patterns. When you have faith and confidence in the Path or the teachings, it touches the mind at a deeper level than just thinking about things.

I spent time at Wat Nong Pah Pong and Wat Pah Nanachat. In January Luang Por Chah’s memorial gathering takes place for about 10 days. You have over 10,000 people of all ages coming from all over the world. Men, women and children living under mosquito nets on the ground. And old ladies everywhere; every type of person was there. It really brings an upsurge of energy and inspiration. You see how the mind can be so limited by perceptions. You can think that a very old woman will not sleep on the floor or will not sit for a long time in meditation, but you see all the grannies doing that. I am getting towards that granny part of life. It was very inspiring to see this lovely strength in people, this deep appreciation of the happy mind.

In my encounters in Thailand, I kept meeting happy people. Of course, people are not always happy. But I was meeting people who are the Dhamma practitioners, meeting their teachers, and meeting the place they love in their heart. I met a lot of very happy people. Even if they have difficulties in life, if they have problems and pain, they still have such a deep faith in the power of meditation, in the power of sīla, and in the power of insight and liberation. They really look beyond their problems. They don’t hang around obsessively with a lot of negativities. It always strikes me that the power of faith is more developed there, faith seems more innate in their minds.

It is different for us here in the West. I am not here to compare anything particularly, but here we have such a powerful thinking education. That thinking training can make our minds very clunky. There are all the views and opinions that we are inculcated with. So many things that we carry at the thinking level, which have been basically brought into us. It’s not that we had a choice necessarily. It may be that our parents wanted us to be educated, to go to university, to learn a lot. And the more you learn, the more expert you become. Then at some stage we end up in a monastery like Amaravati filled up with so much knowledge, an incredible amount of knowledge about things.

When I go to Thailand, I have to say that I am glad to meet those teachers that go straight to the point. They are not concerned about making you happy or softening the message of what the path of liberation is about. I quite like that myself. It’s not necessarily comfortable and it’s not necessarily what the ego likes. You don’t get too pampered there. This is personal experience I am talking about. They will just tell you straight what the path is about. Not any long proliferation about how things should be done and how things should not be done. I like the simplicity of that message.

At the end of my visit, one of the perks of my trip was that I met a nun who was a phra arahant. They have a term there, phra arahant. phra means worthy in Thai. There was a Thai nun, a maechee, who they called a phra arahant. I hadn’t met a phra arahant nun before. I had heard about an enlightened Thai maechee. She features in a book we have about Maechee Kaew, she was a disciple of Ajahn Maha Boowa. We heard that she was considered a fully enlightened woman, a fully liberated woman. It’s good for women to hear that, it’s encouraging. On this trip the maechee was introduced to me as a phra arahant. She had been given a piece of land so that she could move to the mountains. Her nunnery near Bangkok had suffered from exposure to chemical fumes from a neighbouring factory, which had affected the nun’s health. This land was a wonderful place, but it was simply bare barren earth. A jungle on one side and bare earth on the other. She is slowly building a nunnery. There was nothing much there. There was a tent that just had two sides. There were seven women there, seven little huts that were the size of a body and width of a springy Thai mosquito net, and there was the forest. It is three kilometres from Ajahn Gunhah’s monastery. Ajahn Gunhah has been supporting the nunnery. He offered them a kitchen which the nuns themselves were building and a big brand-new water tank. Also, he was arranging the electricity and water supply, and had built a large dirt road between his monastery and the nunnery.

There was something very touching about this sight, seeing the seven women, and other people helping them, and the simplicity of the life there. It was very different to Chithurst Monastery in the early days, where I started in 1979. But it reminded me a little bit of the spirit – all working together to build a monastery. It was work, but when you live with somebody who is referred to as a phra arahant, it is not just work for the sake of work, it is really a meditation.

In the early days at Chithurst there was nothing else but meditation manifesting in doing quite a bit of work. But it was very powerful because it was not just work, then you get exhausted and then you start complaining. There’s also work and if you are tired, can you work with your tiredness? And if you are grumpy, can you work with your grumpiness? Not trying to make the conditions perfect so that none of those states of mind would arise in consciousness. So, you feel that there’s a very powerful teacher there. Seeing that in Thailand was very inspiring. Very inspiring for a nun to meet an enlightened nun. There are not so many of them around. It was very heart warming. I could feel the sense of deep peace and coolness in this person. It was very empowering to experience that.

The theme that interested me on my trip was something that I had heard before from the forest teachers in Thailand. They say that the Westerners have a very strong mind, they have very strong intention and determination. They have a huge amount of knowledge. But what is missing with Westerners is the power of sustaining things to the point where they can actually harvest the result of their practice. They have this impatience which wants to get things quickly, to have instant results, to have instant gratification. And the frustration that comes into the mind when this does not happen. I think it is difficult for us to accept that the result of one’s practice may have several causes or seeds. If these seeds are not growing in oneself, it is very difficult to enable them to ripen to the point of realisation. Sometimes I think this is forgotten. We don’t place enough attention on that. When you plant a seed in your mind, let’s say a seed of the Dhamma knowledge, it takes certain conditions to make it grow, to make it healthy, to make it mature to the point of full realisation. If we talk about the seeds of the Dhamma in the mind – this is what insight is about. Insight is when suddenly the fruit is ripe, and you know that you have let go of something. You know that something has just finished.

The conditioning of delusion, the conditioning of anger, the conditioning of greed: they are the three states of mind the Buddha said we need to be free from to come to the realisation of Nibbana. It can be a broad generalisation when we consider those three states of mind: greed, hatred and delusion. There is a whole spectrum of those mind states: the quality, the strength, the power, and the manifestation of them. At times it is very difficult to see the mind. We can understand these words, we can read a lot about those mind states. We can be very knowledgeable as a psychologist, or a psychiatrist, as a doctor or someone who studied them. But we need to bring patience, attention and powerful mindfulness to those manifestations of the mind, to the point where we can see clearly, how they arise and how they manifest and what kind of message they give. To be able to recognise fully when they arise in the mind is not always easy. Avijjā means the power of not knowing. A means without, vijjā, means knowledge, without knowledge. Avijjā has the power to make you forget, to make you ignore certain signs that are very important. Signs that are important because they support the maturation of the seeds of the Dhamma wisdom. Signs that also support the realisation of the nature of the mind states that the Buddha very clearly mapped out as being anicca, dukkha and anattā; impermanence, suffering and not self.

As I mentioned before, causes need to be put in place to be able to come to the point of letting go. One of the causes is the capacity to sustain attention for a long time on consciousness, on the mind. By attention I mean mindfulness. While I was in Thailand, I had a deeper insight about mindfulness. I have been practising mindfulness as a nun since 1979, so by now I should know what I am talking about, shouldn’t I? But mindfulness is not something that you know something about necessarily. Mindfulness is a quality of mind that enables things to die. It’s nice to hear that Ajahn Chah said ‘mindfulness is the graveyard of all things’. We don’t like things to die, do we? We like to talk about springtime, about new growth and all the positive aspects of birth. But the language we use sometimes in the West is a very sweet language. We try to accommodate our language to the psychology that makes us feel good. It’s not unskilful, otherwise people may not be interested in liberating their heart, so this is maybe the first step.

The Buddha talks about the third noble truth of nirodha: the cessation of attachment, the cessation of conditioning. For that we need to be able to sustain mindfulness to the point where things actually go. To come to the point where you can see something cease, you might have to look at its pattern of arising and ceasing for a long time before you come to full knowledge that something has gone. With our impatience we want things to go really fast. And our knowledge is a cause of impatience. The fact that we know so well the whole thing, but we can’t do it yet. Between that and our knowledge and the goal that we have in mind, the goal that we’ve read about, there is a lot of impatience and frustration that can manifest emotionally. It manifests even without us knowing it sometimes.

I like to talk about another important aspect of the practice, the way we take things so personally. This sentence has been used many times in a less skilful way. When a person may be miserable and about to cry, if they are told ‘Don’t take it so personally’, it adds another nail to the situation. It’s not so easy for someone to hear that. But I’m talking about another level, a level of relief, rather than making someone feel even worse when they’re upset. The level of relief is that we do not always acknowledge the fact that our mind is not ours. The mind is not us; the mind is not me. Our thoughts are not us, are not mine, are not me. Our feelings the same, our perceptions the same. Often, because we don’t know that yet, we feel that we are still in charge – of our world, of our thoughts, of our feelings, of our moods. Of course, up to a certain point we are in charge. We are decent people. We are people who want good, and we have a degree of responsibility in what we do. But this degree of responsibility that we carry around can make the mind feel very heavy. It can feel like a burden. Me, it’s my problem, I can’t do it, I’m hopeless. If I cannot do this, I don’t think I want to continue to walk this path. We feel things are heavy because we think we are in charge to a certain point. Our kamma is in charge. That’s what is in charge. Our history from we don’t know how many lifetimes. The Buddha says very clearly that there are past lives, future lives and so on. It’s important to see that from the Buddha’s perspective we are born through our kamma, we are heir to our kamma, we are related to our kamma. Whatever kamma we do, whether it is good or bad, we are still the heir of our kamma.

With the Buddha’s teaching we can lighten up our kamma. I am sure that the kamma does lighten as we walk the path of loving kindness, of wisdom, of understanding: the Noble Eight-fold path. It lightens because we are beginning to be more conscious, we are beginning to see more clearly. We have a good pair of glasses; they are called mindfulness. We have more wisdom, we have the capacity to contemplate, to see clearly, to know and to understand. That makes our mind much lighter. We experience the confidence that we have finally found a way to walk through life with good eyesight. Mindfulness is like a good pair of eyes; it sees and knows with clarity.

You may be beating yourself up, feeling that you are not capable, feeling that you’re not good enough. If you don’t feel confident with your practice you might want to consider some questions. What are you carrying around in your mind? What is the content of your mind right now? What are you obsessed with? What are you clinging to? Because your thoughts, moods and feelings have a lot of power. Not only the power to make your mind happy or miserable, but also your thoughts and feelings are shared within your environment. If you are a happy person, most people like happy people. But if you are miserable, depressed, unhappy and critical, then don’t be surprised if you don’t have too many friends. Because it’s not so easy to be with somebody who is dragging other people down all the time.

There is this idea that kamma is responsible, that you have been born through your kamma. In Buddhism we say it’s very good kamma to be born as a human being because this is a place where one can see suffering and happiness clearly. The two extremes of the mind, the likes and the dislikes, and so on. We are told that if you are a deva and constantly happy, it’s very hard to be objective about anything because you just absorb into the happiness. If you are a hell-being, you are so miserable you can’t even think clearly.

This idea of our non-self nature, anattā, struck me more this time in Thailand. I think we all have some sense of this when we start practising the path. We get into this very disciplined work. We get up early, we meditate, we dedicate our life to the good etc. There’s obviously a terrific confidence in something that we don’t always know. Why do we become monks and nuns? We don’t always know. Maybe we would say, ‘I have suffered, and I wanted to understand what it is all about. This path gives me the potential to be a fairly happy human being by doing something good, both for myself and for others.’ That’s an inspiration to have a way of living that brings good things in this life. It makes you happier, it makes you stronger, it makes you more confident in yourself and in life in general. This aspect of anattā relates with the cause I addressed earlier. We think that we are responsible for what happens to us all the time, and it is the ‘I’ which is in charge, but what happens is the ‘I’ is not very strong. It is an entity in us that is often very moody. I can be depressed, I can be happy, I can be up and down, I can be confused and so on.

If you depend on ‘I’ which is this illusory entity in ourselves, it’s disheartening because it’s a very fragile reference point for us. The reference point of the ego, which doesn’t even exist when you start looking more deeply at the aspects of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and not-self. You begin to see that you cannot rely on the ‘I’ for too long. It goes up and down. One night you feel you want to meditate all night; the next night you feel you are a hopeless case, and you want to sleep all day. The next night you want to be the best person in the world and the next day you think that you cannot cope. So, relying on ‘I’ is very uncertain, it is very unstable and unreliable.

An aspect which the Buddha encourages us to rely upon is the wisdom of knowing that you need to put in the appropriate cause if you want something to happen. If I want to have a body that has strong muscles, then I need to do a lot of muscle training and gym work. I must put in the necessary causes to make it work. Or there is the topic of good health. These days people can be so obsessed with good health that they don’t realize that their obsessive mind is destroying their health. The mind is more powerful than the body. I was one of them, I am talking from experience here. So, people get obsessed about something which is good. But they don’t realise that their mind is in a state of disarray and misery. There is discontent in the mind. It is wanting to be healthy, which is a response to feeling discontented. You haven’t got something that you want. So, desire is there – it is another force which confuses the mind. What do we do with that? Remember that when the Buddha talks about anatta, he is talking about the fact that what we think about as being me; my personality, myself, my ego, the person in charge in there, is not as real as we think.

You begin to look at life in such a way as to say, ‘What will bring about what I need?’ There are many teachings about that in our Western culture. Many philosophical teachings and great minds that have thought about that. Whether in the spiritual world, or the Christian and contemplative traditions, they have insight into the knowledge of kamma. It is not unknown in our culture. If you want something you have to really engage with what you need and what you want. This is the reason why meditation is so important. Why? Because meditation is the development of the mind. When you cultivate meditation, you enable your mind to touch into its power. Not the power to float above water or the power to go through walls, but the power to have buoyancy in the mind. We call it awake, being awake. You don’t have to have a happy mind all the time. But this buoyancy is another kind of happiness which is not dependent on being happy. I can have buoyancy and energy to look at my negativity. I can have buoyancy and energy to look at my suffering heart, to look at my miserable mind. When you look at that, you begin to have a clearer direction where you want to lead your life. That enables the wisdom to manifest to lead you towards this natural inclination - towards a happy mind, a good mind, a clear mind, a strong mind.

That is the result. It is not about obsessing with having to be happy all the time. It is about setting up causes that develop the heart mind in such a way that it can see things clearly. It can have the patience and the quality needed to look at consciousness and its contents for a long time. It’s called chanda in Pali, to have energetic interest in what you are doing. That energetic interest can be applied to anything, whether it’s the work of concentration, the work of mindfulness practice, the work of insight meditation. It can be applied to any job in your life, to any relationship you have with people, whether it’s in your profession, whatever. That takes energy, which is called viriya. Meditation is not just about making the mind relaxed and happy. It goes much much deeper than that. In Buddhism we are reminded that the deeper purpose of the path is the transcendent aspect of the mind. The transcendent aspect, which is able to realise nibbana, the end of suffering, the end of pain, the end of greed, anger and delusion.

I seem to have met a few realised people on this trip and perhaps that’s why things seem a bit clearer. They are not necessarily charismatic, enticing and illuminating people. Not illuminating in a worldly way. They are just cooled down. They are peaceful people filled with wisdom and compassion. It is a pretty good exchange from greed, hatred and delusion to a mind filled with wisdom, compassion, and clarity. I think the trade is very worthwhile. It’s a good business.

Naturally the journey through the mind, through that development of the heart, is a journey that is not straightforward. It has pitfalls because it is a journey through our conditioning. Our conditioning is made up of a lot of unskilful mind states that can lie and fool you. The ego is the most treacherous thought compound. Your conditioning can make you say things you don’t want to say. It can make you react in a horrible way to things. It can make you pretend that you are this or that when you are not. It can make you feel good when you are not good; it can make you feel bad when you are not bad. It is a liar. The ego mind is filled with lies and it’s vitally important to realise that, not to take it as your reference point. To know things as they really are.

I am sure the greatest creators in the world, the greatest minds in the world came always from when they let go of the known. From when they let go of their conditioning, from when they dropped everything that they knew, at that point they made some amazing discoveries. And that is a point of insight. When you let go. You let go of this deep conditioning you were totally attached to, that you were totally identified with. And after a while you realised that you survived it. Not only did you survive it, but you are freer, you are stronger, happier and lighter. Your burden lightens. What we are involved with is amazing. When you meet those great teachers, you get a deeper sense of what we are engaged with. We are engaged with a very profound path.

The responsibility we have is not to be so involved with this ‘I’, with thinking that it should constantly be this way or that, according to what you have accumulated, your baggage, and the history you carry with you. Our responsibility is to be in accordance with the insights we have from mindfulness. Insights that arise through seeing very clearly the nature of all our experience of the five khandhas, the mind and the body.

In the Forest Tradition there is a very strong emphasis on the body. Particularly in Thailand you investigate the body again and again. There is the bones meditation, the elements meditation, and then you have the visualisation of the body and so on. It is very powerful. They have a lot of very powerful contemplations for concentration. We are more involved with what Ajahn Sumedho describes as cittānupassanā, which has a lot to do with the content of the mind. Whereas in Thailand the great meditation teachers focus a lot on the body, on the physical body. Because for them it seems like the most deluding aspect of the mind is to be attached to this body. For us we are very attached to our thinking.

It’s very nice to be back here. To be back in this amazing place where each one of us is supported in this work. It is extraordinary that we have conditions like this and such profound teachings.