# Being the One Who Knows

Ajahn Pasanno

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on January 7th, 2021.

This is the beginning day of our group practice and the first day of getting our routine and rhythm going. Here are some reflections on practice.

This is an opportunity for focusing and cultivating our meditation practice. We have three months of winter retreat, but I would be hesitant to encourage the perception that all this is only a meditation retreat. This is an opportunity for deepening our whole approach to practice. It is certainly how Ajahn Chah approached practice, and I would venture to say how the Buddha approached practice. This is a complete path of cultivation of body, speech and mind. It is a complete path of sīla, samādhi and paññā; of ethical conduct, concentration and discernment. I think it helps to make that conscious. It is easy to slip into that sense of me and my meditation, and how’s my meditation going? And how’s your meditation going? The approach is to open up and broaden the perspective of what we are actually doing. I think it’s a great theme, to be pursuing the theme of buddhānussati, the recollection of the Buddha, because we are putting ourselves into a larger context.

Years ago, I was very struck when Luang Por Sumedho started reflecting in that way. He said the perspective is to come back and embody or settle into the sense of the Buddha seeing the Dhamma. This is what we are really trying to do. The one who knows, seeing the way things truly are. By doing that, and including oneself in that process, is in itself, Sangha. With the three refuges, what we are really trying to do is enter into, embody, incorporate, and make real, these refuges of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha in our hearts.

There are many meditation techniques and methods. We will be covering some of them through this winter retreat. But I would like to make a plea for you to broaden your perspective. Hold it in a way that does not end up about me trying to get ahead in my meditation. Or me trying to feel good in my meditation, or me trying to enhance my worldly goals, of some kind of confidence or self-identity. Or, trying to prop up a ‘spiritual identity’. Me, the meditator; me, the successful meditator; me, the successful monastic; me, the whatever. What it is about, and what it always comes back to, is the freedom from suffering. This is the perspective that the Buddha gave from his very first teaching through to the end of his life. It was characterised as the elephant’s footprint, that encompasses all the teachings. That sense of the purpose being freedom from suffering. It manifests in different ways. It can be described in many different ways, and it has all sorts of philosophical nuances. The over-arching perspective is to recognize there is not an annihilation of self in order to get something, but it is the Buddha seeing the Dhamma.

The one who knows seeing the way things truly are. And one is relying on the different aspects of the path to facilitate that cultivation. The development of clarity around our precepts. Whether we are lay people practising, or we are monastics in training, or whether we have been monastics for some time. It is about clarifying that relationship with the precepts. People can get very worried and obsessed with precepts and rules. But that’s not really the point. The point is to create a sense of ‘oh wow, I’m really trying’ and in terms of the human condition, this is incredibly honourable, and to take delight in that. That sense of non-remorse. To be really delighting because that is what nourishes the peaceful, clear heart.

Our development of our mindfulness practices, of clear comprehension, of applying mindfulness and awareness in our daily activities. Of having a continuity of mindfulness and clear comprehension in all the things that we do. It facilitates clarity and well-being - that is something to be nurtured. And again, it is not something to get obsessed with or get tight about. It feels so comfortable to be clear and aware, and to be able to return to that base of awareness. As we do that in our chores, our activities, back and forth to our dwelling places, participating in the routines, the rhythm of the daily life, we can be incorporating it into the formal aspects of walking meditation and sitting meditation. We can be incorporating a continuity of awareness and knowingness. The one who knows seeing how things truly are. It’s that simple: the Buddha seeing the Dhamma.

It goes from the ordinary right up to the levels of refined states of stillness. That stillness doesn’t come out of wishful thinking or through fighting with the mind or trying to force it into the mold of stillness. I’d say it comes about through patience. Patience, not just blindly putting up with something or blindly waiting for the unpleasant to be over, but the patience to be the one who knows seeing the way things truly are. We need to be patient with our doubts because we can tie ourselves up in knots. How can I be the one who knows? Patience with the discomfort and physical pain, patience with our own mind that gets restless or gets agitated. Being able to be patient and to hold it within that sphere of the refuges. The one who knows seeing things as they truly are: the Buddha seeing the Dhamma. That is the opportunity as a Sangha member, one who is supatipanno, who practises in a good way; one who is ujupatipanno, who practises in a direct way; ñāyappaṭipanno, one who practises for knowledge and understanding; sāmīcippaṭipanno, one who practises with integrity.

We have this opportunity to embody and experience the flavour and the taste of the refuges. And it does take patience. To be patient with boredom. Sometimes it’s just really boring to sit and watch your mind and have to put up with yourself. But to have that patience as opposed to reacting out of aversion or idealism – it’s just knowing, this is what it is like. And with that patience, when it’s grounded and settled, when it’s established in knowing, the fruit is stillness. You can force your mind to be still for a short period of time, it is not impossible. But for the mind to truly be still, one has to be patient with a whole lot of crap that’s there. But then being able to recognize within that, the opportunity for well-being.

All through the path, the Buddha spoke of the different forms of happiness that arise. The happiness of blamelessness, with having lived with integrity. The happiness of fundamental goodness, the happiness of generosity and kindness. The happiness of mindfulness and awareness. The happiness of the mind when the heart settles. The happiness of seeing things clearly. The happiness that arises from the recognition of impermanence, of unsatisfactoriness, of not self. The happiness that comes from seeing this is the way things truly are. And the kind of release that comes from that happiness is this tremendous well-being right through to complete liberation. The Buddha describes nibbana as the highest happiness. It is not some blank nothingness. So, the whole path is based on the freedom from suffering. We are not just doing this to feel good. It is deeply satisfying to even have a glimmer of our true potential in this human existence. We are embarking on three months of winter retreat. Pick up the practice in a whole, integrative, or a multi-faceted approach, not just a one-dimensional approach.

There are always obstacles to practice. There are always difficulties. Those are the things we can learn from. Rather than seeing things as an obstacle or difficulty, recognise it as an opportunity for deeper understanding. Again, we can think of the example of the Buddha. What did the Buddha do? We can learn from facing our fears, our anxieties, and our discomforts. Think back to the sutta when the Buddha was still an unawakened bodhisattva. He was going to forests and places of solitude that were conducive to fear. Not places that he really wanted to go to. He was going to charnel grounds and being jumpy and anxious. But he was willing to face that and look at it, and he saw that it is natural to the mind. But it is also dukkha (unsatisfactoriness). How do we work with it? How do we see it? How do we be the one who knows, seeing things as they truly are? That’s the Buddha seeing the Dhamma.

We have this opportunity to enter into that perspective. We can stand on the Dhamma. There is a word dhammaṭṭhitatā, which usually means the sense of natural or enduring. Ṭhita literally means, to stand. So, it’s standing on the Dhamma. But it is also referring to the orderliness of the Dhamma, the orderliness of truth. When we stand on ‘this is the way things are’, this is what the experience is right now. Does it have to overwhelm me? Does it have to define me? If we stay with the one who knows, it changes and there is a refuge that can be entered. It is the same with our desires, with transforming the desire energy. Desire and fear are so fundamental to the human condition. That sense of facing fears and transforming desires. That desire energy is transformed into peace, into loving kindness, into a sense of clarity and understanding. It rises up out of these refuges, that sense of being able to give oneself to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha.

When I first started meditating and practising there wasn’t that much information available. Some of what was available were translations that could be fairly stodgy. They were translations of classical texts. But one of the things that was really striking was that the meditation instruction always started with clarifying the refuges. By bringing the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha to mind. Bringing the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha to the process of the meditation. At that point in time, I wasn’t looking for a religion. That’s how you think of the refuges, but it didn’t really sink in until much later, and it wasn’t days later, it was probably years later. That clarification of the refuges is important because it really shifts the way that we hold the practice.

The primacy of the self, the individual, the ‘me’ is part and parcel of the human condition, but it’s very much integral to a Western culture. But when it’s me meditating to get my goals achieved, it gets very frustrating. When we broaden that context, we move to a sense of embodying a principle, embodying a refuge, and embodying a liberating perspective. The Buddha seeing the Dhamma. That shifts how it is held. It shifts the approach. It shifts what we experience. And that shift is so conducive to the goal of freedom from suffering.

That view is something to be considering, reflecting on, from the beginning of the retreat. And as we go through this retreat, lifting it up as a recollection, as a reflection. Are the refuges solid? Am I willing to give myself to the refuges? Am I willing to have a refuge other than me and my preferences, me and my ideals, me and my worries and fears? That is a worthy reflection, and it is not that anything must be taken on faith. It is holding the context in a much larger sphere so that one sees those endless proliferations of the ‘I’ making, the ‘my’ making, the underlying tendencies to conceit. That ‘I’ is not something that is fundamental. That ‘I’ has to be made, a sense of ‘my’ has to be made.

It is created, it is constructed and there is something beyond that. There is freedom, there is liberation. There is peace. There is well-being, a true sense of well-being. This winter retreat is an opportunity to explore our relationship to practice. Yes, one wants to put effort into the practice. Yes, one wants to be diligent, but pay attention to what ends up being measured and then starts judging. Because that’s something extra. This is such a good thing to do on its own, without having to calculate the value of one’s measuring mind. Paying attention to how to practise, how to be diligent in practice, how to put effort in practice, without turning it into a burden.

There is this opportunity for a continuity of three months of practice. It’s like opening a door into stillness, opening a door into light. The Buddha described his own insight; cakkhu karaṇī, ñāṇa karaṇī, upasamāya, abhiññāya. This knowledge, vision and clear understanding arose. That is a possibility. We want to be giving or facilitating our efforts so that we can experience that. We have got the tools. We have got the conditions. We have got the support, and we can encourage each other to keep doing it.