# Returning the Light

Ajahn Ahiṃsako

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on May 1st, 2015. Ajahn Ahiṃsako kindly edited it to be more suitable for reading.

Within our Buddhist tradition, it is believed that the Buddha offered his first discourse on the full moon of July. This teaching is referred to as the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, the teaching on the Four Noble Truths. In this teaching it says that there is dukkha, and one of the most common translations of dukkha is ‘suffering’. I found it to be very difficult to come to terms with this translation because, to me at least, suffering is an intense level of pain. For myself, I tend to use other English words for dukkha, for example ‘stress’, which is a word commonly used in society. I also find ‘unsatisfactoriness’ to be very helpful, especially when you hear someone say that ‘even getting everything you want is dukkha’. How does that work; how is getting everything you want stressful? But on reflection, when we use the word stress or unsatisfactoriness, it can start to make sense.

The traditional formulation of the Four Noble Truths is as follows:

The First Noble Truth: there is dukkha, suffering, dissatisfaction, dis-ease, stress.

The Second Noble Truth: there is a cause, an origin of dukkha. It doesn’t just manifest out of nowhere; there is actually a cause.

The Third Noble Truth: there is a cessation, an ending to dukkha. It’s not a permanent experience. It can and does cease.

The Fourth Noble Truth is laying out the path leading to the cessation of dukkha.

You could possibly spend a lifetime reflecting on this simple formulation. But there’s another formulation in a lovely book called Gifts He Left Behind, which contains short teachings by Luang Por Dune, a Thai monk who died in 1983, living to the ripe old age of 95. There’s one particular reflection that he offered to another monk, in which he summarized the Four Noble Truths. Over the years I’ve heard many references made to this short teaching, and it has always stood out for me.

The mind sent outside is the origination of suffering. The result of the mind sent outside is suffering. The mind seeing the mind is the path. The result of the mind seeing the mind is the cessation of suffering.

You can see that Luang Por Dune changed the traditional order, with the Second Noble Truth first, then the first, fourth and lastly the third.

As we were sitting in meditation this evening, a phrase arose in my mind from Master Hua, who was the founder and Abbot of the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, or CTTB, a Chinese Buddhist monastery near here. Just before he died, he gifted half of the land which is now Abhayagiri Monastery. It was a great gift, and we have a very close relationship with CTTB. A phrase that I’ve been told Master Hua used, and is sometimes used by his disciples, is to ‘return the light’. Recently I’ve been reflecting on those two phrases, ‘the mind sent outside is the origin of suffering’ and then this other phrase that I just mentioned, ‘return the light’.

So, what does that mean, the mind sent outside? Using those words as a reflective tool, I ask myself, where is my mind going and why is it doing that? What came up for me is that when my mind loses its centre, when my mind goes outside of its peaceful stillness, when it starts to inhabit the things that I see, hear, smell, taste, touch or think – perceptions relating to the six sense bases – then my mind has been ‘sent outside’.

I’ll give an example. Less than a month ago we finished our Winter Retreat. Just 36 hours after the retreat ended, I found myself sitting in an airport ready to fly off to another country to lead a retreat. Apart from going on alms round, it was the first time I’d been out of the monastery, and I felt wide open from three months of meditation. However, I could really feel the mind wanting to engage with what I was seeing, that energy of the mind wanting to drink it in, to keep it. I think this was especially the case because I was going to Latvia, a country I had never been to. I’d never been anywhere in that part of the world before, and I could feel a great interest.

I arrived there early enough in the day to go out and walk around the city of Riga. But right away I could feel the mind wanting to grab on. My mind was going outside of its centre. Fortunately, I had three months of meditative momentum, and was able to spot what I was doing right away. For instance, if I jump forward to further down in this formulation of the Four Noble Truths, ‘the mind seeing the mind’, my mind saw the mind that was reaching out. It was all harmless stuff. I was simply walking around this very old and beautiful city. But I was quite affected. I see in myself this effect of going to places that are very beautiful. I asked the question, ‘What’s wrong with being in a beautiful place?’ Essentially, I don’t think anything is wrong, but I could feel the seeds of suffering, of trying to capture it. With the momentum from the recent retreat, I was able to catch myself, and decided to create a simple mantra for that day: ‘Restrain yourself Ahiṃsako’.

Last year somebody gave me a camera, which I had taken with me on that trip. I didn’t want to be ‘monk with camera’ going around taking pictures, but I noticed myself looking around and thinking, ‘There aren’t too many people nearby … click’. I had two reasons for wanting to take photos. One is that I make online photo albums for my mother, and she really appreciates them. She can’t travel anymore because she’s quite old. But if I’m totally honest, on that occasion I was mostly trying to capture the image for myself as a memento. But, more importantly, I caught myself trying to capture that experience, to cling to it in some way.

In the afternoon it started to rain. There was still a lot of daylight left and I thought I could go out again and do some more sightseeing, still capture some more moments. But I could feel that energy of wanting to get as much as possible out of the experience of having a free afternoon in a foreign city. And in that energy, there was a degree of stress, the mind thinking, ‘It’s starting to rain, why don’t I go back to the lovely apartment where they put me? Why don’t I just let go?’ I could see what I was doing quite clearly. I recognized the First Noble Truth; trying to get as much as you can out of an experience is dukkha. It was harmless; nobody was getting hurt. I wasn’t causing any disruption in the city of Riga, just walking around and everyone seemed quite nice and friendly. But I saw that experience of my mind going outside.

I can easily see why Luang Por Dune used that way of reflecting on the Noble Truths. If we’re always trying to get sense experiences to create happiness, for example, we want to listen to really good music, it’s harmless so long as we’re not hurting anybody to get that experience. But if we’re living life just for experiences, just to gratify all the six senses – eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and mind – is that peaceful? Using my example of going to Latvia, if I need to try and wrangle getting invited to some place that I’ve never been to, so that I can be a ‘tourist monk’, amongst other things this is a wrong use of monastic life. This is not why we become a monk or a nun, and it’s suffering. This is stressful, this is unsatisfactory. However, we can use those experiences to observe what we’re doing, to see the mind getting ‘sent out’, and what Luang Por Dune was saying is that the result of that is suffering. If I hadn’t seen what I was doing, then that way of relating to experiences could have been perpetuated. This brings us to Luang Por Dune saying, ‘The mind seeing the mind is the path’, the Noble Eightfold Path, the path to liberation.

Here in this hall we have photos of Ajahn Mun and Ajahn Chah. Ajahn Mun is commonly considered to be Ajahn Chah’s teacher. If I remember correctly, Ajahn Chah only spent a few days with Ajahn Mun. But apparently that short time had a profound effect upon Ajahn Chah. The way the story goes, Ajahn Chah spent a long time seeking out Ajahn Mun, many months walking through Thailand just to find him. Remember that this was pre-Twitter, pre-Facebook, pre-Google. You couldn’t just google, ‘Where is Ajahn Mun?’

I gather there weren’t so many roads in those parts of Thailand at that time. So, Ajahn Chah was often walking through the jungle, looking, asking, seeking this great teacher. Then Ajahn Chah finally finds Ajahn Mun, who says, ‘You can stay for three days.’ Can you imagine spending that long seeking a teacher, and he gives you three days to be with him?

From what’s been handed down to us, Ajahn Chah came away with a key teaching from Ajahn Mun, which was, if you can see the difference between mind and mind objects, then there’s not much more to do. I understand it as meaning that the mind or quality of knowing that recognizes things that enter your conscious experience is seeing things clearly. Whether it’s a sight, sound, smell, or taste, whatever perception comes into our field of awareness – an emotion or thought, pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral – it’s the mind that knows it, that quality of knowing that sees it. And the mind that knows ‘that’ is not ‘that’. The quality of knowing that sees stress, sees dukkha, sees joy or sorrow, sees whatever is entering your conscious experience is not that experience. This quality of mind can also see oneself creating a sense of identity around something. But what is it that knows? It’s that overall and overarching quality of awareness that can see things arising and ceasing. Because if you can see it, how can whatever sees ‘it’ be ‘it’?

With Luang Por Dune’s expression, ‘The mind seeing the mind is the path’, the way I reflect on it seems to me to be in line with what Ajahn Mun and so many of the great Forest Masters of the past and present are pointing to, that knowing quality of mind. In Thai there’s an often-used phrase, poo-roo, which is generally translated as ‘the one who knows’, that knowing quality. So how do we develop that? All this meditation we’re doing, all the Dhamma practice, all the sitting quietly, quieting the mind so that we can get to the point where we start to see, to taste that quality of knowing, to get familiar with it and also learn how to use it as our refuge.

We have the Three Refuges, Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha. When we talk of Buddha as a refuge, it’s that very quality of knowing. Yes, there is the Buddha as a historical figure. But I don’t take refuge in Buddha so much as an entity. It’s more his teachings and his example. But it’s also the experience of that awakened quality of knowing that I find most useful in my own practice. All this practice, learning how to notice it, how to turn to it, and how it can be our refuge; for it to be our base programme that is running in the background, and the other stuff is arising and ceasing within that. Now, I can say these things. I can talk about it. But can I do it all the time? It’s a work in progress. This is why I’m practising.

Now, going back to that phrase, ‘the mind seeing the mind’. It’s that quality of awakeness, knowing what’s coming into the mind.

Then there’s the fourth phrase from Luang Por Dune, ‘The result of the mind seeing the mind is the cessation of suffering.’ Last year I spent the winter retreat here at Abhayagiri, and we were having Dhamma readings nearly every day; going down the line we would all do Dhamma readings from different books. The boundary that was set out was that it needed to be Thai disciples from the Thai Forest tradition, not Western disciples.

Many times, it struck me how the different practitioners that we were reading from had this same or similar phrase of ‘the mind seeing the mind’: Ajahn Chah, Ajahn Mun and other various teachers. In my own experience, I first heard it years ago during a Dhamma talk at Amaravati, and it really jumped out at me, the idea that there’s the mind that sees the contents of the mind. So, taking something like dukkha: that which sees suffering, is not suffering. I remember very clearly how it stood out for me as a concept. And I know for myself that when I’m mindful, like that day in Latvia when I noticed that energy of trying to get as much as possible out of an experience, the stress drops away immediately. Seeing it is a bit like shining a light on a shy animal. In the forest here, when we’re walking at night with our flashlights, some animals are more shy than others. It’s like shining a light on an animal that’s quite shy. It just disappears. But then, when my mindfulness is weak, then it comes back. So that’s why I say it’s a work in progress for me because it’s not steady. And when I’m not mindful, I get caught. My mind is sent out and it engages and gets lost in that object, whatever it is.

Going back to that other phrase, ‘return the light’, I asked our good friend Reverend Heng Sure about this phrase. He’s one of the most senior disciples of Master Hua, who I mentioned a few minutes ago. There’s a lovely book about Reverend Heng Sure’s bowing pilgrimage. In the 1970s he and another monk did a bowing pilgrimage from Los Angeles to Ukiah. It took two and a half to three years. Three steps and one bow, three steps and one bow, all the way up the California coast. They put together a book of letters of written correspondence between them and their teacher Master Hua. In the book, many times the phrase ‘return the light’ appeared. I kept pondering and reflecting on that outward energy that I’ve been speaking about this evening. I’ve read the book a few times and find it very inspiring. For years I’d been meaning to ask Reverend Heng Sure, ‘What does “return the light” actually mean?’ In June last year, I was in Berkeley. Reverend Heng Sure was there and I asked, ‘What does it mean, “return the light”?’ I told him what I thought it meant, to reflect inwards. He said I was right, but that there are three main ways that their communities use that phrase. One is more ordinary. For instance, maybe you’re having a conversation with somebody who says something difficult to you, or criticises you, and you say, ‘return the light’, almost like, ‘look at yourself’, or, ‘check yourself out before you come and complain to me’. That use of ‘return the light’ has a pejorative, negative sense, like ‘watch your own mind’. Another meaning is the one that I offered up, to reflect or look inward; the Dhamma practice of using our meditative tools to look at how experience affects us, and for us to develop that ability to let go of the things that bind us, that obstruct us, that create suffering.

But Reverend Heng Sure went on to say that the third way to use this phrase has a more esoteric or hidden meaning, and it’s the one that they use the most. He and his companion used it a lot on their bowing pilgrimage because of having so much sense contact. There they are, out on the side of the highway. They weren’t bowing through the forest. They were bowing through Los Angeles, they were bowing up Highway 1, through Santa Monica, through all these towns, through San Francisco. A lot went on. They were doing this for many hours a day and then they would rest in the evening.

He said they would use that phrase ‘return the light’ because of the energy of going out, and for me it relates to Luang Por Dune talking about the mind sent outside. That mind getting drawn outwards, going outside, and grabbing. Reverend Heng Sure said that in the evenings they would meditate, chant, and translate sūtras – they would return the light. Using mindfulness practices, they would bring that energy back in. It appeared to me to be a key part of their practice.

For all of us, whether we’re living in a monastery or elsewhere in the broader community, we experience many things, and can get ‘busy’ externally, or experiences can affect us internally only. For instance, as mentioned earlier, some members of the monastic community travel, and things will affect us. Like my example of a recent trip: thirty-six hours after the winter retreat I was sitting in an airport. There was a lot of sensory input, and it definitely had an effect.

So, sitting down at the end of your day. Maybe you’ve experienced a lot of activity during the day. As meditators we try to keep a regular meditation practice, sitting down at different times of the day if we can, even if it’s just for a few minutes. We check in, ‘What’s the experience right now? Have I picked up anything during the day? Have I sent my mind out?’ Is my mind inhabiting something outside of that centre, that peaceful stillness, that stability, that ability to remain steady that we hopefully develop in our lives; the quality of knowing, that can see all things arising and ceasing in consciousness? Sit down, and if we are a bit spun out, ‘return the light’. What got sent out? Where can it come back to? Can we cut that quality of mind that’s been sent out, that’s grabbing, trying to keep or get? Can I return that energy? These are ways of using language to reflect on the Buddha’s teachings.

For about four months last autumn, I found myself overstretched in terms of duties and projects. And for a couple of weeks in the monastery there weren’t any morning or evening pujas. Most people said, ‘Oh, good, no morning pūjā, no evening pūjā. Everyone can practise on their own.’ That’s understandable, and it can be an incredibly useful time. But because I had such a long to-do list, my mind said, ‘Oh, more time to finish my to-do list.’ That was a mistake; it was not wise.

For the first week I would do a morning meditation in my dwelling. But I could see this inner stress being created, me creating deadlines around my to-do list. Nobody was telling me when to finish things. It was me creating a deadline, me creating a situation where I felt that I had to finish things. Then I stopped meditating in the morning, and in the evening I was working through until late at night and then going back to my dwelling exhausted. I didn’t have the mindfulness to see what I was doing. After one or two weeks, the result was of not returning the light. I didn’t see it. Deep down I knew that this was probably not a good move, but I did it anyway. It was a mistake and there was a result, a result of the mind going out into publishing the newsletter and working on a website, and doing all these things. They were all worthy things, helping to make the Dhamma available, but I wasn’t using the Dhamma tools that I have developed. I wasn’t remembering. I don’t regret it because fortunately I eventually saw it. And I think it’s something I’m still trying to learn from. If I reflect on it wisely, I can learn from that experience.

So, when I’m working on a newsletter, where is the suffering? The suffering is what I create. And this is the mind going out, the mind sent out. My mind was inhabiting the idea that I had to finish this on time. I had a good reason because I wanted to finish it in time for the winter retreat, so I wouldn’t be working during those quiet months. But still, the suffering was self-created. Other people weren’t creating the suffering. Suffering is something that we do, we’re creating it, which is both good news and bad news. It’s good news because, if we’re creating it, we can stop creating it. The bad news is we can’t blame somebody else, which is actually not bad news because it’s not nice to blame other people.

I’m using these experiences, using these Dhamma teachings that were offered by the Buddha and his disciples and passed down to us for over 2500 years. We can use them as our tools for reflection, for instance taking one of the phrases I’ve offered tonight and reflecting on it; to use these tools so that we can develop a peaceful heart.

It’s so important to remember the goal. Why are we doing this? Why are we meditating? Why do we learn the Buddha’s teachings? It’s not about information. Yes, we need the information to have a certain intellectual grasp. But then we need to pick it up and use it for reflection. Maybe a phrase jumps out at you. For instance, from Ajahn Chah, the phrase that I keep hearing is, ‘Everything is teaching us.’ Every experience, whether it’s going to an airport after a three-month retreat or travelling to California, we can use every experience in our life, every situation. We can use the tools that the Buddha offered and were passed down to us.

One last point I wish to mention is about developing the willingness and ability to be totally honest. Like with the First Noble Truth, to be honest: this is suffering. An example of this comes to mind. In my first year here as an anagārika, one day I was getting a bit spun out over something and was criticizing one of the other anagārikas. He responded by saying, ‘Are you suffering?’ I immediately replied, ‘No, I’m not suffering!’ It wasn’t until about eight hours later, when I was back in my dwelling, that I realized that, actually, ‘Yes, I am suffering’. Fortunately, it was only after eight hours of denial. But how often do we deny it? In order to walk this path, we need to have that inner honesty to grow from experiences. If there is stress, or if we catch ourselves shining the light out – the light that’s always looking for something with which to gratify ourselves, or to make our situation better – and we’re never turning the light around to reflect, we need to learn to ask ourselves, ‘What am I doing? Is there suffering?’

We can use these images and teachings to look inwardly. Then with awareness there’s the opportunity to use ‘the light of Dhamma’ to look at ourselves and really see what we’re doing. And by seeing dukkha, much of the time it just drops away. The painful things in life come and hit you, but like non-stick pans, they just drop away. The more we have that experience of dropping things – of letting go – then we can have peace. This is our path, our way to non-suffering, our way to liberation.