# Mindfulness, Vitality and Inquiry

Ajahn Vīradhammo

This talk was given in Ottawa on January 23rd, 2008.

I would like to reflect on the seven factors of enlightenment.

The teachings of the Buddha are vast. The Buddha taught for 45 years, and he gathered a lot of disciples. There is a vast body of knowledge that has been passed down to us and it is very rich. The Buddha seems to have taught very much from time and place; he pitched teachings to the audience or person that he was talking to. He didn’t sit down and write it all out. It was very much time and place. It was focused on the person, where the person was at, what was going to serve their needs. Maybe it would be silence, maybe it would be a challenging question, maybe it would be a discourse. He taught in many different situations. Whatever teaching we take, it is always good to bear in mind that it is in the context of a much larger body of teachings.

I tend to focus on the training of the mind. Sometimes I don’t talk enough about morality, precepts, ethics, and things like that. I live a very disciplined lifestyle and sometimes I am not terribly interested in that aspect. And yet it is terribly important, isn’t it? To live a good life, to live an ethical life, to practise goodness, to practise altruism, and to be sensitive to each other. There are so many things which are very fundamental to an authentic spiritual life. Sometimes the teachings around the mind can sound selfish if they are taken out of that context. ‘I am just going to work on myself and not take care of my family and my society.’ There is a huge emphasis in Buddhism on good old-time religion: being grateful, being content, being frugal, being moral, being responsible and not killing, not hurting, and so on. All religious teachings have that. Sometimes when they are taught one can think, ‘I have to be grateful, I have to be content.’ It becomes an egotistical imperative: ‘I must be this and I must be that.’ One can feel guilty for not being grateful. But if you contemplate gratitude, what does that do for you? And then contemplate whingeing. What does that do for you? How does it feel? Isn’t gratitude more aligned to the spiritual life than whingeing? There is an appropriateness if one inclines towards gratitude rather than whingeing. Sometimes one isn’t grateful and that can be alright too.

The seven factors of awakening are part of the teachings of the Theravadans. The Theravadans like lists, so the teaching can be very heavy on intellect. I know in my own evolution with this work, I needed to figure all that out first. Where does this all fit in? I did a lot of intellectual work first, as well as getting my act together when I was learning how to be a monk. There was a lot of confusion around the conceptual part of Buddhism. Now I find I am not so interested in that. I would rather weave or simply observe a pine tree. I have that kind of basis within my consciousness, within my experience.

How much intellectual structure one wants to take on depends on your personality. Some monks and nuns whom I know love analysis. Some aren’t so interested. It depends to some extent on personality. In the texts the right-hand disciple of the Buddha was Venerable Sāriputta. He was most profound in analysis next to the Buddha. He could analyse all kinds of mind states and other things in incredible detail. And yet there’s another monk who finds all the rules and analysis very complicated. The Buddha says to him, ‘Just contemplate a white piece of cloth, just contemplate purity.’ That was sufficient for him. So, there is this vast difference in personality types.

The seven factors of enlightenment come within the lists of Buddhism. As long as you don’t get hung up trying to figure them out exactly, lists can be very helpful because they give you reference points. They give you structures within which you can observe how your own consciousness works. The factors we work with in Venerable Ṭhānissaro’s book Wings to Awakening are threefold: sati, dhamma-vicaya and viriya. Sati is awareness, mindfulness. Dhamma-vicaya is the capacity to investigate phenomena. And viriya is vitality. These three are what we are trying to train in, to employ and use all the time. I see them as one piece of a mind which is present. So, mindfulness isn’t control. Mindfulness is awakeness, it is knowing the way things are. It is not judgement. It is not being happy. It is not being kind. It is not being together. You can be falling apart and know that you are falling apart. You can be confused, and you know this is feeling confused. You can feel bloody-minded, and you know this is feeling bloody-minded. One can feel very loving and together, and one can know that. There is this ability we have as human beings to know. To know the way things are. And this is very special, it is very profound. If we didn’t have this capacity, we would just be stuck with the phenomena that come and go, such as the emotions, the bodily feelings or the memories. We would be stuck on them. But there is this capacity to know. Not only can I feel pain in my back, but I can also know that feeling. I can know my reactions to that feeling. I can know the worry around that. We have this capacity to know.

We say in our teachings, ‘Mindfulness is the path to the deathless. Heedlessness, those who are heedless, are already dead.’ The Buddha’s enlightenment is about this deep and profound possibility in human consciousness. He said that as human beings the possibility of enlightenment is ours as well; if we can know, if we can reflect, if we can be aware. It is a very optimistic teaching. Also, it is a spiritual teaching in the sense that it is not just about reorganizing the furniture in your consciousness. It is about the deep possibility which his enlightenment is a part of; a possibility which is realized through awareness. Mindfulness is the path to the deathless. The deathless is the way the Buddha couched the deepest spiritual realization for human beings. It is not couched in a theological way. It is not couched in a dualistic way, that it’s something outside of you. It is couched in this particular way: mindfulness is the path to the deathless. That is a very important line in my tradition, and I have pondered that a lot.

Mindfulness is about being awake. When I began this sitting session I said, ‘Just listen.’ That is a common way that one is encouraged to remember mindfulness; just listen. That listening quality is not just about sound, but about that attentiveness, that wakefulness, that presence. This is actually very simple, but we tend to forget. We tend to get lost in our projections, lost in our problems and lost in the complexity of thought – the past and the future. When we talk about mindfulness, we also talk about the ability to remember, to be mindful. Not in terms of some memory I had or some experience in the past but remembering the present moment.

There’s a story about one of my peers doing practice in his hut in Thailand. He would set his clock for an hour, then started meditating and he would find himself cutting his toenails. He didn’t know how he got there. He’s better now. You can make a determination to watch the breath and the mind is just gone. It is off thinking about whatever one thinks about, in the past and in the future.

It is a training that needs to be encouraged. How do you become more continuously mindful? One can make suggestions to oneself, such as, ‘I am going to try to be here now.’ That might not sound like much, but that suggestion is a lot. Because by making that suggestion to oneself, ‘I’ll try to be here’, when I am not here, I will certainly notice it. What happens to yogis and meditators is that they become very self-critical. ‘Oh, I am not aware,’ and they are not aware of their criticism. There can be a kind of negativity, self-criticism, judgement, a heaviness about it, and one begins to not like the practice. Not like it because it is coming from a place of, ‘I can’t do it. I am inadequate, I am not getting there, I am not mindful.’ These are all very negative suggestions to the mind. If I make a lot of negative suggestions to the practice, I am not going to want to do it.

It is very important when we are awake, to feel grateful. It is important to notice and to open the mind. Not to try to get anything because there is nothing you really need to get. This might not sound like much, but for me it was a big thing because I would just lose it. I would do walking meditation and half an hour would go by and I would be singing Bob Dylan songs. Where are you? The tendency was to be very diligent and hardworking, but to be very critical. That was a very unhappy way to go about it. I had to come to a very sober realization; I haven’t trained my mind and I am not going to be present for much of the time. But when I do wake up, when something awakens me like a sound or pain, when that’s there, I need to really appreciate that. What does it feel like to be present? What is it like to be here now? That suggestion to be here now is what makes mindfulness more continuous in consciousness. The remembering of what it means to be present. The feeling of being present and the sense of gratitude for being present. To really begin to know what presence is, then that factor becomes more powerful.

The opposite to that is heedlessness. Those who are heedless are already dead. When I am not aware all kinds of ego states can come up. Let’s say, I am resentful about something. I am not aware of it; it comes into the mind and that resentment takes over in thought. I become a resentful person. I start to think resentful thoughts and that is a kind of birth. That is suffering. And yet if I am attentive, I can see a feeling of resentment, but I don’t grab it; I don’t think that way and don’t attach to it. That is the freedom from the cycle of birth and death. The amount of memory we have and the number of experiences we’ve had as human beings is endless. Mindfulness is what really cuts through it all. It doesn’t repress it, because you still feel your kamma, the experiences of your life, but you don’t indulge in it. Mindfulness just knows it. If I can train in that, it is the factor of awakening, the factor of enlightenment. It is a way to get off the wheel of ego suffering that we can get into.

When we speak of mindfulness, people sometimes think that means you have to move very slowly. I don’t know why. Or they think it means controlling everything or never feeling emotions like grief. Sometimes people think if you are mindful, you are not going to feel grief. Why? Or you are not going to feel anger. Why? But there can be the knowing of anger, what anger feels like as opposed to believing in anger. There is a huge difference between knowing anger and believing in anger. There’s an enormous difference between believing in your irritation with someone and knowing you are irritated; and that difference is freedom.

We can find some things very difficult to be aware of. We are so habituated to distracting ourselves away from childhood traumas, from pains or from loneliness. They can be very hard; we have this resistance to looking at them. Part of unravelling our kamma is slowly entering into areas that we find difficult. I have certainly seen that in myself. The things that I am aware of are much more subtle than 20 or 30 years ago and yet they still come out. There is a progression in the practice from grossness to more and more continuity, and more and more subtlety. But the awareness is the same.

The second factor is called dhamma-vicaya. Vicaya means investigation. Dhamma means the teaching or phenomena. Sometimes Buddhism is called a phenomenological practice. That means that in understanding the mind, we try to observe mind, body, emotions and moods as phenomena in nature rather than as personal problems. We reinforce this again and again. There is a difference between knowing resentment as a particular kind of phenomena in consciousness and thinking I’ve got a resentment problem. Or believing in my resentment or thinking I shouldn’t feel resentful. All of that is different than knowing resentment as a phenomenon. It is a mental, emotional phenomenon. It arises because of causes, it stays for a while, and then it leaves. It is a mood of the mind, and it affects the body.

If I can investigate the phenomenon of resentment as something that is a part of my consciousness, I can observe it. I can observe how I can get caught up in thoughts about it, how I feel guilty about it. I can observe how it affects my breathing, how it affects my guts and how it affects my memory. If I am willing to be aware of resentment and contemplate it, then the understanding of resentment is the freedom from resentment. It might still come up because of causes and conditions. But I don’t have to become a victim of it. I don’t have to feel guilty about it, I don’t have to believe in it. I don’t have to project it out, or carry it in my mind, or reject it. I just know this is the arising of resentment and I know this is the ceasing of resentment. So, there is the knowing of one’s own consciousness, the knowing of the phenomena of one’s experience. The teaching sounds very complicated at times, but it actually simplifies things. It is a lot simpler to understand resentment as a phenomenon in consciousness than to be lost in the endless scenarios of resentment, to be lost in the endless storylines, the ways we resent, and all those different memories. Thoughts are very complicated.

The particular phenomenon that the Buddha asks us to understand is the body. To really understand the body. That doesn’t sound like much but how aware are we of the body? How much of our time is spent in thought? How much do we understand pain and discomfort? Because these are phenomena in nature. If we don’t understand them, then we are the victims of them. Pain is a very important thing to understand. How do you understand pain? By being aware of it. We have many attitudes about the body. We have fear about it, we have self-consciousness, we have vanity. We also have ideas around old age or body size. We put all kinds of different stuff upon the body. What is body? What is it before we conceptualize it?

Much of the teaching around awareness is to try to have direct contact with certain frameworks. The body is an area that conscious experience functions in. Being conscious, we must understand the body and learn to come to a peaceful coexistence with the body. That is different to just using the body for physical pleasure, or just using it for work. It is different to using the body as some inert thing to put food or chemicals into or push athletically. All those are cultural and social things that we do with the body, they are not about really understanding the body. In an unenlightened way, we either use the body or we abuse the body, or we don’t pay attention to the body. What does the body like? What does it mean to be compassionate towards the body?

The body is a tremendous place to understand the mind. The mind and body are very much co-linked. When I feel resentment, my body feels it. I have moods and emotions, and thoughts and memories. All of them register in the body. My breath channel gets clogged when I feel anxiety. If I can understand when the kamma of anxiety comes up or when the kamma of anger or irritation come up, one interesting way to understand it is through the body. That is quite marvellous. That simplifies it too. Mindfulness of the body and knowing the way the mind works around the body is much simpler than always analysing it. It is much simpler than thinking it is a problem or trying to get rid of that irritation. You are not trying to do anything about it. You are simply understanding that this is the way it feels.

Quite often we make negative experiences a problem, and then we try to fix them. We can get terribly complicated with that. This very simple opening and receptivity to something unpleasant like anxiety is a wonderful freedom. A freedom that is actually within anxiety. It is quite marvellous. I can directly contact something like anxiety or anger and really know it. I can touch it, like I can touch this carpet and not conceptualize the carpet. Or I can hear sound and not conceptualize sound. I can get rid of the whole storyline that this is a problem which I must do something about. When I can really touch it directly, that’s mindfulness.

And in the touching of that, there is often a deep resistance. There is a deep resistance to contacting loneliness, to contacting physical pain or boredom or discomfort. Resistance to contacting all these negative things. If we cannot contact those things directly, we are always pushed by them. We are pushed away from them. And we seek alternatives and consolation and distractions and objects. If that’s going on, then we can never touch the deathless. Because we are caught in movement, we are caught in time, we are caught in restlessness, we are caught in becoming. And the stillness of the mind is denied us.

There is a tremendous amount of freedom when we can touch something like anxiety very directly and not believe in that resistance. And it’s curious because our patterns are to get away from that. Our patterns are to distract from that, to get a compensation, to seek objects. Now the deathless, where that is a spiritual possibility, is not an object per se. It’s not like sunshine, it’s not like a sunny spring day. You might think it’s nibbana today, but it’s a qualitative difference. Because that which knows sunshine, also knows a sleety, rainy day.

We have this flow of consciousness. We have this flow of emotions, of bodily feelings and memories. It comes and goes because of causes and conditions. Because of our cultural conditioning, our gender conditioning, our age conditioning, and all that. There is this flow of life. We are trying to be very aware and receptive to that and not be victimized by it. When within that flow in life there is something I can’t be with, that I resist or am confused by, that is a sign that I have to practise dhamma-vicaya. I must investigate it. It is something I need to know. It is something I need to understand. We say in Buddhism, your biggest problem is your biggest teacher. Your biggest hindrance is where your biggest freedom lies. It has to be, doesn’t it? If there is some huge aspect of my own consciousness, of my own psyche, which really bothers me in some social, emotional, or interpersonal way, then that is where the freedom must lie. Where else could it lie?

If I always feel competitive, then it’s in competitiveness where I find my freedom. Not by being competitive, but by understanding it. If I feel intimidated by others, then it is in that very feeling of intimidation where I will find freedom from it. It must be that way. This is the counter to what we have been conditioned to do. If I feel I always must be competitive to feel secure or whatever, to actually go towards that very feeling. What underlies that? Is it fear? That’s what mindfulness training and investigation must do. That’s not just intellectual. It is not like me sitting around thinking, ‘Oh I have this competitiveness problem. I wonder what that is really like?’ That is just thought. When I am with my brother or whoever, and I am competitive, ‘Yeah, there it is, there is that guy, there is that feeling.’ What is that really like? Going towards it, touching it directly. Then there is freedom because one is no longer avoiding it, one is no longer being driven by it. It is not a problem. It just is as it is.

So that is the sense of investigation. In religious terms we use the word ‘wonder’. But you don’t usually use that word around anxiety; they don’t go together. We usually use that word when we see an eagle or the Niagara Falls, ‘Ah, wonder’. But we must apply that same sense of wonder to those dark sides of our lives. Because it is only in wonder that we understand, it is not in judgement that we understand.

I like this language of receptivity, of really receiving something. Let it come to me. I have spent so much of my practice trying to control, trying to get rid of things. So much time being diligent and annihilating things and becoming something. All that energy never witnesses the way things are. It is just a kind of warfare, a battle zone. That’s why we talk about compassion so much. Not in some dualistic sense, but in being friendly towards something like competitiveness. What does that feel like? And there is liberation. There is freedom because with that direct contact, there is understanding. Competitiveness and anxiety are not a problem. They are just weather.

The third factor is energy or vitality, viriya. You need juice to do this. This practice doesn’t happen by watching the Senators lose to whomever they lose to. This is not a couch-potato practice. It requires vitality, but it is a subtle vitality. It is not the vitality to try to become. It is the vitality of really awakening to the way things are again and again. Where does that come from? It comes from simple things like yoga, Tai Chi, Chi Gong, pranayama, running and walking, that we can engage with in our lives. But it is more than that. It is more than just aerobics, or another ten-part routine that I have to do, another ten stages of enlightenment. Deeper than that is interest.

What is vitality? I am interested in certain experiences that I have had as a contemplative. I am interested in what my teachers have displayed for me in their being. I am very curious about the Buddha’s enlightenment. I am very interested in saints. (I am not terribly interested in sinners.) I am very curious about what these beings have experienced. Curiosity and interest, that’s vitality.

In Buddhism one must be interested in one’s own suffering. You have to be interested in your own problems. But the interest is not in a kind of self-obsessed, analytical way because that just leads into more thought. But one has to be interested in the phenomenon of suffering, in the contraction, and in the phenomenon of alienation. What is that? Why do we get caught up in that? How does it work? Where does it come from? How does it endure? How does it affect my body? What is the result when I witness it? What kind of distractions do I go towards? That is all in thought. But it’s deeper than thought, isn’t it? There must be an interest and determination to go beyond thought to understand the teaching and to realize the spiritual goal. How do you get that fire in the practice? The fire in the practice is not self-hatred because that really puts out the fire. It is not greed. I’ve tried being greedy to get enlightened. That doesn’t work. It is not control. It is not ego. It is not about me getting something. It is about a mind which is willing to awaken, willing to look and willing to observe. A mind that is willing to wait and to watch until insight arises.

In religious language we talk about revelation. We talk about vipassana insight, about seeing the way things really are. How does that insight arise? It doesn’t arise from an ego state. It arises more from humility. How often have you struggled with something, then you give up and say, ‘Alright, what is it about?’ You are finally mindful. What is it really about? What does this really feel like now? Then there is a kind of humility and awareness, ‘Ah, I see, that’s how that works.’ Some of the neatest insights I have had, have come about from really struggling in my hut. They have come from putting fierce disciplines on myself. Then from getting fed up with it all and oversleeping, or losing myself in a novel, struggling and fighting it. Then giving up and saying, ‘I wonder what it really feels like now?’ Then the mind is awake.

That is one of the curious processes you go through in the spiritual life. You try and try, and then you give up and you notice the way things are. Trying is quite subtle. It is very profound. When I first entered the path, the only way I knew how to try was through ego. I had good intentions, I tried to get rid of my anger. I tried to do lots of loving kindness practices. I tried to be grateful, I tried to be content. I took up the whole storyline of being a monk. I tried to be a monk. (That’s what I am paid for, sort of). But I was trying to do it out of ego. I was trying to be a nice monk. But it was still me trying to do something, me trying to become something; it was still based on ego. And of course, after a while, that fails. Then I wanted to get out of there. Then I started to be a monk.

Because there is a process you go through where you try to be a religious person; where you try to be a Buddhist and do all the right things. It’s better than not doing it. But coming to the place of awakening rather than becoming is different. Awakening to some very negative feeling and saying, ‘Okay I am willing to allow this to become conscious and I am going to investigate it.’ That is different than trying to be a person that doesn’t have negativity. There’s a whole lot of difference. And quite often it is difficult because of the resistance.

So those are the three factors: sati which is awareness, dhamma-vicaya which is this investigation of the phenomena of consciousness or dhamma, and viriya which is vitality or interest. These three are really one piece, one type of mind which is awake, which is wondering and seeing. You don’t have to wait to suffer to do that, do you? It is better to do it when you are happy. When I was walking across the experimental farm I felt a sense of joy, of presence, of being with that, and sustaining that, rather than thinking, ‘Oh, it’s springtime, great, winter is over,’ being lost in thought, not even noticing that it is springtime. You can take the beauty of life as a way of being present, a way of cultivating the sense of presence. In doing that you move away from thought to the present moment.

Awareness, investigation, and vitality lead to the other four factors: pīti, which is gladness; passaddhi, which is tranquility or composure; samādhi, a sustained mind which has all those qualities; and upekkhā, equanimity, the peace of the heart. Those other four fall into place as you practise in this way. Whatever conceptual structures you have, can you get the feeling of just being awake? How does one awaken? How can one just sustain that awakeness? How does one fall asleep? Why? Where does that happen? Where does the mind go? Then it is a very lovely kind of practice. It is not a coercion. There is a lot of love and compassion in this practice. It doesn’t come from egotistical judgments. If you find that mindfulness practice becomes contrived and controlled and you can’t enjoy an ice cream cone because you are being a Buddhist, I say, ‘take up something else’. The difficulties of most religions arise when you get into this idea that you somehow have to control and suppress, and not enjoy, life. You can’t sustain that.

When there is joy, beauty, stillness, be grateful for that. Really use that and say, ‘Okay, now the heart is balanced. This is what it feels like to be balanced, to be at ease.’ Not just as a thought but with a real sense of that gratitude. There are times when your mind goes off balance and you start to complain. Or when there is some fear and your heart starts to shake, there can be the knowing of that, ‘Ah, there is the arising of the shaking of the heart.’ Or you start to be annoyed at someone, ‘Oh there is the arising of annoyance.’ As mindfulness gets stronger, you see the arising of conditions. You usually see the cessation of conditions first. One good thing to notice is the cessation of thought. You may think you are thinking all the time, but there are times when you stop thinking. When you stop thinking, that is the death of the ego. When you are out in the garden and you notice that first crocus, your mind stops. That presence is a very valuable moment.

We may be caught in our self-views and self-judgements, and then we awaken. For example, if I was in the monastery feeling tired and irritated, and I say to a monk, ‘You’re a turkey.’ I have said something dismissive to the monk, and then I go back to my hut, ‘Oh, I blew it, wrong speech, thirty years as a monk, I’m no good.’ That’s not being mindful. Maybe I hear the sound of a crow and I wake up. When I awaken to that sound, that is the end of self. That is the space of awareness, of awakeness, of enlightenment. It is very important to notice the end of that thought because that is the end of self. If you can really notice that, taste that moment of the end of self, you enter the silence of the mind. Most people don’t notice that. They think they shouldn’t be thinking, or they try to control themselves not to think. But actually, you’ve already stopped thinking. That is a very valuable moment.

When you have been thinking about yourself, or the future, or time, and then you awaken, you notice the end of time. That is an important moment. The end of time, the end of the future, the end of the past, the end of self, the end of becoming. That’s where the deathless lies. Mindfulness is the path to the deathless. It’s like a crack or a space. In our monasteries, we say, ‘Go for the gap.’ There is a gap there between thoughts, between self, between time. It’s always there. Because the deathless or the spiritual possibility must be something that is here and now all the time. It is something we are missing. It can’t be something that you get in the future, because that’s still me, getting something in the future. It is always timeless; it is always here and now.

Try to notice that moment. So often we are just thinking about ourselves or the future or the past. And then there are gaps. Observe that tendency. We think, ‘Oh no, I am thinking too much again.’ Don’t believe in that because that creates another self. Say, ‘Oh, thank you.’ What does that feel like? The end of thought, the end of self, the end of time. And then the thought again, ‘What am I going to do?’ If you can notice the gaps, then you begin to see that that is your real home, that mindfulness is the path to the deathless. When I am heedless, I am already dead. It doesn’t mean I’ve got rigor-mortis or something. It means the whole sense of ego is birth and death, and a sense of time. That is the problem.