# The Pāramīs as Practices of Liberation

Ajahn Jayasāro

This talk was given at Amaravati Monastery on November 6th, 2021. He edited the transcript to make it more suitable for a written format.

On one occasion the Lord Buddha said that the essence of the Dhamma Vinaya – that which unites it, the common thread or theme in all the 84,000 teachings, is that of liberation. In a famous simile he compared it to the taste of the oceans. In every ocean of the world, the water has the same salty taste. Similarly, every single teaching – if it’s an authentic Buddhist teaching – has the taste of liberation. I have found it useful in my own practice to apply this perspective to the teachings. Today I would like to offer a reflection on how the practice of the pāramīs are all practices of liberation, leading to liberation, characterized by liberation.

What are the pāramīs? They’re usually translated as the ten perfections, and although this group of ten is not found in the sutta literature as such, it is of great antiquity, and I think a very useful group. Its particular value lies in helping us to see our Dhamma practice in wider terms: as including the cultivation of supporting factors rather than merely the application of techniques. It seems to me that these days we can easily become obsessed with content and technique, and believe that problems in our practice can always be solved by spiritual technologies or by information. The assumption is that facing some difficulty in meditation practice, all we need is some special tip or some secret key and everything will work out.

But I have never observed a clear correlation between knowledge of techniques and success in meditation. There is a hidden or unknowable factor involved in our progress on the path and that is, I would suggest, the previous accumulation of pāramīs. To put it in other words, it is a matter of spiritual maturity. You may know the means to develop stability, clarity and alertness in the mind and be familiar with the techniques of Vipassanā meditation. But if you lack the spiritual maturity, the accumulated pāramīs, to integrate those practices, the fruits will be meagre. So, I think these pāramīs are worthy of study. My belief is that they provide the foundation for long-term and profound growth in the Dhamma.

The first pāramī is a very familiar one, that of dāna. Meditators can sometimes be a bit sniffy about dāna. ‘We’re not so much into this merit-making stuff. We’re into meditation. We’re here for the essence of the Dhamma, not the basics.’ But the development of generosity and giving is, if it is carried out correctly, a practice of liberation. Through it we seek to be liberated from stinginess and meanness, and attachment to our possessions and our wealth. When we give without expectation of any reward the mind experiences an initial form of freedom, letting go of the burden of attachment to external material things. Through giving we experience a great joy. And there are, too, many lessons that may be learned from observing the mind in the process of giving.

The Buddha says successful giving is achieved when we take care of our minds before giving the gift, at the time of giving and after giving. This is often overlooked. Let’s say someone is taking food to the temple and they get up a bit later than they meant to and then everything is a rush; they’re hurrying around, glancing at the clock. Worrying it’s not going to be ready in time, they can get upset and scrambled. In this way they are failing in the practice of merit making and offering of dāna in the pre-giving phase. At the time of offering food in Thailand donors will often keep a beady eye on the Abbot to see whether or not he takes any of their food. If he doesn’t, or he takes little, their mind can be clouded with disappointment or displeasure. The joy of giving is undermined, and its liberating value lost. Sometimes when people go to take back their dish, they’re feeling resentful: ‘I have been up since 4.00 this morning to make that and they’ve hardly taken any of it.’ They are not taking care of their mind after giving. Giving dana is not always such an easy practice.

It’s an exercise of mindfulness in itself to care for your mind before giving, at the moment of giving and after giving. If you feel regret after giving something away, then you have also reduced the purification of mind that takes place through giving. The word merit, or puñña, means the purification of mind. This isn’t a theory or a Buddhist concept. Merit is something which can be directly experienced very easily if you compare how your mind feels when you give something with expectation of something in return and how it feels when you give something without expectation of return. I think there is a significant difference. The cleansing, brightening effect of giving without expectation is not experienced to the same degree at all when there is a desire for some return.

I would like to share with you an example of the beauty of dāna that I experienced a few years ago, in India. I was walking around Maharashtra in Western India, in a kind of a loop from the city of Aurangabad through Ajanta and Ellora. I would spend the nights amongst the hills which bordered the road. There were few mosquitoes, and the weather was mild; I didn’t need my umbrella or a mosquito net. I would just put down a groundsheet, cover myself with my robe and sleep just as monks did in the Buddha’s time. At dusk one evening, as I climbed up a hill looking for a suitable place to spend the night, I realised that I was being watched by a goat-herder from a nearby village. I was concerned that out of curiosity he would follow me and try to engage me in conversation. But as night fell all was quiet, and I sat on a large flat rock meditating. It was perhaps around 9.00 pm that I heard something scrambling up the hillside. I was a little wary and shined my torch to see what it could be. Eventually a man appeared over the ridge. I saw that it was the goat-herder. He had climbed up the hill in the dark without a light, carrying a big bunch of bananas. He was afraid I was hungry. He’d probably worked a 10 or 12-hour day and after dark he’d walked from his village for a couple of kilometres and then climbed up the hill in the dark. The hill was covered in boulders, quite difficult to climb. He did all this to give me a bunch of bananas.

I don’t speak the Marathi language and it was quite difficult to explain to him that I don’t eat in the evening and that, grateful for his kindness as I was, I couldn’t accept his gift. He was understandably disappointed – I felt bad for him – and he left. Then about another hour or two later, quite late at night, I heard more scrambling, somebody climbing up this hill again. Who could it be so late at night? It was the same man, this time proudly carrying a blanket. I accepted the offering and made it clear that in the morning I would leave it for him to retrieve at the bottom of the hill. It was the kind of giving that you experience and know that you’ll never forget. That man and his act of kindness will always stay with me.

We have all acted kindly in the past. And if we bring the memory of a pure act of generosity to mind even five, ten or twenty years afterwards, notice how bright and joyful it makes us feel. The Buddha referred to ariyadhana: Noble Treasures of the Heart, acts of generosity become noble treasures of the heart in that they never lose their value. They never become tarnished. Whenever you recall the memory of an act of generosity, your mind becomes bright and clear and happy. This uplift of the mind is what we call merit. Dāna, the act of giving, is the fundamental means of making merit. But it is also an act of liberation; it is our first lesson in letting go. Learning how to let go of our attachment to possessions, to wealth, to money, creates a habit of letting go. It creates a habit of abandoning attachment which we can build upon and develop internally. It comes to our aid when we come to deal with our relationship with the negative emotions which we have held onto for a very long time.

The second pāramī is sīla. How is sīla a practice of liberation? If we voluntarily undertake to observe certain boundaries for our actions and speech, and we are able to consistently govern our conduct within those boundaries – even on occasions and situations when we are very tempted to transgress them – then we become liberated from the bad kamma which we might otherwise create. Also, very importantly, we free ourselves from the guilt and anguish and self-loathing that accompanies unskillful actions.

These first two pāramīs might be considered the Buddhist answer to the question: how do you create self-esteem? You do it by governing your conduct and speech within boundaries that you have voluntarily adopted. The voluntary part is crucial. If you are maintaining a moral standard out of fear or desire for some reward, the psychological benefit is lost. And you do it by giving. Because when you give, you are proving to yourself that you can make a positive impact on your family, on your surroundings, on your community, on the society in which you live. You are proving that you can bring happiness to others. And by constantly giving, you are strengthening this perception of yourself as someone who can make a difference in the world. It may not be a spectacular difference, but small reductions of suffering and small increases in happiness and welfare are meaningful and bring joy with them. Giving, together with the restraint of sīla, creates the sense of self-respect, self-esteem, which is necessary for the more profound levels of dhamma practice.

The third of these pāramīs is nekkhamma. Nekkhamma is renunciation. It is the renunciation of all that is negative, useless and harmful in our lives. That’s the first level. The more refined level is the renunciation of all that is trivial and pointless. Nekkhamma means transcending the world of sensuality or, at least, withdrawing from it. In its advanced form nekkhamma may mean abandoning one’s old way of life and becoming a monk or a nun. But, for most people, in everyday terms, it means gaining a perspective on sensual desires and not being manipulated by them. The five precepts provide a framework of restraint by which lay Buddhists can ensure that their natural desires for sensory pleasure will not lead to harm for themselves or others. The attitude to sensuality here is not some kind of puritan rejection of physical instincts saying, ‘I enjoy it therefore it’s bad or I am bad because I enjoy it’. It’s a recognition of a simple psychological truth that if your only access to feelings of well-being is through the sensual world, you’re putting all your eggs in one very fragile basket. You are condemning yourself to a very unstable experience of happiness and well-being because the forms, sounds, odours and all they are based upon, lie outside of our control. The body itself and its capacity to enjoy those sensory pleasures is also unstable and unreliable.

Psychologically, the point is that if you are too caught up in the sensual realm then your mind does not incline towards, it doesn’t delight in, the non-sensual realm. A very simple analogy: if you’re in a tall building and you’re on the ground floor you can’t, at the same time, be on a higher floor. It’s not to say that there’s anything wrong with the ground floor but if you would like to see what the view is like from a higher floor then you have to be able to leave the ground floor, at least on certain occasions.

In the life of lay Buddhists, it’s generally recommended that one takes the eight precepts on the Uposatha day, and if possible, also on the ‘wan phra’ day (the eighth day of the waxing and waning moon). That makes four days a month. The five precepts are a sufficient and effective standard for body and speech on a daily basis. But by undertaking eight precepts, you take on additional precepts, such as abstaining from entertainments that are not directly concerned with the avoidance of unwholesome actions per se. They are precepts of renunciation. They provide a taste, an experience, of renouncing the non-essential. It is a regular training in how to develop a perspective on our relationship with the sensual realm.

On a daily basis one of the ways that we can develop nekkhamma most effectively is the practice of meditation. In focusing on the breath for instance, we put our attention on an object that is not immediately attractive or stimulating, and that is precisely the point. The mind, which is addicted to thought, to memory and to imagination, feels threatened by meditation. It struggles, it feels very uncomfortable if it has to devote itself to the bare experience of an in-breath and out-breath. This reaction is something to be accepted and recognised as being as natural as the struggle of a wild animal to resist any attempt to tame it. But if we are willing to be patient, if we see the value of practising in that way, then we can eventually transcend the addiction. In the initial stages of meditation practice the mind will gallop off elsewhere. It will seek refuge in the enjoyment of memories and imagination. Training the mind to let go of that habit, is developing the perfection of renunciation.

The sensuality that we are renouncing in meditation is not restricted to the coarser forms of delight: sexual fantasies and so on. We renounce whatever it is that we enjoy thinking about and dwelling upon. Memories and perceptions of what we like pull us away from the meditation object. Being mindful of the breath means not forgetting it, bearing it in mind. But if it does wander, recognising that it has done so means the mind is back on track. It is a moment of clear awareness, of sampajañña, comprehension that what you’re doing now is not what you set out to do. In effect, you wake up to what’s going on. Following that moment of wakefulness, the return to the meditation object is the actual practice of nekkhamma pāramī. It means you make the decision to reject the sensual world of indulgence and trivial enjoyments and return to the task in hand. You are voluntarily returning to the simple, non-exciting reality in the present moment.

Many people who start to meditate are discouraged when they find that their meditation practice consists primarily of bringing the mind back to the breath. It goes off and you bring it back, and then it goes again and you bring it back again. And so on. You may think, ‘I’m not doing this right’ or ‘I can’t do this properly’. But wandering and returning is the point, you’re developing an ability to recognise that the mind has strayed. You’re developing the strength of mind and the renunciation to say, ‘Yes, even though I find this quite an enjoyable mental state, quite an enjoyable thought and memory, I’m going to put it down because I aspire to something higher and more meaningful.’

Often, the reason why thoughts, the same thoughts, return again and again is because there’s still a delight in them. There’s an abiding interest in the thought and the mental state. So, you bring the mind back, but if it’s not done wholeheartedly, there’s no real renunciation involved. There’s still a lingering interest and a desire to carry on that thought to its conclusion. After the mind is back with the breath for a short time, it strays back to where it was just now, and you become even more frustrated. The spirit of renunciation is key.

A couple of suggestions here on dealing with distracting thoughts in meditation. If the distraction is predominantly one of words rather than images, when you catch yourself thinking a particular phrase, then rather than returning to the meditation object straightaway, deliberately repeat the phrase in your mind a few times. After a few repetitions a feeling of boredom will arise, and at that point return to the breath. Now there is a wholehearted renunciation of the thought. You don’t want to think that anymore. A variation on this is to carry on the train of thought in a very slow and deliberate way. Very soon you lose interest in it and can return to the breath voluntarily.

So, if your mindfulness is strong and your commitment is strong, then merely being aware that the mind has strayed, that awareness, that awakening of the mind is sufficient for the thought to fall away, to cease by itself. But in the case that the thought is more tenacious and there is more investment in it, these two techniques, counter intuitive as they may seem, can be very helpful.

Renunciation is simplification. Simplification allows us to see the way things are much more clearly and effectively. We feel lighter. We feel brighter. We feel the confidence to recognise that without attachment to enjoyments of memory, imagination and so on, we feel better. We make a profit, we don’t lose out in any way.

The next pāramī is wisdom (paññā). Wisdom is considered to be the heart of the Buddhist path. There are different levels of wisdom. As a pāramī, the kind of wisdom emphasised is wise reflection (yoniso­manasikāra), which may be divided into two kinds. First is the reflection, the thinking which seeks to replace a negative mental state, an afflictive emotion, with a wholesome mental state. The second is the reflection on the way things are, specifically the three characteristics of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and selflessness. This two-fold division parallels the two approaches to meditation called samatha and vipassanā. Samatha deals with craving and other unwholesome mental states, vipassanā with our ignorance of the way things are.

An example of the first kind of wise reflection is one with which you may be familiar: reflecting in ways that encourage loving kindness and forgiveness to replace persistent negativity. Similarly, when sensual thoughts, memories and perception completely obsess the mind, then we develop wise reflection on the unattractive nature of the human body. There is nobody, no matter how attractive, how beautiful, how handsome, whose body lacks non-beautiful or non-handsome features. Instead of allowing the mind to dwell unrestrainedly on the beautiful, handsome, attractive features, we simply shift the focus and dwell upon one of the unattractive features. Reducing the power that attraction and aversion exert upon our mind is an important life skill. Another key reflection is on death. Reflecting on the inevitability of death, the uncertainty as to when it will occur and how, counters heedlessness, laziness, and complacency.

The second kind of wise reflection is based upon observing the way things are: in particular looking again and again at the impermanent, uncertain nature of experience as it manifests in the five khandhas of body, perceptions, feelings, mental formations and consciousness. We make conscious the impermanence of every aspect of life, inner and outer. In daily life, we can use Ajahn Chah’s teaching of ‘mynae’, continually bringing the mind back to the uncertainty and unreliability of all that occurs.

The unsatisfactoriness of unenlightened existence might seem a rather grand philosophical position to take. But in daily life we can investigate it in the simplest of ways. On public transport, for example, we may give ourselves the task of noticing the changes in posture of everybody around us. Nobody is still for more than a few seconds, and it’s clear that almost every single movement that is made is an attempt to escape from discomfort. Reflecting on anattā means looking into causality. When we look closely, we see no owner of experience, no permanent independent entity controlling the show. What we see is this complex flow of causes and conditions.

Being able to see things in terms of causes and conditions allows us to make wise choices. We can start to discriminate between those causes and conditions which are amenable to correction or to encouragement, and those causes and conditions which are outside of our control and which we need simply to accept. Lacking that wisdom, we may find ourselves accepting things which should be amended and trying to abandon things which should be accepted. It’s through clear penetration and reflection on the causal nature of phenomena that we can respond appropriately and wisely to different situations. This is wisdom on that level of developing anicca-saññā, the perception of impermanence, dukkha-saññā, the perception of unsatisfactoriness, anattā-saññā, the perception of non-self. These are creating habits and creating an affinity with, a familiarity with, the three characteristics. It will stand one in very good stead as the mind becomes more peaceful through meditation and can be turned to investigating the three characteristics on a non-verbal level. This is not vipassanā in itself but creates a pathway for it. It’s creating a way into the non-verbal recognition, cognition, of the three characteristics.

Wisdom is often divided into three categories: the wisdom that comes with listening and studying, the wisdom that comes from thinking about things we’ve heard and studied, and the wisdom that comes from meditation. The more we look at our minds and the more we understand ourselves, the more we understand the human condition. In meditation we are the guinea pigs, the representatives of the human race with whom we have the most immediate access. If you can develop insight into the way that greed, jealousy, hatred and so forth appear in your mind, then you know how they appear in the human mind generally, because they are universal characteristics. Similarly, the more you understand how the positive qualities arise in your own mind, then the more you understand and appreciate the goodness in other people. Empathy arises through this kind of insight. Through meditating you gain some very interesting information about the way that defilements work. There is a common idea that goodness makes you a bit gullible and liable to be outsmarted by the unscrupulous and evil. In fact, the more you look at your mind, the more you understand defilement, and the more you understand defilement, the easier it is to recognize it and guard against it.

There are many old wisdom tales. One deals with a theft of jewels from the Emperor of China. The investigations fail to reveal the thief, but it is clear that it must be someone within the palace. The wise Emperor orders a ‘magic’ bell to be suspended behind a curtain in the main assembly hall. He tells all the suspects that the magic bell is sensitive to immorality and the moment the thief touches it, the bell will ring. Then everyone is commanded to form into single file and walk behind the curtain, one by one, and touch the magic bell. They do so, but no sound is heard. Everyone assumes that the plan didn’t work. But then the Emperor demands to see everyone’s hands. The bell has been coated with grease and all but one person – the thief – has traces of grease on his hand. He was the only one who did not dare touch the bell. The wise Emperor did not need magic to catch the thief. He relied on his understanding of human nature.

The next pāramī is khanti: forbearance or patient endurance, the virtue referred to by the Buddha as the ‘supreme incinerator’ of defilements. There’s a famous folk hero in Thailand called Sri Thanonchai. At one time while Sri Thanonchai was ordained as a monk, the King announced a competition to see who could summarize the Buddha’s teachings most concisely. Monks and sages came from all over Thailand. Finally, it was Sri Thanonchai’s turn. He got up on the Dhamma seat, gave the Namo Tassa invocation, and then summed up the whole teaching in three terms: ‘Patient endurance, patient endurance, patient endurance.’ And then following the traditional ornate phrase by which Dhamma talks are ended, he descended from the Dhamma seat. Sri Thanonchai won the prize.

Most people assume that Ajahn Chah spent his days giving wise and profound teachings. The image is of him walking through the monastery with his walking stick, turning to somebody, smiling, and saying something incredible that changes their life forever. That did happen, but actually not so much. His Dhamma talks were often quite repetitive and went into great detail about things like monastic regulations and how to use them in the development of mindfulness. When I was first in Thailand, and couldn’t yet understand the Dhamma talks, there was one phrase I would hear more than any other, ‘ot ton’. One day I asked a senior Western monk what it meant. He said, ‘Patient endurance’. That was very much what Ajahn Chah was emphasizing – more than almost anything else. You can be mindful that something unwholesome has arisen in your mind, but if you have never developed the ability to withstand the siren call, the temptation of defilement, with patient endurance, then that moment of mindfulness is wasted. It is swept away by craving.

Khanti is, in Luang Por Sumedho’s phrase, the skill of peacefully co-existing with the unpleasant. It doesn’t mean gritting your teeth until something comes to an end, but to endure calmly, to be fully present with the disliked, without struggle. Practising it, you realise that you don’t have to get so flustered, oppressed and depressed, because things aren’t going your way or things aren’t how you’d like them to be. In certain circumstances, although you can’t do anything about the unpleasant event, you do have the capacity not to buy into it, not to take it so seriously. ‘It’s just like this, it’s alright, it’s bearable.’ Often the critical factor is how you deal with the voice in your head saying, ‘I can’t take this anymore, it’s too much, it’s too much.’ Often all you have to do is to calmly reply, ‘Why? Are you sure? No, it’s okay. It’s alright.’ Learning how to talk to yourself intelligently is another aspect of wisdom and is a great support of patient endurance. Wisdom is always needed. Patient endurance is not always the right strategy. Sometimes you shouldn’t bear with something. Sometimes you should say ‘no’ or change what you’re doing. Patient endurance always needs to be supported by wisdom, which tells us when and when not to exercise it.

The next pāramī is viriya. This word is derived from vīra, meaning hero, and refers to heroic effort. The Buddha specified four kinds of effort: firstly, the effort to protect the mind against unwholesome mental states which have not yet arisen; secondly, in the case in which unwholesome states have arisen, putting forth the effort to abandon them; thirdly, putting forth the effort to give rise to wholesome states of mind; and fourthly, putting forth the effort to care for, nurture and bring to maturity those that have already arisen. These four kinds of effort are essential in every area of formal practice and in daily life. The key point is consistency and continuity of effort. In Ajahn Chah’s words: ‘when you feel diligent you put forth effort; when you feel lazy you put forth effort.’

I will tell you another story. It’s about a woman and her daughter-in-law going out to collect mushrooms after a long rain. The daughter-in-law knew a particular clearing up on the hill behind the village where the mushrooms grew in great abundance. She was determined to get up to that particular spot as quickly as possible. Her mother-in-law had a different idea. As they were walking along, every time she saw a mushroom by the side of the road she’d stop and pick it. Her daughter-in-law became frustrated, ‘Mum, Mum come on, we’ve got to get up to that field up there. There’s hundreds of mushrooms there. Down here, there’s just a single mushroom here, a single mushroom there, it will take hours to get enough for what we need. Let’s not waste any more time.’ But the old lady paid no heed. She picked a single mushroom, walked a bit further and then stooped down for another one. The young woman wanted to scream. Eventually she ran out of patience altogether and with a curt, ‘I’m going on ahead,’ she strode off. The young woman walked quickly but on reaching the clearing she discovered that the mushrooms had all already been picked. She wasn’t the only one to know about the place. Tired and miserable, she trudged the long way back to the village. As she approached the house, her nose detected a wonderful fragrance. She went into the kitchen, ‘Mum, that smells so good.’ And her mother-in-law smiled kindly, ‘It’s single-mushroom curry. Sit down and I’ll bring you a bowl.’

Many people approach meditation the way the daughter-in-law approached the mushrooming expedition. But there’s much to say for the mother-in-law’s approach. We need to put forth a constant, consistent effort. It may seem rather modest at times, but it steadily accumulates and bears real results. Alternating spectacular effort with periods of rest and relaxation is like trying to rub two sticks together to create fire, but putting the sticks down whenever you feel tired.

Next is sacca. Sacca means truthfulness. We don’t just have to refrain from lying. We need to cultivate a love of truth. An indication of its importance can be found in the Jatakas. The bodhisattva, over all his lifetimes of accumulating pāramīs before his final birth as Prince Siddhartha, is seen in one life or another to fail in all of the pāramīs. The one pāramī that he never betrayed, never fell away from, was sacca pāramī, truthfulness.

People will often say that truthfulness is obviously a good thing, but surely there’s nothing wrong with an occasional white lie? But that’s the point. That’s why keeping precepts is a Dhamma practice in itself. Thinking you have a choice between telling the truth and hurting someone’s feelings on one side and telling a lie out of concern for their feelings on the other, is a false dilemma. The challenge is: how can I avoid hurting that person’s feelings without telling a lie. You have to use your intelligence. Practising the pāramī of truthfulness, you are freeing yourself, you’re liberating yourself from falsity. Someone who respects the truth, and never compromises on it, is someone whose word is given great respect and has real weight. I first met Ajahn Sumedho and his Sangha in London in 1978. One of the things that inspired me the most was they all seemed to me to be practising what they preached. They seemed to me to be true to their vocation, sincere in what they were doing.

Sacca is a wonderful quality to develop. It is truly liberating. There is no need for doubt: should I tell the truth or not? Because once you allow the possibility of telling white lies, that you may under certain circumstances say something untrue if there’s a good reason, you open a can of worms. Your weaselly mind soon finds a way to use that loophole to excuse lies that are not actually noble or compassionate at all. Maybe it’s just that you fear the reaction of the other person, or you just don’t want the complications that might arise. Your convenience before the truth and your sacca pāramī never grows. Caring for sacca is a true purification of mind.

Adhiṭṭhāna, the power of resolution or of vows, is the next pāramī. This is a very good quality to cultivate if you’re a doubter. If you are often thinking, shall I do this, shall I do that? Shall I do neither? Shall I do both? Should I be asking myself so many questions? There’s a story about an old Persian gentleman who had a very long beard. One day his grandson said, ‘Grandad when you’re asleep, is your beard outside the blanket or inside?’ He couldn’t answer. That night he lay down to sleep and he felt for his beard, ‘It’s outside, but it doesn’t feel quite right.’ So, he put it inside and he thought, ‘No, that doesn’t feel quite right either,’ and he put it outside again. This went on all night, and he got no sleep at all. He ended up cutting off his beard in the morning. Excessive doubt followed by a rash decision made merely to escape from the torment of doubting is a common phenomenon.

A wiser way to be free of doubt is to make vows. But there is a skill to it. If you make a vow too difficult and you can’t keep it, then you’re going to feel hopeless and be discouraged. If you make a vow too easy, too easy to keep, you’re not going to have any sense of accomplishment. It’s like playing a sport. Say you play tennis with someone who’s much better than you and you get beaten six-love, six-love. That’s hopeless and you don’t want to do that anymore. But if you win six-love, six-love that’s not very enjoyable either. If you play with someone who’s just a bit better than you, then you find you’re playing better than you thought you could. Somehow their slight superiority brings forth something within you that you didn’t realise you had. And this is what happens when you make intelligent vows.

Joining and leaving the monastic order is like being born and dying. It’s difficult to get born. It takes a long time. It’s very easy to die. It can happen at any moment, very easily. It’s very difficult to become a monk and it’s very easy to leave. There’s no special ritual involved. All you have to do to leave the monkhood is to say words to the effect of, ‘I’ve had enough,’ and for somebody to understand what you said. That’s it. You are no longer a monk. Very easy. So, you can imagine that whenever a young monk meets some kind of difficulty, one part of his mind is probably thinking, ‘Ah, I’ll just throw it all in. I’ve had enough.’ There are no lifetime vows. But that kind of doubt and irresolution can torture the minds of young monastics. So as teachers we often recommend making a private vow for five years or three years and say, ‘Just forget about the possibility of leaving and doing something else and giving up on this for a certain period of time, three years or five years. Put all your doubts to one side for a certain period of time and then decide whether you’re cut out for this life.’ It clarifies and focuses the mind. You find that by cutting off that doubt and irresolution you access some real energy. There is liberation from doubt and irresolution and confusion.

The practice of mettā is a liberation from anger and aversion. It makes the mind bright and happy. I once read in a history book of an act of kindness that impressed me a lot. It occurred after a battle during a war between Sweden and Denmark. A Swedish soldier, more or less unharmed, was walking through the battlefield. All around him wounded men were moaning in pain. He passed a Danish soldier in great pain begging for water. Out of compassion he bent down to give him some water from his flask. But as he did so, the Danish soldier realising that he was a Swede reached for his knife and tried to stab him. The Swedish soldier easily caught his arm and disarmed him. Then he said, ‘I only wished to help you and you repay me by trying to kill me. I was originally going to give you all of the water in this flask, but now I’m only going to give you half. I’m going to keep half for myself, because I’m pretty thirsty too.’ I like the fact that he didn’t walk away in disgust. Despite the ingratitude he held onto his kindness.

An essential point about mettā is that it doesn’t discriminate. Having mettā for someone you love is easy. If you feel mettā for people who have the same beliefs as you do, the same colour skin, the same political persuasion, the same group, the same country, but not for people of other ethnicities, or religions, or countries or whatever: that’s not really mettā. Mettā makes no distinctions. It is by cultivating boundless goodwill that the mind is set free in such a marvellous way.

So how do you practise mettā toward people who behave badly? If you think mettā is this kind of idealistic, ‘I love you all’ kind of attitude, then nasty, evil people are a real challenge. If you wish a nasty person to be happy and they’re happy being nasty, won’t you be complicit in their nastiness? Should there be a limit to mettā? No. But we need to be clear about what mettā means. It’s not necessarily a fuzzy feeling of warmth and love. It means wishing all beings well. Sometimes it might be the wish for others to enjoy freedom from anger and enmity and hatred and the desire for revenge. It might be the wish for people to recognise that they’re creating bad kamma and to abandon their unwholesome actions. We wish all beings to know the happiness of the freedom from defilement and the joy of goodness. If we use our reflective ability, we can see that there is always a way in which we can wish others well. Even if it’s simply at the level of abandoning the unwholesome actions that are so obnoxious.

Sometimes there is a temptation to look to the law of kamma as some kind of righteous retribution for people who do bad things. You might comfort yourself that a certain person’s evil actions may have gone unpunished in this life, but after death they will go to a hell realm and suffer terribly – and it will serve them right! If so, that’s a really black, unwholesome mental state you’ve invited into your heart. At the moment we allow our mind to dwell in, and indulge in, anger, we’re no longer on the middle path. At that moment, we’re no longer disciples of the Buddha. We’ve turned our back on the Buddha. We’ve turned our back on our teachers. We’ve turned our back on all that we hold most noble and good.

In Buddhism, we have no concept of righteous indignation. There’s absolutely no situation in which anger is considered a wise or an intelligent response, even to the most awful injustice or violence. It only ever makes things worse: an angry mind is a stupid mind. It’s only when the mind has the wish for the well-being of all that we can find creative responses to the terrible things that go on in our societies and our world. We have to free ourselves and liberate ourselves from anger and negativity, and mettā is a wonderful way of doing this.

The last of the pāramīs is upekkhā. It’s very easy to see in children that liking or disliking are, to them, absolute values. They can say, ‘No!’ and when you ask them why not, they say, ‘I don’t like it.’ And to a child, not liking something is a completely rational and sufficient reason for not having anything to do with it. I don’t think that adults are really that different, except we can disguise it a lot more. If you look very closely, I think there is this belief that having to do things we don’t like is somehow wrong, and freedom is being able to do what we like. It is the freedom to follow our desires that we value.

But that’s a very spurious kind of freedom. The freedom provided by equanimity, on the other hand, is the freedom from being compelled to act or not to act by feelings of liking and disliking. It is providing a balance and evenness of mind. Liking and disliking become a bit like the weather to a farmer. Some days it may be brutally hot and other days it may pour with rain, but if you’re a rice farmer that’s irrelevant. Whatever the weather may be, you have to go out in the fields and do your job: plough your fields or transplant your rice, or whatever. Farmers are aware whether it’s hot or cold or wet, and they don’t like being uncomfortable, it’s just the background to their life. It doesn’t determine what they do every day.

With equanimity, the liking and the disliking arise and pass away according to nature. They’re no longer absolutes in our mind. We’re free of their power to condition our mind. It’s not a matter of striking an equanimous attitude. The idea is not simply to reject feelings of like and dislike, and to cultivate indifference. We can’t achieve equanimity through willpower. But the more we see how much we limit ourselves by our likes and dislikes, the less weight we give them. The more we observe the conditioned nature of phenomena, the less we seek fulfilment in transient phenomena.

In the practice of creating the foundation for, and supporting conditions for, meditation, we cultivate these kinds of liberation:

liberation from stinginess and selfishness, from attachment to material things, through dāna;

liberation from the unskilful actions and speech which create bad kamma, and from remorse and lack of self-respect through sīla;

liberation from entrapment in the sensual world through nekkhamma;

liberation from prejudice and irrationality, from superficial and deluded attitudes, thoughts and perceptions through paññā;

liberation from fear of pain and difficulty through khanti;

liberation from complacency, stagnation and laziness through viriya;

liberation from doubt and irresolution through adhiṭṭhāna;

liberation from insincerity and hypocrisy through sacca;

liberation from anger, aversion and resentment through mettā;

liberation from addiction to feelings of liking and disliking through upekkhā.

By cultivating these ten pāramīs, we nurture the causes and conditions for the ultimate liberation. May these ten pāramīs flourish within you all.