# Disempowering Difficult Mind-states Through Contrast

Ajahn Vīradhammo

This talk was given on September 19th, 2020 via Zoom.

This morning I was talking about the idea of cultivating with awareness, awareness with breathing.

Last night I was talking about resistance. Around that theme of resistance, it’s good to always reflect that Buddhist practices of mind cultivation are always in the context of dāna and sīla. The worldly concerns we are involved with and our social responsibilities are governed by moral restraint and generous action. We do as much good and as little harm as possible in the world. That’s always the context of these teachings of the mind. If you misunderstood the teachings on non-resistance, then you think I shouldn’t resist the desire to yell at someone and hurt them. That isn’t the idea at all. With our action and speech, we are always doing the utmost to refrain from harming ourselves and others, and to try to enact feelings of generosity and compassion.

So, there is restraint and there is activity. Restraint is governed by moral restraint, sīla, and activity is governed by generosity and compassion. But within that context of our social life, our inner life sometimes throws up things which we resist, things which we don’t want. That’s the resistance I am talking about. If an impulse of harm comes up into consciousness, I don’t think in the morning, ‘I think I’ll do some harm today, that will be fun.’ We don’t think that way because we have already committed ourselves to goodness. But thoughts of harm or wanting to hurt someone or hurt myself, will come up because that’s just the conditioned nature of our childhood, of our culture, whatever it might be. And then the resistance to that means it never ceases, it’s never allowed to be in consciousness. It’s just an object and it is allowed to cease. We resist it and we keep pushing it back, and it keeps popping up again. We can have a lot of self-identity around that.

That’s what I am talking about when I refer to resistance and non-resistance. I am not saying that when we get angry, we punch someone in the face. That’s obviously not what we do. You need to always get that right. The shortest form of Buddhism is to do good, to refrain from doing harm, and to purify the heart. That third part, to purify the heart, is the ability to be aware of things which are deeply unpleasant and bear witness to them as something that changes, something that arises and ceases. If you dislike your parents or dislike your kids, on the one hand you could just argue about yourself or you could make it conscious; this is the feeling of disliking my parents. It’s not permanent. But it may be frightening or threatening, or you think it is real. There is the capacity to say, ‘Oh, it’s like that.’ That’s what I am referring to in terms of non-resistance. With non-resistance I’m referring to the Four Noble Truths which are talking about the discontents we are experiencing as human beings. And that the causes of those discontents are an attachment to various types of wanting. When we understand that wanting and we don’t attach to it, then it isn’t problematic. We don’t get hooked into the discontent. Our reference is more the peace of awareness, rather than the struggle with the various contents of what we experience.

The craving for an experience to go away, vibhava-taṇhā, is very powerful. It comes from idealism. It comes from biology: ‘I don’t want this pain in my knee’, or whatever it might be. That’s an important aspect of our conscious experience that you have to understand vibhava-taṇhā (and that is the Buddha’s recommendation), if you are going to be free. You need to understand this whole operation in consciousness. You need to see it arising, and not get sucked into it and believe in it. You need to investigate what letting go really is. You need to understand what letting go is or to understand what letting it be is. That’s important. It can’t just be dismissed as, ‘I shouldn’t be like that’ because that is not wisdom. That is idealism. If that’s true and makes sense, then meditation should somehow serve my understanding or my increased capacity to understand that aspect of suffering. If my meditation doesn’t somehow serve that, what’s the point of it? It’s like going to the movies, that was a nice experience. But meditation, samādhi, whatever you call it, should serve that very existential problem that arises for us as humans.

One of the things I like to think about in terms of meditation is contrast. That if I have social fears, have anxiety, for example, obviously I don’t want them there. When they arise, I don’t want them, I want to resist them. I don’t want to get lost in them. That resistance exacerbates them because they are never really known as an object. So, I become the subject that is always fighting these things. It’s not so much the fear that is the problem, it’s the resistance to the fear. It’s not the shyness that is the problem, it’s the not knowing of the shyness. It’s not the vulnerability that is the problem, it is the not wanting of the vulnerability. Without the resistance, the not knowing and the not wanting, I can see my own suffering.

Once I’ve seen that, how would meditation serve that in ordinary life? The idea of contrast is that you see, in this instance, resistance. What is the contrast to resistance? It is welcoming or acceptance. If your meditation is about welcoming rather than getting something, you are creating mind states which would then serve resistance. You could say, ‘Okay, I’ll meditate, being witness to the end of the out-breath with the feeling of welcoming.’ How would that feel? That’s another way of looking at the training of the heart. The tuning analogy is nice too. You tune into something like tuning into a radio station or the voices in a choir. As monks we tune into each other’s voices while chanting. If we tune into these states of mind and sustain them, then that will serve other parts of our life because I have this kind of attunement. It’s not so much an achievement. It’s intuitive, it’s not very esoteric.

In meditation, if I could say to myself, ‘What would welcoming feel like?’ If I welcomed the in-breath, what would the tone of the mind be there? I tune into that. Then I use the end of the out-breath or the breath itself. I’ll practise awareness with breathing with this quality of mind called welcoming. If I do that with the in- and out-breath, then my experience of life has a certain tone to it. That tone will help me as I resist things, as I try to repress things, or as I try to get rid of things. It will help because it has created a contrast. That kind of meditation is not absorbing into anything. It’s about ordinary life and it’s tremendously helpful. Meditation must serve us all the time. It can’t be just a separate activity divorced from the reality of our experience.

I was explaining a way to use the breath and how you can cultivate wholesome states of mind with an out-breath. You can tune into that wholesome state of mind. One of the wholesome states of mind I recommend is stillness, to just listen and know. Just know. Then it’s not so much about the sound. The sound brings you to the stillness because the stillness is what we really are concerned about. We are not concerned with the objects of our experience but that which underlies our experience. That kind of underlying peace of consciousness which we can miss when we are always distracted by our resistance and our infatuation. Then we are doing exercises that are about the quality of attention rather than the quality of our objective experience. That is a change, isn’t it? Desire is about the quality of our objective experience. You like salt on your scrambled eggs. You like your garden to be nice and neat, so you make a neat garden. You like your apartment to be decorated in a way which is pleasing. Those are all the ways we use beauty and what we like in the external world. That can be helpful in your environments, but that will not liberate you.

Contemplative meditation is not so much about whether my mind is experiencing beauty or ugliness. It is about the underlying knowing, knowing from silence. Knowing that it’s okay to feel greed, hatred, and delusion if you don’t believe in them. That is really liberating because it does two things. It gives you the right reference. Then the manifestations of greed, hatred and delusion go through consciousness, but because they are not identified anymore as me, they get disempowered. This is the idea of purification.

What empowers worry? It’s thought, isn’t it? That’s what empowers worry. You think worrying thoughts. What empowers rage against someone? You think rageful thoughts. What empowers self-disparagement? You think self-disparaging thoughts. How do we disempower these energies? Not by getting rid of them, but by knowing them as phenomena in nature that arise and cease. Hence the Buddha’s emphasis on the perception of change, anicca-saññā.

We miss that perception when we are addicted to the attachments of craving. That is one type of addiction, that idealized getting rid of ‘I shouldn’t be this way’. The stance of awareness is ‘It is this way. It’s like this, it feels like this.’ And then if it’s morally inappropriate to go in that direction, you don’t go there. You don’t harm people with speech, no matter how angry you might be. Or you don’t do corrupt things because it’s wrong to do that. But it’s not wrong to feel that. It’s not wrong to want to take a bit of money from the till. Just don’t do it. It’s not wrong to want to yell at someone who you are frustrated with, but don’t do it. And that’s hard to do. But you can see how if you don’t do it, you still have the burning. Bearing with the burning is why we talk about patience, about wisdom and all those different qualities.

Ajahn Chah once said to someone in the monastery, ‘When you’ve cried three times, you’ll have some insight.’ To have insight, you’ve just got to meditate, meditate, meditate and your head blows open. There it is. But he was suggesting it is the struggle which often brings insight. Or he would say to me, ‘Wait for five years, you might have some insight.’ He was saying that because my mind wasn’t changing, I would have to just develop the basics. Be patient, just know the way things are. Hopefully the meditation serves that for us. It certainly does for me.

In my own meditation, I put in the suggestions of affection a lot, or of welcoming, of kindness. Then I try to flow the whole breath with those affections, with those attitudes, with those types of mindsets. Obviously if you do that, then that’s what the mind becomes to some extent, but not always.

It’s beneficial for each of us to look at what kind of mind states we become preoccupied with? Is it always making lists or planning or fantasizing or resenting? What is the basic tone of mind that constantly preoccupies my attention? Because if my attention is preoccupied with the subjective world of emotions and experiences, that preoccupation precludes my realization of the unconditioned. Because I am looking in the wrong place. I’m preoccupied. The problem is the preoccupation. It’s not that we are bad. We are very good people. It’s not a moral problem. It’s just this preoccupation all the time. Much of this preoccupation is not really that emotional. It is in the habits of thought. That’s generally where we are at. Most of us have worked through our basic neuroses, in some way. We are functioning as fairly normal human beings. We know how to do most ordinary things. Usually, it’s just this endless preoccupation with thinking. And the thinking always has a self-sense in it, doesn’t it? Me and what I’m going to do? Me and what I should do?

What would be the ways of creating contrast to thought, whatever the thought is? What would be the ways of creating contrast to the self-thinking mind? Functional thinking is fine, it is necessary and good. But the kind of thinking we are talking about is this me and my thinking. What should I do? I shouldn’t have done that and all the associated resentments. That’s preoccupation and that’s not functional. What kinds of meditation would help in contrasting that? Well, obviously the body. Just being aware of your heart chakra or being aware of your breathing at the hara or being aware of the end of the out-breath. Bypassing the whole self-thinking mind and just going to the body. If you did that a lot, then that’s a contrast to thought. Simple, isn’t it?

So, with the breath meditation, you are with the body for one out-breath. You are following the whole out-breath, you are with the whole in-breath. Then body awareness becomes very constant. When thoughts come up, you’ve got some place to return to. You can bypass all that proliferation in the mind and say, ‘Yeah, yeah, I hear you, but where’s the body now? Where is the heart chakra now?’ You need to do this a lot because the preoccupation with self-thinking is so powerful. It’s not trivial. It’s a very powerful force in our makeup, a powerful force in our kamma.

In these ways you make a determination in your life to create a contrast. You say, ‘Okay, more and more I’ll refer to the body.’ My own practice is being aware of my body. I put a lot of emphasis on the heart chakra. Simple enough, there’s no complexity there. It always seems to be there, either contracted or open. But then that becomes a ‘go to’ place, and that’s not about thought. I am not thinking about it. What’s it like here? What’s it like here? Constantly, constantly. Then the place attention habitually inhabits is no longer thought, but it’s the body. Because that’s what it’s been doing. That is its momentum, that is its nature. By doing that and being aware of the heart chakra when the mind produces self-thinking through worry or annoyance, you are not addicted to that. You’ve got the body telling you there’s a lot of thinking going on now. There’s a whole lot of proliferation going on now. What’s that about? Then rather than try to resolve it through thought, which is endless and analyzing, you don’t try to figure it out. You say, ‘Oh, thought is this way and the body is this way.’ So, you begin to abandon the strategies of self-thinking. You let go of that.

In terms of contrasts, the things that I find very helpful are all the aspects of the divine abidings, the brahmavihāras, all the aspects of the open heart. Anything that is like gratitude, devotion, compassion, appreciation of beauty, peace; all those are contrasts to their opposites. And then the opposites for me tend to be the negativities of worry, worry about the monastery. They are not so great now. But they used to be very powerful, based upon fear. If the uprising of old kamma is very emotional, then you’ve got this brilliant way of processing it through the body. And if it is not very emotional, if it’s just habitual, then it’s coming up through thoughts. It is the same thing. It works in the same way. These ideas are not very complicated, but maybe they are worthwhile considering.