# The Need for Balance

Ajahn Pasanno

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on September 13th, 2019.

This afternoon, one of the laymen who attended the meal offering, offered to give me a massage. He’s a really good masseur. While sitting meditating, I noticed how good I felt. The body was relaxed, comfortable and at ease. I was thinking, the body feeling at ease is one thing, but our Dhamma practice is for making the mind feel at ease. It is for having the mind, having the heart releasing, relaxing and settling. That is the purpose of the practice. In the same way that having a good massage relaxes all the areas of the body, similarly, training the mind can bring a real sense of ease. The training works with a whole range of different aspects and qualities for the heart to really settle. That’s why many of the teachings of the Buddha are not just to do one thing – just be mindful or just be wise or just be patient. There are all these different qualities that we need to be attending to and bringing into balance.

A common set of teachings the Buddha gives are the five spiritual faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom: saddhā, viriya, sati, samādhi, paññā. These are things to be working on and cultivating. One can be looking at them as qualities to be working on in a linear way. First you lay a foundation for a sense of faith, confidence, trust and when one does that there is some energy, so effort arises. As we put forth that energy and effort, mindfulness arises, and attention needs to be cared for. As these qualities start to gain momentum in the mind, then the heart will settle. The heart will become more composed, it will become more still. With that as a foundation, then wisdom, discernment and understanding arise. That’s looking at it from a linear perspective. There is a certain validity to it, but I don’t think that’s the whole picture because there are also the qualities of balancing that need to be attended to. A sense of faith and wisdom informing each other, the first quality and the last quality. We have to learn how to have those qualities inform each other, to have those qualities nourish and support each other. Because faith needs to be informed by wisdom and discernment, otherwise it is just blindly believing something. Or there is excitement and enthusiasm with faith, but it is not being tempered by reflection, investigation and discernment. Similarly, the wisdom faculty needs to be tempered with faith and confidence and trust, because you can’t just be analyzing and logically pounding out a system of practice through the intellect. It just doesn’t work. It is not satisfying. As intelligent as one can be, if one is just relying on the intellect and rationality, then it doesn’t go very deep. It is pretty superficial.

The aspects of energy and effort need to be balanced to bring a certain stillness and composure, because energy can be agitating, or even on a certain level it can be addictive. ‘I’ve got to do more, I’ve got to push myself, I’ve got to really keep pushing, I’ve got to put more energy in. The more I do, the more I will achieve.’ Well, not really. That isn’t necessarily true, because sometimes the more effort we put in, the more frantic and agitated the mind becomes. So, it needs to have the qualities of settling and stilling. It needs that composure element, it needs samādhi. That firm establishment of the mind, as a balance and as a support. They need to feed each other. And if we are constantly just trying to still the mind, trying to compose and settle the mind, without applying some effort and energy with it, then it often tends towards dullness. It tends towards a kind of turgid quality in the mind, which can be like sludge. ‘I’ll keep focusing the mind and one pointing the mind and making the mind more and more still,’ and then it just sinks into this puddle of quicksand. It isn’t bright. There needs to be some energy in the system, but it needs to be balanced.

You need to be attuning to these different qualities. That’s what mindfulness is for. Mindfulness, awareness, attention that’s checking in on, what am I experiencing? Is it useful? Is it beneficial? Is it in line with the Dhamma? Mindfulness isn’t just some global awareness; it isn’t a non-discriminating attention. Mindfulness has got work to do and it needs to be alert. It needs to be attentive. With these different qualities of faith, confidence, wisdom, discernment, effort, energy, stillness, composure, and mindfulness working together, then there can be a felt sense of release from dukkha. When they are functioning together, there’s a release from that sense of stress, discontent, dissatisfaction and dis-ease. In the way I was reflecting on my experience of the massage – after having a massage, the body was feeling really light. There was a felt sense of ease. Similarly, in the mind, in the heart, there is this sense of ease and freedom from dukkha.

The Buddha says over and over again, ‘I teach only two things: suffering and the cessation of suffering.’ Suffering has the whole spectrum of dis-ease, of discontent, along with the ending of it. One needs to take an interest. It is not so much, how do I get that but what do I do in order to support the experience of ease and well-being? To support the freedom from suffering? The spiritual faculties are good parameters and reminders, but that is just one set of teachings that the Buddha gave. It’s a good start. It is a good boundary, but there’s many different ways to nurture and support that sense of well-being and growth in the Dhamma. That is something that we need to be considering, not just what do I do in meditation to feel better? It’s also what do I do in my daily life so that I feel a sense of ease and well-being? How do I integrate this into my life? Whether it’s in a monastery or whether it’s in society with a job and a family, what qualities are helpful?

Of course, there’s an endless number of things to point to, but I think there’s some recurrent themes that consistently come up when teachers advise people who are interested in the Dhamma. Certainly, the precepts lay a really firm foundation for how we guide our daily life. Viewing the precepts, not just as restrictive guidelines which force me to give up certain behaviors, but looking at what really makes me feel good. And what makes others feel good? So having a commitment to non-harming, not taking the life of any living creature, not threatening some other life form.

When we steep ourselves in that, we feel good. It is the same with not taking what isn’t given. Steeping ourselves in the commitment to honesty, the commitment to respecting the belongings of others. Especially when we think of trust. I use trust often with the word faith. Faith, confidence and trust. Those words have similar qualities. For ourselves, how do we trust ourselves? How do we have faith in ourselves? Well, it’s that commitment to honesty, it’s a commitment to respect. Again, that gives a certain strength within the heart that is very supportive in our practice. To be reflecting on the precepts in this way: there is the precept around sexual relationships, ‘I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct’. But it is also how we relate to each other in a respectful way so that there is trust in our relationships with each other. It lays a foundation for us to experience a sense of trust and self-confidence.

That’s something the Buddha points to as a benefit of having kept the precepts and forming a basis of integrity with our actions of body and speech. There is confidence when we go into different assemblies of people, when we interact with people. Whether it is a small or large number, whether it’s people with authority or not, there is a sense of confidence that is underlying our relationships and interactions with other people. Again, there is a sense of ease when we engage with others. I think of Ajahn Chah as one of the foremost examples of that. He was at ease whether he was with farmers, merchants, military, or foreigners. There’s just this ease and straightforwardness that comes from the precepts, that comes from that foundation. It is something that the Buddha points to as a benefit that arises.

And certainly, that is the case with the fourth precept around speech. When we are committed to truth, when we are committed to non-harming, it’s not that there needs to be some super wise application as to how we relate. We are committed to right speech, to not gossiping, not telling tales, and not wasting our energy in frivolous speech. In the scriptural language, the word that is translated as frivolous speech is very illustrative of what the Buddha is pointing to. It is samphappalāpa, it is onomatopoeic. You can just hear someone blathering along about nothing. So much of speech is not necessary, is not useful. Rather than distracting ourselves and distracting others with frivolous speech, we have a settled quality inside. Again, there is an ease that comes from that.

There is a commitment to the precepts not because we are afraid of some punishment or that there is some sort of punitive aspect to transgressing the precepts, but because it feels much better to be within the bounds of the precepts. It is for our cessation of suffering; it is for experiencing that sense of ease and well-being.

The last precept of refraining from intoxicants of various kinds is for keeping the mind as clear as possible. We already have the intoxicating habits of greed, hatred and delusion, and all of their ramifications. So, we refrain from the various kinds of substances that can intoxicate the mind and create more dullness and confusion. It is a commitment to clarity. And as we continue with that, we understand that the Buddha’s teachings help us to refine that commitment to clarity, to truth, to well-being.

There are other aspects, other qualities of heart and qualities of being that are helpful in our spiritual quest. The quality of respect. The first person to be respectful towards is yourself. What is it that would really prevent me from doing something unskilful or harmful? I really don’t want to create suffering. I do not want to do something which is hurtful or harmful. It’s not what I would want to experience. Not wanting to bring that into one’s heart, not wanting to bring that into one’s being. It’s because one respects oneself that one is committed to not nurturing anger and ill-will. Not nurturing the kind of greed that ends up being selfish and self-centered. That isn’t respecting myself. I deserve better than that. Considering that simple reflection, that simple respect.

What are the things that are worthy of respect? What can I give my respect to? One respects oneself, but then what else is worthy of respect? Certainly, for a Buddhist, there are the refuges of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. They are worthy of respect because they embody or exemplify those qualities that we aspire to. The Buddha is the prime example of an awakened being, an enlightened being. An example of one who has completely freed the heart. That is really worthy of respect. The Dhamma, the teachings, lay out a path of practice and training that give us the possibility of understanding and liberating ourselves. That is worthy of respect. The Sangha are those who practise well. When we do the chanting, we chant the qualities of the Sangha: one who practises well, one who practises directly, one who practises insightfully, one who practises with integrity. Those are the qualities of the Sangha and are worthy of respect. It is not just having robes and taking a formal ordination, because when we ordain our defilements ordain with us. It’s about practice. It’s about training. And that includes whoever takes on the practice fully and experiences the fruits of practice.

The traditional chant that we do goes back to the time of the Buddha. The Buddha spoke of the qualities of the Sangha. He spoke of the Sangha as a refuge, of the Sangha as an object of veneration. These are the qualities of the Sangha: ‘Supaṭipanno bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho’ and it goes all the way through. These are the Blessed One’s disciples. The four pairs, the eight kinds of noble beings: those who experience the path and the fruit of the practice. The four pairs are the path and fruit. They are the path of practice and the fruit of the practice: stream enterer, once returner, non-returner and arahant. This is the Sangha of the Buddha’s noble disciples, whether an ordained person or a layperson. Just knowing that there are these fruits of practice, and that they are worthy of respect. Respect is a quality that nurtures and supports our practice.

Ajahn Chah would repeatedly emphasize another quality that is very essential for our practice – patience. Just willing to be patient. We want to experience the fruits of practice immediately. We want to gain knowledge and understanding immediately. We want to get it quickly. That’s understandable but again it’s a process that we have to trust, we have to get a feeling for. We need to develop confidence in this process of training. This is where Ajahn Chah uses that simile of being patient and diligent with putting in the causes and conditions. It’s like planting a tree. You must dig a hole for a tree to be planted. You get the right mixture of earth and dirt. You have fertilizer that you put in. You water it regularly and depending on the kind of tree it is, it’s going to give fruit in a different way. It doesn’t take very long for chilli peppers or tomatoes. Within just a few months there are already tomatoes available. Whereas, when you plant an apple tree or a coconut tree, it takes ages before the coconuts actually show up. You have to be patient with the process.

It’s the same with ourselves. We don’t really know what kind of person we are. Some people experience the fruits of the practice slowly. Some people experience those fruits quickly. But the process of cultivation, the process of developing and balancing all these different faculties, it is very, very similar and the fruits of the practice do come. It’s the nature of this Dhamma. The Buddha was extremely confident in the efficacy of this path to the point where you don’t have to believe in him. Here are the tools, here is the path, here is the practice. Do it and the fruits will appear. The Buddha was immensely confident and assured in his teaching. This is the way it works. This is the human condition. There is this suffering. There is this possibility of freedom from this suffering. This is the way to do it. The Buddha is not going to do it for us. It doesn’t matter to him whether anybody else does it. He is already freed from suffering. It is the same with the other great teachers. They know for themselves what the path of practice is. They’ve experienced the fruits of it. They encourage, they teach, and they set examples. If people don’t follow the path, if people don’t practise, it’s not a source of suffering for them. It is an opportunity that the person themselves is missing out on.

So, that sense of being patient with the practice. Being patient with the conditions of our life. Often patience is seen as just putting up with something unpleasant until it is over. But patience is about being willing to be present with, whatever conditions we are experiencing. Being patient with happiness or ease. When we start to feel a sense of ease and happiness, it can be easy to start to drift, ‘Oh, I am getting somewhere now.’ But you need to be patient even with that feeling of happiness and peace. Because it’s important to let that settle and let it unfold into a deeper understanding, a deeper drawing close to truth, a drawing close to a freedom of heart. It’s so easy sometimes to start to feel peaceful or happy and say, ‘Oh, now I have got somewhere, now I’ll go do something else.’ That is not being patient with it. Have the patience to let it really unfold.

So, developing qualities of respect and patience. Developing a commitment to integrity and commitment to the process of the path. Recognizing that there are many different factors that need to come together: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. These need to work together, they need to be balanced. Learning how to implement and live this path in our daily life. To live this path in the circumstances that we are in, whether it’s on the cushion or on our walking meditation path, or when we attend to our responsibilities and duties. These are the qualities that give us an opportunity to experience a freedom from suffering – to experience the peace and well-being that the Dhamma can give us.