# In This Body

Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on January 27th, 2021.

The contemplation of the 32 parts of the body is a favourite of mine. It’s something that I have spent a fair amount of time practising with and nurturing as a contemplative practice.

A little background of how I came to practise with it. I started meditation practice on my own as a solo endeavour, self-taught, quite young (in my late teens), just dabbling a bit, off and on. I got more seriously involved in meditation practice as I got into my twenties and my thirties. But essentially it was all self-taught from books, and without a particular foundation in Buddhism. I didn’t know much about the teachings of the Buddha until the age of 30 or so. I just knew inside myself there was something I needed to do to help settle the mind: meditation felt like something to pursue, but I didn’t really know what Buddhism was all about.

I stumbled my way along, knowing it had something to do with sitting quietly and watching my mind. Then I came across some of the teachings of meditation in the West: mostly meditation on breathing as a way of calming the mind, and just following the instructions that I was able to find. Most of these teachings came from Westerners who practised in Southeast Asia, particularly the Burmese style, which was often how it was introduced into the United States and Western Europe.

The meditation technique I learned was watching the breath with a very narrow focus somewhere in the body: the belly, the nose or the chest, and developing an exclusive focus on a very small point to help settle the mind and not get distracted. That’s what meditation was in my mind and that’s what I doggedly pursued for many years on my own. I got some enjoyment out of it, or at least a sense that this is something I should be doing and kept pursuing it even though I found it quite challenging. I didn’t really know what else to do.

But then I started to get connected with the monastic tradition in my early thirties and was introduced to the Wat Pah Pong tradition mostly through the West: Amaravati Monastery in England. Ajahn Amaro was just starting to make some regular visits to the West Coast on invitation of the Sanghapala Foundation, and I got to know the tradition in that way through gradual exposure. A whole new world started to open up. I started to really understand and explore the teachings of the Buddha as they were brought to us in the monastic tradition. This included a much wider range of teachings than just a meditation technique: the Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path. I was very pleased with the fullness of the practice and all of a sudden it started to make some sense. I kept plugging away with the meditation technique that I had learned on my own, but I didn’t really develop a lot of competence with it. But it didn’t seem to matter all that much to me because of the wider perspective that I was starting to understand.

I finally made the decision to pursue monastic training around the age of 40 and ordained at Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery. Over the first six months we were here, we were so busy getting the monastery set up, and I had many duties as an anagārika. I was very occupied in that way, learning the precepts and the other fundamentals of monastic training, but still doing the same meditation technique.

After about six or seven months and with the arrival of Luang Por Pasanno, we went into a period of winter retreat for two months. We started in February and for the first time I sat down with Luang Por. He was doing interviews with a handful of us as he has done almost every year during our winter retreats. The first time I sat with him, he asked me about my meditation practice, and I had to be very honest with him. I told him that for years I had been doing this mindfulness of breathing, with a very small, narrow focused point, with attention on the tip of the nose. It felt pretty hopeless actually. I didn’t feel like my mind got very settled at all, and I talked about that to some extent with him. He was listening and finally just said, ‘You should stop doing mindfulness of breathing. You’ve developed such a habit of negativity around it because it’s not been working, and you need to take a break from it and do something else.’

I was a bit confounded: ‘Well, what else is there?’ He replied, ‘Pick up the contemplation of the 32 parts of the body.’ I was familiar with that contemplation from our chanting, but I didn’t know much about it. It sounded kind of interesting and certainly seemed better than doggedly pursuing, out of some sort of loyalty, this technique that didn’t seem to be working. I asked, ‘How long do you think I should do that for?’ and he replied, ‘A year.’ I was surprised: ‘A year! And no mindfulness of breathing?’ Luang Por replied, ‘No ānāpānasati, just do the 32 parts.’ I received some instruction from him on how to pursue that and made that my meditation practice for the next year. I memorized the chant that we do, in Pali and English, spending lots of time reciting it and developing it over a year’s time.

At the end of a year, having received a lot of benefit from it, I talked with Luang Por Pasanno again. ‘Okay it’s been a year, should I start practicing again?’ He said, ‘No, too soon.’ ‘Okay so what should I do?’ He recommended, ‘Switch focus to some mettā-bhāvanā, working with loving kindness contemplations.’ ‘That sounds interesting. So how long should I do that for?’ Once more he replied, ‘A year.’ I asked, ‘A year, and no ānāpānasati?’ His reply, ‘No, no ānāpānasati.’ So that was my next year, which was my year as a novice. After that year, I met with Luang Por again and was given permission to resume ānāpānasati. But this time it was with a firm practice of the 32 parts contemplation and mettā-bhāvanā, to act as very strong foundations for further explorations with ānāpānasati.

Right from the very beginning, then, the 32 parts was part of my regular contemplation and I found it so useful. I think I also had a natural proclivity for it, having been trained as a nurse; I always enjoyed anatomy and physiology, so there was that familiarity with it as well. I found it grounding and so useful in many ways. Those three methodologies, the 32 parts contemplation, mettā-bhāvanā and ānāpānasati, are still primarily how I spend my time during walking and sitting meditation. Of course, there are many other contemplations that I now fold into my practice: death contemplation, the 3 characteristics of anicca, dukkha and anattā (impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, not-self), the peace of nibbana, and others as well. But those three are a very strong part of my practice and I have never lost interest in the 32 parts contemplation.

Where does it fit in terms of the teachings of the Buddha? The 32 parts contemplation is part of the reflections on the body found in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, the Four Establishings of Mindfulness or Four Frames of Reference. The first section is mindfulness of the body. The second, third and fourth sections are contemplations of feelings, mind and dhammas (teachings on the hindrances, five aggregates, six sense bases, Four Noble Truths, etc.). The 32 parts contemplation is one of the contemplations focused on the body. Ānāpānasati is also one of them. But it’s only one of them, and development of all of the bodily contemplations is very strongly emphasized in our tradition.

It might be useful here to clarify some of the terms that we use in meditation practice. The words mindfulness and concentration (sati and samādhi) are used in various different ways. A lot of the ways that the teachings have come to us have come out of the commentarial tradition. There were some perceived gaps in the suttas that the commentaries attempted to flesh out a bit more. Additionally, different teachers and traditions also add their particular slant to these terms as time goes on.

As a result, a common teaching has evolved that mindfulness and concentration are two separate practices. In one interpretation, mindfulness is what you do when you put your full attention in the present moment on just whatever is arising in the mind. You are just staying present for whatever is happening right here, right now, and that’s what mindfulness is all about. Concentration is considered to be a separate activity where you establish a narrow focus in an exclusionary way and try to develop a sense of peace and calm based on that focused, narrow beam of attention. In this approach, these are two separate practices that are both needed but, in a sense, one develops them separately.

Additionally, they have become conflated with the terms samatha and vipassanā. Samatha is often conflated with the term ‘concentration’ (one translation of the word samādhi) and vipassanā is often associated with the mindfulness practice described previously. In this scenario, you are watching whatever is arising through the lens of anicca, dukkha, anattā (impermanence, unsatisfactoriness, not-self). That’s called ‘vipassanā meditation’ which is done separately from “samatha practice.”

A more sutta-based approach, which is being taught, talked about and brought more into our awareness these days is one that recognizes that Satipaṭṭhāna, the Four Establishings of Mindfulness, are all contemplations that we do as a basis for developing samādhi. The four Satipaṭṭhāna contemplations are ways of collecting the mind around a theme, a frame of reference, that serves many purposes. It serves the purpose of developing both samatha and vipassanā. And the result, if done with diligence and clarity, is a gathering of the mind, a collecting of the mind into composure, a firm establishing of mind that we call samādhi. These contemplations are related very strongly in that way, dependent on each other and supportive of each other. So, in that way, the 32 parts are another subject that we can focus our attention on and develop both samatha and vipassanā as a support for developing a very strong state of composure, of collectedness of the mind, of samādhi, with a very broad, open, all-around kind of awareness.

Any of the contemplations of the body, whether ānāpānasati, the 32 parts, the four elements, the four postures, the activities of the body through clear awareness, or even the cemetery contemplations: all of these are ways that one can develop samatha and vipassanā towards that purpose of a very powerful composure of mind. This strong composure allows us to delve deeply into the nature of our experience. The 32 parts contemplation, sometimes called asubha or contemplation of the unattractiveness of the body, is often seen as kind of a sideline that particularly monastics do to reduce sensual craving, sexual desire. And as such, it is just an adjunct meditation that is not suitable for the lay community who aren’t pursuing a celibate lifestyle. But over the years, I have found from many of our lay practitioners a great appreciation for this. Many years ago, talking about it with a small group of people, one of the long-time lay practitioners came up later and asked me, ‘Why have you been keeping this a secret? This is wonderful. This is the kind of stuff that we want to hear.’ So, I was encouraged by that comment not to just give it a short shrift, not to think it would not be of use to anybody but the monastics.

It has a broad appeal in a number of different ways and can be used for a number of different purposes. It is very useful for the reduction of sensual craving. As such, it’s important not only for monastics, but for anybody who is caught up in strong sense desire, particularly sexual attraction, and finds him/herself thinking, ‘I’m not sure I want to do this, to be controlled by this.’ Whether you are living a celibate life or trying to be more responsible in your relationships with other people, the 32 parts can be very useful to help to cool things down to a more peaceful level.

When you really look at it, is that kind of intense craving peaceful? Is that what we want? We can find certain pleasure or excitement in it, but in the end, can you say, ‘This is really peaceful’? I can’t say that. I found, over the years contemplating it, that it is actually very agitating. It’s not to say that there isn’t enjoyment. I’m not trying to be a downer for people who are still active in that realm. And it’s not a moral issue at all unless you are breaking any of the five precepts. It’s more just an issue of looking for a bit more peacefulness, settled-ness, coolness and clarity. In that sense, it is suitable for anybody who is looking for that settled quality of mind.

It is also good to contemplate the reason you might pick this practice up along the lines of the Buddha’s teachings on the gratification, the danger and the escape in regard to sensual experience. We all know there is a certain amount of gratification in sensual experience, not just sexuality but in all experiences of the five physical sense bases. It’s not to deny that there is a certain pleasure that comes from that. But it’s when craving takes over and is controlling our lives that it becomes an issue. It can become an obsession if taken to its extremes. Also, at its best, it’s a temporary form of enjoyment because it is dependent on certain causes and conditions. It has its own lifespan which is usually pretty brief, and there is no long-lasting sense of fulfilment and happiness. That’s what the danger is: it doesn’t last, and it requires constant support to keep it going. With that in mind, one can say, ‘Well maybe there is a better way, a cooler way to live by helping to settle the mind.’

So, pick up the contemplation of this very body and see what it is really all about. When sense desire is in charge, it will have us selectively see those aspects of our physical experience that support that craving. For example, if we are attracted to somebody, sense desire will cause us to see what it is that we want to see in a way that supports the desire mind. That’s what desire does. It takes control over our attention and notices what helps to support it, to keep it going. So, we see what is conducive to attraction and ignore the rest. We must consciously allow ourselves to ignore that which is not so attractive. We learn to adjust our attention in a very soft-focused way so that we see things through the blur of our sensual desire rather than through clarity. The 32 parts contemplation helps us to wake up a bit and see things as they are: the body in and of itself through the lens of clarity rather than confusion or the soft haze of rose-colored glasses.

We start to attend to everything that is part of experience, not just to the parts that will kindle and keep alive the sensual desire. However, it’s not meant to induce aversion. Some people think that it causes a state of disgust or aversion. If you look at the word ‘disgust’ etymologically, the part called ‘gust’ comes from ‘gustatory’, taste. So ‘losing the taste’ is not quite as strong as we usually use that word. We are looking just to help neutralize the strong craving, not develop aversion. If we develop aversion to the body in that way, then we are using it incorrectly. What we’re attempting to develop is a sense of clarity and coolness: ‘Is this really what I think it is?’

Investigate the 32 parts of the body: hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin, and then into the internal structures and fluids. Develop a sense of coolness and clarity that ramps down craving and the delusional way we look at things through our rose-colored glasses. Having practised with that for so long, I find there is a peacefulness that comes from that cooling of the way one sees the world, which is quite wonderful, quite settling to the mind.

Additionally, I find it innately settling and calming to the mind when I keep a broad focus of attention throughout the whole body. This is done by attending to tactile experience. This contemplation is done as recitation of the body parts, developing the visual images, and also developing a tactile sensation of those parts of the body to whatever extent we can. Doing that really helps to develop sabba-kāya paṭisaṃvedī (experiencing the entire body), which is the third step in the Anāpānasati Sutta. It’s the actual experience of the body, the bodily energy as a whole: full body contemplation.

I have found this reflection particularly useful on the walking path as well: developing that sense of the fullness of the body as it’s walking back and forth and that sense of bodily presence, as a whole. The 32 parts is a great way to introduce that full body experience into the meditation session. Whether it’s sitting or walking, or any other posture, it can develop into a very strong samatha practice in addition to the neutralizing effect on sensual craving.

So, the reduction of craving, the calming of the body, the development of the whole-body awareness then leads to a natural settling into ānāpānasati, the breathing of the body. The mind just settles into a very peaceful state of tranquility. Often settling with in- and out-breathing as a natural result, rather than something one has to pin down and focus one’s attention on through effort. It comes as a natural result through developing that full sense of the body.

As the mind settles, as craving decreases and clear awareness increases, then full development of the Satipaṭṭhāna starts to manifest. In the section often referred to as ‘the refrain’, the instructions are to contemplate the body internally and externally and with reference to its arising and passing, investigating impermanence and noticing this human body and its changing nature. One develops insight (vipassanā) into the body, its many parts, how the appearance changes over the years and the instability of the health of the body.

The ‘refrain’ continues with instructions to contemplate the body just in and of itself. There is a phrase (Bhikkhu Bodhi’s translation), ‘… mindfulness that “there is a body” is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.’ Just that one phrase, ‘there is a body’ sounds very simple, but it’s quite profound and points to contemplation of anattā (not-self) in relation to the body. We can experience this body just as it is, regardless of any opinion or thoughts or ways that we might view it. It is just this body, in and of itself, without adding any judgments or values to it. It just does what it does. It has its own life; it responds a little bit to some of the things we choose to attend to by way of keeping it healthy or well fed or maintained. But essentially, we don’t really have much control over it. It has its own nature and will go its own way.

So, in this way, the 32 parts contemplation is very complete, just as all of the Satipaṭṭhāna contemplations can be. You can develop any of them to the full extent, resulting in both samatha and vipassanā. This full development of calm and insight leads to a steady composure of the mind, collected around a particular theme: this is samādhi. This samādhi, when it becomes unwavering, acts as a basis for even deeper insight and, finally, for the relinquishment of all clinging to this body. So, the 32 parts isn’t just an adjunctive type of contemplation. It can be developed fully and can be a basis for strong realization.

That is a bit of cheerleading for 32 parts contemplation. Over the years, it has remained a very important part of my practice. That, in conjunction with mettā-bhāvanā, ānāpānasati, and many of the other reflections, truly have been a blessing in my life. I have much gratitude for Luang Por’s initial instruction to take that up in my very first year as an anagārika at Abhayagiri.