# Mindfulness and the Five Spiritual Faculties

Ajahn Sumedho

This recording was made for this project by Luang Por Sumedho, kindly supported by Ajahn Asoko at Amaravati Monastery in July, 2021.

Question. In the teaching on the five spiritual faculties the first factor is usually translated as faith, but you relate to it more as trust or confidence, don’t you?

Ajahn Sumedho. The five spiritual faculties are faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom: saddhā, viriya, sati, samādhi and pañña.

Saddhā is generally translated as faith, but often faith in English means blind belief. And that is not what saddhā is in Buddha Dhamma. Faith is interest or confidence. I see my Buddhist interest started with saddhā, it started with an interest in the Buddhist teachings. I didn’t know much about it, but I had an interest. That was the beginning of faith. Then through the investigation of those things and with meditation, wisdom could manifest. It wasn’t about a kind of blind belief in the Buddha’s teachings. The whole essence of Pali Buddhism is the investigation of these teachings. It is not demanding that you believe, but there is this original interest and confidence. This is interesting enough to want to pursue meditation and the practice. And then you see the emphasis in the five spiritual faculties. Mindfulness is the axis or the centre point. Mindfulness creates the balance between the study of the Buddhist teachings which create interest, and the actual meditation practice where wisdom can manifest.

Also in the five spiritual faculties, we have effort, viriya, and concentration, samādhi. If there is too much effort, you can’t concentrate. If you have too much concentration, you get dull. You have to balance effort and concentration, through mindfulness. The imbalances or the dullness come from just concentrating. The futile efforts that you put forth to concentrate can give you a headache. So, sati is an important word, because in the seven factors of enlightenment, sati is the first one. If there is no consciousness, there is no world. The world as we know it just on the physical level, what we see arises in consciousness. Often in modern parlance mindfulness is mindfulness of only objects. You can be mindful of what you’re reading, you can concentrate on what you’re reading. If you put forth too much effort, you can’t concentrate very well. And if you just read without effort, you fall asleep. With conscious awareness, or mindfulness, you have insight. You have the wisdom to know the balance between effort and concentration, between faith and wisdom.

Question. It sounds like mindfulness in the five faculties has an evaluating function, to see how the other factors are operating and the results they have, is that right?

Ajahn Sumedho. Yes, it is not focusing on an object anymore but on the present moment. You are aware when you are dull, or when you are putting too much effort into something. It’s through that kind of reflective awareness that you begin to have the insight into balance, to have insight into equanimity. This is like bringing mindfulness not just to the objects of crossing the street or reading a book or concentrating on your iPad, but meditation is really bringing that kind of mindfulness to the present moment. Bringing mindfulness to the postures of the body; bringing mindfulness to the inhaling and exhaling of one’s breath; and bringing mindfulness to the state of mind. You are aware.

When people try to meditate, they are stirred up by life. They have busy lives. They have to deal with family issues and office problems and all kinds of personal habit problems that arise. We are aware of objects, so we try to distract ourselves when we are upset, when we are depressed, or when things are going wrong. When we are bored, we go to eat or drink something, or talk to a friend on the phone, or surf the internet. We are constantly distracting our attention from the way it is.

Say you are in a depressed state, you’re feeling sad, lonely, or unloved. Then you try to read an inspiring quote from a sage, or you may indulge in food, cigarettes, and booze. All these are ways of distracting yourself from suffering. But the first noble truth is about understanding suffering. Mindfulness in this sense is being aware that suffering ‘is like this’. You are not trying to distract yourself from it or to get rid of it, but you are trying to understand it. This is what bhāvanā or meditation really amounts to.

There are a lot of concentration techniques like the samatha (tranquility) techniques to calm the mind. To calm the rabid, angry, conscious, thinking mind, to calm emotional excitement or problems, by concentrating on an object for a long time through samatha practices. But that’s not understanding suffering. It can be skilful. It’s like doing yoga or physical exercises or a mental exercise, but it doesn’t release you from the reality of the first noble truth. It is just a temporary suspension through concentrating on something else. But with mindfulness, you are aware. The Buddha said, ‘There is suffering, it should be understood.’ So, we observe the suffering. It’s like this. Being bored, being restless, being worried, being guilty, is like this. You’re not judging it. You’re not trying to get rid of it, but you are understanding that to be angry or guilt ridden is like this. In this way, there is mindfulness, you’re aware of the way it is in this present moment.

Question. One thing you used to mention a lot is sati sampajañña as mindfulness; as awareness and knowing time and place (sampajañña is clear comprehension, full awareness). It points out that mindfulness is not just knowing the present moment as yet another object of meditation, but about knowing context. It is about opening up an awareness that is inclusive. Can you elaborate on that?

Ajahn Sumedho. Yes, usually what we regard as bhāvanā meditation is awareness of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, but also sampajañña is aware of time and place. So, when you are with your family, it’s like this. You are not judging it, but you are aware of who you’re with and you respond spontaneously to the condition of the present moment. Otherwise, we tend to carry grudges. In family life or life in general, if we don’t like somebody, we don’t speak to them. That is not sati-sampajañña. You are grasping the mood. You are not aware of your mood as an object. ‘This person offended me, and I will never forgive them.’ Then when you meet that person in a meeting or a family dinner, you are reacting. You are not spontaneously opening to the way it is. We’ve all experienced this in our lives. There is a lack of clear comprehension where we carry grudges and resentments into situations. We feel very righteous and the people who we are angry with are wrong or evil or mad. This is passing judgement. It is not mindfulness and wisdom. It is habit patterns on an ego level that we develop, but it’s not sati-sampajañña. Sati-sampajañña is aware that resentment is like this. Fear is like this. Then, when we are aware, the situation that we are in, is like this.

Right now, we’re in the conservatory in the Aroga kuti with these beautiful flowers. It’s like this. I see the beautiful flowers. I’m not judging these flowers. They were offered yesterday on my birthday, so it’s like this. When I am just mindful of it, there is sati-sampajañña. But I can start thinking about which are the prettiest flowers, should I rearrange them, or are flowers even necessary? I can start thinking should a Buddhist monk be looking at beautiful flowers, is that creating desire for beauty? I can create all kinds of personal problems and reactions, when I am just sitting here in the conservatory. Then I am lost in my own judgmental, righteous views.

I might start talking to Ajahn Asoko and I am full of righteous indignation over something that has happened. I am totally caught up in my righteousness and dumping it onto him. And if he is not mindful, then he’ll react to me. But if we both take our refuge in mindfulness, then we are aware. Righteous indignation is like this. And right now, the atmosphere in the conservatory is like this. This is just the way it is. So that’s sati-sampajañña, mindfulness and clear comprehension and sati-paññā, mindfulness with wisdom. It’s not judgmental, but it is understanding that the present moment can only be the way it is. You can be aware of all the things around you and be aware of your mind state, all in the same moment. One doesn’t cancel out the other. If you are being mindful of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, you don’t have to be so intensely concentrated that you lose contact with time and place. But everything is included – everything belongs.

Sampajañña has an all-inclusive connotation. When we are teaching about everything that belongs in this moment, regardless of whether you like it or don’t like it, it is like this here and now. It belongs here and now. It’s a way of reflecting with wisdom. It’s a sunny morning at Amaravati, there is a beautiful garden, but the weather forecast is for cloud and rain in the afternoon. I don’t like that. I want it to be sunny all day, to be nice and warm. And I am lost in my own conceptual proliferating habit patterns. I am complaining and making value judgements without knowing what I am doing. It is because it’s habitual. The complaining mind is a habit pattern. It’s not natural, but sati is natural. It’s dhamma. You don’t create mindfulness. I don’t create mindfulness as some kind of gift that I have developed from being a monk for so long. Even in my most stupid and ignorant stages, there was still sati. I knew what was going on, but I didn’t have wisdom to guide me. So, I tended to just be caught in habitual reactions to life. Somebody says something you don’t like, and you feel angry and resentful.

Or you start worrying about the future.

When I was in graduate school at Berkeley, I would worry endlessly about finishing the Master’s degree. I would spend many hours in the library just trying to absorb all the knowledge so I could write the necessary treatises to pass the examinations. But I would worry that the professors would not agree with me, that they would not like what I was doing. Maybe they won’t give me the degree, because the future before I got the degree was unknown. I would carry this anxiety back to my room, and I would wake up with it in the morning. It could be obsessive. I could hardly socialize with anybody because of feeling I ought to be studying.

I have this story I like to share about insight. When I was a sāmaṇera (a novice monk) in Nong Khai, I had a recurring dream. I was entering a coffee shop and I order a cup of coffee and a very nice pastry. I’d be sitting with the coffee and pastry and the thought would come, ‘You shouldn’t be here, you should be studying for the exam.’

When I went to Wat Pah Pong to stay with Luang Por Chah, this dream kept recurring. So, I’m meditating and I’m getting insight, but still this dream would come. If I was not practising meditation, not practising concentration, not studying the scriptures, then I’d start, ‘You should do this 24/7, otherwise you are going to feel guilty. You might never get enlightened unless you know everything in the scriptures and develop all these concentration practices.’ And so, I’d create this sense of guilt about not being completely devoted every moment of my life to meditation practice. And then this dream kept recurring. I’m really trying my hardest. I’m keeping the Vinaya rules, the monk’s rules of discipline. I’m doing everything Luang Por Chah suggests, but I still have this dream. And then one morning I woke up and I had insight into this dream and what it was. There never was an exam. The examination was always in the future and enlightenment was in the future. And I was always living for the future. So, one gets insight.

Even trying to analyse the dream didn’t work. I studied psychology in university. What is this dream telling me? Is it giving me some important message? Some of the dreams were bonkers, they were crazy, nonsensical things. A lot of them were about anxiety and fear. What was responsible for me having all this fear and anxiety? In the 1950s, in my generation, we were getting all these modern psychological approaches about how your mother influenced your early life and created all these endless problems for you in later life. I kept trying to think about my mother – actually she was a very good mother. I never doubted her intentions as being right and good. But I kept trying to analyse, why do I feel this fear and anxiety? And then one realizes, it’s just the way one thinks. You create these mental states out of habit. It’s what you are habitually doing, creating problems about the future.

Right now, for example, what is the future? You look at the news and it’s all pretty glum: climate change, pandemics, nuclear wars, droughts and floods in Europe and America. The climate is changing and it’s going to get worse, so we’ve got to do something about it. And then I’m 87 years old and I don’t have that much longer to live. So, what is death like? On the level of cultural conditioning, death is something you avoid thinking about. In our cultural and social identities, it’s not polite to attend somebody’s birthday party and talk about dying. You talk about the joy of living and finding happiness. You talk about finding the right partner, the right wife or husband and in the future, you will live happily ever after. When you grow older, you know that’s not going to happen. Maybe momentarily, you find the right person, but you can’t sustain that because they too are changing conditions. So, then it’s easy to become cynical when you get older. Your youthful enthusiasm and bravado diminish, and with mindfulness, you’re aware of that. You can feel disappointed with your life or guilt ridden about mistakes you’ve made, even when you’re 87. Physical death is not that far away when you’re 87. In three years, I will be 90. That’s really old. In terms of the perception of age, of old age, of old men and old monks, a 90-year-old monk is a really old monk. That perception still exists even though mentally I am not 90. Physically, I am 87. It’s like this.

With mindfulness, you’re aware and you have insight into the fact that the body is not self. No matter how many vitamins you consume, you can’t make the body young again. It’s going to grow old no matter what you do. Plastic surgery might create more of an illusion of not being as old as you are. But that is not the answer to the problem. That is not understanding suffering.