# Mindfulness and Kamma

Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on June 15th, 2019.

I’ve been back from the Ajahn Sucitto retreat for two weeks and I am still reflecting on some of the effects of that. One of the things that came up is that even with all the busyness of a lot of work, and not a lot of formal retreat time, after an initial adjustment period, you realize that the work you have been doing, even though it seems to have been subterranean and clouded over by lots of engagement and activity, is still making its way into your heart, mind, citta and establishing itself even though formal practice sometimes takes a back seat.

Living the life of a committed Buddhist practitioner, following precepts, reaching towards simplicity, renunciation, giving and generosity, as well as periods of reflection, meditation, listening to teachings and periods of formal meditation, all work together. The firm bases of sīla, dāna and renunciation do their work even though we may not be consciously aware of it all the time. So, when the time comes that there is the opportunity to let go of the normal routine and jump into a retreat, after a transition period, the mind does settle more peacefully. This is different than it was several years ago. The work has been happening on an internal level, establishing kusala citta, the wholesome, skilful mind, and that kusala citta is accessible when the routine is allowed to settle and we can tune in to the inner practice. It was a realization I had before, coming in and out of busy periods in monastic life, and is a heartening thought to share with people who have busy lives. With a heart dedicated towards the commitment to the Dhamma and doing those basic practices, keeping precepts and reflecting on that, and working towards wholesome action, you can see that those have their effect in the heart.

The formal practice is of course very important. But most of us have come to some realization that doing formal practice by itself, without all the other aspects of the Noble Eightfold Path, is limited. It’s an unfortunate way that some teachings developed as meditation practices came to the West. It’s become a kind of meditation-only practice in some areas. You start to realize that to be successful towards reaching the goal of real liberation, it must be multi-faceted and encompass the entire Eightfold Path.

So, it brought up some reflections on kamma, action. Kamma (karma in Sanskrit) basically just means action and the fact that it is rooted firmly in cetanā (intention or volition). Intentional action is what causes results from a kammic standpoint. The actions that don’t have any intention one way or another will certainly have some sort of peripheral effect, but in terms of the moral effect on the mind, intention is a required factor. So kamma is actually a moral law. Action that is based in wholesome states of mind will eventually in some way have wholesome results. Actions that are based on unwholesome or unskilful states of mind, states that are clouded or deluded or angry or based on some sort of harmful, defiled state of mind, will have unwholesome effects at some point down the line. So kamma is a moral law, but the results of kamma are heavily dependent upon intentional action.

Intention, cetanā, how can you describe it? How can you know it? I experience it as momentum, this thrust of mind, this movement of mind that precedes any kind of action of body, speech or mind. It’s the momentum that is generated prior to taking any action. And it’s definitely a mental experience. You can see it happen in extreme states of wanting, desire, craving or aversion. You can feel that momentum start to arise if you have some sense of clarity in the mind at all, even if it is a tiny bit. Sometimes in strong situations, you can start to feel that rise of energy that wants to express itself in some sort of action. It’s that mental momentum, that mental rising up based on some sort of strong mind-state that gives you an idea of what intention, cetanā, feels like. It is usually a movement to get something or to get away from something, to negate something. It results in some sort of speech or action or thinking, mental process, often some sort of proliferative process. So, it’s part and parcel of any kind of kammic-producing activity.

Kamma is also often referred to with vipāka, the result of intentional actions. We can see that when we have intentional actions based on positive states of mind, then the result, either now or later, is positive. Negative intentions will result in negative results, and there’s also the mixture of the two.

Then there is the fourth kind of kamma: the kamma that leads to the ending of kamma, which is the action that is based in practising with all the factors of the Noble Eightfold Path. Practicing with all the factors is the kamma, the intentional action, that leads to the end of the kammic process itself, which is the hallmark path towards liberation. Often, we think of kamma, in its colloquial uses, in a negative sense, ‘Oh, something bad is happening to me. It’s because of some negative kamma I did in the past, and I am experiencing the results of it now.’ But it is important to remember and reflect on the positive results of good actions from the past. If we really reflect on it, we can see that probably all of us in this room are experiencing the results of really positive, wholesome past actions. We have abundant requisites, food, clothing, shelter, medicines, material objects that we need. Often, we have quite a bit more than we need. All of this is the result of past wholesome action coming to fruition. We are with good friends. We are surrounded, at least in this monastery, by good-hearted people who are interested in truth and interested in establishing wholesome, skilful internal states of mind. Skilful states, not only for themselves, but also looking out to the world around us and wanting to ensure that all creatures, all friends, people, animals that we meet, have that feeling of security and safety and well-being, too. And being with these like-minded people is the result of past action. We set the causes and conditions for this to come to fruition and are experiencing the results of that past good action right here and now.

We have come into contact with Dhamma, another rare result of past kamma. All of us have done something in the past to bring us here to Abhayagiri Monastery. Whether we’re visiting or whether we’re resident, it is a very fortunate set of circumstances from actions that we created in the past to bring us right here and now to the Dhamma. The requisites are here. Our mental capacities are intact to be able to understand it. The teachings are present. We are here with people to help us explore and experience the results of practice, and we’re in a community that is committed to doing that all the time, everyday. Consider and recollect how rare that is. And remember this comes from past action.

So, it’s always important not to think of kamma and view our lives in terms of where we screw up, and all of our defiled mind moments which most of us still experience. But to reflect and rejoice in the goodness that we have experienced because of past positive kamma. And with that kind of recollection, to make that determination to keep on making that kind of kamma, particularly the fourth kind of kamma that leads to the ending of kamma. This leads to a very wholesome, easeful state of mind, especially when we reflect on it. Creating good kamma and then also reflecting on it in this way leads to a real quality of pāmojja: ease of mind, or delight, or gladness. This is referred to in the ānāpānasati teachings (mindfulness of breathing). Breathing in and out, one gladdens the mind. That’s referring to pāmojja. That’s a very happy, skilful state of mind. Many of us who have picked up the practice of meditation think that what we need to do is get concentrated and then we will be happy. But we get the order reversed: what we really need to do first is establish a sense of ease and happiness in the mind. It’s that mind that is able to settle into collectedness and concentration much more naturally. This development of pāmojja, gladness and a sense of well-being, is one of the most skilful ways that we can experience happiness and satisfaction, because it is based on a mental quality of skilfulness.

We, of course, can experience many pleasures of the senses: eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body, and those do in their own way bring a source of pleasure. But if we are looking for something that is a much more secure and stable form of happiness and pleasure, then we should develop those mental qualities that lead to pāmojja, to that gladdening of the heart, to that easeful state of mind that reflects and feels the effect of skilful action and the development of the Eightfold Path: the recollection of the good fortune we have; the recollection of the generosity that we’ve provided; the recollection of keeping the precepts and the non-harming that we offer to the world. That’s the kind of happiness that is much more stable and long lasting. And that’s what forms the basis of kusala citta, the wholesome skilful mind. Even that subterranean, ongoing development of the heart that we may not be so completely aware of, is plugging away based on that development of a gladdened mind, a mind filled with pāmojja.

Cetanā, intention, is also a subtle mental factor that is in operation all the time. We are often not so conscious of it when it arises. We can be more aware of it in very strong mind states when we have a semblance of mindfulness. But intention is at the basis of much of our action, whether we know it or not, whether it is conscious or unconscious. So, with a confused state of mind, or a mind that has delusion in it, we are making kamma all the time, even though we may not be aware of it. And it’s good to remember too that intention is different from motivation: intention often being just that inclination to perform a certain action, whether it is skilful or unskilful, and motivation being the underlying quality of what is driving that intention. The same actions, but with different motivations, will have different effects in our kammic stream.

Consider the intention to take something that is not ours. It could have a very weak motivation. You are at work, in the office, and you see something that might be useful at home, like a pen. You are not thinking very clearly with conscious intention, but just with a lack of mindfulness, you pick up something and you take something that is not yours. So, there is an intention there which is based on an unskilful motivation, but it’s not very conscious, versus something that is very conscious, like the mind of a thief going to burglarize a house. Same action, taking something that is not yours, but the mind like a thief has a much stronger kammic consequence. So, motivation has its role in terms of how we experience the effects of our actions. Our practice is not only to see intention arise but to examine the motivation behind it. And that helps make it more conscious. This is a clear way to develop mindfulness and clear comprehension as very important tools. This gives us the ability to examine what’s going on underneath any kind of intention that is arising for action and to be able to make a moral choice to stop it if it is moving in the wrong direction. In terms of developing wholesome states of mind and experiencing the results of those, you need to have a good degree of sati and sampajañña – mindfulness and clear comprehension – to be able to see the intention that is arising and to make a moral determination, is this skilful or is this unskilful? And then to readjust through choosing, through intending to act in a skilful way and to refrain from doing any unskilful action.

In fact, in quiet states of mind, when you are looking at this factor of intention as it arises, you can also look at it in terms of contemplation of anattā, not self, because the quality of intention can sometimes have a strong infusion of self. Because the quality of intention has this element of choice related to it, it can often be seen as ‘Oh, this is who I really am. I am somebody who can act in a certain way to produce certain results. I have the willpower through the use of intention to perform some sort of action.’ When we look back and see that intentions arise to make a choice, there’s a real sense of personal power to that and we adjust that action based on that self-perception. The perception of self enters into intention very easily. But one should realize that intention is also a mental factor that has its own causes and conditions, and only masquerades with this sense of self. Intention to act in a certain way arises from other conditions.

When there is contact and we have a certain experience, if there is greed, hatred and delusion underneath the experience, then intention arises controlled by the greed, hatred and delusion. That’s what is driving the intention to get something or to get away from something; to act skilfully, or in the case of greed, hatred and delusion, to act unskilfully. That’s what is driving it. But the intention to act skilfully usually comes from mindfulness and clear comprehension as driving forces. These are mental factors that are actually at play with clear comprehension. Mindfulness is the driving force to form an intention for skilful action. So, we can see that the more we habituate ourselves and the more focus and attention we use to bring up mindfulness and clear comprehension, the more likely we are able to evaluate the moral quality of something we are about to do. With that clarity and clear comprehension, we choose the wholesome course because we know that it feels better. We develop skilful states of mind because we know it will bring us a stable sense of contentment and happiness and freedom from suffering.

So, this is just reflecting and using the teachings on kamma to realize that we actually have a choice in how we experience our lives. Sometimes kamma is thought of as a deterministic, fatalistic law, (that’s how it is actually taught in some other Eastern traditions). That we are essentially under the control of kammic laws that we have absolutely no control over, i.e. that some past action has a determined effect in the present or the future. But the Buddha introduced a different concept that we not only experience the results of past kamma in the here and now, but how we experience it in the present moment and what moves on into the future is something that we do have this ability to modify through appropriate attention and skilful intentions. We can receive kamma from the past in a way that results in less suffering. We can then generate skilful actions, skilful kamma to ameliorate the effect in the present moment and to produce a positive effect for the future. There is this ability to understand and have some control over how we receive kamma from the past and how we generate well-being in the future. This is how it differs from that deterministic view. The more we bring in mindfulness and clear comprehension, the more we will naturally choose the skilful forms of action.

So kamma is a law to be reflected on and to realize that it’s not just a theoretical statement from the Buddha. It is something that gives us the power for change, the power to redirect our lives, and the power to move beyond our usual habitual ways of attaining happiness or avoiding pain. To be able to act clearly and with good intention to create positive effects, and also to really focus developing that kamma that leads to the disbanding of kamma and the realization of the Unconditioned.

When we reflect on all the good kamma and the good conditions we have and the opportunity to practice, that gives rise to a sense of urgency. We reflect on kammic action and the results, the sense of urgency, realizing that this is a rare opportunity with all these causes and conditions coming together. And reflecting that time is short. ‘When the end of my life comes, where do I want my mind to be? What state of mind do I want to be in?’

Debbie was also bringing up a reflection that she received from Ajahn Sucitto talking about how all of us want to live our lives and how we want to spend our time. Ajahn Sucitto’s very terse reflection that he uses to remind himself when he gets wrapped up in the events of the world, is to just say, ‘Already dead.’ It brings us back to a sense of ‘OK, already dead. How would I have wished to have spent my last moments?’ So, to use that as a reflection to keep on bringing up our mindfulness and clear comprehension, and choosing actions that move towards gladdening the mind, settling the mind, and choosing skilful ways of being in the world.