# Don’t Be Selfish

Ajahn Pasanno

This talk was given at Abhayagiri Monastery on February 12th, 2021.

The other day I was thinking about an occasion years ago when I was still living in Thailand. It’s a story I’ve told from time to time, but it’s a story that’s stuck with me. It was when I went to pay respects to Ajahn Buddhadāsa. I had been to visit and pay respects quite a few times, but this happened on my last visit. He was quite old at the time. He was over 80, and his health was starting to decline. I had noticed over the years that he tended to pick up a theme and explore it for an extended period. He would speak on it from different angles. He was very skilled as a teacher. So, I asked him, ‘Now that you’re reaching the last part of your life, what theme are you teaching now?’ He just laughed and said, ‘Oh, I am not teaching much at all these days. I just keep telling people, ’Don’t be selfish.’ That really struck me. Once you start unpacking that teaching, you start reflecting on it and implementing it, you realize that it covers everything. It covers whatever aspect of the Buddha’s teachings and whatever aspect of life that you apply it to. Don’t be selfish. Being able to make it explicit in the mind, so that one keeps reminding oneself how to live like that. If we really want to be free from suffering and to awaken to truth, then we can’t be selfish. We can’t be bringing selfish concerns, or selfish perspectives. The Dhamma goes one way and selfishness goes the other way. They go in opposite directions.

This theme is a big feature in Ajahn Chah’s training and the way that he set up his monasteries. That sense of going against the stream of any kind of selfishness. On a practical social level in how we live as human beings, there is always an encouragement to see how one can help with everything. There is encouragement to be present at everything that the community is doing. There is that sense of stepping back from selfishness.

Selfishness plays itself out in so many ways. There is your normal assumption of selfishness which is around greed and self-concern. But there’s also that self-orientation, that self-protection and self-cherishing. Living together really helps to go against that very ordinary human tendency of selfishness; by sharing community, by sharing everything in common. There is so much selfishness just on a social level amid a pandemic and in the conflicts that have been occurring in America over the past decades.

We work on the deep-seated sense, ‘I want to be happy. I don’t want to suffer. I don’t want to experience difficulty. I want to experience security, safety and peace.’ And then we keep doing the things that make us miserable. The Buddha’s teachings are so skilful for giving us tools to live in a way that helps us create the conditions for safety, security, peace and well-being. But it does take a relinquishing of selfishness. Cultivating that sense of generosity, of giving and sharing – and it isn’t just material things. Certainly, in terms of material things, giving and sharing what we have. But it’s also the giving and sharing of time, the giving and sharing of attention. Just being willing to pay attention to how other people are doing. How they are managing, as opposed to the obsession with me. ‘Those other people out there are just kind of annoying, they are smudges on my well-being.’ That attitude doesn’t lead to beautiful states of mind.

Ajahn Chah’s training was very much about one attending to things that need to be done and everyone helping. When there are things happening, you pitch in. There isn’t really a time for me and ‘What about me?’ So, there’s that opportunity to relinquish selfishness and self-orientation. It gives a great sense of ease, well-being and freedom. A good example is when Ajahn Sumedho asked to study, and train with Ajahn Chah. Luang Por Chah thought about it for a bit, and he said, ‘Yes, you can practise and train here, but you’ve got to fit in here. I can’t give you special privileges or special consideration. You come from a different culture and are used to different food. You have to adapt to here.’ Of course, Ajahn Sumedho took that on, and the results are pretty good. With all the rest of us who went to train with Ajahn Chah, he was in a position to try to make our life easier. He could have. ‘But that isn’t going to help you in the end. You are going to learn how to be wise by adapting to what is here and by stepping away from your personal story, from your personal preferences and from your personal views and opinions. And that will make you wise and free.’

He was quite happy to let us flounder sometimes and to do without things. But that was to help us to learn about not being selfish. You realize there is a tremendous freedom when you can just adapt to the circumstances that you’re in. You can give yourself to the circumstances you’re in. You can give yourself to the people you’re with. And it’s that giving and that giving up of selfishness that lays a foundation.

There are simple things in the practice that are a part of the signature characteristics of Ajahn Chah’s monasteries. There is a lot of bowing. You come into the hall, and you bow. You get up to leave the hall, and you bow. And you bow in a mindful, composed manner. It is not a perfunctory thing that you do. You go back to your dwelling place, and you bow. When you leave to come back to the central area, you bow. Bowing is the first thing you do when you enter shared communal places of practice and living. It wears away the kind of self that is, ‘I just want it comfortable. I want it easy. I don’t want to have to think about being present very much. I just want to go on automatic pilot.’ You can’t do that. It is a simple thing that really helps one to counter the sense of self-obsession, of self-cherishing. ‘I want to do it my way for me to be comfortable, to be easy for me.’ Which certainly doesn’t lead to liberation and awakening.

Being able to integrate bowing and the recollection of the Triple Gem was something that Luang Por Chah learned from Luang Por Kinnaree. On one occasion Ajahn Chah said to Ajahn Jayasāro, ‘If you really knew how to bow, you would be in tears every time you bowed.’ There would be this sense of gratitude and appreciation, having that opportunity to step out of the me and my obsession. To step out of my worries, my fears, my competition with others and my comparing with others. Another aspect of ‘Don’t be selfish’ is the comparing that we have with others and the competitions we have. The images, views and opinions we have about others. It really clutters the mind. And it is all rooted in selfishness. If we let go of that selfishness and self-obsession when we are living together with other human beings, harmony is the natural result. You realize that so much of the conflict and the difficulties living with each other is when selfishness is there. And relinquishing, letting it go and being willing to go against that selfishness, the sense of harmony comes. You can live together with a lot of people, and people can still be diverse and different, but it is just learning how to live together. Learning how to be unselfish.

In Thailand, the millipedes are really big, they have a thousand legs. Ajahn Chah said, ‘You’d think with that many legs, they would trip over each other, and it would really be difficult. But they don’t. Those legs all work together. They move along pretty smoothly.’ In the same way it is possible to live together harmoniously as a community, as a society, as a culture. On a social level in stepping back from that tendency to selfishness, a sense of harmony is facilitated.

Also, there is the commitment to keeping the five precepts, the commitment to virtue. Those are great gifts that one gives. That sense of giving the gift of security, of compassion, of safety. By being willing to refrain from harming, to refrain from taking what is not given, to refrain from sexual overtures and complications, to refrain from speech that is unskilful, to refrain from consuming intoxicants. In giving up selfishness we can offer this tremendous gift of safety, security, compassion, and care to the world. That really brightens the mind. When the Buddha speaks of precepts, speaks of virtue, firstly there is the harmlessness of it. But also, it is not stained, it is not spotted, it is not complicated. It is conducive to composure. It is conducive to settling. When we do step back from those selfish competitions, selfish views or desires, it leads to a sense of settling and composure, externally but also internally. That view of seeing the danger, that willingness to relinquish and to let go. To have the commitment to conduct that is harmless brightens the mind.

When there is harmony among us, when we go to meditate, we are not carrying around the story of the latest conflict or the latest kind of difficult interaction that one has had. Especially when it involved some kind of selfishness. It’s always somebody else’s problem; it’s always somebody else’s fault. It’s never me. By having that willingness to not be selfish, when we sit down to meditate, the mind is ready to be present. The mind is ready to be mindful, it is ready to settle. There’s an ease there, even when the mind starts to proliferate with the five hindrances: sense desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry, and skeptical doubt. Those hindrances all revolve around me, the selfish obsessions, the selfish spacing out or distracting oneself in some way. So not being selfish, that settles the hindrances. It’s not as if one must go around stamping them out and annihilating them. That’s another selfish crusade that one goes on so one can try to get my samadhi and my concentration. It goes against the grain of the Dhamma. Don’t be selfish. Then the mind settles. The heart becomes still, serene and composed.

And certainly, on the aspects of wisdom and insight, you realize that selfishness, the self and other program, that sense of me and the world that one has to either struggle against or be fearful of, or try to gain some advantage over, is generated by fundamental self-obsession. Even the aspects of time, what is time? There is the future that is all about me being something in the future. And then the past. It is all about me in the past with some self-program going. It is all about me. Whether it’s memories of regret or memories of the fantasy of the good old days. It’s all fantasies about me and movement to the future and past. That sense of self is generating the whole complicating project. This is right and that’s wrong. This is good and that’s bad. Those judgements that go on. What is the root of it?

There is freedom that comes from, ‘Don’t be selfish’. It seems so simple, but it really pervades everything. The opportunity to just see things in their true nature. To see: this is dukkha, this is the cause of dukkha, this is the cessation of dukkha, this is the path leading to the cessation of dukkha. That is not a self-program. That is a phenomenon that one experiences, but it doesn’t have to have a self. This is the causal process, cause and condition, the idappaccayatā. When this is, that is. When this is not, that is not. The whole this/that conditionality. It is a conditioned process. It doesn’t need the whole ‘me’ program going into it. And tremendous ease and peace comes. This is recognizing the impermanent, unsatisfactory, non-self nature of all phenomena; internal or external, coarse or refined, near or far. It is just like this, that is all it is. And being able to take respite in seeing that, being able to take refuge in that. You can pick up something that is simple and straightforward, and experiment and reflect on it, ‘How does that work?’

Ajahn Buddhadāsa taught on that theme for many, many years. He was a really great teacher. The collected teachings that he gave, along with his publications fill a huge library. Amazing. And it’s all selfless giving. But if you bring it down, get a handle on it, then one can start to apply it to everything. So, ‘Don’t be selfish.’