# Mindfulness with Wisdom

Ajahn Sumedho

This recording was made for this project by Luang Por Sumedho, kindly supported by Ajahn Asoko at Amaravati Monastery in July 2021.

Question. When I ask you how one cultivates mindfulness, you are quite adamant that one does not cultivate mindfulness. You say that one cultivates right understanding or wisdom. Can you elaborate on that?

Ajahn Sumedho. You don’t cultivate it because you are mindful. The Buddha was often pointing out that consciousness without wisdom tends to be the cause of suffering. The first step on the Noble Eightfold path is sammā-diṭṭhi, which is right understanding or wisdom. You don’t cultivate mindfulness, but it supports a transformation from seeking distraction through the senses to being the witness to the mental states. It supports being witness to the Four Foundations of Mindfulness which are the body, the feelings, the states of mind, and dhamma or phenomena. Then there is mindfulness with wisdom, with conscious awareness. If you try to get mindfulness as a kind of personal endeavour, you don’t know who you are at all. It indicates that you are operating from an assumption that mindfulness is something you’ve got to get, rather than something that is naturally present, here and now.

Unless they are drunk or drugged, most people are aware whenever they are crossing the street or driving a car. Their very existence depends on being aware of dangers, and the instinctual intelligence operates. That intelligence is mindful of potential dangers and problems that arise in the world, that arise in the conditioned realm. But when there is a lack of wisdom, there is always this sense of going out, of sending conscious awareness out through the senses to the sense objects. One is continually identified with the sensory experiences that one has: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching and thinking. That identity with the senses results from a lack of wisdom. There’s no wisdom in that, it’s just habit patterns that you develop from early childhood through to old age. Without wisdom, even at 100 years old, you are still operating as being a physical body. You are operating as a personality according to the conditioning you have had through the three fetters: personality view, sakkāya-diṭṭhi; attachment to cultural and social conditioning, sīlabbata-parāmāsa; and doubt that is born of thinking, vicikicchā.

The suffering is always the result of a lack of wisdom. When there is wisdom and right understanding, then the rest follows from that. So right mindfulness comes from wisdom. It’s not that you cultivate it. It’s the result of wisdom being the foundation, of wisdom being the very foundation of reality, here and now. When there is wisdom one sees the senses, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, the mind and their objects as conditioned phenomena that are constantly changing. Grasping and identifying with those conditioned phenomena is the cause of suffering.

You can cultivate mindfulness with concentration practices focusing on objects and grasping the object to absorption. You are still sending consciousness out through the senses and refining it. But with right understanding there is wisdom that recognizes the sense world, recognizes the senses themselves, and recognizes the sense objects as objects. Through wisdom, you begin to see that the sense of being a person, of being a personality with desire to get rid of defilements, to get rid of personal problems, or to get what you don’t have, results from a limited self-view. You operate from the limited view that you are a physical body, a person, a personality. If that is never recognized, even if you always operate from best intentions, you end up suffering as a result. The whole point of anattā, the characteristic of not-self, is to see through this personality view that we hold out of habit, not out of choice. We’re conditioned through cultural and social conditioning to operate from this sense of I am this body, I am this person, I am a separate person from you. As you grow up, that whole perception is never challenged, until you begin to investigate suffering. Why do I suffer as a person? Conditioned phenomena are about differences, they are not about perfection.

Some people are born beautiful, and others are born ugly or disabled or blind or mentally retarded. They’re born according to the kamma of the parents. They receive the hereditary genes from their parents and the rest is conditioned. The body is a condition. It is what you inherit as a physical state, and then you identify with it. The Buddha was pointing to ultimate reality. The physical body is not a person. All the perceptions that you hold through identification as a physical body are based on that basic delusion. That’s why this realm of saṃsāra, the endless cycle of birth and death, is a realm of suffering because it always ends in death. The body is going to die eventually. Even if you live to 100 years, that’s nothing compared to the age of the universe. And if you don’t develop wisdom, at the end of 100 years, you will be still operating from delusions about yourself and the world. In his first sermon, the Buddha says very clearly, that the Noble Truth of suffering is to be understood. We start with something that is realizable here and now. This attachment we have, this identity with conditioned phenomena, is the cause of suffering.

With wisdom, you are investigating. You are not just believing Buddhist doctrines anymore, but you are engaging in investigation. Am I really a physical body? Is that all I am? Am I just this physical form and these habitual mental states of ego? These habitual states with their cultural biases and conditioning. No matter how many conditions you accumulate, no matter how beautiful or excellent they might be, they are still impermanent. They are going to fail us. There is no refuge in phenomena because its very nature is change. It is wisdom that is aware of the change.

We can recognize change in some ways, like the changing of the seasons. But what doesn’t change? What is it that doesn’t change when all the changingness is going on? Does mindfulness change? If it’s always going out to objects, then it changes from one object to the next because you can see the desultory movement of mental states. For example, you hear something and then you see something and then you are distracted into feeling some unpleasant physical sensation, such as an itch or an irritation. Then a mosquito bites you and you feel annoyed. You know how the mental states change according to the conditions. You are caught in that incessant movement, caught in that desultory movement. We begin to see this as just the habits of being identified with the senses and their objects. And with that identification we suffer accordingly. The ego is where we operate from when there is ignorance. But when we see that our true nature is awareness, there is conscious awareness of the senses and their objects. Then the personality, the ego becomes an object rather than a subject.

If you disagree with me because you don’t feel the same way, or you have a totally different view of what I am saying, then we get into arguments. And you’re not aware of what you are doing. You are just operating from your intellect or your personal feelings in the moment. You are operating out of habit, from conditioning, from biases and prejudices, which are all objects that arise and cease. There is no wisdom in that, there is just habit.

The Dhamma is a refuge in Theravada Buddhism. We can take refuge in the Dhamma, and still be totally ignorant. We may not even know what Dhamma is. We just believe in something called the Dhamma, but we are not aware. And that’s a belief. Is taking refuge in the Dhamma something you believe in? Or is the Dhamma as a refuge something that is reality, that is recognized through wisdom and awareness? With wisdom and awareness, you can let go of the desires that we tend to blindly hold to and act upon all the time. You can let go of the causes of suffering.