# Focused Attention, Panoramic Awareness

Ajahn Soṇa

This talk was offered as part of the Virtual Mindfulness Retreat on YouTube.

Our first focus is mindfulness. If you read about this sutta, the Mahā-Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, you will find various schools and approaches to it. If you’ve been trained in the sort of formal monastic type of approach, perhaps Sri Lankan, you’ll get a very scholarly presentation about this entire sutta. The Mahā-Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, from the Long Discourses of the Buddha (Dīgha Nikāya 22) will be treated as a kind of holy text which is complete and came whole from the mouth of the Buddha at a certain point in history. Then other versions will just be partial or very casual approaches to this. I would suggest that this is not a piece of music; it is not a cantata by Bach or anything like that. This is a collection which was given over the years in many different situations. Certainly, it wouldn’t be appropriate for the Buddha to give in a single instance the entire full version of this: mahā meaning ‘great’, satipaṭṭhāna meaning ‘focuses of mindfulness’ or ‘foundations of mindfulness.’ The thing that one should keep in mind is that this is something offered for you, and you will use parts of it at different times of your life. If you stay at this long enough, and you’re interested enough, you will eventually start to have an overview of the whole thing. It’s not like a single masterpiece that must be experienced from first word to last.

So, we are starting in the body. The body is very good because it’s the most obvious. It’s tangible. It’s material. At Wat Pah Nanachat, I remember hearing one of the teachings that the body as a foundation of mindfulness is like the gate of the monastery. Before you go into the monastery, you must pass through the gate. So, the body is the gateway to these other dimensions which you direct your mindfulness to, which you direct sati to. Sati is the sentry overlooking the gate, the entrance, which you can regard as the body. I will discuss further this relationship between the entrance, the gate, the body and the walled city, and the sentry. You will be hearing a lot about this simile. This is how you retain it; you get a coherent sense of it by looking at and remembering the similes that the Buddha gives. These are brilliant. The Pali Canon is probably the largest collection of similes and metaphors in religious literature, all given by one person, and each one is not just casual. Each element of the simile is very important as a support to the entire understanding.

Mindfulness as the sentry and mindfulness also as memory. The original meaning of the word is memory. This is another area you will come across if you study Buddhism. You will find that there’s a whole school of people that are interested in etymology, the sources of the words: what the Sanskrit roots are and all that. I often think that it has very limited real relevance. The Buddha re-formed and re-used words in the way he wished to. The original meaning of sati is just purely ‘memory’ in Sanskrit, but the way the Buddha is using it is remembering the instructions heard from early in your life. You have instructions that your parents gave you, that your teachers gave you. You got these instructions when learning crafts and skills, and the general attitudes to life. The problem is some people do not seem to be able to remember them. This is what comes out of the mouths of mothers talking to their children, ‘How many times have I told you not to do that?’, and then the kid looks up, having a sudden moment of remembrance: ‘Right. Yes, you did tell me that, every single day for the last three years.’ It is amazing how we can forget that. It’s not forgetting a name or how to do maths. It’s that we should do maths.

How do you forget that? It’s very easy. When you’re a teenager, you’re suddenly sent out into the world, attempting to become an adult, and you may not have any idea how to manage money. You keep coming up short at the end of every month and you’re mystified as to why. It’s because you don’t pay attention to the numbers. You have basic mathematical skills and if you record every cup of coffee that you buy, you will find out why you don’t have any money at the end of the month. Somehow, we have amnesia, we blank out, we don’t pay attention.

This is what the Buddha is talking about as that aspect of sati. We don’t remember things that were told to us many times exquisitely and precisely, with many a simile and many a helpful way of remembering. He even gives you five this, seven that, eight this. Just basically what you can count on your hands. Remember the ten commandments? Two tablets, five commandments on each tablet. Does that make any sense? Yeah, two hands, just a handful. When we say you lack mindfulness, it is not necessarily the fact that you can’t pay attention. There are all kinds of things that you can pay attention to. Whatever grabs your interest, you can pay attention to. But you may be paying attention to something and forget you have an appointment. You don’t have a sense of the appropriate attention. A big part of mindfulness is appropriate attention.

There’s something else that goes along with sati, is hyphenated as an important part of it, and it’s sampajañña, so sati-sampajañña. Sampajañña is sometimes called ‘clear comprehension’, but what it really is, is a sense of the appropriate. How are you to behave with a sense of the environment around you? This would be particularly for monks; it’s given in the rules of conduct. It is something to also explore. The monks are asked to change their behavior and speech in public. This is because the act of simply walking through a village, walking through a town, walking anywhere that’s inhabited, is a teaching. The Buddha insists that the monks walk in a collected way, that they are not to laugh loudly, stare here and there, or walk in an eccentric fashion. They’re also to have their robes neatly and evenly wrapped around them, so they don’t look disheveled because this has an influence on all kinds of people that may see their serenity, collectedness, and focus.

Remember, this is the fourth of the heavenly signs: illness, aging, death, and then a renunciant, which caught the attention of the Bodhisattva. This last sign is a very important one. As a monk, one is a sign. You’re a walking signboard. This is why you must wear your robes in public. You can’t conceal them. You can’t take off your robes. When the monks go out in some of the Catholic monastic orders, they put on regular clothes. But for Theravada Buddhist monks, one is never to go in public without the robes, including the head uncovered, to show this shorn hair as a sign. You’re a sign and how you conduct yourself is a sign as well. This is sampajañña, appropriate awareness of the whole situation. Do you remember that you’re not in the monastery? Do you remember that you’re walking in public? Do you remember that people watch you as a sign? This is the form of sati, this is mindfulness and clear comprehension; they go together.

In modern times it’s very interesting that we have this awareness of the brain as a kind of center of consciousness, and it has two hemispheres. It seems that in modern brain science they’re understanding more and more that the left hemisphere takes care of the specific applications of mindfulness to details and the right hemisphere looks at the larger picture, as it processes and interprets the whole thing. You might think of this as sati-sampajañña. We can’t isolate sati from sampajañña. You have a practice at home as laypeople. In the morning you may sit for half an hour, or even an hour, watching the breath, focusing, concentrating, and then you will tackle the day. You have to go to work; you have to deal with relationships and lots of other things. That is the time when your sampajañña is still required. How do you conduct yourself? What is appropriate? What is inspiring to other people? What helps change the atmosphere of a room? When you walk in, how do you walk in? How do you hold yourself? How do you speak? This is part of the Satipaṭṭhāna. Although we’re focusing on the word sati, we can’t leave off this sampajañña.

Another simile for this is that a bird also has a hemisphere cleavage in the brain. The bird must use a great deal of attention to pick out seeds from amongst grains of sand. How does the bird not eat the sand and just get the seed? By very close attention. But while that bird is doing that, they also need not to be surprised by a predator, so you’ll see them looking around. They have appropriate awareness of the environment because something wants to eat them while they want to eat the seeds. The deer are the same. They’re constantly having to browse but, at the same time, having to be hypervigilant and aware of their entire surroundings. Our mind does two things and needs to do two things: it needs to pay attention to the small details, but it also needs to pay attention to the overarching sense of the world around us.

Sampajañña is a kind of wisdom as well. It has to have information and wisdom. When you do the four foundations of mindfulness, it’s always in a context and only wisdom knows the reason. Why are you doing these exercises? Sometimes when we start this practice, we don’t really know why we’re doing this exercise except maybe out of desperation. You finally decided you’ve got to do something, and you’ve heard meditation might help. So you go to a monastery, you go to a retreat, or you even dial up a YouTube channel and you start meditating, and you’re not sure why. It’s only when you are integrating this information into the Eightfold Path that you are truly understanding why you’re doing it. Sampajañña and sati are performing their roles in the context of the Eightfold Path. Sati is not simply mindfulness, but sammā-sati. It’s right mindfulness and that means that it’s the seventh factor of the Eightfold Path. The Eightfold Path also is not coherent unless you understand the Four Noble Truths. The Eightfold Path is the path to the solution, the path to the end of suffering. The overarching reason for the harnessing of sati and sampajañña is for the ending of suffering, for the release from suffering. All this is going to be harnessed, so that’s why you’re carefully attending to your body and so forth.

All kinds of skills and capacities may develop. You will hear and experience life, reality, and relationships in a different way if you start doing these mindfulness exercises. You will start training your mind to pay attention in a systematic way. If you keep this up, you will have surprising results in other areas. You will notice things you didn’t notice before. You will see other people’s motives in a new light, and you also will see other people’s minds. Quite often in a so-called conversation with another person, there are two people engaging in soliloquies. Instead of a dialogue, there’s just two people, each one talking to themselves. This is a characteristic particularly of our time, that people’s attention spans, as many have noted, seem to be reduced. The art of conversation also seems to occur in a very primitive, unsatisfactory form. That is because we can’t sustain attention long enough to hear what the other person says and then have the appropriate sense to respond to what the other person said. So, you see this fragmentation happening. Perhaps only sati is working and only sati about your own life is working, so there is no sampajañña in the dialogue.

It’s very interesting to look at some of the perception tests that they give in cases of schizophrenia. They will show the person some letters, say a capital ‘H’ and a capital ‘A’ on a page, but the letters are made from numbers. Tiny little numbers, almost like pixels, are what give shape to these letters. Then they ask them, ‘What do you see?’ and they see only the numbers. They don’t see the prominent shape of the letter. You can see the mind is not doing two things, it’s doing only one thing. It sees the details but doesn’t put them together; it doesn’t see the broader picture, it doesn’t see the letters. We have a well-used saying in English: ‘You don’t see the forest for the trees.’ You see trees but you don’t see the forest. The forest is the letters, and the trees are the numbers. In fact, a forest and a tree are inseparable, and they interact, and that is what’s going on in life.

In order to have wisdom you need to cultivate both of these things. You need to pay more attention to be able to sustain attention on the details, but you also need a context for those details. You need a bigger picture. Why am I doing this? What is the point of this attention? Is there a difference between a person who walks on a tightrope a hundred feet above the ground and a person doing walking meditation? A tightrope walker must pay close attention. Is there a difference between that and walking meditation? Yes. The tightrope walker’s attention is not at the service of something, it’s not at the service of the larger picture of life. It’s not at the service of wisdom. It’s not at the service of sampajañña. When we do our meditation exercises, they must always be in the context that these are strengthening exercises for our attention. They are directing our attention to certain vital realities that we must understand. We must not only understand them theoretically, but we must understand them to the marrow of our bones. How do you understand something to the marrow of your bones? It becomes second nature. Your relationship to these things is not merely abstract, but you’re in harmony – what you say and how you feel are one. You are not capable of hypocrisy. Lots of people say things that they don’t believe. Your theoretical view of life is harmonized with how you actually feel about it.

This is a general preparation, and it is often missing in the plunge into mindfulness retreats and often vipassanā retreats as well. The Satipaṭṭhāna is the foundational sutta for many vipassanā courses. There are various schools of vipassanā, but often they’re deriving their teachings from the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta. Quite often you just show up and are plunged into it all with explicit directions to watch the breath or something like that. Then also to watch the rising and passing of things such as feelings, or the breath, or the rise and fall of the abdomen. But the pervasive context of this is sometimes not emphasized enough. I have been through many of these kinds of courses myself and spent a lot of time with different teachers of these techniques. I have heard and read a lot about these techniques, and my sense is that we need to have a far-reaching picture of why this is happening. It’s like dance lessons, like being taken into the gymnasium or studio when you’re 12 years old to be shown how to dance. If you’ve never been to a dance, this business of moving your feet around in certain unfamiliar ways may not be very coherent to you. It’s only when this sense of the dance arises that you understand the details. You understand why you were doing it and why they were instructing you this way. That is the difference between notes and music. This mindfulness is at the service of music. It is not notes. It is not to make you a better scientist or anything like that. Attention itself is not the solution to the end of suffering. It’s only a tool. A tool that is at the service of the ubiquitous truth the Buddha has shown us about how to bring the unsatisfactory qualities of life to an end.

Sometimes the story ends there, that things are impermanent. You wish to diminish the negative things. But what about the positive things? Sometimes they get herded in with the negative things as simply impermanent. That misses a huge point. The positive emotional dimension of your life is not to be observed with detachment, as something that rises and passes away. It does indeed rise and pass away. Different types of positive emotional experiences rise and pass away, but you are to remain in the field of these positive emotions night and day. In the descriptions of the arahants, it is said that even in their sleep they do not leave this exemplary emotional state.

This is the Buddha saying the mind is absolutely purified of the negative elements. What remains? Just change? No, not change. Positive mental states fluctuate and flow, but are all in the positive dimension, they remain in the positive dimension. You are to remain in that dimension. Sometimes you’re joyful, sometimes you’re equanimous. Sometimes you have a great heart of loving kindness, sometimes you have a great celebration of others’ joy, muditā, and so on. You are flowing between different positive emotions.

Yes, they all rise and pass away. But you’re remaining in that field and that’s the point. That is the goal of this. It is for the end of lamentation, sorrow, and grief. It is for the overcoming of greed, hatred, and delusion. This is the most basic formulation of the teachings of the Buddha: greed, hatred, and delusion are the problem. Generosity, kindness, and clarity are the solution. Are you supposed to be sometimes generous, sometimes greedy, sometimes confused, or all the time generous, kind, and clear? You are to remain in that dimension. The mind is cleansed of all negative elements.

How are you supposed to do this? People like this message. They love to hear this kind of thing, but they don’t know how to transform themselves. These are the exercises for transformation. The Buddha says, ‘Here are some guidelines, some how-to exercises. Let’s start with the body. Become aware of your body. One thing that you can become aware of is the breath itself, the fact of respiration. Can you let the past and future go long enough to pay attention to the fact that you’re breathing?’ It’s a strange request. It’s not something that anybody else will tell you. If you go and study music, they’re not going to ask you to pay attention to your breath. They’re going to ask you to pay attention to the violin bow or something like that. The world is not interested in the fact that you breathe. Your breathing is a strange thing to become interested in. But there’s a very deep connection between your emotional states and the breath. A lot of your structures of anxiety and fear and sorrow are very intimately connected with the experience of the breath. The Buddha is bringing you into the zone. Later, he’ll ask you to pay attention in other ways: Are you sad or are you not sad? Are you angry or not? But he’s going to bring you in with the breath, then later he’s going to bring you into the awareness of the mindfulness of the mind.

He’s going to make you an aware person. A person who is no longer walking around unconscious. A person who is no longer driven, pushed and pulled by unconscious sorts of inherited, scattered trainings. There are all kinds of patchwork habits. There are bits of information you picked up along the way, that are quite often bad habits. He’s going to say, ‘Well, we’ve got to start again. We’ve got to retrain you right from scratch. Out with the unskilful and in with the skilful.’ He’s going to take you back and start you at something as simple as, ‘Let’s just breathe. I want you to do nothing else. I want you to pay attention to this.’ Eventually we’ll move along to, ‘How do you feel while you breathe? I don’t want you to wander away from the breath, but how do you feel when you breathe? How are you feeling? Now I want you to find out if you can induce a sense of well-being, gladness, and ease while you breathe? I don’t want just noting of random emotions while you breathe. I want you to discover that the positive emotions of joy, ease, gladness, well-being, and loving kindness are not random happenings. They don’t come from the external environment. They are products of your own mind, and you can learn to create them. You can become more skilful with your emotions. You can generate the emotions you wish to have. You can also let go of the ones that you do not wish to have.’

This is taking control of your own emotional structure. It is not the way ordinary human beings talk. They’re always looking for happiness or love or something like that. They’re hoping to get lucky. They’re just out there hoping to get lucky, hoping that love will somehow fall on them, that joy will somehow fall on them. The Buddha says, ‘Stop that. That’s a very, very poor way of negotiating this domain. I want you to stay home and learn how to do this. It comes out of you. It doesn’t come to you; it comes from you.’

This is the overarching aim of mindfulness practice and clear, panoramic awareness. That distills the word sati-sampajañña : focused attention and panoramic awareness. These are the two things that are going to be developed in the Satipaṭṭhāna. The body is the gateway to the absolutely beautiful monastery that you’re about to enter. Yes, we’re back to the body as the gateway. What is the gate embedded in? The gate is embedded in a wall. There are six roads that lead to this walled city. The six roads represent the six senses: sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. They all lead to the walled city. What is the walled city? It is the body. Inside the walled city are four roads which lead to the center of the city. What are the four roads? They are the four elements: water, air, fire, and earth. These are the elements that the body is made from. The wall is where the external reality is separated from the body. Mindfulness is attending to the place where the external world enters the body. You must know the body; you must know the nature of the body. So, sati, the sentry, is right on the edge of the body and the outer world. It should know both places. What’s profitable is allowed into the body because through the body it finds its way to consciousness. Consciousness is the king at the center of the four roads.

The role of sati is very, very, very important. It’s the informed attention which discriminates, and it’s the early warning detection for what must not be allowed in and what should be welcomed in. This is the function of sati and satipaṭṭhāna.