## Seeing the Buddha, Seeing the Dhamma

Based on a talk given at the Vesākha Pūjā at Tisarana Monastery in May 2009.

We don’t usually say that the Buddha “died.” Instead, we say that he entered parinibbāna, which means the “complete extinction” or final nibbāna following the bodily death of an enlightened being. The Buddha’s parinibbāna might seem very distant to us because it is something that happened about 2,500 years ago. And yet the Buddha made the path to enlightenment highly accessible to us in a timeless way by virtue of his having grounded it in the lives of ordinary people. My own life, for example, has been totally transformed by the Buddha’s teachings. I met my first bhikkhu, Ven. Bodhesako, in India in 1971 and was basically “blown away.” I was utterly inspired by both him and the Buddha’s teachings, so I decided to take up the training of a bhikkhu.

Whether as a monastic or a layperson, one of the things we’re trying to do in Buddhist practice is to bring forth wholesome states of mind. And gratitude is one of them. Having lived as a Buddhist monk for many years, I feel deeply grateful not only for the teachings, but also for the lifestyle I’ve had as a bhikkhu. What about you? How have the teachings of the Buddha affected your life? Ask yourself that question. It’s an excellent way to evoke gratitude. You can also contemplate the life of the Buddha to bring forth gratitude. This type of sati (mindfulness) is called Buddhānussati, or the recollection of the Buddha. Whenever we recollect some achievement that is extraordinarily courageous and noble, it elevates us because we see the possibility of doing something very grand and profound with this human existence. As we look at a Buddha-image or a stupa, or as we contemplate the Dhamma, we realize that we wouldn’t be on this Path were it not for this remarkable being who taught so many centuries ago.

Since gratitude is a foundation for enlightenment, we try to make gratitude into something we can cultivate—and not just when things are going well for us. For instance, when someone is nice to us, we feel grateful to them: that’s gratitude of circumstance. Now there’s nothing wrong with feeling grateful in favorable circumstances. But we can certainly make our gratitude more robust by practicing the bringing forth of gratitude regardless of the situation. This is what we call bhāvanā (development of mind). We’re now cultivating a skillful state of mind—in this case, one of thankfulness.

Another good way to develop gratitude is to create a personal shrine. On my shrine, I have two Buddha-images, pictures of my teachers, and other objects of interest. A Buddha-image points to both the historical Buddha, as well as our own possibility for enlightenment. When I look at the various items on my shrine, I experience a sense of gratitude—gratitude to my teachers and parents, gratitude to all those who have made mendicant life possible for me, and gratitude for a way of looking at the world which was given to me by the Buddha. This attitude of thankfulness is a very beautiful state of mind. I like to joke that when you get enlightened, you’ll probably be extremely grateful for that. The enlightened mind isn’t greedy, impatient, or complaining; the enlightened mind is grateful. Of course, we’re not always thankful for life’s difficulties. However, we can still cultivate gratitude in so many different ways.

For example, we can develop a deep sense of gratitude for the exemplary qualities of the Buddha, for his teachings, and for this lineage. Moreover, we can evoke a feeling of appreciation for our teachers. When you meet a great teacher like Ajahn Chah or Ajahn Sumedho, you’re touched by them. You’re so grateful to be in their presence, and you think, “Thank you.” And when you ask them about a difficulty you’re having, they’ll say, “Don’t make it into a problem. Let it go.” This doesn’t sound like a major teaching since it seems so simple; but it’s very hard to do and it’s ultimately the challenge of our lives. We can also express gratitude for the fact that we’ve been born as humans at a time when the Buddha’s teachings are still available to us. And most of us live in societies that are not beset by war, starvation, or disease, so we have tremendous opportunities for personal reflection. These are all things for which we can be immensely thankful.

So how do we use this valuable human birth skillfully and avoid frittering it away in trivial pursuits? We do this by practicing the Buddha’s teachings and by developing wholesome states of mind such as generosity. Generosity is one of the virtuous qualities that leads to enlightenment. If you think about the life of the Buddha—his renunciation, his many years of selfless teaching, and his enlightenment—you can see the depth of his generosity. For forty-five years, he walked up and down the Ganges Valley offering teachings, admonishments, and reflections to countless monks and many thousands of laypeople in a spirit of tireless generosity. He even had to deal with a lot of recalcitrant monks along the way.

People sometimes think, “Oh, you Buddhists are so selfish. All you want is enlightenment,” as if enlightenment is some kind of corrupting, self-seeking, narcissistic endeavor. Well, it’s not. Enlightenment is actually the end of the ego. It’s the opening of the heart of compassion, the heart of generosity, and the heart of gratitude. My first teacher—the monk who I met in India—used to describe the Buddhist desire for enlightenment as “the selfishness that puts an end to selfishness.” The aspiration to awaken is not self-seeking in the sense that you care nothing for the welfare of others. Rather, it’s self-investigating in the sense that you’re investigating your own suffering for your benefit and for the benefit of all beings. You’re exploring the conflicts and fears and arguments you have with life—in other words, that whole business of being a human being. When you come to understand quite clearly that the suffering of the mind is caused by various mental habits that need not be followed, then greed, hatred, and delusion begin to fall away. As they fall away through the practices of non-attachment and patient awareness, the heart begins to relate to others quite spontaneously with goodwill and compassion.

The selfless nature of the desire for enlightenment is beautifully expressed in the life of the Buddha. If we recall, the Buddha left home to find the answer to a very personal existential question. He wanted to know: “If I am subject to death, and if all those around me are subject to death, is there the Deathless? Is there an element in consciousness that is not subject to birth and death?” He pursued the answer to that question for six years until he attained enlightenment. But his enlightenment wasn’t simply a personal possession—that wouldn’t make sense. While he did experience the peace of awakening in a personal way, he also expressed this awakening in all of his actions, including in the ways he taught and generally related to people, in his giving nature, and in his establishment of the Sangha of monks and nuns.

The aspiration to go beyond suffering means taking personal responsibility for our suffering. It’s easy to blame our stress or unease on something or someone else, or to distract ourselves away from it. But if we always avoid assuming responsibility for our suffering, we’ll never be free of it. We really have to take charge and figure out why we’re distressed. The Buddha’s teachings have a universal appeal because they address the suffering that is common to all of humanity: the fears, the disappointments, the doubts, the aging of the body, etc. The Buddha points to these very mundane discomforts and asks, “Why do we suffer?” The response is that we suffer because of attachment. Attachment means identifying with the movement of life and not realizing that there’s a deep stillness behind that movement—a stillness of awareness, of knowing. So if we’re moved by fears, or desires, or prejudices and biases, then the task is to find that which is unmoving. When we’re aware of the flow of life, and when we have the courage to watch this flow rather than react to it, we begin to discover the beautiful quietude of the mind. Where that quietness takes you is ineffable—you can’t describe it. You’re just there with the stillness of the mind.

Another question to ponder is: “How well am I undertaking the path that the Buddha set out for us?” It’s an extremely rewarding path, but it’s very hard work. Ajahn Chah would always say, “Training your dog is easy; but training your mind is very difficult.” Yet what could be more interesting or more important than understanding what motivates you to say and do the things you do? And what could be more essential than finding that place within ourselves where we can choose peace over suffering?

We can create the causes of peace even if we don’t feel peaceful. You discover this in meditation. If you’re a beginner in meditation and you sit for ten minutes, you’ll probably start to feel restless. Then if the teacher says, “Just hang in there for another twenty minutes,” you might think, “But I’ve had enough; I want to get up.” But if you do hang in there, you’ll discover that you can choose to connect with peace even when the mind is agitated. You do this by choosing to witness, to be aware of, whatever experience is arising in the present moment—even if it’s an unpleasant one. It’s this choice that lays the foundation for our meditation practice. Once we’ve finished meditating, we realize that we feel more peaceful because even though the meditation itself may have been difficult, we made a choice for peace. Ajahn Chah used to say, “People want to be peaceful, but they make the choice for suffering.” For instance, if we feel annoyed at someone and we yell at them, then that’s choosing to suffer. How can we be peaceful if we make a choice for suffering?

Of course, at times we all experience impulses that lead to stress and conflict. Although it’s difficult to curtail these impulses through force of will, we can still be aware of them, which can help us not to react to them. Restlessness is a good example of an impulse that can precipitate suffering. When we’re feeling restless for whatever reason, we often find ourselves wanting to escape from the present moment. This can create even more suffering for us, since it’s not possible to run away every time we face an unpleasant situation. Because this becomes clear when we meditate, we learn to simply observe restlessness rather than act on it. The same principle of skillful witnessing applies to other feelings and emotions as well. If we just bear witness to our wanting to follow some mood or emotion, then we’ll eventually see that mood or emotion pass away. In this way, we’re making a claim for peace. Peace will become part of our consciousness because we’re no longer a victim of our moods and emotions.

Seeing Buddha-images and other symbols of the Buddha’s life and enlightenment can help to remind us that mindful witnessing is meant to be an ongoing practice of ours. When we enter a Buddha hall, for example, we always bow to the shrine. We can use that Buddha-image to remind us of our aspiration to go beyond suffering, which can easily be forgotten in the course of our day.

As meditators, we can sometimes be very hard on ourselves when we see that we’re still getting caught up in painful emotions. One way to remember that we’re essentially good people doing good work with our practice is to reflect on the life of the Buddha. This reminds us that we’re also honorable people aspiring to bring greater peace into the world. I personally enjoy reading about the Buddha’s life. I’ll read different accounts of it or even the same account again and again. I never get tired of it: it’s such a great story! There’s a famous actress living next to one of our monasteries whose husband won an Oscar for his work on the film “Doctor Zhivago.” At one time he was working on a screenplay on the life of the Buddha. When Ajahn Sumedho asked this man’s wife how the screenplay was going, she replied, “Oh, it’s a really difficult story. He’s a good guy who got better.”

One statement that often comes up in Buddhist teachings is “When you see the Dhamma, you see the Buddha. When you see the Buddha, you see the Dhamma.” When you see the Dhamma, you understand the way things are without the distortions of ignorance. Thus you are awake to the truth of the way things are. This is Buddha—or awakened consciousness. So when we realize the Dhamma by being awake, by being present, that’s seeing the Buddha. What’s the sign that we’re not awake to the truth of what-is? Suffering! Once we’ve suffered enough, we might one day realize: “This really hurts. I’ve had enough of this.” That’s the first step towards peace, towards enlightenment.

Awakening to the truth of things takes some practice. If we look at the people who come to meditate at the monastery or on retreats, they’re typically nice people. But because they’re conscientious people, they can sometimes be self-judgmental. They might find themselves harboring some negative emotion towards someone in their family and think, “I shouldn’t feel this way.” However, that’s not awakening to truth—that’s just perpetuating a sense of ego. Awakening to truth means recollecting: “Right now, it feels like this.” That’s a constant refrain that comes up in Buddhism, and one which we need to practice coming back to over and over again.

Socially, we do our best to live responsibly and in harmony with others. But inwardly, there’s always very important work to do, and because it’s hard work, we need to keep encouraging ourselves to carry on with the practice. We also need to continue to bring to mind that which is wholesome and uplifting. There’s no better gift we can give to ourselves, our workmates, our family, our friends, or the world at large than to operate from an enlightened mind, a mind of clarity.