## The Brahmavihāras as Mature Emotions

Based on a talk given at a retreat sponsored by the Ottawa Buddhist Society in February 2011.

In Buddhism, mature emotional happiness is defined as the four brahmavihāras. These benevolent states of mind, which consist of goodwill (mettā), compassion (karuṇā), empathetic joy (muditā), and equanimity (upekkhā), are also known as the four “immeasurables” or “divine abodes.” This almost sounds like a heavenly realm. But this is heaven experienced in your own heart and mind, rather than some celestial sphere “out there.” And it’s based on mettā, which is the Pali term denoting the strong wish for the well-being and happiness of all living beings, including oneself.

Mettā is often taught as a kind of prayer-at-a-distance for someone, especially if that person is known to be unwell or dying. Phrases such as “May you be well,” “May you be free from sickness,” or “May you be serene even in the face of bodily afflictions,” can be recited with the intention of trying to help someone through their suffering. This form of mettā practice doesn’t click with me, since we really don’t know whether or not it works to improve that person’s physical or mental state. It certainly feels good to send kind well-wishes to another person; and if that person hears about it, they may also feel good. However, the Buddhist texts don’t portray the monks as sitting in circles offering mettā in that way.

On a more pragmatic level, the practice of goodwill or friendliness towards myself and others comes from my own intelligent aspiration for happiness. Happiness arises when I’m free from suffering. And just as I want to be free from pain, stress, loneliness, etc., so do you. Therefore, I make a point of letting go of negative states of mind that give rise to suffering for myself and sometimes for others, too. Ill-will is one of these difficult mind-states. Ill-will is expressed in thoughts such as “May you not be happy. May you be miserable and lonely.” It’s often a very vengeful mindset that can trigger unskillful behavior, which leads to even more suffering for myself and others. Because ill-will is not a happy state of mind to be in, it’s in my best interests to sincerely wish you well. So, in one sense, I benefit from the cultivation of goodwill towards others because if I’m holding on to aversion towards you, then I’m clinging to a mental object that is in itself unpleasant and causes me harm. In another sense, others reap the benefits of my mettā practice, since planting these seeds of goodwill will naturally bring about a deeper concern for the welfare of others. Essentially, the wish for the well-being of myself and others is a natural expression of the open heart.

The feeling of ill-will also prevents me from realizing the Unconditioned—or that deeper state of inner peace and wisdom in Buddhism that isn’t dependent on external circumstances. This is because I’m now preoccupied with the conditioned in the form of you and my dislike or hatred of you. So it actually works in my favor to wish you freedom from suffering. In developing this kind regard for another’s welfare, I’m also opening my heart to experiencing the pleasant, warm-hearted feeling of connecting with another living being. This too promotes a sense of happiness in us.

When I tell people to offer mettā to Muammar Gaddafi, the response I sometimes get is: “I’m not giving him any!” as if goodwill is a commodity that I have only a limited amount of. That’s a misunderstanding of mettā. The practice of goodwill is wishing that Mr. Gaddafi would be compassionate, generous, wise, and ethical because that would be in his best interests; then he would be truly happy. When I wish that Mr. Gaddafi be happy, I’m not wishing that he continue to be in power and increase his family’s wealth by exploiting Libyan oil revenues. In other words, I’m not agreeing with Mr. Gaddafi’s current political actions—what he’s doing is unconscionable. But if I harbor hatred in my own heart for this image of Mr. Gaddafi, then that hatred becomes a part of my inner system and the way I live in the world. While this sense of indignation may be justified and supported by other people, what is it doing to my consciousness? It’s creating the habitual tendency towards hatred whenever the mind is contacted by an object of a similar nature. That in itself is a mode of suffering that preempts my capacity for happiness.

It’s important to remember that mettā is not a form of sentimentality in the sense that I need to have cloyingly sweet feelings for everyone. In fact, it’s not even necessary for me to like the person to whom I’m directing my well-wishing. The word mettā is often translated as “loving-kindness,” which is a pretty loaded word. When I hear the term “loving-kindness” used in relation to a cruel person, it doesn’t seem to fit. But extending friendly goodwill to this same person, knowing the beneficial effect this will have on my inner world, makes a lot of sense to me. It’s also something I think I can realistically do. In this way, the practice of goodwill has an insightful quality to it; it’s a form of intelligence rather than sentimentality. So that’s how I look at mettā: goodwill as opposed to ill-will.

Goodwill is the first of the brahmavihāras that is defined as limitless. We call these four attitudes limitless because they include everyone and everything, at all times and in all places. In terms of my mettā practice, if there’s still one aspect of the external world that I refuse to accept or relate to without animosity, then that’s where I need to let go. When I harbor ill-will towards another person, it creates a sense of “me” and a sense of “them.” This very division between self and other creates suffering, since there is now a tension that has arisen between the two. In addition, desire and aversion are born because we crave that which supports our sense of self, while we reject that which undermines it.

Thus my ability to experience a sense of boundless peace and contentment is cut short by the person or people to whom I cannot extend goodwill. The same is true of those difficult parts of my own consciousness—the Gaddafis of my own mind—that I reject; they continue to haunt my mind because I haven’t learned to let go of my aversion to them. So goodwill has a quality of insightful awareness to it. In the same way, there may be moods of the mind that I don’t like, but I have to learn to bear with them until they come to an end. To hate them or say that I shouldn’t have them would demonstrate a lack of goodwill and a lack of wisdom.

Compassion is the second of the brahmavihāras. Being an extension of goodwill, it refers to the empathy I have for beings who are not well-off or who are suffering physically or mentally. For example, if you’re suffering from a particular illness, then not only would I wish you to be free from that illness, but I would do what is within my power to help you through it. This is what I would want others to do for me if I was unwell. So karuṇā is compassion in action.

Empathetic joy or gladness is the third brahmavihāra. This is the sense of my being genuinely joyful for your success or happiness. This is quite different from focusing on the idea that “Your success will soon change,” or “You’re happy now, but that will end.” Although these statements are true, if they’re the expressions of a cynical mind, then that becomes a kind of “wet-blanket” Buddhism. Instead, I wish your good fortune to continue. Muditā is a lovely quality that you can also extend to yourself. You can do this by making conscious your own skills and wholesome attitudes, your own good intentions to help others, your own capacities to create worthwhile things (such as a meal for your family or a set of shelves for your neighbor), and so on. There are innumerable areas in our lives that can be the focus for muditā and gratitude.

If you’re jealous of or angry at another person’s good fortune, it’s hard to bring up that feeling of gladness. You can also see how unhappy you’d be if every time another person experienced joy, you experienced envy or resentment. That would be a rebirth of suffering for you again and again. Therefore, it’s in your best interests to free your mind from those negative mind-states. If you’re truly interested in realizing the Unconditioned, then if you’re caught up in any condition—including resistance to someone else’s happiness—you have to figure out how to let go of it. So it works in my favor to rejoice in your happiness. In a broader sense, empathetic joy also brings more peace and happiness into the world.

The fourth brahmavihāra is equanimity. This evenness of mind, which allows me to have a calm and measured response to situations, is the balancing factor for the other three divine abodes. For instance, if my goodwill for another human being isn’t tempered by equanimity, I might be tempted to overlook or minimize their unethical conduct in my wish to extend to them a sense of deep personal acceptance. While it’s important not to have animosity towards a violent criminal, I can’t let my goodwill for them cloud my judgments about their moral and social responsibilities in the world.

Similarly, if compassion is not balanced by equanimity, then my caring for others can easily lead to excessive worrying about them or even burnout in my capacity as caregiver. Equanimity allows me to see that as much as I wish to help those who are suffering, I also have to acknowledge my own limitations in terms of what I’m able to do for them, realistically-speaking. In this vein, while still doing what we can to help other beings, the Buddha suggests that we also reflect upon the law of kamma. Simply put, this natural law holds that intentionally skillful actions will produce positive results, while intentionally unskillful actions will produce negative results. Hence the Buddha tells us: “All beings are the owners of their kamma, heirs to their kamma, born of their kamma, related to their kamma, abide supported by their kamma; whatever they shall do, whether for good or for ill, of that they will be the heirs.”

We all have things we have to work through in our lifetime. Parents certainly see this as they watch their children struggle with their own life challenges. So it’s important to know that there are some areas of suffering in the lives of others that you can’t put an end to, no matter how much you’d like to. The practice of equanimity helps us to face this fact without getting overly distressed about it. At the same time, the qualities of goodwill and compassion are what keep equanimity from degenerating into a cold indifference to other people’s suffering.

Equanimity also prevents me from getting overwhelmed by appreciative joy. If muditā is not balanced by a steadiness of mind, it can lead to a giddy restlessness that will eventually exhaust me. And when I become overly excited, I forget the age-old axiom: “This, too, shall pass.”

So consider how you can cultivate the brahmavihāras in your own life. I try to really make conscious what the open heart feels like. The Buddhist texts speak of how the practice of goodwill can be expanded in a limitless fashion by including different categories of beings. Once you understand the importance of these four sublime attitudes and how they relate to your inner world as well as to the world at large, you’ll make a point of developing them with great benefit to yourself and other beings.