## Living a Contemplative Life

Based on two talks given at a retreat sponsored by Satipañña Insight Meditation Toronto in July 2013.

Our Reflective Capacity

The teachers who have most inspired and encouraged me in my own spiritual training have always offered their teachings for reflection rather than as the basis for assuming dogmatic positions. Buddhism has a well-developed doctrine, but when doctrine is merely held as an opinion, it easily becomes the source of a lot of argumentative debate that is not productive. The task of the contemplative is to take a teaching and internalize it, thereby making it alive in your own heart. You do this because you have faith in a teaching, rather than any blind belief in it. When I hear a teaching that makes sense to me, I need to learn how to apply it to my own life. This is a reflective capacity that we have as human beings.

I like to differentiate between what I believe in and what I can reflect upon in a very alive way. I find this helpful because I’m not always sure whether the ideas presented in Buddhism are true or not. But then there are things that I know for sure are true. For example, if you tell me that killing people is going to make me happy, I’ll say “no” because I know that harming people is not conducive to happiness. However, if you ask me about rebirth, I’ll say, “Beats me.”

In my early days as a monk, I struggled with those areas of Buddhist doctrine whose truthfulness was difficult to prove one way or another. I thought that if I couldn’t know for myself if something was true, then it mustn’t be true. I came to see that attitude as quite arrogant. Then I felt that I had to believe in a teaching such as rebirth because I’m a Buddhist monk, after all! But that way of thinking didn’t feel authentic either. Then I began to reflect: “What if it was true? How would that affect me? And what would that imply about the way I live my life and how I perceive my world?” That worked for me. I thought to myself, “I’ll take this model on as a kind of working hypothesis.” That challenged my own beliefs and world views that weren’t so well formulated at the time. I found this to be a helpful strategy to apply to those areas of the teachings I just wasn’t sure about. I felt that I could take them on board because there was so much within Buddhist doctrine that I already trusted.

This reflective capacity is what defines human consciousness. In Thailand, it’s said that a biped isn’t necessarily a human being—that it’s living morally and reflecting on the way things are that qualifies you as such. This is a higher definition of Homo sapiens than we typically encounter. So to be fully human, we need to have this capacity to investigate and understand life, which involves a training of the mind and heart.

When I reflect on the Buddha’s teachings, I obviously come at it from a monastic angle. That’s how I learned about this tradition. I met my first Buddhist monk in India in 1971, and within a couple of months, I wanted to ordain. When I went to Thailand to train as a monk, I had never done a meditation retreat; I didn’t even know what retreats were, much less who Ajahn Chah was. I just felt a strong pull to be in monastic life. Although we don’t all have the vocation to be a monk or a nun, I think that all of us gathered here today have a bit of the monk or nun in us. We all have that aspiration for a deeper meaning in life; otherwise, we wouldn’t be here.

As Theravada monastics, we have different lifestyle conventions and social responsibilities that we adhere to which are collectively known as the Vinaya. These 227 rules of conduct include moral precepts, legal processes, hierarchical considerations, ways of assigning authority, guidelines for interacting with laypeople, and so forth. Our monastic training has two streams of practice: the first encompasses our conventions of social etiquette, while the second centers on our stream of consciousness approach to understanding ourselves. In terms of the social, ethical way that I live, I’m defined as Ajahn Viradhammo. I have a Canadian passport, a Social Insurance Number, a diary, my responsibilities as the abbot of Tisarana Monastery, etc. That’s when we use the sense of “I”—the sense of my being a particular person. This sometimes gets confusing in light of the Buddhism concept of not-self. “Not-self is going to the dentist.” This doesn’t make sense, so we say that “I” go to the dentist. In conventional reality, each of us does conceive of himself or herself as a person, which defines how we operate in the world in terms of our livelihood, morality, social responsibilities, social activism, care for the land, and so on.

As bhikkhus, our monastic training with respect to how we live is quite detailed. Because we’re encouraged to try to keep things as simple as possible, one of the strong suggestions that we work with is “contentment with little.” This is a very important perception to cultivate. Oftentimes our culture promotes the opposite messages: more is better, supersize everything, buy the upgraded model, wear the latest fashion, etc. To incline the mind towards contentment with little is countercultural, and hence a powerful antidote to the restless consumerism of our society. So as monks, we’re encouraged to consider the basic monastic requisites of food, clothing, shelter, and medical care as “good enough for the day.”

It’s essential to know how to use our capacities for reflection and perception for training the mind. When I first entered the monastery as a trainee, I was not content with little; in fact, I was not content at all. Forty years ago, contentment was not one of my strong points. But if I thought that I had to be content with little, then I was finished from the get-go. Taking the ego-position that I am someone who should be content is not a real training of the mind; rather, it’s a form of inner tyranny. To illustrate what I mean by this, let’s imagine that I sit down and look at the food being offered to me and think, “This is rubbish! Oh no, I shouldn’t think like that.” So instead I try to tell myself, “Laypeople are really kind. Thank you, thank you.” But instead of actually feeling this, I’m thinking, “Gosh, I don’t want to be here.” When I think that I have to be a certain way, I’ve attached to an ideal that’s not at all indicative of the way things are. So when I feel that I should be grateful and content with little, that’s not being reflective.

For me, being reflective means that as I receive my alms-food, I try to be mindful not just of my physical actions, but also of my inner attitude in each and every situation. And as I’m aware of my inner attitude, I can also consider whether my mind is involved in wholesome or unwholesome thinking. If I’m feeling discontented with the food I’ve been given, I can reflect on that and ask myself, “How did the Buddha ask me to train?” He asked me to train to be content with little. Now I can make a choice not to pursue this feeling of discontent, which is not denying it. I’m not saying that I shouldn’t feel discontented; I’m simply no longer making it the core value of my life. Instead, I’m choosing to cultivate a different core value: to be content with little. This is how we go about training in perception, which is very different from training in idealism. We’re observing discontent arising and then we’re noting that discontent feels this way in the body. Then we shift our mind to a more wholesome perception: “Yes, discontent may be present, but still, thank you for this food.”

Perhaps your discontent is so deep that you can’t do anything about it. If so, then you simply have to hang in there. When I was involved in very rigorous training as a young monk in Thailand, there were times when I felt that I couldn’t bear it any more—I just wanted to jump the wall. So I’d reflect: “This is the feeling of wanting to jump the wall.” As I stayed with that feeling of wanting to escape, it would eventually cease, even though I hadn’t run away. When Ajahn Sumedho became really frustrated with some aspect of monastic life, he’d say, “I can’t take another moment of this! … Oh, there’s another moment.” This capacity we have to become fully conscious of our inner world, to awaken to the totality of the present moment, is the true basis of understanding ourselves and realizing the highest possibilities of human consciousness.

For monastics, the Vinaya provides a kind of mirror with which to look at our behavior. How am I behaving around the requisites? How am I using the communal resources? How am I relating to senior and junior monks? What is my speech like? How do I admonish correctly? How do I receive admonishment? The Buddha conferred this wealth of teachings upon the monastic community because he lived within it. Laypeople, however, have to extrapolate what these guidelines might mean in the context of non-monastic life. The principles remain the same though.

Consider right speech, which is addressed in the fourth of the Five Precepts. This precept states: “I undertake the precept to refrain from lying, divisive gossip, swearing, and foolish speech. I undertake to train in right speech, to speak in concord, truthfully, and beautifully.” Because language is so powerful in terms of producing either beneficial or harmful effects, good communication is obviously very important. When we study the Buddha’s teachings on right speech, we tend to observe our own speech more carefully. In this way, we become more deliberately conscious of how we communicate with others. And when we compare our own habits of speech to the Buddha’s recommendations, we gain insight into what is skillful and what is unskillful. This gives rise to the intention to refrain from harming ourselves and others with wrong speech. We do this by developing inner boundaries and markers to help guide us in the ways we converse with others.

As part of my own spiritual practice, I write down the elements of right speech and then I really explore them until they become ingrained in my consciousness. By doing this, these teachings—which continue to echo in my mind—become an integral part of my daily life. They remind me to mindfully choose the path of least suffering, or what’s known in Pali as dukkha—also translated as “unsatisfactoriness” or “stress.” As an example of how this works, I may find myself talking with someone and notice that I’m stretching the truth. This may not be totally immoral, but because I’ve pondered right speech as it relates to truthfulness, I can, even as I’m speaking, ask myself, “Why do I have to overstate the truth? What’s going on in my consciousness that I now need to be untruthful in some way?” Because the reflective mind is awake and aware, I see: “Ah, I want this person to like me.” Or “I want to manipulate them.” Or “I like to exaggerate to get more attention.” Then there’s some understanding of my motive for embellishing the truth. And because this understanding is there, I can then choose to refrain from engaging in speech that is grounded in attitudes of selfishness or deceit. This course of action isn’t easy, but it’s a noble and potentially very fruitful one.

Because these impulses—which are the causes of wrong speech and the suffering it engenders—are no longer being given free rein, they tend to die away. So there’s less regret and confusion in the mind over having spoken untruthfully in one way or another. If we’re aspiring to follow the Buddha’s teachings, we try to communicate from a place of compassion and wisdom, which are the roots of right speech. Therefore, we train ourselves to act in accordance with the Buddha’s basic recommendations to “Do good, refrain from causing harm, and purify the heart.” This is not a form of idealism, but rather the hard work of right mindfulness and right effort.

So far we’ve been looking at the first kind of truth, which is known in Buddhism as “conventional truth,” in which on a functional, social level, I’m Ajahn Viradhammo, abbot of a monastery, living within a world of responsibilities and relationships. Because these social parameters are clearly defined, it’s easy for me to dedicate my life to being a monk. If my social role wasn’t so well defined or if I had a whole array of social roles to choose from, I might end up spending a lot of my time trying to get my social life in order. I think we’ve all seen that getting our lives totally right on an external level is impossible. So the more clearly we can define the social conventions we live by, the easier it will be for us to engage in inner reflection and find inner peace. The Buddha suggests that we try to maintain a stable lifestyle and, as much as possible, a simple one, too. As a monk, I can’t say what that is for laypeople. But I think we all feel that “less, not more” is a good attitude to have in modern life. Certainly, having a simpler life where we don’t get caught up in too much busyness or too many trivial distractions gives us more space in which to reflect.

We now come to the second way that the Buddha asks us to look at life—one that doesn’t reference a sense of self. This second kind of truth is called “ultimate truth,” and on this level of reality, we no longer think in terms of “me” or “mine.” Instead, we witness our stream of consciousness as a physical and mental phenomenon that is always changing according to the arising and passing away of myriad causes and conditions. When I say “stream of consciousness,” I don’t just mean the rushing flow of thoughts as exemplified in the literature of James Joyce; rather, I’m referring to stream of consciousness in the Buddhist sense. This includes all of the events in the conscious realm: sights, sounds, bodily feelings, smells, tastes, emotions, thoughts, perceptions, memories, and all other phenomena that constitute our inner world. Instead of relating to conscious experience in a personal way, we now relate to experience through the awareness of change.

As we investigate this deeper level of reality, we notice that our bodies are sensitive to temperature, to pleasure and pain, and to comfort and discomfort. We also see that emotional feelings affect us both mentally and physically, and that the thinking mind responds to the presence of stress in the body. For instance, let’s say that I go for a job interview and that creates mental and physical stress, both during and after the interview. This is natural. This is Dhamma (or the nature of what-is), and I can observe it through the awareness of change. In effect, I can become intimate with the ever-changing nature of my experience. That’s a stepping out of taking things personally, a stepping out of the storyline into a more fundamental knowing of thought as simply thought, bodily feeling as simply bodily feeling, and emotion as simply emotion. Rather than relating to these experiences as the subject (or person) who is experiencing them, I become more of an objective witness to their unfolding. This reflective skill of knowing what’s going on in my inner world is something that needs to be developed.

In the same way, when I’m talking with someone, I’m trying to not only get my idea across or hear what they’re saying, but I’m also attempting to notice what my inner world is doing in the course of the discussion. So I’m essentially living on two levels. Most of us do this from time to time, don’t we? Let’s imagine that you’re talking with someone and you find you’re getting uptight about what they’re saying. Maybe they’re expressing some strong opinions about politics or religion that you disagree with. So there’s the discussion going on, but there’s also the heartfelt reaction to it. If the inner reaction is unskillful, I can patiently watch it until it eventually ceases, rather than getting embroiled in it and being the victim of habitual reactivity. This is a skill that needs to be honed—one that we get better and better at with practice. In effect, not only am I functioning socially, but I’m also witnessing the way things are in the stream of consciousness of my inner world. Hence when we refer to awareness and not-self, as in “Feelings are not-self,” we’re referring to this impersonal or “witnessing” level of experience.

But as I mentioned, when we’re talking about social responsibility, we’re back to the self-referencing. For example, if my fellow bhikkhus find me acting inappropriately and causing harm to others, it would be ridiculous for me to say, “This behavior is not-self.” Instead, I need to be responsible for my conduct and try to live according to the principles of morality and generosity that the monastic code requires of me. So the social level of reality also matters, which is why we want to get that as neat or as right as possible. But as important as it is for us to function well as individuals within social parameters, if we only have that part of the equation, then we’ll never realize the peace that comes with knowing that all things that arise, pass away. On the other hand, if we ignore the fact that we’re individuals with social and moral responsibilities, then that will confuse us so much that we won’t even have the capacity for reflection. Therefore, part of the method of Buddhism is right living to the best of our abilities. To have a flawless outer life, however, is impossible because our experiences are dependent on so many variables.

As we gain more understanding of how our consciousness works and what is and isn’t conducive to peace, we can start to develop the right language with which to train ourselves. For instance, when I’m meditating, I’ll often silently repeat to myself the word “non-anticipation.” This helps me to become aware of any sense of anticipation that may be arising in the mind. Almost all meditators experience the desire to try to get some result because that’s how we’re conditioned to see effort: “If I make an effort to do something, I expect to get something out of it. I’m not doing this for nothing.” But if I’m able to patiently stay aware of the feeling of anticipation, knowing it will change, then the anticipation changes to non-anticipation. So the use of the word “non-anticipation” can help me to notice my tendency to reach forward to the next moment during meditation. This is quite useful, since I’m now in the position to choose to notice the changing nature of anticipation, rather than attaching to that feeling through a lack of awareness.

As a young monk, I came to see how the wise use of language was also a form of right thought. In other words, it came about as a direct result of understanding the way things are. When I first started to meditate, I was an extremely willful and testosterone-driven monk with a very gaining mind: I thought I was going to get enlightened tomorrow! Although this kind of ignorance was well-intentioned, it was still wrong understanding. After suffering through an enormous amount of willful effort, with various teachers telling me to “take it easy,” I finally began to reflect on what right effort was. I began to contemplate: “Well, that doesn’t work—that’s for sure. So what does work?” That was the beginning of right understanding for me.

If we can maintain an attitude of inner vigilance—observing and reflecting on our suffering and the errors we make in our practice—then our choices in life become more in tune with the Dhamma. As a result of this, the suffering that we create through ignorance fades away. This kind of training is very pragmatic; it allows me to see that when I try too hard, I get a bad result. What would produce a good result then? So I tell myself, “Be gentler, kinder to yourself. Take it easy, be more patient.” That language is coming from insight. Thus, from right understanding, you get right thought, right suggestion, and right aspiration.

Working with Perceptions

Besides having a reflective capacity, we also have the capacity to perceive. This is a necessary part of living in the world: you know where the kitchen is, what a car is, etc. Perception, which operates through memory, builds up the world around us. Your city, partner, boss, and even your own personality are created through the perceptions you have of them. Sometimes our perceptions are neutral and merely functional, as when we perceive that this is a traffic light, this is a spoon, this is a dog, and so on. Sometimes perceptions are loaded with unseen biases based on culture, gender, and other forms of conditioning. It’s not uncommon to be the victim of unskillful perceptions that are founded on ignorance. Consider someone who’s raised in a very racist culture where one ethnic group is demonized by another. To the unreflective person, the sense of another ethnic group being inferior to one’s own can seem like an absolute truth. So these kinds of perceptions can become ingrained habits of mind which then create an ostensible reality that’s fraught with suffering.

On the other hand, it’s also possible to be aware of perceptions as objects of the mind, and to discern which ones are conditioned by delusion. Once we’ve discerned which perceptions are unskillful, we can then direct the mind towards perceptions that are skillful and that lead to the end of suffering. My elderly mother would often say to me, “I really like that Buddhist idea of what comes, goes.” I’d think to myself, “Good for you, Mum.” She used the perception of impermanence to help her during her bouts of arthritic agony and suchlike. In Buddhism, we refer to this way of interpreting a set of events as anicca-saññā, or the perception or recognition of change. It’s important to keep in mind that we’re not just “prisoners” or victims of a whole set of perceptions that have been built up over the course of a lifetime. We can also introduce new perceptions into the mind which enable us to experience greater peace.

As we observe our inner world, we need to discern when perception is skillful and when it’s unskillful, thereby causing us distress. That’s not a judgment—it’s more of an assessment of the situation through watching what’s going on in your mind. If we pick up the teachings of the Buddha, we can ask ourselves, “What perceptions did he encourage? What perceptions might be skillful?”

In guided meditation, I sometimes suggest that you work with the perception of the body being in awareness. However, if you then go on to interpret that perception as an absolute truth and take up the philosophical position that awareness is vast and unchanging and that all conditioned things arise and pass away in awareness—then OK, big deal. Does that statement really help you in any way? But to actually use that perception as you’re practicing meditation is radically different. Notice how a perception is not asking you to believe in anything. You just try it out and see how it works. For example, notice how sound is in awareness. Then notice how the body is in awareness. That’s the use of perception. In my own practice, this has a good effect because it brings me to a state of peaceful, silent awareness that’s not dependent on these objects of awareness being in my field of consciousness. I find that very freeing.

What happens when you take up the perception of all things transpiring in awareness and then begin to cultivate it? For instance, what happens when you apply that perception to an argument you’re having with your neighbour? You’ll probably discover that you have the mindfulness, the centeredness, and the quickness of mind to notice that the quarrel is transpiring in awareness. To me, that’s very liberating. The argument is still going on, but once I see it as unfolding in awareness, the strong emotions I’m experiencing and all my attachments in their various forms start to dissolve. There’s now a perspective on things. This shift in viewpoint is part of the larger movement of the stream of consciousness. More and more, I find that if something is happening in awareness, then I can make better choices about how to respond because I’m no longer being driven by my blind reactions to these objects of conscious experience.

Another very important perception that the Buddha suggested we develop is that of “dependent origination.” In its most basic formulation, this teaching centers on the principle that with this being, that comes to be. With the arising of this, that arises. With this not being, that does not come to be. With the cessation of this, that ceases. Take the example of a light switch. With the light switch on, the light comes on. With this being, that comes to be. With the light switch off, the light goes off. With this not being, that does not come to be. With the cessation of this, that ceases. That’s a basic reality in nature much like the law of gravity. The principle of dependent origination is not constructed out of abstract thoughts; rather, it’s something I can experience for myself and reflect upon. For instance, with the air conditioning (as a condition) on, there is bodily comfort—for me, at least. With the arising of this, there is the arising of that. With the air conditioning not on, there is not bodily comfort. With the cessation of this, there is the cessation of that. This dynamic is playing out all the time.

Now apply the perception of dependent origination to your emotional life. Let’s say that I’m talking with someone and I perceive them as acting aggressively towards me and that affects me. If I’m not aware of the principle of dependent origination, I might react by becoming equally aggressive, defensive, or submissive. And then they’ll have their corresponding counterreaction and so on. But if I have enough mindfulness to reflect: “With this aggression as a condition, that sense of defensiveness comes to be,” then all of a sudden I’m no longer the defensiveness; there’s simply a reaction (i.e., defensiveness) in nature. This realization is very liberating because from that perspective I can choose to follow or not follow that feeling of defensiveness. Whereas if I’m simply in the midst of that reaction and I’m believing that I’m being unfairly treated and a sense of self arises, then, of course, I don’t make skillful choices. I just am that reactive mechanism that leads to suffering. It’s quite a skill to have enough inner vigilance to see: “With this as a condition, that arises. Without this, that does not arise.” The mind is now available for a response that is in context and appropriate for the way things are. You can introduce that perception into your most complex life situations.

While we are responsible for our individual lives, what we’re emphasizing when we look at life through the lens of dependent origination is that life is not to be taken personally. This is the paradox that you have to wrap your head around in Buddhism. And certainly don’t take your personality personally, since that too depends on causes and conditions triggering off whatever kind of personality is manifesting at any given moment. For example, if an arrogant person approaches you, then one type of personality comes up. If you meet a kind and loving person, then a different kind of personality surfaces. But none of these personalities is actually “you” in any permanent, definitive sense. To have this perspective is very freeing.

I’ve been talking with friends about the notion that you have to change your personality as part of your spiritual development. That’s a losing game, isn’t it? Now, you don’t want to hurt anyone of course; but to try to always be clever or charming or quick or upbeat—you’ll never get that quite right. And so what if I am slow-witted under certain conditions? Is that so bad? When that happens, you simply notice that this is what slow-wittedness feels like in the body and mind. It’s OK. Whereas if you take slow-wittedness as a personal problem, then you’re always trying to become some quality that keeps eluding you, which in turn leads to the suffering that results from endless self-criticism and self-judgment. If we think that we need to develop a perfect personality as part of our spiritual path, then we’ll always feel compelled to become a different, better personality. We can get really depressed trying to do this, since we can never live up to that ideal. The beauty of Buddhism is that it’s not asking you to become a “personality.” Instead, it’s asking us to be decent human beings.

This basic formulation of “With this, there is that. With the ceasing of this, there is the cessation of that,” is one of the perceptions that the Buddha asked us to introduce into our lives as an antidote to the perception of ego or self. To illustrate how this works, let’s imagine that I made a cruel remark to someone with whom I was arguing last week. As I’m sitting in meditation, that memory comes up, together with the sense of my having been in an argument with someone. If I’m not careful, I could use that memory as an opportunity to hate myself by thinking, “I’m a terrible person. I shouldn’t have said that.” So with this memory as a condition, that self-referencing image comes to be. If I hold onto and buy into that sense of self, then I’m perpetuating the attachment to this sense of “me” and “mine.”

But if I notice that there’s no permanent person in that scenario even though there is a personality (or “memory-person”) that arises in consciousness—and see that as a flow (i.e., with this as a condition, that arises)—then I see it’s all just one piece. I also see that I don’t always have that memory. I have other memories, too—ones of my having done something beneficial for someone. So with this memory of my cruel remark not being, that sense of myself as being a bad person does not come to be. Applying the perception of dependent origination to the flow of consciousness is one of the methodologies for letting go of taking this stream of consciousness personally. We discern that there’s no fixed person there.

It’s this kind of interpretation of the movement of consciousness that needs to be applied to our understanding of anattā (not-self). The teaching of anattā basically says that our mind-body experience is continuously changing according to causes and conditions, and that there’s no essential, fixed entity at the center of it. If I have the presence of mind to know that, then I’m able to see memory as just memory when it does come up. I may remember something and think to myself, “What a stupid thing to have done.” But that very sense of my being stupid is actually just a condition with the potential to trigger another type of self-view. Knowing how these things work, I patiently notice that this sense of myself as being foolish is just a thought—and nothing else. I don’t need to believe in it.

Another area where many of us tend to cling to a limiting self-perception is that of body image. Consider body image and the difficult cultural norms surrounding body shapes. A self-perception can arise from all the cultural propaganda telling you that your body shape is wrong. For example, if you happen to have what the media calls a “pear-shaped body,” you might start thinking, “I’m someone who’s pear-shaped.” That’s a self-view. You can believe that perception and become very self-critical, or other people can become very critical of that body-type. You can see that with this kind of propaganda as a condition, that kind of self-view arises. If you subscribe to that particular spin on things, then you’re finished; they’ve got you. However, if you say to yourself, “With this kind of suggestion, there’s that kind of self-image,” then that’s not who you are. You’re not your body shape. That would be a disaster! You’re not ultimately pear-shaped; that’s just what bodies do over time. Certainly getting in shape and eating well is good. But we can get obsessed with these things and begin to think that somehow a fit and healthy body is where liberation lies. You do your best to take care of your body, but ultimately you come to see that real freedom lies in understanding how this flow of consciousness comes and goes.

The sense of self is extremely insidious. For this reason, we have to observe how a particular sense of self arises because of a certain cause or condition. Once you notice that happening in your mind, you can make a choice not to grasp at that self-conditioning. Instead, you see it as part of the impersonal stream of consciousness that we’ve been talking about. Once you’re able to do that, your mind begins to abide in the silence that knows this movement of coming and going. Your mind begins to see the end of self-view. But that’s not because you’ve rejected it or repressed it; rather, it’s the result of wisdom. There’s a profound sense of peace and freedom in no longer clinging to a sense of self, isn’t there? You don’t have to develop the perfect personality. It’s lovely.

However, if you are charming, then great. Ajahn Chah was the most charming and charismatic person. Ajahn Sumedho once asked him, “Why are you so charming? What’s with the charisma?” Ajahn Chah replied, “It’s my hook. It brings people to the practice of Dhamma.” So he used these qualities for good rather than for his own self-inflation. But he could turn them off, too, when there was no longer the need for him to be that way. Sometimes not only was his charisma not there, but there was no one there. At Wat Pah Pong, Ajahn Chah would often sit in a wicker chair on the bottom level of his hut and counsel various monks, nuns, and laypeople who had come from the town to meet with him. They would discuss their spiritual, business, or family problems with him, and he would give them advice and cheer them up. But once they left, you could see that Ajahn Chah was no longer there as a personality, even though he remained quietly seated in his chair. At first I felt confused by this, but then I just rested peacefully in that state of non-being, as it were. That was a very interesting insight into how personality can manifest when it’s coming from a place of purity. Ajahn Chah’s charm was a natural expression of compassion, joy, and wisdom.

When you have empathy and you’re not consumed with self-referencing, then you don’t have an agenda that might get in the way of your heartfelt response to what someone is saying or doing. A troubled person may come to you and your personality just arises in the context of your compassion for them. If a child shows you their beautiful drawing, you might say, “Ah, you’re a Picasso!” You have joy in response to the child’s own sense of delight. That arises in context. Or if the child is starting to play with matches, you’ll have a more gruff personality as you tell them: “Don’t do that. It’s dangerous!” So personality is very fluid: it comes and goes.

Our tendency is to say things like “I’m not diligent enough.” Or “I’m too angry.” Or “I’m too fearful.” Or even “I eat too much ice cream.” These statements correspond to the different self-views we take on. Once we see what our own self-creating tendencies are, we need to train in identifying which conditions engender them. Let’s say that I’m prone to cynicism. I’m now going to notice that with this as a condition, cynicism arises. In this way, I become more aware of what conditions provoke cynicism in me so that I can mindfully choose not to follow my habitual reaction (of cynicism) to this triggering condition. That’s using perception to train the mind in a good way. But this training is never the result of thinking, “I’m a bad person who needs to become a better person.” In fact, it’s completely divorced from any sense of self-view. We’re ultimately doing this work in order to let go of the various unskillful mental and emotional habits that our attention gets caught up in.

Investigating Why We Suffer

It’s helpful to ask the question, “With what as a condition, is there suffering?” That’s why we’re in this ballgame, isn’t it? We want to be happy. If we suffer, then we want to free ourselves from that suffering—that’s natural. Our aspiration for happiness exists on the physical, emotional, and spiritual levels. This aspiration is what leads us to investigate the cause of suffering. So we can ask ourselves, “With what as a condition, does suffering come to be? With the cessation of what, is there the cessation of suffering?” The Buddha’s answer is that ignorance is the primal cause of suffering. In other words, with ignorance as a condition, there’s the arising of suffering. What do we mean by ignorance? Ignorance, in the Buddhist sense of the word, is when I see permanence in that which is impermanent. This is a major cause of dukkha for us.

Common examples of this type of ignorance are when I think that this good health I’m enjoying will always be present, or when I think that death only happens in other families. The attachment to inspiration is another instance of this. It’s wonderful when inspiration arises and we get that feeling of “Great, now I’ve got it!” Being inspired by a spiritual teacher is very much like this. At one moment I can feel incredibly uplifted by a teacher’s words; but later on I can feel quite disappointed in that person. I can even hate that teacher who I was so devoted to some months ago on account of the fact that they no longer inspire me. This is because the feelings of uplift I experienced earlier are dependently originated. They arose because of causes and conditions, and they will likewise cease because of causes and conditions. From a Buddhist perspective, not seeing the truth of this is ignorance.

So seeing permanence in the impermanent is ignorance that will result in some form of suffering, including disappointment. It’s quite simple, but insidious. You can also consider this idea from a different angle. Let’s say that I’m in the monastery and I’m subject to the same chanting, the same monks, the same Dhamma talk, the same sticky rice, and the ever-present mosquitoes and heat … day after day. Because intense boredom and exasperation are welling up in me, it all feels never-ending. Then I think, “Oh man, I can’t take another fifty years of this Pali Buddhism!” We’ve all experienced some difficult emotion that feels eternal. But thinking that the feeling of eternal depression is permanent is ignorance. If, however, I can introduce the perspective of “With the arising of this, that arises. And with the cessation of this, that ceases” into the negative parts of my experience, then that feeling of eternal misery transforms into the realization that this is just the feeling of eternal misery; it will pass. Now I’m obviously not talking about clinical depression, but rather the more “garden-variety” bouts of unhappiness that we all have.

Another form of ignorance that leads to dukkha is when you perceive that which is not-self as a permanent self. It’s important to remember that the body itself is a part of nature, which is subject to constant change. As such, the emotions within it are also natural, and they too come and go. Yet it’s very tempting to create the sense of a permanent self around a certain mood of the mind, especially an intense one. Years ago, I contracted typhus in Thailand. It was an awful sickness. I remember feeling so utterly wretched and alone that I started to think of my mother—who was living in Canada—comforting me by feeding me grapes. My mood was that of a child wanting protection, although I was about thirty years old at the time.

Because the feeling of vulnerability was so real to me, it easily gave rise to the sense of a helpless, child-like self—as well as a sense of personal drama in my life. If I had clung to that particular self-image, I would have brought even more stress into the sickness by perhaps feeling sorry for myself and so forth. But once the condition (of feeling extremely vulnerable) had passed, so did that particular sense of self. Rather than indulging in thoughts like “Poor me. It’s not fair. I wish I wasn’t here”—which were being driven by my attaching to the sickness as “me” and “mine”—I tried to observe the sickness as a phenomenon in nature, albeit a very unpleasant one. When I was able to do this, I could abide in a mind that was empty of a sense of self. Thus the physical suffering didn’t have to become mental suffering.

So with ignorance as a condition, there’s suffering. Let’s imagine that you went through an acrimonious divorce from your wife five years ago. What happens when someone compliments your former partner? They tell you: “She was really a wonderful woman, wasn’t she?” Your blood boils! With memory as a condition, anger and resentment arise. Then you might think, “You really don’t know her. The things she did to me ….” Another scenario might be: “Oh, no. I thought I had forgiven her. My meditation isn’t working very well. I’m hopeless.” That’s taking the memory of your ex-wife and your reaction to it personally. If, on the other hand, you can choose to see the memory as just memory, and observe that memory feels this way in the body, then there’s no opportunity for a sense of self to get triggered.

And if you do have a strong memory of someone or something, why shouldn’t it be there for a lifetime? Why should it have to end? Its intensity might change, but if you get the right causes and conditions, it’ll continue to arise. That’s just the way memory works: it’s neither good nor bad, although it might be difficult for you to experience. But if you can learn not to take your reaction to the memory personally, then that’s seeing your reaction as not-self. It’s also seeing it as dependently originated. Even if you might feel fury at the memory of a particular person, that’s just fury. There’s no intention to hurt that person. Or if there is a harmful intention forming, then you choose not to act on it. In this way, you’re no longer taking that which is not-self as a permanent self.

Believing that the unsatisfactory is satisfactory is also an aspect of ignorance. This brings us back to the Pali word for suffering or unsatisfactoriness, which is dukkha. This is basically the unpleasant side of sense experience. According to the Buddha, dukkha is comprised of three different facets: dukkha-vedanā (unpleasant or painful sensation); dukkha-saccã (the Noble Truth of Suffering within the Four Noble Truths); and dukkha-lakkhaṇa (unsatisfactoriness as one of the three universal characteristics of existence). So I might say, for example, that the heat in this room this morning was dukkha-vedanā for this body. Right now, the air conditioning is sukha-vedanā (pleasant sensation). These two possibilities express the feeling of attraction or repulsion that’s often present in sense experience.

Within Buddhism, the characteristic of unsatisfactoriness is typically contrasted with what is referred to as the Unconditioned, the Unoriginated, the Unformed, the Island, the Refuge, the Deathless, the Timeless, Peace, nibbāna, or enlightenment. One way to understand these terms is to notice that the knowing/awareness of conditioned phenomena is not a condition. The knowing/awareness of anger is not anger. And the knowing/awareness of doubt is not doubt. Having had his own realization of the Unconditioned, the Buddha was then able to point to that which is not that realization. So he drew our attention to the fact that anything that begins and ends cannot be timeless. In the same way, anything that is dependently originated cannot be independent. And anything that is born and dies cannot be deathless. Hence we see that letting go of the limited leads to the attainment of the unlimited.

As you contemplate the five khandhas (i.e., the body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and sense consciousness) that make up the mind-body experience of a human being, you notice that they’re always dependently originated. Because the khandhas by their very nature arise and pass away, they’re unsatisfactory. They’re not unsatisfactory in that they’re bad. They just have their limits in terms of how much happiness or pleasure they can bring us. For instance, a nice cup of coffee is very enjoyable, but it’s not the Deathless. So we see that the pleasant—or sense happiness—is unsatisfactory in comparison with the Buddha’s realization of a happiness that’s even more profound. The realization of the Unconditioned comes about through the non-grasping of conditions. And the grasping of conditions comes about through greed, hatred, and delusion. When faced with these causes and conditions, my tendency is to love them, hate them, be confused by them, want more of them, want less of them, etc. My mind is almost always preoccupied with my dependently originated reactions to things. So there’s no sense of peace in the mind.

Through noticing this flow of dependently originated change in our inner and outer worlds, the mind begins not to grasp at that which is unsatisfactory. By not grasping at unsatisfactory objects, the mind begins to abide in a clear, silent knowing of the way things truly are. And the more this happens, the more we intuitively know: “Yeah, that feels right. That’s the Path.” Then the sense of renunciation around the objects of sense experience (including thoughts and emotions) becomes very strong, not because we’ve rejected them, but because we now know how limited they are in terms of their capacity to make us happy. That being said, we can still enjoy the goodness of sense objects and the benefits we derive from them. Just think of your favorite piece of music or the beauty of a calm lake. Even if they’re only finite sources of happiness, you don’t make that a problem. They can still be relaxing and uplifting. If we relate to sense objects through the perception of change, then when they do change, we see that the awareness of change is what ultimately leads to the realization of an awareness that is changeless.

So try introducing these kinds of skillful perceptions into your way of relating to your experiences. You’ll get a feeling for what the contemplative life is like in Buddhism. It’s not just about meditation: it also involves an ongoing inner vigilance which is immensely fruitful.

Question and Answer

Question: I have a deep craving for attention, for which I feel a lot of shame. How do I give it up?

Answer (Ajahn Viradhammo): First, you have to simply observe the craving, because acting on it only strengthens it. The craving is analogous to the itch you get when you have poison ivy. When I was a young fellow, I once fell asleep in a patch of poison ivy in a park. It was awful. Most of you probably know what a bout of poison ivy feels like. The poison ivy plant has an acidic liquid that transfers to you on contact, creating a blister on your skin that itches. So you scratch it and it feels good. The act of scratching briefly stops the itch, but it results in a bigger blister forming. Then you determine not to scratch it again. But the itch comes back more intensely! After resisting the urge to scratch for a while, you give in and scratch the itch, which once again feels good … until the itch returns with a vengeance. There’s no doubt that the scratching gives a good result of temporary relief. However, if you want to go beyond the affliction of itching, you have to forgo the short-term satisfaction that comes with scratching your skin. And that’s largely what Buddhism is all about!

If I feel lonely and want attention, that’s a form of craving that has just arisen. That’s the itching. If I make contact with someone, it certainly feels better and it’s not wrong. But if I’m not aware of the desire for attention, then the craving just keeps me in an endless cycle of itching and scratching. At some point, I’ll probably realize that I can’t just keep scratching—that I have to look at what’s causing the itch. So I can decide to investigate this sense of lack that’s coming up. What does the suffering that I have around wanting attention really feel like in the body? I have to bear witness to that feeling of a lack of attention or loneliness, no matter how uncomfortable it gets. This takes a lot of endurance and patience, since this is when the craving mind gets activated. And the more we’ve been unable to be with this suffering in the past, then the more we almost instinctively jump into the craving mode in order to distract ourselves from it.

It can seem counter-intuitive to stay with that unpleasant feeling without judging it, wanting to fix it, etc. But if you can hold in awareness the feeling of being unnoticed or lonely long enough, it will eventually cease, since all conditioned phenomena are subject to change. Because this issue grabs so much of your attention, your best shot at freedom from suffering is the overcoming of this very problem. So you make that your project.

To see the itching and forgo the short-term satisfaction of scratching is a nice model to apply to our practice. It’s important to have the willingness to confront suffering and to try to figure it out in this lifetime. How does it operate? This is the challenge and opportunity that presents itself to us again and again.