## Revisiting the Four Noble Truths

Based on a talk given at the Ecology Retreat Centre in Ontario, Canada, in April 2013, with additional excerpts from a talk given at Bodhinyānārāma Buddhist Monastery in New Zealand in February 2012.

In the remote region of Northeast Thailand, there exists a lineage of highly accomplished Theravada Buddhist teachers dating back to the time of the Buddha. Unfortunately, their teachings—of which we have very few written records—have largely been lost to history. Little is known about these ascetic, forest-dwelling monks prior to the time of Ajahn Mun, who was a renowned meditation teacher in this lineage during the first half of the twentieth century. Ajahn Mun was among the first of these Thai Forest monks to have passages from his discourses recorded for posterity. He, like other practitioners of Forest monasticism, focused on meditation and the development of contemplative insight as the vehicles for realizing enlightenment.

Because we don’t know too much about this lineage, our knowledge of the history of Theravada Buddhism tends to come from the ancient texts of the Pali Canon and their subsequent commentaries. These sources primarily emphasize the perspectives of urban monasteries. As centers of monastic learning and scholarship, these monasteries were considered the “universities” of their day, and attracted the best Buddhist scholars and intellectuals. We’re extremely fortunate that these texts have been preserved over the centuries.

However, as a forest monk, a great part of my own learning stems from the oral tradition of a teacher instructing a pupil according to the pupil’s needs and level of understanding of the Dhamma. This one-on-one interaction between a teacher and disciple is obviously very important, whether it involves a discussion of the Buddha’s first discourse, or coming to a contemporary understanding of what the attachment to rites and rituals means. Also, there’s nothing like a real-life examination of a given theme by a living teacher who can illustrate their points using culturally relevant analogies and metaphors to broaden one’s understanding of a subject. Consequently, I’ve always appreciated the Dhamma talks given by contemporary forest practitioners such as Ajahn Chah, Ajahn Sumedho, my peers, and others. Their teachings can be quite penetrating because rather than expressing the Dhamma using stories and analogies found in the Pali Canon, they use pertinent examples from our times and our cultures to elucidate the principles. And because aspects of these teachings often derive from the teacher’s own direct meditative experiences and insights, they can suggest different ways in which to work at overcoming suffering.

A more scholarly monk, on the other hand, might typically expound the teachings by making reference to the ancient texts and presenting examples and stories that were believed to be from the Buddha himself. While this traditional sutta-based approach to teaching the Dhamma has been the cornerstone of Theravada Buddhism for over two-and-a-half millennia, there’s also been this oral, unrecorded transmission of ideas that has existed since the time of the Buddha. This more unconventional way of reflecting on the teachings can sometimes be controversial, but it certainly wakes you up. If you’re used to hearing a teaching in one way and then it’s presented to you in another way, that’s valuable because it makes you re-explore the teaching rather than just routinely agreeing with it in a manner that doesn’t inspire you to apply it to your own life. For this reason, it’s very helpful and important to get different perspectives on the Buddha’s basic teachings.

Ajahn Dune was another monk in the Thai Forest tradition who could present the Dhamma in an entirely new light. Ajahn Dune was born in 1888 in a village in Surin province in Northeast Thailand, and ordained at the age of twenty-two. He was a town monk for several years until he got fed up with all the rituals and left for Ubon to study the Dhamma in greater depth. Several years later he met the esteemed Ajahn Mun, who was a great ascetic wanderer. Ajahn Dune was so inspired by his teachings and the forest practice that he re-ordained in Ajahn Mun’s sect, himself becoming an itinerant forest monk under the guidance of his accomplished teacher. In the course of his wanderings, Ajahn Dune practiced meditation continuously and lived a very simple, austere life—much like the hermit monks of China.

After almost twenty years of wandering in the forests and mountains of Thailand and Cambodia, Ajahn Dune was called back to Surin by his ecclesiastical elders. He was then asked to become the abbot of a town monastery, which would have been a challenge for him. He remained at the busy, academically-oriented monastery of Wat Burapha for the next fifty years. It probably wasn’t his cup of tea, yet he agreed to serve in this way. Ajahn Dune was famous for not giving Dhamma talks. Yet he was generous with his advice and made himself available to anyone, at all times. His teaching style was more satsang, and involved exchanging questions and answers within the context of a genuine spiritual gathering. Ajahn Dune’s teachings were succinct and very powerful, including one given on the Four Noble Truths.

The traditional expression of the Buddha’s Four Noble Truths is that there is the Noble Truth of suffering (dukkha-saccã); there is the Noble Truth of the cause of suffering (samudaya-saccã); there is the Noble Truth of the cessation of suffering (nirodha-saccã); and there is the Noble Truth of the Path leading to the cessation of suffering (magga-saccã). In addition, the Noble Truth of suffering has to be understood; the Noble Truth of the cause of suffering has to be abandoned; the Noble Truth of the cessation of suffering has to be realized; and the Noble Truth of the Path has to be developed. The Buddha then states that as a result of having practiced in these ways, the Noble Truth of suffering has been understood; the Noble Truth of the cause of suffering has been abandoned; the Noble Truth of the cessation of suffering has been realized; and the Noble Truth of the Path has been developed.

Suffering (dukkha), in the sense in which the Buddha uses it, can mean discontent, trauma, stress, or any situation in which the heart feels a sense of lack or let-down. So that’s the classic twelve-factor formulation: four truths, each with its three aspects. You should memorize that formulation and be able to write it out for yourself. You can then draw on it as a contemplative tool, thereby making the Four Noble Truths an essential part of your consciousness.

Before I present Ajahn Dune’s reworking of the Four Noble Truths, I’ll briefly review some of the Buddha’s teachings. The Pali term for cessation is “nirodha.” This is a problematic word to translate because it’s used in various ways in different contexts. Nirodha can mean cessation, as in something decaying or naturally fading away. Feelings of pleasure and pain, for example, cease as a result of the inevitable process of things changing. Nirodha can also signify the cessation of a certain phenomenon when its supportive or causal factors are no longer there. For example, when electricity is not present, there is no luminosity in the light bulb. Now that’s a different way of thinking about cessation which can lead us to a more complete understanding of the Four Noble Truths.

According to the Second Noble Truth, the cause of suffering is the attachment to craving, which can also be expressed as a kind of compulsive wanting. So the abandonment or relinquishment of this persistent wanting is what leads to the realization of the Third Noble Truth (i.e., the cessation of suffering). Using the analogy of a wheel with its rim and hub, craving is always intent on going out to objects on the rim. These objects can be thoughts about the past or future, material items such as food or new forms of technology, someone’s approval, and so on. Craving is also associated with the ignorance of self-view: it’s about me getting something in time.

Craving can take the form of sense craving, craving to become something, or craving to get rid of something. Sense craving involves the pursuit and consumption of sense pleasures in their many forms. The craving to become is an expression of our ego-based desires, such as our wanting to get somewhere or be someone. A good example of this is the desire to become a person who has a perfect relationship with a perfect partner in a perfect home overlooking a perfect seascape in a tropical paradise. The craving to get rid of, or annihilate, points to our wanting things to be different than they actually are. For instance, if you’ve judged your tendency to get angry or annoyed in certain situations as terrible and pathetic, then you might desire to become a person who never loses their temper and is always perfectly composed and compassionate in all circumstances. In other words, the craving to get rid of certain personality traits has now arisen.

The abandonment of these three forms of craving is the Third Noble Truth. When you hear about the idea of the cessation of suffering in Buddhism, you might feel a bit daunted and think, “I’ve got a lot of work to do. This suffering isn’t about to cease!” But if you consider nirodha in the second way in which I’ve been talking about it, and reflect on the fact that when the supporting conditions for suffering are not there, then suffering is not there, you have a more concrete and direct understanding of how the end of suffering comes about. In other words, you now know what to let go of in order to bring suffering to an end.

In 1956, Ajahn Dune reformulated the Four Noble Truths to read:

“The mind sent outside is the origination of suffering. The result of the mind sent outside is suffering. The mind seeing the mind is the path. The result of the mind seeing the mind is the cessation of suffering.”

~ Ajahn Dune, “Gifts He Left Behind: The Dhamma Legacy of Ajaan Dune Atulo,” collected teachings complied by Phra Bodhinandamuni

He’s rearranged the traditional order of the Noble Truths: Second, First, Fourth, and Third. You could spend a lifetime contemplating this unconventional approach to the teachings. Since Ajahn Dune states that the cause of suffering is “the mind sent outside,” you might begin by asking yourself: “What does ‘outside’ mean?” In Buddhism, the idea of “outside” isn’t a physical location, like the foyer of this building. Rather, “outside” in this context refers to any object of consciousness that the mind goes out to, including bodily sensations. For instance, I might be sitting in meditation and my knee suddenly begins to hurt. I start to get restless and look at the clock. There’s twenty minutes left in the session, so my mind starts to think about those twenty minutes. I begin to wonder: “What if this pain gets worse? Should I move my leg?” As a result of the mind getting snarled in physical discomfort, a sense of self gets born, as well as a sense of time.

Because my mind has gone out to this pain, I’m now experiencing the truth of Ajahn Dune’s second statement: “The result of the mind sent outside is suffering.” The suffering isn’t the physical discomfort in my knee; it’s all the other stuff going on that’s leaving me feeling agitated and upset. It’s important to remember that something which is unpleasant (such as loud traffic noises, extremely cold weather, or fear) is not dukkha. The unpleasant becomes dukkha only when I get caught up in it. What do I mean by that? All of us have experienced physical discomfort of some kind, and it’s not suffering: it’s just discomfort. Discomfort is natural—it’s part of the human condition. When does it become suffering? When there’s the aversion to it (which makes it feel even worse), the worrying about how long it will last, the wanting to get rid of it, the attempts to distract oneself from it, and so on. In this way, we fully go out to the physical displeasure.

Another illustration of this second part of Ajahn Dune’s equation is when the mind follows a powerful memory. Let’s say that several years ago you ended your closest friendship after discovering that your best friend had been bad-mouthing you for years behind your back. This experience left you feeling extremely angry and betrayed. One day, a mutual friend suddenly praises your ex-best-friend. Your first reaction is one of disbelief and rage, and you think, “You really don’t know what they’re capable of.” A powerful memory has now surfaced in consciousness and you choose to give your full attention to it. Consequently, all sorts of emotionally charged thoughts are activated (“That person treated me so badly,” “I was so stupid to trust them,” etc.), and a sense of self is created. This is another example of the second formulation: “The result of the mind sent outside is suffering.”

Even when the mind pursues pleasant objects, we experience dukkha. For instance, I might have a nice memory of my late mum emerge into consciousness. I might recall how happy she was whenever I brought her fresh-cut flowers. If I’m not careful, I can get quite involved in that memory, which makes me think about her even more. Even though I’m immersed in some lovely memories of my mother, there’s still suffering or unsatisfactoriness there because these warm memories will inevitably dissolve. They’re also keeping me from abiding in the peace of the present moment, which is free of any form of craving or clinging to transitory things. Another danger of entering into pleasant thoughts is that while they can be very enjoyable, there’s still a sense of self or “me” informing them. And if I entertain pleasant thoughts by following the storylines of self, I’ll also develop a habit of doing the same with negative thoughts. In effect, both of these tendencies will keep me preoccupied with the objects of thought, emotion, and memory. The mind simply won’t have the space to realize the peace of non-preoccupation. So, what to do?

Ajahn Dune proposes that we train in “the mind seeing the mind” as a means of realizing the cessation of suffering. This meditation practice, which is found in many spiritual traditions, is also spoken of as “awareness of awareness” or “witnessing the witness.” So how do we practice this? Well, let’s imagine that someone else brings up the subject of your ex-best-friend again. The same painful memory comes up, but this time you just stay with that uncomfortable feeling in the body, noting: “Memory feels this way.” The recollection of your duplicitous friend still has emotional power—it still wants to create a sense of self and a whole host of thoughts around it. But you simply stay with awareness: “Yeah, this memory is really strong. It feels this way.” If you don’t go out to the memory, the energy of suffering is not fed. And because it’s not fed, it eventually dies. The same is true of mental objects such as greed, worry, aversion, jealousy, loneliness, and so forth. If you’re able to see them as they arise in the mind and just know that greed or worry feels this way, without grasping at them, then there’s no opportunity for suffering to take hold of the mind. This is the path of the mind seeing the mind.

Let’s return to the earlier example of the discomfort in my knee. Because I’m now practicing the mind knowing the mind, I notice the mind wanting to do something about that pain. I can see it starting to veer towards craving for the discomfort to end. Since I’m aware of the craving, I simply focus on how craving feels in the body, rather than following it. If I just bear witness to the energy of craving, sooner or later it runs out of steam. Because the mind is aware of what’s going on in the mind, I can also see its attempt to go out to the clock; so I note: “It’s just this way.” Moreover, I’m now able to recognize more clearly when the sense of self is trying to regain its foothold in my consciousness (“What if I need to have a knee operation?” etc.). However, I don’t buy into that either. I simply pay close attention to that sense of self being born until it eventually ceases. In this way, I begin to be at peace with discomfort. Thus I experience for myself the truth of Ajahn Dune’s statement: “The result of the mind seeing the mind is the cessation of suffering.” That whole disturbance of the mind has come to an end.

If you stay with the practice of the mind knowing the mind, ignorance falls away. Ignorance is always tied to the sense of self that gets embedded in a sense experience. We’re simply conditioned through habit to think that if something is happening in the mind or body, it must be happening to me: a separate self with specific, lasting qualities. When you identify with a particular experience of the mind or body, you can forget that its very nature is one of impermanence. Instead, you might be inclined to define yourself as someone who is in pain, for example. This can make the experience of physical pain seem even more substantial and lasting than it actually is. You can even feel like the experience will never end. The perception of not-self (anattā) isn’t saying that there’s no discomfort in your knee—your knee pain obviously still exists. And the concept of anattā isn’t denying your sense of individuality. Rather, it’s pointing to the fact that the idea of a true and fixed self is merely a fabrication devoid of any real substance. So even if feelings of discomfort are still arising in your knee, they’re experienced as mere sensations that are no longer conjoined with ignorance.

As you continue to train in the mind seeing the mind, you see that whole sense of “I,” “me,” and “mine” simply arising and passing away. That’s the realization of emptiness. In Theravada Buddhism, emptiness is synonymous with not-self. With the realization of emptiness comes the cessation of suffering. Why? Because the supportive condition of ignorance is absent—although it can certainly resurface later. Conditions such as memories, thoughts, emotions, and perceptions are still there, as are bodily feelings; but there is no suffering because there is no one suffering. As this insight takes root, it becomes a foundation for peace.

So if Ajahn Dune’s way of practicing appeals to you, give it a go. But it’s also essential to return to the traditional teaching of the abandonment of craving. To see craving simply as a mental object or impulse that comes and goes, and not pursue its pull is crucial. You learn this in meditation, when you’re able to clearly see how indulging your craving precipitates some degree of suffering. If we go back to our earlier example of knee pain during meditation, we get a sense of how quickly craving in the form of wanting my pain to go away can arise. Quite often, you’ll also start to fixate on the time: “Oh gosh, I hope the next twenty minutes go by fast!” When you’re this caught up in craving, you know it’s going to be a long twenty minutes. If you’re already embroiled in the suffering of persistent wanting, you can try working with the practice of the mind knowing the mind. By training in this way, you’re not going to punish yourself for having those craving-based thoughts, since you’re more interested in what’s causing the discomfort in your body to escalate into dukkha. It’s ignorance, of course.

Whether you’re working with the standard rendition of the Four Noble Truths or Ajahn Dune’s reformulation of it, the point is to apply this reflective framework to your own consciousness. You can ask yourself: “How does my mind ‘go out’ in my own life?” You can see what happens when your mind is sent outside by comparing that experience to what it’s like to be home. In meditation, you learn to come home—that is, to just “be here now,” in the words of Ram Dass. The terms often used to describe being in the present moment are “non-becoming,” “non-rejecting,” and “receptive.” This is the language of not going anywhere. So you establish in your own heart and mind what it means to be home. Then you try to make that capacity to be present, to be aware of the way things are, stronger and stronger in your daily life. In this way, you really begin to see for yourself that the mind sent outside is truly the origin of suffering.