## Making the Dhamma Our Own

In Buddhism, we gain a type of experientially acquired knowledge that grows in our hearts through what we call “practice.” We use the word “practice” in Buddhism much more than we use the word “belief.” We don’t say to each other: “How’s your belief going?” Instead, we ask, “How’s your practice going?” It’s a different way of learning.

Some of our Sri Lankan friends studied Buddhism as a subject in high school. Here in the West, you might decide to take a course in Comparative Religion to learn about it. When you learn about Buddhism’s history and its various beliefs through formal study, you end up with an academic knowledge of Buddhism. You might even get an A+ on the final exam; but then when you arrive home, you get into a furious argument with your brother. Although you have what’s called an “explicit knowledge” of Buddhism that’s easily shared with others, it hasn’t helped to liberate you, has it?

Intellectual learning gives us intellectual knowledge. Having an intellectual knowledge of Buddhism is akin to memorizing instructions on how to cook rice. Just because we’ve read or memorized the instructions doesn’t mean we’re going to be successful at cooking rice. To put it simply, we won’t really know how to cook rice until we’ve done it ourselves. To be successful at it, we need to put into practice the knowledge we’ve gained.

This second, more experiential way of learning is called “implicit learning,” which gives us “implicit knowledge.” Implicit knowledge is not the kind of superficial information that we can jot down on an examination paper as a result of having memorized it. It’s much deeper and harder to put into words than that. Implicit knowledge is something we learn for ourselves through practice, through trial and error. Implicit learning involves a particular type of process for acquiring knowledge. For example, we might read a set of instructions and then want to apply them. So we proceed to try to follow the instructions in real life, but then discover that things aren’t working out well. Consequently, we go back and reread the instructions to figure out what we may have done wrong. Eventually, there’s that “Aha!” moment when we’re able to carry out the instructions successfully. But to reach that point, we have to keep putting the instructions into practice until we get things right.

Right Understanding

We develop insight into the Dhamma, or the truth of the ways things are, in the same way: through the implicit knowledge we acquire through practice. To live our lives in accordance with the Dhamma, we have to understand certain ideas, just as we have to understand the cooking instructions on the packet of rice before attempting to make the rice. The ideas that we first need to grasp include that of impermanence, causality, the cause of suffering, and so on. We achieve this preliminary understanding by taking up the Buddha’s teachings and asking, “What do they really mean?” We have to ponder them and work through them. When we use the intellect in this way to study the Buddha’s teachings, we begin to establish what we call “right understanding” (sammā-diṭṭhi), which is the first part of the Noble Eightfold Path. Right understanding is the deep understanding of the Dhamma that we acquire from reflecting on the teachings of the Buddha, and then applying them to our own lives.

So gaining an intellectual comprehension of the Buddha’s teachings from studying or reading books about Buddhism is the beginning of the process of developing right understanding. Then you can begin to make an effort to bring your energies, personal narratives, and habits in line with the Buddha’s teachings. It’s important to bear in mind that the intellectual knowledge we’ve acquired about Buddhism isn’t meant to be left as just a set of interesting ideas. What would be the benefit of that? Therefore, we try to apply our understanding of the teachings to our lives. As we do this more and more, different types of insights into the truth of the way things are start to arise that are very personal; they represent the kind of implicit knowledge we’ve been talking about. For instance, the First Noble Truth asks us to understand suffering not just intellectually, but as a concrete, lived experience. Thus we are being asked to patiently observe the various forms of discontent that arise in our mind until we have gained an intuitive understanding of the nature of our inner stress and conflict.

As your practice deepens, the implicit knowledge you attain into the nature of what-is becomes even more profound. And even if you can’t articulate this knowledge, you certainly have it. You have it because you’ve done the work of observing your inner world, which has enabled you to glean insights into the workings of your mind. After all of that trying and making of mistakes and then trying again, you’ve had some success, which gives you confidence. You think, “I know this way of inner reflection works.” And if someone says to you, “That’s a load of rubbish,” you think, “That’s OK because I know this works.” You’ve seen the results for yourself. You’ve had some deep insights into the causes of human suffering and how you can begin to let go of them.

Right Intention

Without insight into how things really are, life can appear to be little more than a series of random experiences of suffering from which we’re constantly trying to escape. But as our understanding and implicit knowledge of the Dhamma become more profound, we begin to make the Dhamma truly ours. Rather than viewing it merely as intellectual knowledge or as something belonging exclusively to the Buddha or the monks, we start to “own it,” as they say in modern parlance. When we begin to make the Dhamma our own, it conditions the way we create our intentions. This brings us to the second part of the Noble Eightfold Path, called “right intention” (sammā-sankappa). Right intention is very far-reaching in that it refers to the entire inclination of your life: how you’re thinking and how you’re approaching this craft of living your life.

Let’s go back to right understanding for a moment. Right understanding, in the way that I’ve been talking about it, means that you’ve acquired implicit knowledge about how to work with negative habit patterns. You’ve gained this knowledge through studying the Buddha’s teachings and then making an effort to bring those negative habit patterns into accord with them. That implicit knowledge is your right understanding. And right understanding ensures that your thinking mind will be in line with the Dhamma when those unskillful habit patterns come up again. Say, for example, you have a colleague at work who really annoys you. If you have right understanding in regard to your annoyance, then when your co-worker starts to bother you, your thinking mind will remind you to “Be mindful. Be careful,” or “Pay attention to the body.” There’s a thinking process going on that isn’t random, impulsive, or reactive.

This kind of experientially acquired knowledge is what leads to right intention. As you gain implicit knowledge into the way your mind works as a result of applying the Buddha’s teachings, your mind begins to incline in new directions. It now inclines towards renunciation, harmlessness, and goodwill towards oneself and others. So how might I set a right intention? Let’s say that I begin to notice that I’m habitually critical and judgmental of myself and others. Because I realize how much suffering this creates, I make an intention to notice the arising of these recurring judgments and then give up that behavior. So with applied attention and intention, which are based on my insights and the desire to be free from suffering, I slowly abandon my unskillful habits and acquire more skill in living a truly wholesome life.

Setting the right intention, however, doesn’t necessarily mean that the follow-through will be easy. Some things have very simple instructions, but are extremely hard to do. For instance, if you have diabetes, your recommended diet is quite strict: no high-sugar or high-carb foods, and so on. The instructions are easy enough—just don’t eat the things you’re not supposed to; but following them is more difficult. While it’s usually fairly obvious what your path of skillful conduct should be, something inside of you often resists following it. Take self-disparagement, for example. I talk a lot about that because people ask me about it and I suffer from it, too. Simply put, if you want to stop being self-disparaging, just be kind to yourself. The instructions are straightforward, but our habits can be exceedingly hard to break.

Despite having clear insights into how to deal with our difficult habit patterns, we’re still up against the forces of kamma—or the consequences brought about by our intentional actions of body, speech, and mind—which, if unwholesome, can keep us at least temporarily snarled in the energies of greed, hated, and delusion. For instance, the mind can get deluded around certain areas of our lives. If we see that we’re repeatedly falling back into old modes of suffering, then there’s something we haven’t fully understood yet, there’s some aspect of the Dhamma we haven’t truly made our own. So we need to keep trying to see why we’re succumbing to these modes of suffering until insight arises. This persistence in wanting to understand is very important because it’s those areas where we get most caught up in suffering that provide us with the richest opportunities for developing our capacity to let go. Like it or not, these difficult areas are our teachers.

Let’s take road-rage as an example. If I typically suffer from road-rage, it’s likely that I’ll eventually see how harmful and futile this form of behavior is, and then begin to shift my attitude in the direction of equanimity and patience with the way things are while driving. In our practice, we’re continually trying to understand the structures of suffering, discontent, and conflict. Once we gain some understanding into the nature of these things, we can then work on developing ways of keeping our attention from getting “hijacked” by them. These efforts to prevent our attention from getting caught up in difficult mind-states are very personal and unique to each individual.

Right Effort

This brings us to the sixth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path known as “right effort” (sammā-vāyāma). Right effort involves trying to sustain wholesome qualities and abandon unwholesome ones. The intention to understand the various forms of suffering is an important wholesome quality. It stands in stark contrast to the intention to try to get rid of suffering, which is not the Dhamma—it’s simply aversion. So we apply right effort to try to sustain this powerful intention. Making the effort to understand the Buddha’s teachings around suffering is an intelligent approach to take when it comes to wanting to be free of our distress. As the saying goes: “When all else fails, read the instructions.” What do the instructions say? They say that if you’re suffering, you have to let go. What do you have to let go of? You don’t know. So you struggle with these things. The struggling itself is important because it’s through that struggle to understand how to let go of suffering that implicit knowledge arises. It’s like grappling with a complicated recipe: What do they mean by a pinch of salt? It’s through this intense effort to understand that you learn.

The effort to develop wholesome states of mind and release unwholesome ones can be coarse or subtle. Perhaps you’re getting impatient with someone and you’re aware of wanting to say something nasty, even though you know that the consequences would be disastrous. In this case, you need to apply strong effort to stop yourself from blurting out something hurtful. So you might just say to yourself, “Be careful, be careful, be careful ….” Right effort can be very subtle, too. When your energies are balanced and you’re able to stay with the breath, you hardly have to make any effort to cultivate or relinquish certain states of mind. You might only have to make infrequent inner suggestions such as “peace” or “quietly.” Right effort is a necessary part of the Path, but you need to know how much effort to apply in different situations.

Right Mindfulness

The seventh stage of the Noble Eightfold Path, called “right mindfulness” (sammā-sati), can help you to gauge which amount of right effort is appropriate at a given time. Right mindfulness is the capacity to be fully in the moment and aware of what’s happening in our body and mind, as well as in the world around us. This includes noticing and closely observing whatever changes are taking place in and around us. Right mindfulness is supported by right understanding, right intention, and right effort. It’s cultivated and deliberately sustained by wisdom. If we’re unable to sustain mindful awareness for any length of time, we won’t be able to see the workings of cause and effect as they pertain to our thoughts, words, and deeds. Without right mindfulness, we can’t see the results of our efforts, nor can we see how conditions arise and whether or not we’re dealing with them skillfully or unskillfully. That’s why the need to be mindful is consistently emphasized in the early teachings of the Buddha.

This capacity to be mindful means that no matter what we’re doing, we’re present to it. Mindfulness begins to shine a light on our reasons for acting in the ways that we do. For instance, we can be mindful of the intention or motive that underlies our effort to work with restlessness during meditation. We can ask ourselves, “What’s my intention here? What’s the motivation behind the effort I’m making?” We might see that our intention isn’t to understand restlessness, but rather to get rid of it. Then perhaps we’ll see that wanting to get rid of something doesn’t work too well, and that if the motivation behind the effort we’re making is wrong, then the results won’t be beneficial. If we’re not mindful of our intentions, we won’t understand why we’re getting bad results from the effort we’re putting forth. So it is essential to have the intention to practice sustained awareness.

In our effort to sustain awareness, we need to keep a close eye on our use of willpower to make sure we’re applying it skillfully. In my own practice, I’ve seen how there can often be a willful desire to overcome certain hindrances. On a certain level, this makes sense. But whenever I’ve attempted to impose my will in a more forceful way to try and turn a situation around, it hasn’t worked; it’s just made me tense. Self-disparagement isn’t fruitful either. Willfully commanding: “I shouldn’t be like this. I should be different,” really doesn’t help. But we can come at it from a different angle by gently suggesting, “May I be free from suffering. May all beings be free from suffering.” This has a different effect: the former is rooted in aggression, while the latter is rooted in compassion. Our intentions are now coming from a place of skill, wisdom, and understanding of the Dhamma.

Right Concentration

Along with right effort and right mindfulness, we have “right concentration” (sammā-samādhi). This eighth factor of the Path completes the three “mental discipline” factors we’re working with. Right concentration is the capacity of the mind to stay closely focused on one object of attention (such as the breath) for longer lengths of time. In a 45-minute meditation session, for example, we can lose our concentration many times. To sustain our focus, we can ask ourselves, “How does our focus get lost in delusions? Why is it so difficult to stay present to a simple thing like the breath?” This basic line of inquiry can help us to see the mind’s tendency to go to the past or future. This is important, because if we want to stay focused during meditation, we’re going to have to find a way to address the mind’s propensity to dwell either in the future or the past. So perhaps we set an intention to say, “Later. Not now,” whenever a thought about the future comes up that we want to follow up on.

One way or another, we have to make the intention and the effort to awaken. How do we do this when the mind gets confused, sleepy, annoyed, lonely, or jealous? The secret is to be curious about the very state of mind that seems problematic. Let confusion come into consciousness. Let jealousy come into consciousness. Let whatever mood that’s arising become fully conscious. How to do this? Observe the mood before you start thinking about it, analyzing it, or making it a problem. How does that mood feel in the body? This brings us to the First Noble Truth—which is the truth of suffering. To understand suffering, we need to allow it to come into consciousness as a direct experience without an overlay of judgements and opinions, so that we actually feel the suffering rather than just thinking about it. This experience of direct knowing allows our natural intelligence to understand the way things are. This work requires patience and trust in the practice. But it’s this kind of inner inquisitiveness that keeps us interested in the very things that can otherwise appear confusing or troubling to us. And it’s because of this curiosity and inner vigilance that we gain insight.

The Interconnectedness of the Mental Discipline Factors

In a sense, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration are what we’re always working with in our practice. Once you begin to get a handle on the precise conditions that trigger in you a sense of unease, then the factors of effort, mindfulness, and concentration become honed to very specific things. Maybe it’s your relationship to your spouse or your children. If you’re a parent, for instance, a large component of your practice might center on understanding and thereby attempting to release the feelings of stress that arise around your children’s welfare. The very areas of your life that are sources of suffering for you can also help you to develop all the inner qualities which are necessary for attaining peace.

Repetition is a wonderful tool for helping us to hone in on the behavior patterns that bring stress into our lives. We see this with monastic life, which is extremely repetitive. The same Pali chanting has been going on for 2,500 years now. As monks, we do the same few chants again and again; we live with the same people; we more or less follow the same monastic schedule; and so on. This high degree of repetition means that there’s a chance for us to “get things right” eventually. It’s like the movie “Groundhog Day.” Let’s say that I acted unskillfully with one of the newer monks: I really lost my temper with him, which caused a lot of stress for both of us. The next day, I get an opportunity to interact with him again; but now I make a point of applying the three factors of mental discipline to get things right this time.

A more varied lifestyle is harder to practice with because the situations we encounter are so different that we may not realize that it’s the same patterns of reactivity that keep cropping up. A more repetitive lifestyle, on the other hand, gives you the chance to see your reactions to a particular condition (or triggering event) over and over. This kind of environment—where you’re dealing with the same group of people, at the same location, who are doing the same work—can be very good for developing insight. It can show you the precise patterns of reactivity that your mind tends to fall into again and again. Of course, this kind of situation may be too crushing and consequently unhealthy for some people.

Right Speech, Right Action, and Right Livelihood

There are three factors in the Noble Eightfold Path that directly address the way we live our lives: “right speech” (sammā-vācā), “right action” (sammā-kammanta), and “right livelihood” (sammā-ājīva). Right speech refers to speech that is truthful, harmonious, soothing, and worth taking to heart. Difficulties around speech come up a lot for most people. For this reason, the capacity to be mindful of speech, to pause speech, and to see the result of speech in our hearts is very edifying. As we become aware of the effect that our speech has on ourselves and on others, we gain a better understanding of our inner life and once again abandon some of the causes of our suffering. It’s extremely important to develop an awareness of speech, since speech can be very reactive and quite easily misunderstood.

Let’s imagine that someone says something to me that sounds like a personal criticism. Instead of waiting to respond, I just blurt out something hurtful back to them. If I had been more mindful of my speech, I could have held my reaction in check and made a more conciliatory type of remark. In effect, I could have made the other person feel more peaceful, as opposed to exacerbating their anger towards me, which also compounds my own suffering. That capacity to pause, to not say the first thing that comes to mind, takes a lot of mindfulness. Because so much of our lives revolves around the way we relate to one another through speech, there are ample opportunities for things to go wrong. For this reason, the capacity to know the intention behind our words is an essential part of our practice.

To better understand your intention, you can ask yourself, “Is my intention for speaking skillful or unskillful? Is it rooted in compassion and wisdom, or is it simply the product of habitual delusion?” To illustrate what I mean by speech that’s motivated by habitual delusion, let’s say that I had learned as a youngster that whenever I got angry, people would give me what I wanted. That way of speaking from anger then becomes a habit I fall into whenever I’m not getting what I want. Even though these belligerent outbursts aren’t producing good results for me as an adult, I’m still engaging in them thinking that they’ll somehow work to my advantage. If I see a situation (like this one) where I’m continually getting tied up in wrong speech, I can think, “OK, I know this area is difficult for me. But I’m going to try to see if I can be more aware and careful with my speech here.”

This intention is one which aspires to freedom rather than self-judgment. A mind that is very self-averse will tend to come down heavily on minor mistakes by thinking, “Well, I shouldn’t have spoken in that way. I should have been more mindful.” Maybe so, but putting yourself down doesn’t make you more mindful the next time. Intentions that recognize the problem but avoid self-deprecation are usually more effective. Consequently, it’s better to think, “OK, that produced a bad result. I’m going to see if I can cultivate more awareness the next time I’m in a similar situation. I’m going to try to breathe more, or pause more, or be more aware of my tendency to react blindly to things.”

Our insights and good intentions need to be in sync with the way we act, speak, and live in the world. If we’re not acting on our newfound understanding of the causes of suffering, then we’re not keeping faith with the Dhamma. True insight gives rise to right action, right speech, and right livelihood. This means that we live in a way which causes the least amount of harm to ourselves and others, while contributing to the well-being of all sentient beings. Our wholesome intentions also help to create the sustained mindfulness that we need in order to relinquish suffering. Simply making the intention to try to be more aware and more careful in the areas where we lack mindfulness is very powerful because it reminds us to pay attention to life as it presents itself to us. In fact, trying to sustain mindfulness in those areas where we get most caught up in reactivity is one of the most important aspects of what we call “practice.” Although it’s challenging, we have to keep at it.

I happen to enjoy trying to solve puzzles that involve string. But the real puzzle in life pertains to inner freedom. What’s holding me back from being free of stress, of unease, right now? Why isn’t my heart open to the way things are? That’s the real puzzle. What greater thing could we do in this lifetime than solve that puzzle so the heart and mind can be liberated? So we strive to make the Dhamma our own. Only once it’s our own, can we offer it to others.