## Glossary

Pali is the scriptural language of the Theravada Buddhist tradition. Several Pali words, as well as some Thai words, are used throughout this book. This glossary briefly defines those terms.

adhiṭṭhāna: determination, resolution.  Ajahn (Thai): teacher.  anattā: not-self, impersonal, without individual essence.  anicca: impermanent, inconstant, uncertain. anicca-saññā: the perception of impermanence or change.  añjali: to join the palms in a reverential gesture of respect.  anusaya: latent tendencies, predispositions.

bhāvanā: cultivation of mind. bhava-taṇhā: desire to become something.bhikkhu: a fully-ordained Buddhist monk.brahmavihāras: sublime states of mind (goodwill, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity).Buddhānussati: recollection of the Buddha.

dāna: generosity, giving.Dhamma: natural law, the teaching of the Buddha.dhamma-vicaya: investigation, contemplation of Dhamma.dosa: ill-will, hatred.dukkha: suffering, stress, unsatisfactoriness.dukkha-lakkhaṇa: unsatisfactoriness as one of the three universal characteristics of existence.dukkha-saccã: the First Noble Truth of suffering.dukkha-vedanā: unpleasant or painful sensation.

kāma-taṇhā: sense desire.kamma (Skt. karma): intentional action.karuṇā: compassion.khandhas: aggregates—the five components comprising physical and mental experience (form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and sense consciousness).khanti: patience, forbearance.

lobha: greed, unskillful desire.

magga-saccã: the Fourth Noble Truth of the Path leading to the cessation of suffering.mettā: goodwill, loving-kindness.muditā: appreciative joy, joy at others’ welfare.

nekkhamma: renunciation.nibbāna (Skt. nirvāna): the extinguishing or dying out of the “fires” of greed, hatred, and delusion.nirodha: cessation.nirodha-saccã: the Third Noble Truth of the cessation of suffering.

pañcasīla: the five “precepts” or guidelines in Buddhism for training in wholesome actions of body and speech.parinibbāna: the “complete extinction” or final nibbāna following the bodily death of an enlightened being.pariyatti: theoretical understanding of Dhamma obtained through reading, study, and learning.poo roo (Thai): to be the knowing.

samādhi: concentration, unification of mind.samana: contemplative, renunciant.sammā-ājīva: right livelihood; the fifth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-diṭṭhi: right view; the first factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-kammanta: right action; the fourth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-samādhi: right concentration; the eighth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-sankappa: right intention; the second factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-sati: right mindfulness; the seventh factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-vācā: right speech; the third factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.sammā-vāyāma: right effort; the sixth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.samudaya-saccã: the Second Noble Truth of the cause of suffering.Sangha: international community of renunciate disciples, and collective of those who have experienced some degree of realization (ariyan Sangha).sati: mindfulness.sukha-vedanā: pleasant sensation.sutta: discourse or sermon by the Buddha or one of his contemporary disciples.

taṇhā: craving, thirst.Theravada: literally “Way of the Elders”; the oldest still-existing school of Buddhism grounded in the discourses recorded in the Pali Canon.

upekkhā: equanimity.Uposatha: Observance Day (corresponding to the phases of the moon) on which Buddhists gather to reaffirm the precepts, listen to the Dhamma, and practice meditation.

vibhava-taṇhā: desire to get rid of something.Vinaya: the monastic discipline, or the scriptural collection of its rules and commentaries on them.

wat (Thai): monastery.wat pah/ba (Thai):  forest monastery.