## Stepping Outside of Our Comfort Zones

Based on a talk given on a Uposatha day at Tisarana Monastery in 2013.

Today at the monastery, we have the opportunity to sit in meditation until midnight. So we can make the effort to do that, switching to walking meditation when we need to. Sleep is a very attractive thing, so a lot of aversion can arise from not being able to lie down and rest. The Thai Forest monastic tradition encourages us to experiment with discomfort, using it as a source of investigation rather than as a form of self-mortification.

By putting forth the effort to meditate well past our usual bedtime, we’re ensuring that our practice isn’t just limited to sitting when it feels comfortable, or for the length of time that suits us. By challenging ourselves in this way, we’re being made to look at the discomfort associated with doing what we don’t want to do and not doing what we want to do. Ajahn Chah used to encourage us to frustrate desire and then learn how to be patient with unfulfilled desire. In this way, we develop the kind of resilience and strength of character that serve to lay a foundation for peace and well-being in all circumstances. Without these qualities, we’re easily cast into suffering by the fickle winds of fortune, sometimes getting what we want, but often getting what we don’t want. Of course, you don’t want to make the mistake of turning this type of training into a willful practice of self-mortification that’s devoid of wisdom and skillful intention.

The study of the Dhamma is another area that often requires us to venture outside of our comfort zones. Pariyatti—which is the Pali word for the theoretical comprehension of the Dhamma acquired through reading and study—is an important part of Theravada Buddhism. For anyone intent on pursuing the Noble Eightfold Path, there has to be a deep curiosity about the Buddha’s teachings and how they might be applied to one’s life. It is not enough to just come at it from one’s own perspective on what needs to be done. Although it’s fine for us to have our own agendas in terms of spiritual learning and practice, those agendas are often grounded in popular cultural norms. But the Buddha’s teachings on freedom from suffering are actually quite radical and entail a complete transformation of consciousness. Therefore, an in-depth study of his teachings is necessary.

When I say this, I don’t mean that you just read the easier, more popular books on Buddhism—the ones that only present little bits and pieces of the teachings. Rather, I’m suggesting that you really take the time to engage with the more difficult texts from the Buddha’s own discourses, and then ask yourself, “What did the Buddha really mean by that?” There has to be some kind of challenge to the intellect taking place, some form of rigorous intellectual inquiry. For example, truly ponder the teachings of the Four Noble Truths, dependent origination, and the cessation of suffering. In addition, ask yourself, “What are the five khandhas and how do they relate to my own conscious experience?” And carefully consider what the terms dukkha-vedanā (unpleasant sensations), dukkha-lakkhaṇa (suffering as one of the three universal characteristics of existence), and dukkha-saccã (the First Noble Truth of suffering) mean within the larger framework of Buddhist ideas.

If you don’t have an understanding of the basic Pali formulas, you’re not able to see how the various theoretical structures fit together and support one another. They’re all one piece. The Four Noble Truths correspond to the teachings of dependent origination, which in turn correlate with the three universal characteristics of existence. These concepts and constructs also connect with the five khandhas, which subsequently link with the ten fetters. Taken as a whole, the Buddha’s teachings present a brilliant analysis of the human condition; but more importantly, they offer a clear strategy for the personal realization of profound peace. So you need to internalize these structures by patiently reflecting on them, memorizing them, and then letting them arise in your consciousness. For instance, spend a year contemplating the khandha of perception. Instead of thinking, “Oh yeah, I know what that means,” ask yourself, “What is perception?” Since the Buddha talks quite a bit about perception, it’s important to know what it means. In order to answer this question, you start by consulting the suttas. But eventually you refer to your own mind to see and ultimately understand how perception works. In this way, Buddhist theory becomes an avenue for highly fruitful investigation.

Engaging in this mode of study is more difficult than reading those lighter, popular books and magazines on spirituality that make us feel good. There’s nothing wrong with this type of reading material. However, some degree of intellectual rigour greatly helps to guide the investigative work that’s such a vital part of Theravada Buddhist practice. This process of intellectual inquiry also serves to counter any intellectual doubt that can crop up around, for example, the trustworthiness of the Buddha’s teachings or even one’s own progress on the Path. It’s rather like having studied a road map of a journey you’ve embarked on. The journey will have obstacles, but because you’ve scrutinized the map and know the overall terrain, even if you do get a bit lost, you can return to your recollection of the map to regain your sense of direction and carry on. You don’t have to wander around in aimless circles of doubt and uncertainty.

So it is essential for you to do your homework by delving deeply into the teachings and internalizing them, rather than simply listening to Dhamma talks or university lectures on Buddhism. These are fine supplements to one’s own intellectual work; but in our Western culture, many people turn primarily to academic courses and meditation retreats to acquire knowledge about the Buddhist path. They expect the teacher to guide them through the teachings. I’m sometimes surprised by the number of people who have been coming to meditation retreats for years, but who have no real background in the formal study of Buddhism. These individuals have never really been curious about the basic structures of Theravada Buddhism. Perhaps that’s the fault of the teacher.

But if you genuinely have the aspiration to nibbāna, you should be encouraging that by being the one to ask the question: “What did the Buddha teach?” Allowing your own initiative, curiosity, and investigation to guide your study is more powerful than having a teacher tell you what you’re going to learn that day. So try arousing this spirit of vigorous inquiry by recognizing for yourself what the important teachings are that need to be understood. You can also examine any doubts you may have around a particular teaching and look for the sources of that doubt. This kind of work is called dhamma-vicaya, which is the Pali term for the deep investigation of the Buddha’s teachings, as well as the physical and mental phenomena they describe. Dhamma-vicaya allows us to see how things transpire in accordance with the Four Noble Truths. Ultimately, it’s the wisdom we gain through investigation that frees us from the defilements of greed, hatred, and delusion.

A thorough, systematic study of Buddhist theory also involves breaking down the intellectual structures into their component parts and investigating each of those parts in relation to one another. It’s rather like the understanding that a mechanic needs in order to know how a car works. The braking system, the engine, the fuel gauge, the rear axle, etc., all serve the overall function of mobility. By understanding the individual parts and how they work in conjunction with one another, the mechanic has an overarching grasp of how a car operates. The same holds true for the Buddha’s teachings. So study the various components of the Four Noble Truths, the Noble Eightfold Path, the seven factors of enlightenment, the ten perfections, and so on, until you understand the teachings as a whole, rather than as separate bits and pieces. Ajahn Chah, who spent the first seven years of his monastic life studying the Buddhist texts, had a very good background in the structures. Hence this dedication to pariyatti is to be encouraged; but it’s also a highly personal endeavor. The key point is to challenge yourself and not fall into the habit of simply reading the Buddhist literature that caters to the individual with little intellectual patience.

Applying the Buddha’s teachings to one’s own life is also an aspect of study. Pariyatti encompasses both intellectual study and the study of one’s inner world. So consider what it means to apply the theory of dependent origination, the three characteristics of existence, and so on, to your own conscious experience as viewed from a Buddhist perspective. While it’s fine to read what Carlos Castaneda, Carl Jung, Rumi, or the Advaita Vedānta have to say about conscious experience, you don’t want to be entertaining too many different viewpoints at one time, since that can get quite confusing. If one has no solid grounding in intellectual principles on which to base one’s understanding of human consciousness, one can just keep getting inspired by new theories about it. Eventually, the intellect develops a need to be stimulated and inspired in ways that can be quite trivial or short-lived.

So take up the Four Noble Truths or the ideas around craving and look at your own mind through these specific lenses. Once you make these concepts and structures your focus, you begin to observe the fundamental truths about the way things really are that the Buddha is trying to bring to your attention. Buddhist doctrine isn’t a philosophical body of knowledge that the Buddha dreamt up out of thin air. Rather, his teachings are the product of years of contemplative practice, and the simple but profound realizations that sprang from that practice. Thus they are reflective teachings as opposed to belief teachings. So what if you believe in the Four Noble Truths or the law of impermanence? That won’t liberate you from suffering in any transformative way. In order for the Buddha’s teachings to be effective avenues for awakening to the true nature of things, they need to be actively contemplated and applied to one’s own life.

So work with perceptions such as craving (taṇhā) and ask yourself, “What is craving?” Moreover, bring up the perceptions of bhava-taṇhā (the desire to become something), vibhava-taṇhā (the desire to get rid of something), and kāma-taṇhā (sense desire). What are these things and how are they operating in the mind? When and how do they cease? What does cessation mean? What does it mean to realize cessation in your own mind? Cultivating this kind of intellectual curiosity means that the mind will have questions; but they now stem from a more silent, inward inquiry into the nature of consciousness.

In order to adhere to this path of rigorous inquiry, you need to have both determination and humility. You have to be willing to look at a lot, give up a lot, and endure a lot, while being humble enough to carry on with this challenging work. Determination and humility can seem like an odd combination of qualities. But determination without humility can translate into a form of willful arrogance. And humility without determination can amount to a kind of meek whimpering in the face of life’s difficulties. It’s also important to bear in mind that the quality of humility doesn’t demand that a certain result ensue from doing this investigative work. In fact, humility is not demanding of anything.

In his biography entitled No Worries, Ajahn Liem advises us to practice for the sake of practicing. In other words, we simply keep at it because it’s the right thing to do. That’s the humility of not demanding any kind of result from our practice. Although this investigative process makes it possible for us to have deep insights into the nature of the human condition, it’s our anticipation of a result that prevents us from patiently allowing truth to reveal itself. If we can just be patient, with our attention focused on the way things are, then we’ll eventually notice that anticipation and resistance are the root causes of suffering.

As we try to integrate the Buddha’s teachings into our daily lives, we can reflect on the following questions: Why is life burdensome? And how does life become burdensome? When does it feel like I’m carrying around a mountain of problems? And when does my attention get entangled in thoughts and worries about the past and future? How does that entanglement work? We’re obviously not free from suffering at those moments. You can also consider: When do I start to find relief in my practice? Where do I feel that the practice is working well? Where do I derive joy from the practice? It seems to me that joy comes when the mind is no longer burdened by old modes of programming, and you find yourself beginning to let go of your former sources of stress and reactivity. This is when the mind becomes truly free and attentive to the way things are. This kind of liberation is not an attainment so much as a relinquishment, an unbinding, a letting go. So contemplate: What am I clinging to? Why can’t I just be free? It’s just this way now. Why am I always getting angry at someone? What’s with the fear? How come I doubt my practice all the time? Why can’t the mind just be silent? What’s going on?

This kind of inward observation can sometimes be interpreted as an obsession with the inner life—or a judgment of it. But it’s neither of these things. Rather, this path of inner inquiry is about noticing why we’re suffering at any given moment. And that’s the Four Noble Truths in action. The First Noble Truth tells us that suffering needs to be understood. I sometimes take a moment to reflect on the fact that I’ve got enough food to eat. I’ve got a roof over my head. I can go to the hospital if I’m sick. The taxes are paid. No one is trying to kill me. So why am I making this situation into a problem? This kind of honesty and curiosity allows you to begin to awaken to the entanglements of thought, of “self and other,” and of how these things work. And this leads to the ability to attend to these various forms of stress or unsatisfactoriness so we can eventually be free of them. In this way, we assume the role of a contemplative intent on internalizing and actualizing the teachings of the Buddha.

How is suffering to be understood then? Well, you have to be in the midst of suffering to understand it. Take aversion, for instance. Let’s say that someone walks into the room and they proceed to do something that annoys you. That annoyance then leads to thoughts like “This person is so irritating. Why can’t they be different? They need to stop doing that. I don’t like this person.” Or, if they’re coming into the room a second time, you might think, “Oh gosh, I don’t want to be with this annoying person.” So you naturally conclude that it’s the person who’s creating the difficult mood. But in reality, it’s the mood that’s creating the person. They’re interdependent, aren’t they? The more I buy into the mood of annoyance, the more I see the person in that negative light. Thus the mood gives rise to the person, and then that person’s conduct (as I perceive it) feeds back into the mood. It’s actually one thing. However, our perception can get deluded and we can think, “I’m here and the person I dislike is over there. They’re doing that, but if they weren’t doing that, I’d be OK.” Or we might think, “I shouldn’t be thinking like this.” That’s the same delusion: I am someone.

But if you’re able to see the aversion you’re experiencing as stemming from a particular mood of the mind that comes and goes, then that entire storyline of “self and other” falls away. They fall away and you fall away, because that person is ultimately pointing back to the mood. Hence that whole scenario is dependently originated. In its most basic formulation, the law of dependent origination states that with this as condition, there is that; when this isn’t, that isn’t. It’s quite simple. So with the mood of aversion as condition, there is that person (whom you perceive as annoying). When aversion is not present as a condition, there isn’t that annoying person. It’s not that the other person doesn’t exist. It’s just that the drama in your mind is actually one piece; it’s not comprised of “you and them.” And when these constructs of “self and other” dissolve, you’re left with silence, with emptiness, with a timeless and radiant knowing. In Buddhism, we call this the realization of the cessation of craving and self-identity.

Let’s look at another example of this disbanding of things. Imagine that I’m worrying about a presentation I have to give at work next week. Because the mood of worrying is arising, the fearful mind is generating the image of a future possibility of failure, public humiliation, etc. Then I begin to think, “I’m going to be giving this speech and that’s going to happen and it’s going to be very bad for me.” The mood is creating the scenario and the scenario is in turn reinforcing the mood. So they’re actually one thing—they’re dependently originated. Once you see this, the whole drama collapses because you now understand that there is no substance to it. What initially gave it substance was the fact that you believed in it. In Buddhism, we call this kind of belief ignorance.

Once you’ve seen into the truth of dependent origination, you can see cessation taking place moment-by-moment with the ongoing dismantling of “self and other” and of craving itself—which includes the desire for things to be different than they actually are. At these moments, there is no longer any becoming or non-becoming, any aversion or non-aversion. All that is left is silence. And then you realize: “Ah, I see. This is cessation.” You have to make that realization conscious in the mind. As the mind becomes more and more aware of the deep sense of peace accompanying the experience of cessation, there’s a greater inclination to experiment, to observe cause and effect, and to taste this kind of letting go.

How to live then? You live by following the precepts and by taking care of your responsibilities. You do what you have to do. You go to the market to get the week’s groceries, guide your children through the minefields of adolescence, pay your car insurance, go for a walk in the park, and so forth. But inwardly, you maintain a sense of inner vigilance in order to deepen these basic insights into cessation. Over time, the heavy fogs of delusion dissipate and the heart abides at ease with the way things are.