## Gradual or Sudden Enlightenment?

Based on an evening talk given at Tisarana Monastery in 2007.

In Buddhism and in Eastern spirituality in general, enlightenment is usually seen as being either a gradual or sudden phenomenon. In the case of instant enlightenment, the argument goes—and I’m oversimplifying a bit here—that there’s nothing to do because you’re already enlightened. You simply have to see through delusion and not get caught up in it. The gradual path to enlightenment, on the other hand, is one where you just keep carrying on with the practice, and in the course of time, perhaps lifetimes, you finally realize enlightenment.

However, I don’t think these two different approaches to enlightenment need to be mutually exclusive. In the Thai Forest tradition, through teachers like Ajahn Chah and Ajahn Sumedho, we come to understand that “now is the knowing.” In the Thai language, they use the expression “poo roo,” which means to “be the knowing” or “be the awakened consciousness.” The idea is that this awareness or this awakened consciousness is intrinsically pure. So you can’t purify it, nor can you sully it. You also can’t become it. You can only be it. You can only awaken to it. Viewed in this way, it doesn’t make sense to say, “I’m going to awaken tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow, or when I go on my next retreat.” It just doesn’t compute.

In essence, awakened consciousness is simply knowing “This is the way it is, right now.” It’s rather like when Ajahn Kusalo and I were walking down one of the main roads near the monastery, and we suddenly realized: “Oh, there’s Denny’s cottage.” There was an instant recognition of what we knew to be Denny’s cottage. Or, let’s say you’re traveling across a bridge over the Mississippi River and you remark, “That’s the Mississippi River.” You recognized the river; you knew what it was. It’s the same with awakened consciousness. You just keep recognizing: “This is awakened consciousness.” This kind of awareness is pure. There’s no place other than here, and no moment other than now.

When we think about our own practice, we might conclude, “I’m a better person for having worked at this for a number of years. Now there’s less greed, hatred, and delusion; there’s also less fear. And there’s more compassion and happiness. It’s different now—there’s been a change.” In this sense, we might say that awakening is gradually taking place as our practice deepens over time. But how did that change take place? What does that change imply? One thing that it does not imply is that the purity of consciousness has changed. Awareness is always awareness. However, awareness can sometimes get “kidnapped.” This happens when we spend our lives engrossed in thoughts, fears, worries, and all those other things we experience as human beings, both pleasurable and not-so-pleasurable, which entangle us in delusion and result in a lack of mindfulness.

The wrong definition of the gradual path to enlightenment occurs when people think, “There’s something wrong with me. I’ve got too much fear, too much anger. I have to get rid of all this stuff, and then I’ll eventually be a better, happier person.” That viewpoint is, of course, heavily invested with a strong sense of self. In addition to being self-view, it’s also wrong view. And that’s why people who favor the idea of sudden enlightenment think that the gradual path to enlightenment is a mistaken notion. The right view (sammā- diṭṭhi) on the arising of a negative mind-state would be: “This condition is present. Having arisen, how can I sustain awareness around it?” If awareness can be sustained around a difficult mood or emotion, then it won’t delude the sense of knowing, so the condition will be recognized for exactly what it is.

We’ve all seen our tendency to get swamped by the powerful energies of greed, fear, depression, jealousy, anger, and so forth. We can also get thoroughly caught up in thoughts, in distractions, and in programmed modes of reactivity. The constant challenge, if we’re not to be overwhelmed by these conditions, is to sustain this awakened consciousness, which is always in the present moment and never in the future or the past. If we’re mindful of our fear and anger, and can recognize them just as they are in the present moment, then the fear is less powerful, the anger is less powerful. How does that process work? In a sense, it’s instantaneous—but it’s also gradual.

Let’s imagine that my mind is moving towards some depressed state. Because of the depression, I’ve suffered, worked with it, understood it, and now I acknowledge: “Depression feels like this.” I take the time to feel the sensations of depression in the body, since the body is always in the present moment. So the sustaining of that awareness is always in the present moment and involves being in a state of knowing. And that’s what enlightenment is about: being awake to whatever feeling is arising. We’re mistaken when we think that there’s something wrong with “me” that can only be resolved by “me” becoming something else in the future. In reality, there’s only a condition that has arisen which needs to be recognized so that its power over us can be dispelled.

Now, what we’re waking up to might be very unpleasant, so the challenge is to recognize and be fully conscious of that negative mind-state without wanting it to end or to be different from what it is. That’s what we’re being asked to do: to be aware of the mind-state as it is—without craving, without blaming, without distraction, and without identifying with the mind-state as “me” or “my” or “mine.” We simply recognize: “Right now, it’s like this.” We can be free from suffering or unsatisfactoriness (dukkha) even in the midst of an unpleasant mood if we can know unpleasantness as just another aspect of experience, and then be patient until that time when it ceases. In some cases, the unpleasant aspect of a strong mood may persist for a long time. Moods such as loneliness or hopelessness can have quite a strong momentum. So we persevere with the practice I just described. In this way, the end of suffering can be known moment-by-moment until the unpleasantness eventually runs out of steam.

Because the craving mind usually doesn’t want to be with a difficult mental state, we need to bring some determination (adhiṭṭhāna) to the task of simply being with the way things are, in this instant. We see this on meditation retreats, don’t we? We come to a retreat and some painful emotion or mood comes up, and the teacher says, “Hang in there. Be aware. Feel it in the body.” We also have to develop patience (khanti) by adopting the attitude of “I’m really going to watch this now.” And when we cultivate that kind of forbearance, we’re showing a determination to bring awareness to what’s coming up for us. It’s not a blindly willful determination. Rather, it’s simply an attitude of wanting to understand this mind-state.

With this determination comes a willingness to just be with whatever is arising in the present moment. Instead of wanting to become someone who’s more patient when facing difficult moods and emotions in the future, we’re being patient right now. We’re really doing the work of not resisting experience. And as a consequence of doing this work with determination and patience, we see its immediate results in the present moment. We come to realize that the path to enlightenment which the Buddha set out for us can only be in the here and now—that is, instantaneous—because we can only work in the present moment, we can only wake up now.

Yet we also see the gradual results of this kind of mental training. We see that after having worked at this practice for a number of years, and in spite of our tendency to still get overwhelmed at times, we’re better people. No matter what the self-disparaging mind may say, over time we’ve changed for the better. We’re happier, calmer, easier to get along with, more forgiving, more patient, etc. And this gradual improvement has come about as the result of our ability to sustain awareness in the present moment.

It’s very important to understand these truths. We need to recognize what mindful awareness is, and know that there’s a way of being, of knowing, that is not a sense experience. Mindful awareness is not the same as seeking comfort and happiness through the six senses—it’s quite different. When it becomes apparent that the seeking or getting rid of physical or mental experiences is endless and ultimately futile, then the craving for different sense experiences begins to dissolve. There’s a shift in consciousness: you’re now willing to bear witness to difficult mind-states rather than once again seeking compensations and distractions in the face of them.

As a young monk in Thailand, whenever I was fed up with living in the monastery and found myself longing to be somewhere else, I’d ask myself, “If you can’t be with this experience, where are you going to go?” That’s where renunciation comes in. Renunciation (nekkhamma) shifts our attention away from a craving relationship to sense objects such as sights, sounds, tastes, sensations, and ideas, to the coming back to that which knows sense objects. Renunciation is not a denial or repression of craving. Rather, it’s being aware that we cannot ultimately fulfill our desire for happiness through craving, since the very objects of our craving—whether it be a cheeseburger or the latest text message from a friend—are impermanent and uncertain (anicca), and therefore unsatisfactory. Worst of all, they leave the sense of craving unsatisfied. And if the sense of craving has not been seen for what it is—a hunger that can never be truly satisfied—then it goes on and on.

So once we see craving for what it is, what exactly are we left with? Well, we’re left with “This is the way things are,” which is instant enlightenment, moment-by-moment. And we’re enlightened not because we’ve rejected anything, but because we’ve seen into the true reality of things. Once we reach this point, we begin to see what suffering is all about. We see that dukkha isn’t just about being unhappy. It’s the fact that sense experience itself is unsatisfactory. This may seem like a “wet blanket” way of looking at sense consciousness. It may also make Buddhism seem like a “downer” religion. But if we find ourselves thinking in this way, we’re missing the point. The real point of acknowledging the limits of sense consciousness is to re-shape our understanding of sense consciousness.

Ajahn Sumedho would often ask, “What does a Buddha know that others don’t know?” The answer is: “A Buddha knows that that which has the nature to arise, has the nature to cease. And it is not personal.” When we perceive things in this way, we begin to be objective in our observations and become a witness to the changing flow of consciousness. Once we see into the inconstant nature of all conditioned phenomena (including sense objects), we see the dukkha that comes from forming attachments to things that simply won’t last. And when we’ve understood that all conditioned things have an inherent tendency to arise and to cease—putting them beyond our control—we can enjoy them while we have them, without becoming attached to them. The same is true of our various mind-states that come and go: we recognize them, but we don’t attach to them as “ours.” We just let them be. With this greater understanding comes a sense of peace as a result of our not wanting things to be other than how they are.

Of course, each of us has to work this out for ourselves. So when negative states of mind come up, we apply the right view or right understanding I’ve been talking about. And right view leads to right intention (sammā-sankappa), which, in this case, means orienting our lives in the direction of this new understanding. At this point, your whole intellectual system is now in line with the Dhamma, so you’re no longer operating from a sense of self or ego, nor are you being repeatedly overwhelmed by challenging conditions, such as anger or craving for a particularly enticing sense object. Eventually, the whole path of Dhamma practice comes together with this idea of “This is the way it is, right now.”

However, we also see how difficult it is to sustain this awareness of the way it is now for longer periods of time. We’re challenged because our underlying habits of mind—or what we call our “latent tendencies” (anusaya)—often derail our best intentions. These harmful mental habits include sensual desire, aversion, speculative views, doubt, conceit, wanting to become, and ignorance. So on the one hand, it’s quite easy for us to practice “This is the way it is, right now.” On the other hand, our latent tendencies are so ingrained that, in the beginning at least, it’s hard for us to sustain that awareness for more than a few seconds or a minute at a time. Yet as we continue to practice in this way and encourage ourselves in the right manner, our ability to sustain the recognition that “This is the way it is, right now” becomes ever stronger. Then the whole Noble Eightfold Path becomes quite beautiful. Everything becomes clearer and fits together as we come to experience the real blessings of the Buddha’s teachings.