## Preface

In the succeeding pages, we’re invited to read some reflections from Ajahn Viradhammo on the practice of Dhamma. For myself, and I hope for you, there will also be the experience of hearing his voice, and even being in his presence. It’s a warm voice, and a presence that supports the Way out of suffering, or dukkha. Perhaps when these teachings are carefully considered and put into practice, that Way becomes clear and the heart can be guided into openness and peace.

I think there’s a good chance of that, mostly because what is presented here are some of the cardinal teachings of the awakened Buddha, a person who is widely acknowledged for his deep wisdom and compassion. But also it’s because this particular presentation comes from Ajahn Viradhammo, a man of this age who has given himself fully to the Buddha’s Path for over forty years. More than reading or lecturing on it, he has lived in the Buddha’s Way—the Dhamma-Vinaya. And his voice is of this age, easily understandable, down-to-earth, and rich with humor and anecdotes.

Ajahn Viradhammo is a Canadian, currently abbot of Tisarana Monastery near Perth, Ontario. He went forth as a bhikkhu in Thailand, but has spent over thirty-five years working to establish monasteries in Britain, New Zealand, and Canada, as well as teaching retreats for the general public. His initial training was under Ajahn Chah and Ajahn Sumedho—the former a Thai, the latter an American—who are both renowned as outstanding Dhamma Masters in the contemporary Theravada Buddhist world. And his ongoing learning is through living the life of a bhikkhu in the West and dealing mindfully with what comes up. To live in that way for decades takes resolution and skill.

For my long-lasting welfare, I have lived alongside Ajahn Viradhammo and benefited from his example during the time we spent together in Britain. I hear his voice quite clearly in the following pages, and it gathers me into the presence of a living tradition of good and noble people. What a blessing! As when you are invited to sit alongside a potter, a carpenter, or a calligrapher and watch what they do, and how they do it, you gain something from being in the presence of such skillful contemplatives that you won’t get from study.

Although what we are holding in our hands is a collection of words, this is not an academic book. It’s a book to spend time with, and even read out loud and listen to. It contains the words of a craftsman. In our monastic fellowship, Ajahn Viradhammo is known as such. He has intelligent and careful hands. Craftsmanship, in terms of sewing robes, weaving rattan, and fashioning wood into monastic accouterments, is a respected aspect of the training of a bhikkhu in our lineage. It lessens the tendency to self-obsess and theorize—pitfalls for a meditator. And it supports the expression of a beauty that is both calming and sensible. Recently, Ajahn took to weaving and I am currently in possession of a rug that he wove for me. The colors are quiet, the pattern subtle and simple; it is a solid piece of work, crafted with care and attention, and then given away.

This is the way that Ajahn Viradhammo works, lives, and teaches. This book is a further example of that. Herein you are given the fibers of the Buddha’s teachings and guided on how to weave them step-by-step into a raft heading for liberation. That journey can take you deep and reveal places in the heart that are anguished or numb, but on it you are offered the know-how, companionship, and compassion that you need. So although no one can take you to liberation, craftsmen like Ajahn Viradhammo can show you how to build your raft—and give you the confidence to sail it. May your journey be under clear skies!

Ajahn Sucitto

Cittaviveka Monastery, 2014