## Openness of the Heart

Based on two talks given at Bodhinyānārāma Buddhist Monastery in New Zealand in February 2012.

When I speak about listening, I don’t just mean the auditory element. I also use “listening” as a synonym for awareness beyond the sense of hearing. So when I suggest that you listen, you can go to sound first if you’d like; but then you let go of sound so that there’s just pure awareness. “Looking” is also used as a synonym for this broader sense of awareness. Looking at the way things are is obviously not just a visual experience. Rather, it points to a knowing of the truth of the moment’s experience.

In the development of their meditation practice, most meditators find some way of abiding in the present moment which indicates that the mind is not caught up in preoccupations. Part of it is just the letting go of thought; part of it is having a sign. Ajahn Sumedho, for example, uses the sound of silence as his touchstone for being in the present moment. He says that when the mind is relaxed, open, attentive, awake, and non-grasping, you’ll hear this background silence. For other people, bodily feelings such as a sense of physical relaxation may signal this open, accepting state of consciousness. As I meditate, I note my state of mind and the state of the body, especially with respect to bodily tension. When I’m anticipating any kind of result from my practice, my body informs me of this by exhibiting traces of tension throughout the body. If my mind is serene and receptive as opposed to being in a “wanting” state, then the body is physically relaxed. Do you have any signs or indications in your own practice that signify for you the calm and spacious mind? These are very helpful signposts that are usually quite individual in nature.

Another way of peacefully abiding in the present moment is to go to the heart and listen from there. So often our focus is on trying to analyze life’s complexities or resolve various issues using the brain. As an alternative to this rather stressful way of living, one can instead bring attention directly to the center of the chest—or what is sometimes known as the “heart chakra”—and allow the sensations there to become conscious. This takes training and patience, but it gives very good results. So the next time you’re in a meeting and you start to feel agitated, see if you can bring your attention to the physical sensations at the center of the chest. Rest your attention there and see what happens.

In his teachings on the foundations for open-heartedness, the Buddha spoke of the four brahmavihāras (sublime states of mind): mettā is the sense of goodwill, of well-wishing to all beings; karuṇā is compassion for the suffering of beings; muditā is joy or gladness for the success or good fortune of other beings; and upekkhā is equanimity or even-mindedness. The brahmavihāras enable us to relate to both ourselves and others in the right or most beneficial ways. These four attitudes help us to resolve social conflicts, as well as heal from the suffering inherent in the human condition. They promote harmonious and mature relationships, and make it possible to let go of self-centredness. The brahmavihāras allow kindness, joy, hope, and forgiveness to flourish in our hearts.

Of course, it’s also natural not to be open-hearted. There is nothing unnatural about being close-hearted, such as when you’re angry, frightened, or jealous. Sometimes you might discover that open-heartedness is conjoined with fearfulness of some sort, in which case that’s not the open heart. Just think of those times when you’ve been overly deferential, solicitous, or obsequious towards someone. If we find ourselves being kind to someone in order to try to appease them or make them like us, that’s not mettā; rather, that behavior is based in fear.

But if we can try to develop the genuinely open-hearted attitudes, they become strengths. The combination of deep open-heartedness and fearlessness is very powerful. I’ve never met more radiantly compassionate beings than His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Ajahn Chah. What was so impressive about Ajahn Chah’s profound compassion was that he was also totally fearless. He wasn’t a soft-hearted pushover whom you could manipulate with a please-feel-sorry-for-me storyline. Rather, his compassion and fearlessness always brought you back to the suffering you were creating by not letting go of your attachment to wanting things to be different. People sometimes think that mettā is some kind of a “doormat” practice where you’re adopting a subservient stance; but it’s not. It’s a natural strength of the heart. When the heart can be free from aversion and deeply accept the way things are, then where’s the problem? There is no problem. Whereas if you look at anger or fear, they’re not strengths. They’re actually weaknesses in that they undermine your confidence and sense of security in the world.

Bringing up the memory of my mum, my brother, or my teacher connects me with the feeling of well-wishing in my own mettā practice. The more we can enhance that natural tendency towards goodwill, then the more that manifests even in negative situations. The more I can say, “May I be free from suffering,” and feel that outflow of benevolent regard wholeheartedly, then when suffering does come up in the form of annoyance, for instance, I can remember to be kind to myself by saying, “May I be free from annoyance.” This is quite different from thinking that I shouldn’t be irritated, or believing in the irritation and running with it.

The teachings around the openness of the heart also include equanimity. Equanimity is the capacity to be at peace with success and failure, gain and loss, good and bad health, and so on. It’s this steadiness of mind that allows us to remain balanced when confronted with life’s ever-changing circumstances. However, equanimity without an open heart can easily become cold indifference, repression, or disassociation in the face of whatever may be arising in one’s own experience or in the experiences of others. So the joy, compassion, and well-wishing that naturally flow from an open heart are meant to coexist with this sense of deep peace. When open-heartedness and equanimity are both present, there’s a profound acceptance of the fact that that which has the nature to arise, has the nature to cease. Events are as they are. According to Theravada Buddhism, it’s this combination of open-heartedness and evenness of mind that gives us a sense of emotional balance.

When we hear about someone sustaining a serious loss, or getting sick or dying, it’s this equanimous mind that enables us to reflect: “Ah, life is this way. Life has loss.” To recognize this fact implies a kind of strength without being dismissive. While you need to have compassion to do the utmost you can to help other beings, you also have to realize that we all have lives that include both gain and loss. Ajahn Chah and Ajahn Liem are perfect examples of this: both teachers possess tremendous compassion, but they also have a deep, peaceful acceptance of the ways things are, rather than demanding that they be different.

Do look at the difference between sentimentality and the open heart. When you sincerely abide in the open heart, it’s not at all sentimental in the sense of seeing things as sweet and syrupy and then thinking, “Oh, everything is wonderful.” Open-heartedness is a beautiful, direct, and honest connection to life that’s very powerful and visceral. It’s when you connect with someone who’s happy and you also revel in their happiness. That’s not being sentimental or “gushy.” You’re simply connecting in a kind, heartfelt way to another person.

An important part of my own inner life involves continually bringing attention to the heart chakra. When I’m conversing with people, I’ll very often let my attention rest at the heart. This allows me to listen with empathy and be more in touch with the tone of the conversation, rather than just the specific details of what’s being said. For me, this kind of empathic listening is more about understanding a person than simply taking in information. When I allow my attention to rest at the heart throughout the day, an intuitive sense of discernment is available to me which connects me to life in a way that complements my thinking brain. I’m not sure why this is, but perhaps the heart center gives us direct access to the empathic part of our consciousness. In any case, focusing on the field of sensation at the heart chakra helps to calm the brain by giving it something to attend to other than thought.

Abiding in the open heart is a craft. So you’ve got to experiment with it to see how it works. It’s really a major component of Buddhist practice. As we’re receiving the meal offering today, think of these good people who have been coming to this monastery and supporting us with their dāna for so long. As you’re looking at them, let your attention go to the heart and make a point of inwardly saying, “Thank you.” Then go to each person individually and thank them. You can use a situation that’s as naturally beautiful as this one as a way of resting in a heart full of gratitude.

Empathetic joy is the third brahmavihāra. When you look at this wall of green plants, you experience the beauty of its colors, textures, and movements. That’s the sense of delight and uplift that nature sometimes instills in the heart. Someone once asked me, “Is it OK to be happy?” Yes. A real gladness of the heart isn’t the hedonistic gladness that comes with being stoned or drunk. This second type of pleasure is the “high” associated with an episode of heedless abandon. A genuine rejoicing of the heart, on the other hand, is when you see someone who’s doing well and you’re sincerely happy for their good fortune. That’s beautiful! This gladness of the heart can also take the form of the happiness and gratitude I feel when I look at this lovely carving behind the Buddha statue. I know who carved it, I saw it being carved, and I was present when the artist offered it to the monastery. It’s a magnificent piece of work. It’s also a good example of how beauty can really open the heart. An attachment to beauty, however, means that you want a similar carving for your home. That’s when grasping at beauty becomes a form of greed. What’s so good about appreciating the beauty in nature is that as much as you can admire this wall of greenery, for example, you can’t truly “own” it.

Do ask yourself, “How do I open my heart to the way things are? What is the pathway to open-heartedness for me?” In my own meditation practice, I reflect on the good friendships I have to stimulate an openness of the heart. Notice that the open heart is all about gladness, gratitude, and compassion, which help quite naturally to dispel any negative emotions I might be experiencing. The heart opens in different ways according to the time and place. Start to notice: What does the open heart feel like? How does the heart feel when I’m anxious, mistrusting, critical, or fearful? What’s that like?

I like working with the idea of contrast. If you see light, then you’ll also see shadow. If you see light as the open heart, then you’ll see the shadow of the closed heart more clearly. For instance, if I note what it feels like to forgive a child and make fully conscious that way of relating to another human being, then when my heart does close with resentment for whatever reason, I’ll be more likely to see that resentment as a changing mood rather than as a fixed reality. It’s not that the open heart is right and the closed heart is wrong; they’re both natural responses to your experiences. But knowing how these things operate gives you a better sense of how to move towards the freedom of a more open heart.

I think that the brahmavihāra practices of goodwill, compassion, appreciative gladness or joy, and equanimity are the way to emotional perfection. Consequently, it’s the difficult emotions that close the heart that we’re trying to be aware of and not attach to. The less we feed them, the less they influence us. These more harmful emotional states will still come and go, but they don’t become fixed realities that we buy into, since we know they’re simply objects of the mind. Instead, we encourage wholesome states by being kind and generous, by making gratitude conscious in the mind, and by noticing how beauty can open the heart. Because the heart likes to go to these comfortable places, this becomes the momentum of the heart.

One person mentioned that he couldn’t feel anything in the heart. Well, you don’t want to manufacture some kind of incredible, blissful heart-state because that wanting is a form of greed. That’s the problem whenever someone describes their pleasant experience: you may try to produce a similar one. And that doesn’t work because the very desire to get something means that you’re no longer available to experience anything new, since you’re already preoccupied with something you’ve heard about. Because you’re fixated on a memory, you can’t have any kind of fresh experience.

If you’re having trouble feeling anything in the heart, then I suggest you try to notice the sensations in that area. Get to know what that part of the body feels like as you breathe. Notice as you breathe in, it feels this way, and as you breathe out, it feels that way. Just rest your attention at the heart and become conscious of the changing sensations there. As different events unfold, this area will become more alive because of your consistent attention to it. If you repeatedly pay attention to something, then your attention will tend to go there naturally. For example, if you’ve been practicing mindfulness of breathing at the belly, then you’ll find that your awareness will tend to gravitate to your belly even as you eat your food. In the case of the heart-sensitizing practice I’ve been describing, you’re learning how to focus on a certain part of your physiology. This is very different from trying to manufacture an experience. As you abide more and more in the region of the heart, you’ll eventually notice more of what’s going on there, whether it’s a negative contraction or an opening of sorts. From there, your heart-centred practice will continue to evolve naturally.

In my early days as a monk, I had an extremely cerebral practice: I often felt quite dead from the neck down. Therefore, it was very important for me to make conscious what the open heart feels like. So I followed my teacher’s instructions and did more training in body awareness, which gradually revealed to me how unalive I was in the heart area. Sometimes we’re just not attuned to these things because we haven’t given them much attention. In fact, if you don’t direct any attention to the body, you’ll only notice it when it’s undergoing extreme pain or pleasure. But if you start to work with the body by doing Qi Gong, Tai Chi, or yoga, you’ll start to notice the body’s subtler energies and become more sensitized to them. In this way, your attention will also be in the body, rather than simply being in thought all the time. This will help you to understand yourself on a visceral level as tensions and energies come and go according to the moods of the mind.

There are many ways to stabilize our attention in the present moment. Bringing awareness to the heart chakra is particularly helpful because it connects us to the body and to aspects of our emotional life. If we train in developing this kind of sensitivity, then the heart becomes a place that we can continually return to for a sense of peace and well-being. Cultivating an openness of the heart is an essential part of being in tune with the true nature of things.