## Doctrine and Doing

Based on a talk given at a Day of Mindfulness at Tisarana Monastery in June 2009.

Religion, which can be fraught word for many people these days, is a term that comes from Western culture. Its Latin root word is “religio,” which, according to modern scholars, derives from “ligare,” which means “to bind or fasten.” So the word “religion” implies a sense of binding yourself to something in the same way that ligaments bind the body. In binding yourself to a religion, you give yourself up to it—that is to say, you devote yourself to following its teachings and practices even at the expense of sacrificing your own more self-serving desires. In this sense, “religion” can be a positive word that conveys a very wholesome perception—provided that you’re connected to a good tradition.

From what I can tell, the term “religion” as such didn’t exist in the Buddha’s time some 2,500 years ago. Instead, one wandering contemplative (samana) would ask another: “Whose teachings do you follow?” The reply would be something along the lines of: “I follow Mahavira,” or “I follow the Buddha.” So it was more the case that spiritual seekers were following the doctrines and practices of a particular teacher.

Buddhism’s Emphasis on Practice

Today, there are many different schools or cultural forms of what we call “Buddhism.” There is Pure Land, Zen, Vajrayana, and Theravada, and then there are the schools-within-the-schools. It’s similar to the way in which there are different manifestations of the Abrahamic religions, such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, each containing within it its own schools. So Buddhism is not monolithic. However, all of its schools would agree that Buddhism is essentially a practice. As a Buddhist, you give yourself up to a certain structure of practice, which allows you to gain insight into the deeper levels of your consciousness. All the schools of Buddhism concur that Buddhism is a “doing”—that it’s a cultivation or a craft.

The cultivation of generosity, morality, and goodwill has remained central to Buddhism to this day. Buddhism also has a long-standing tradition of chanting and reflection, with chanting comprising the ritual aspect of this tradition. Its doctrinal aspect consists of study, and its contemplative aspect is expressed through meditation. So in Buddhism, we have a tradition of ritual, of doctrine, and of contemplation. It’s this particular form you bind yourself to if you have faith in it.

The monastery near Perth, Ontario, where I live comes from the Theravada tradition of forest monasticism in Thailand. This is a very orthodox tradition within Buddhism. Unfortunately, the word “orthodox” can carry a lot of negative connotations because it sounds like the most uptight, conservative part of spirituality. But in traditional Western religious language, the word “orthodoxy” (which means “correct belief”) was used in combination with the word “orthopraxy” (which signifies “correct action or practice”). The word “orthopraxy” thus implies that there are practices which form an integral part of a religious tradition; it isn’t just a set of beliefs that are blindly held. So even within the more orthodox schools of Buddhism, we find that the idea of practice is paramount.

So which English word might best describe the Buddhist tradition? Is there a term that could encompass a 2,500-year-old institution rich in spiritual teachings, iconography, art, chanting, monasticism, and monastic/laity interactions? What would you call that? Well, anthropologists would call it a “religion.” But as I mentioned, many Westerners don’t want to call Buddhism a religion, so they label it a form of “spirituality” instead. But somehow that word doesn’t fit the whole idea of a tradition that has been practiced, honored, and cultivated for as long as Buddhism has. So Buddhism remains very hard to classify as a spiritual system.

You can have an orthodox tradition, but if that tradition doesn’t have the component of orthopraxy—in other words, if it doesn’t have a genuine practice element—then it can be merely superstition. It can also devolve into a series of rituals that people perform simply because their parents performed them. If Buddhists were to fall into this kind of mechanical observance of rituals, then their tradition would become little more than a cultural artifact that might be quite comfortable around religious holidays, but it would never liberate them. They might go through the motions of performing various Buddhist rituals out of a sense of superstition, duty, or even entertainment, but it wouldn’t really free their minds from suffering.

The Structures of Moral Discipline

The heartwood of Buddhism—as taught by the Buddha—is meditation. Consequently, it’s important that we lay a strong foundation for our meditation practice, and this begins with training in morality. It appears that the Buddha would inquire about a person’s consciousness before he would teach them meditation. He would look at the way they lived socially, and how they acted in the world. In this way, he could tell whether or not they understood the basics of spiritual practice, such as the importance of cultivating generosity. So the Buddha’s initial teachings would be on the benefits of generosity and of having a good heart. If a person has a sense of generosity and goodwill, they’ll care about the well-being of others.

The Buddha encouraged people to extend their feelings of goodwill to include all sentient beings. Therefore, an attitude of benevolence wasn’t reserved simply for a particular tribe, or even for humanity as a whole. The Buddha encouraged people to make their feelings of goodwill limitless. Once a person understood the merits of warm-hearted friendliness and generosity, and then lived their lives accordingly, the Buddha would teach them about the structures for a moral life—known as the Five Precepts (pañcasīla). Throughout its history, Buddhism has maintained the tradition of introducing the moral precepts as the starting point for all Buddhist practice. The five basic training precepts are:

I undertake the precept to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.

I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.

I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct.

I undertake the precept to refrain from false and harmful speech.

I undertake the precept to refrain from consuming intoxicating drinks and drugs which lead to carelessness.

If we can observe the Five Precepts, then we’re not only protecting ourselves, we’re protecting society. Essentially, these precepts provide us with a formula to more easily discern and then ferret out our unskillful impulses. To put it simply, if our impulses go against the Five Precepts, we know they’re unskillful.

Observing the Ethical Guidelines

A gathering of monastics and laity will often begin with the taking of the Five Precepts. This fundamental code of ethics is a good example of rules or guidelines that one binds oneself to, that one gives oneself up to. As monks, we have the 227 Vinaya (monastic discipline) rules that we do our best to follow. While the Vinaya guidelines have definite moral implications, they also serve to bring order to the monastic community. They regulate our relationships to the laity and to each other, and offer a means of working with the four monastic requisites of food, clothing, shelter, and medicine—the basic requirements for living a life. The Vinaya rules are helpful because they don’t depend on a particular opinion, viewpoint, or preference. They were laid down by the Buddha and his elder disciples, and are not the product of individual tastes and beliefs. As monastics, we give ourselves up to these various disciplines, which are bigger than any individual monk.

In recent years, the term “designer religion” has become quite popular. A designer religion is one that borrows elements from a number of different spiritual traditions, allowing you, in effect, to design your own set of spiritual principles. The danger in this is that you can end up tailoring your spiritual teachings to suit your own desires, some of which may end up being harmful to you and others. The benefit of sticking to one trustworthy spiritual tradition is that it becomes something you can subordinate your own desires to in the service of a higher good, such as the alleviation of suffering in the world. When you try to follow the rules of conduct within a good spiritual tradition, you can watch your reactions to the restrictions placed on you by that tradition. This is tremendously helpful because this set of ethical conventions acts like a mirror reflecting the conditioned contents of your own mind back to you.

The monastic tradition, for example, asks one to conform to a communal way of life comprised of long-standing practices. If a monk resists the suggestions, guidelines, rules of etiquette, and communal agreements contained within the Vinaya, then that resistance becomes the place on which to focus his attention and understanding. The roots of the monk’s resistance might be pride, greed, laziness, or any number of other mental qualities. These inclinations become apparent as the containment of the discipline frustrates desire, as well as the ability to just do what one wants.

The Precepts

The Five Precepts also serve to reflect the workings of the mind back to us. The first of the Five Precepts is an undertaking not to kill. This precept provides a mirror for that which is violent in the human mind and wants to expunge anything displeasing. In giving us a moral structure that we can give ourselves up to, this first precept makes it easier for us to notice that impulse of ill-will as it first arises. And by providing us with an ethical standard by which we can judge our actions, the first precept protects us from harming sentient beings. If we can stop ourselves from impulsively or deliberately harming ourselves and other beings, goodwill can arise. This is very important, since a heart of goodwill is the foundation for enlightenment in the Buddhist tradition.

The precept structure is a skillful way of helping us to develop our reflective abilities. A reflective capacity allows us to see our intentions and the results of those intentions. It also enables us to see when the results of our intentions are foundations for peace and when they’re foundations for remorse. So honing the powers of reflection is crucial to our spiritual practice. If you think about the second precept—to refrain from taking that which is not freely given—it requires that we be honest in our dealings with the world. In our Buddhist training, we’re encouraged to keep to the precepts quite strictly. So if we carefully observe the precept of not stealing, we’ll see the tendencies of the mind to want to take things that aren’t ours to take. We probably wouldn’t see these tendencies if we weren’t being asked to reflect upon them in some way. Hence the second precept can help us to shine a light on some of the more morally questionable areas of our conduct.

Let’s take as an example the act of copying a copyrighted CD. Now that’s a pretty commonplace occurrence. The thinking mind tends to reason: “What the heck, it’s Sony; they’ve got lots of money. It’s not like the world is going to fall apart if I copy that music.” But the training in following the precepts oftentimes takes us to a more difficult place in our reflections. This isn’t a spiritual path where you just get to do what you want to do. At first, you might rationalize: “I just want this one album, but I can’t afford it. So I’ll download it from the internet.” But then you begin to reflect: “But is that an honest or a dishonest thing to do?” The second precept is now acting as a mirror to help you build the foundation for inner peace.

At times, however, people can get so obsessed with morality that it becomes impossible for them to live with any sense of ease. A good illustration of this occurred when I was living in a monastery in Northumberland, England, in the early 1980s. At that time, we were absolutely broke and trying to build a new monastery. We didn’t have any heating, and for our plumbing we had to salvage steel pipes from the junk yard and thread them, since that was all we could afford. Although it was marginal living, it was still a good life. Back then, we probably had about £15 in the bank, which is the equivalent of approximately $30 Canadian. We also had one committee member who was obsessed with upholding the principles of ethical banking. I remember being present at one particular committee meeting about ethical banking that must have gone on for hours. I thought, “Give me a break—we’ve only got £15 in the bank!” This person was so preoccupied with maintaining his high standards of ethics that no one could stand to live with him even though all of his standards were very logical. So that’s one extreme. The other extreme is to have no reflective capacity or ethical standards whatsoever, and simply give in to the whims of the mind.

The fourth of the Five Precepts deals with right speech, which is speech that is harmonious, helpful, truthful, beautiful, and aligned with the Dhamma. Wrong speech, on the other hand, is speech that is abusive, divisive, slanderous, spreads gossip, and tells lies. Just ask yourself, “How many times have I suffered remorse because I’ve used wrong speech?” Wrong speech can come up pretty quickly if you’re not watchful. But if you contemplate the fourth precept (i.e., “to refrain from false and harmful speech”), it becomes a very powerful mirror to help you look at states of mind that would produce unskillful results were you to follow them.

For instance, if you’re in a bad mood and you aren’t mindful of it, you might end up dumping your mood onto someone else. And then you’ll probably think, “I shouldn’t have said that.” A sense of remorse arises—if you’re a reflective person, that is. If you’re not a reflective person, then you’ll just unload your mood on them again! And that’s obviously not going to produce good results. If you just mouth off at someone because they’ve annoyed you, you’re not creating a foundation for peace. So the kind of careless mind-state that can easily lead to wrong speech is not one you want to cultivate.

For these reasons, it’s very useful to resolve to keep the precept around right speech. It’s a reminder of what is wholesome and what is not wholesome. For example, if you’re using your speech to try to manipulate people, or to try to make yourself look better to them, or whatever it is you might be using your speech for, you can begin to look at that. You can ask yourself, “Does this intention to flatter people and have them like me all the time really lead to peace? Where’s this intention coming from?” So if you can adhere to this fourth precept and use it as a mirror for your mind, it can really help you to see how your mind operates.

Surrendering to the Form

People sometimes ask me about the precepts. They ask, “Can I keep three?” I reply, “Which three? They’re all pretty important.” That’s where the binding aspect of a religion or spiritual tradition comes in. If you surrender to its form, and the form is skillful, you can truly benefit from it. But if you decide to throw out all the teachings that conflict with your own desires or preferences, you can really cut short your spiritual growth—to the point where it’s stunted.

A structure of moral discipline isn’t something that’s meant to cater to the needs of your ego. Rather, it’s something that’s meant to challenge you. It challenges you to look at yourself in a helpful way, rather than in a self-deprecating way. The precepts certainly do that. However, the importance of the precepts isn’t in the rules themselves, but in how we practice with them. Just blindly keeping to the precepts can degenerate into superstition or conceit. In the latter case, we can develop an attitude of “I’ve got more precepts than you. I keep eight of them.” It can get very silly at times. But when the precepts act as mirrors to the impulses arising in the mind, and when they become something we reflect upon and practice with, they become very beneficial. So think of your work around the precepts in terms of orthopraxy—or right effort based upon right understanding—and the good results that come from that effort. If you think of these moral disciplines in terms of awareness, contemplation, and kamma (or the consequences brought about by our intentional acts of body, speech, and mind), they’ll really help you.

Using Meditation to Calm the Desire-Mind

Once we’ve laid a foundation for our spiritual life by cultivating generosity and goodwill, and by upholding the precepts, our meditation practice will proceed much more smoothly. It unfolds with greater ease because the mind isn’t so confused or taken up with unpleasant memories, guilt, or remorse over some unwholesome deed for which we may be responsible. If, however, meditation practice is still difficult for you, stick with it because you can develop virtuous qualities just by persevering. When things get tough on the cushion, try surrendering to forty-five minutes of non-distraction. Giving yourself up to doing something that you don’t want to do provides you with insight into how your mind works because it allows you to see where your mind really wants to go. So try giving yourself up to not being able to do what you want to do. You’ll quickly see how your mind can create suffering when it doesn’t get what it wants.

Of course, the desire-mind—or the mind that is resisting the reality of the present moment or is hankering after some other experience in another time and place—doesn’t want to surrender; it doesn’t want to be still. It wants to think and organize and talk to itself. If you follow the desire-mind, you end up engaging in a kind of “inner committee meeting” where there’s this profusion of inner dialogue being spoken by different characters within your consciousness all jostling for your attention. Have you ever really looked at all the different people—or facets of your personality—who populate your mind? There’s the arrogant one and there’s the humble one. There’s also the obsequious one and the know-it-all. In short, there’s a wide array of these committee members inhabiting your consciousness.

The beauty of the reflective mind is that it allows you to realize that none of these personalities is your true self. You’re not the arrogant one, the humble one, the obsequious one, or the know-it-all. They’re simply conditioned moods, perceptions, and mental formations—the latter of which includes will, mental impulses (such as fear or compassion), prejudices, and many other mental states. So practice getting to know all of the committee members as objects of the mind that come and go, rather than identifying with any of them. This too is part of Buddhist orthopraxy. If you think about it, which one are you? Are you the very humble one when you meet with the Ajahn? Or are you the arrogant one when you’re feeling conceited? You’re none of them, because they’re all just changing conditions of the mind. Unfortunately, they can seem all too real at times.

The capacity to know the different phenomena of the mind, and to reflect upon them, becomes strengthened through meditation. It becomes strengthened through developing the ability to be still and to know one breath at a time. It’s very difficult just to observe the way things are in any given moment. More often than not, we’re trying to get rid of something, trying to figure something out, or trying to have an experience we’ve heard about or experienced in the past. The mind is often either resisting the present or moving into the past or future: it’s continually restless. So we have to firmly resolve to notice all of the things that occupy our attention, but without getting caught up in them. We have to set an intention to observe the committee members as they make their speeches, but not get drawn into the emotions fueling their arguments. In other words, we resolve to monitor the mental objects that arise, but not grasp at them. In this way, we make up our mind to be the observer and not the participant. That’s the practice.

Working with Obsessive States of Mind

Let’s say there’s a person who’s always worried about what other people think of them. They’re worried about what their boss thinks of them and they’re worried about what their colleagues think of them. However, their worry isn’t just a healthy concern with their own performance; it’s a more general sense of anxiety over how others perceive them. That’s not a very productive or happy state of mind to be in. But we all do that, don’t we? Or instead of being driven by worry, we might be driven by resentment, by jealousy, by self-criticism, by the tendency to fantasize, and so on. The mind can become preoccupied with many different ways of thinking. So we can ask ourselves, “How much of this thinking is actually necessary?” Isn’t most of it unnecessary? Isn’t most of it just an unproductive habit of the mind? When life is interesting or exciting or frightening, we focus on the present moment; we absorb into it. But when there’s nothing to focus our attention on, our minds just go “Blah, blah, blah,” on and on.

So how do we practice with these obsessive states of mind? Well, in the case of people who have a strong tendency to worry, they can begin to look at their worry as being just a mood of the mind rather than a reality. This can be done by first identifying the mood instead of simply believing in the storyline behind it. By awakening to the mood that’s being experienced, we see it more objectively to the point where we can even observe the stress it creates in the body. It’s important to remember that thought which is being driven by these inner delusions begins to overwhelm our inner space if we’re not careful. Then we end up living in realms of suffering. But by observing our obsessive habits in this more mindful, objective way, they have less and less power to delude us. Getting that perspective on how the mind operates is the first step towards liberation. So we inquire, “What’s the mood of the mind right now?”

Buddhists sometimes develop an idealized sense of what their minds should be like. I did that, and I suffered a lot because of it. During my first year of meditation at a monastery in Thailand, I found myself fuming with anger over a mango, or something equally unimportant. After the rage had cooled down, I felt terribly guilty that I’d gotten so upset over another monk eating the last mango. I went to Ajahn Sumedho and told him what had happened and said, “I have so much anger. I shouldn’t be angry. I should love everyone.” He said, “Just swear.” He advised me to walk up and down and just swear for a while. So I went and swore for five minutes. Then I began to see, “Oh, this is anger.” So rather than thinking that I shouldn’t be angry, or buying into the anger, I turned the feeling of anger into an object of awareness.

Given the right conditions, all of us get into moods that tend to obsess us and take us over. If we’re observant, we can see that certain conditions cause certain moods to arise. Perhaps I have difficulty receiving criticism, so that every time someone finds fault with my behavior, I react defensively or with aggression. We can work with our habits of mind by making the determination to observe them and to know them as moods that are transient, as opposed to identifying them as personal problems or absolute realities. We can set an intention to become aware of the fact that a critical mind-state, for instance, is simply an object of the mind, rather than who we are in a more permanent, self-defining way—as in “I’m a critical person.” The more we make these kinds of intentions, the more we tend to see our thought patterns as mere objects whose arising depends on certain conditions being in place. On the other hand, as we become more familiar with our habits of mind, we can end up hating and criticizing ourselves by thinking, “I shouldn’t be this way!” But that’s more an expression of ego than a product of awareness.

Even as full-grown adults, we sometimes have to confront mental states that are quite childish. When I was living at the Wat Nong Pah Pong monastery in Northeast Thailand, my desires were often thwarted, so I had to face up to some fairly immature states of mind. In our monastery, we had fifty monks who, at mealtime, would line up in two long rows on each side of a lengthy dining hall. Being the newest novice, I was number twenty-five on my side of the dining hall, so the food would get to me last.

At the midday meal, big pots of food and trays of cakes and sweets would be set out for all the monks. So we’d go down the line and slop the food from the pots into our bowls. But the young monks who were distributing the cakes would have so much devotion for the senior monks that they would give them all the cakes. By the time they’d reach me at the very end of the line, there’d be no cakes left—only half a banana! My mind would get really critical at those times, and I’d think, “This is absolute hypocrisy! It’s not fair! … Blah, blah, blah.” Sometimes at night, Ajahn Chah would give a Dhamma talk and ask, “Why do you suffer?” And I’d think to myself, “Well, it’s because you had all the cakes!”

When it became very obvious I wasn’t going to get any cakes, I either had to figure out why I was suffering or I had to leave the monastery. Thankfully, I began to see that it was just the greedy mind. And being an object in awareness, it will change. That was the beginning of freedom for me. The mind would still want to complain when the banana arrived or when the monk next to me got the last mango; but now I’d think, “No, I’m not going there.” So I wouldn’t follow that train of thought.

This scenario may sound childish and even funny, but it was actually extremely painful because it was so absurd. There I was, a grown man, but my thinking was so juvenile. But that’s the way it is, isn’t it? We may think of ourselves as being mature people, but t­­he stuff we have to look at inside the mind can be rather embarrassing. Fortunately, when these immature attitudes come up, we can be aware that this is simply the conditioning of the mind; it’s not who I am.

Touching the Deep Peace of the Heart

The monastic structure that existed at Wat Nong Pah Pong forced me to watch my own tendency to be greedy. Previously, when I was hungry, I just ate whatever I wanted. I had lots of freedom to travel, too; if I didn’t like the country I was in, I’d just go to another one. When I arrived in Thailand and entered the monastery, however, there weren’t the same levels of freedom around food or travel. When it came to eating, I just ate whatever was offered to me. Surrendering to that structure paradoxically gave me a kind of freedom I hadn’t experienced before. Prior to coming to the monastery, I thought freedom meant having the opportunity to do what I wanted; but that didn’t bring me peace. Now, as a monk, I could observe this seemingly endless pattern of wanting. But instead of following those impulses, I was giving myself up to a way of life that was bigger than me. This was a way of letting go of craving, which is the true source of peace.

Notwithstanding this intention to relinquish desire, there would still be greed arising in the mind while I was staying at the monastery. At one point, I became so obsessed with cakes that I had a cake dream. In my dream, I was in a grocery store with a shopping cart piled full of cakes. Then I’d get to the checkout counter and I’d be a monk—I’d have no money! After I had that dream, I thought, “Wow! Where is your mind at?” In training with an obsessive state of mind that’s coming up, you can reflect: “This thing constantly preoccupies my mental energy. And if I’m always preoccupied in this way, I can’t touch the deepest silence of the heart.” You can’t touch the deepest peace of the heart because your attention is lost in thoughts, in emotions, and in the past and the future. So you have to learn how to be very present to the way things are. This is how you connect with the profound silence of the heart.

So our challenge is simply to bear with these strong emotions and regard them as impersonal objects that arise and pass away. When we do this, we can also open to them in a more accepting way. Of course, your desire-mind will either want to get rid of these powerful emotions or it will want to grasp at them. If it grasps at them, then that will make them seem all the more real. For instance, if you buy into self-doubt, it can seem very substantial and important. Conversely, if you refrain from giving credence to the self-doubt, it eventually loses its momentum, which allows you to see it for what it really is: just another passing thought in the mind.

As Buddhist practitioners, we bind ourselves to the Buddha’s teachings. This means that not only do you remember the Buddha’s teachings and have confidence in them, but you apply them to your life. Liberation comes from putting the Buddha’s recommendations into practice and observing for ourselves the results that this brings. Our faith in the Buddha’s path of awakening deepens as we practice and realize that the Buddha’s teachings are not just intellectually or philosophically significant, but they have enormous practical value within the ordinary day-to-day living of our lives.