## Finding the Deep Peace of the Heart

Based on a talk given at a Day of Mindfulness at Tisarana Monastery in March 2008.

I once took my mother to visit the eye doctor. In the waiting room was a middle-aged fellow who kept restlessly clicking away on his BlackBerry mobile phone. After Mum had seen the doctor, we went down to the main lobby to wait for our ride. That same man was also in the lobby. I watched as he phoned someone, left a message, and then proceeded to wait for the person to call him back. The next thing you know, he’s phoning another person. I got the sense of a mind that just craves stimulation, a mind that just needs to do things. This mind-state is so unpeaceful, so unhappy, and people who get caught up in it even look unhappy. Everything is just about doing, doing, doing. Now. Without patience.

Life at the monastery is different. At the monastery, we have the opportunity to develop the reflective mind. This is a capacity that all human beings have. Imagine you’re going to the symphony. You get your best outfit on, stand in front of a mirror, make sure your hair looks OK, double-check that your tie is on straight, and so on. You’re really looking at your appearance. The human reflective capacity allows us to do the same with our minds. We can carefully watch our motivations, our feelings, etc. But this is something we have to cultivate. When we use this reflective ability, we aren’t just doing things; we’re observing how we do things. We see what our inner world is like and how we’re responding and reacting. Without that reflective capacity, we’re simply victims of circumstance, getting blown around by the winds of fortune. Moreover, we’re just creatures of habit, blindly following our typical reactions to different situations. We might be politically free or economically successful, but we’re not truly free.

Practicing the Buddha’s teachings depends upon the ability to notice life and see how things really are. This may not seem like a big thing, but very often people who don’t practice Dhamma lack this reflective capacity. They just indulge in anger, or in a negative mood, or in wrong speech, and remain unaware of the consequences of that indulgence. They don’t see that succumbing to anger and wrong speech leads to suffering. Then they wonder: “Why am I unhappy?” So we have to train in honing this reflective skill. In honing our reflective powers, we’re not seeking any particular experience. Instead, we’re developing the ability to witness. Witnessing is a skill; it’s a faculty to be developed in the mind. If we go on long retreats, we have an excellent opportunity to develop our capacity to witness. Of course, our reflective capacity is not something that’s limited to the time spent sitting on a meditation cushion.

In many ways, it’s easier for monks to be reflective because our lives are so slow and uncomplicated compared to the pace of urban life. Monks have the opportunity to cultivate reflection in most of the things we do. We’re very fortunate that way. As practitioners—whether we’re monastics or laypeople—it’s both useful and important to contemplate and reflect on our lives, on our intentions, and on our habits. However, we don’t just observe these things and then do nothing. We use the Buddha’s teachings to see whether our mind-states are skillful or unskillful. If they’re unskillful, we can try applying different techniques to make them more skillful. But we always do it from the perspective of witnessing.

In order to work in this way, it’s necessary to have some knowledge of the Buddha’s teachings. If we don’t have this as a starting point, we might notice reactions in the mind coming up, but not have any idea of how to deal with them. So the teachings give us the pathway to understanding because they tell us: “Look in this way. Practice in this way.” The Buddha’s teachings help us to look in the right place, which is the mind itself. Once we’re looking in the right place, they help us to ask the right questions about what we see. The right questions would be: “Why am I suffering with this? Why are my reactions so strong? Why can’t I just let go?” Our questions have to come from the heart. They have to come from our own experience and not from some abstract intellectual theory. If our questions are coming from the heart, from the witnessing of experience, then the answers to these questions can be very beneficial.

The Buddha’s teachings are always pointing to the same kinds of themes. The basic theme is non-attachment or non-grasping. The Buddha emphasized non-attachment quite a lot. But we need to hear about it time and again because of our inclination to forget. This is why our reflective capacity needs to be honed. If we keep developing our capacity to observe the intentions behind our actions and the outcomes of those actions, our ability to practice non-attachment deepens. When a negative mood arises, we learn to just patiently watch it. Then we can see the best course of action. We can see how to apply the Buddha’s teachings.

One way to practice non-attachment is to reflect on our tendency to develop a strong personal identity around the contents of our experience, which include our psychological make-up, our social experiences, and so on. In practicing the Buddha’s teachings, we’re trying to break down that sense of a personal identity. We do this by looking at it in terms of the khandhas—or the five aggregates or components of the mind-body experience that make up a human being. The five khandhas are form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness. The Buddha states that we should look at each of these aggregates as impermanent, unsatisfactory, and not-self. If we look at ourselves in terms of the khandhas, that’s a big step away from taking things personally. It’s a big step towards seeing things as natural functions, as natural movements in consciousness.

Lots of unpleasant things can enter consciousness, such as disappointment, self-doubt, jealousy, vindictiveness, etc. But there’s a big difference between being a witness to something unpleasant and being a person who’s afflicted by something unpleasant. Take sickness, for example. There’s a big difference between witnessing sickness and being a sick person. If we just bear witness to the symptoms of cancer, the flu, an ingrown toenail, or whatever it is, we suffer less. On the other hand, if we take on the persona of a sick person and worry about our symptoms and wallow in self-pity because of our pain, we suffer a lot more. A hypochondriac would be an extreme example of someone who has built a personal identity around sickness.

At times, the unpleasant feelings we experience in a sickness can be made worse by our own attitudes towards them. If our tendency to worry that things will get much worse for us is making our symptoms feel worse, then our symptoms are not only the products of sickness, but the products of delusion as well. These symptoms arise in part because we’re thinking in terms of self, of “my” sickness. So our symptoms may be exacerbated by the worrying that self-thinking can create. Therefore, if we’re attached to our sickness, we suffer more. If we let go of it, we suffer less. How to let go? Well, we can observe that sickness is just sickness—it is what it is. Symptoms are as they are. They are painful, they are unpleasant, and so on. If something needs to be done about them, we go to the doctor. What we don’t want to do is to create a personality around them, to think that these symptoms (or this sickness) define us.

The Buddha’s teaching on anattā (not-self) goes against this whole sense of personality. It goes against this sense of self. What is a sense of self? It’s the idea that “I” am this kind of person with these kinds of characteristics. A sense of self is also born of the feelings that arise when external circumstances challenge my idea of what “I” am. So the Buddha taught the contemplation of anattā. When we reflect on the teaching of not-self, it leads us towards the insight into emptiness. The word “emptiness” is used in various ways in the different Buddhist traditions. In the Theravada tradition, emptiness refers to a mind state that isn’t preoccupied with, addicted to, or deluded by personality view. It’s empty of that. Through the contemplation and understanding of not-self, we can see personality view arising. We can see that moment in which the mind attaches to something and makes it personal.

Personality view can easily arise around unpleasant people. If you’re with a person whose behavior happens to be toxic—perhaps someone at work, in your family, or at the monastery—you can be really impacted by their negativity. So you practice witnessing the way you’re affected by their toxic behavior. You witness the feelings and impulses that come up, and you resist the temptation to make them personal. If you’re not practicing witnessing these things, and if you don’t understand that your feelings which arise around this person are empty of self, then you might heedlessly identify with their mood. For example, if you’re around an angry person, you might be drawn into their world and become angry. If you’re around a fearful person, you might become fearful. On the other hand, if you’re practicing witnessing, then you’ll notice the effect that this person has on you. You’ll feel the emotional result that their actions have on you, but you won’t become “something” because of it. You won’t become an angry person. You won’t become a fearful person. Instead, you’ll just witness.

However, just because we practice witnessing doesn’t mean that what we bear witness to will be pleasant. It doesn’t mean that at all. But if we hold the insight into emptiness, we think, “Unpleasant? Yes. But this is simply the way it is right now.” We continually let go into the moment, even if it means observing ugly, painful, and unpleasant sensations. If we continually let go, then ugly, painful, and unpleasant sensations are just that—they’re just sensations. We don’t build a personality around them. If we simply stay with that witnessing, then the experience is as it is—empty of a sense of self. If you can just bear witness to unpleasantness, you might be surprised at how quickly it passes. Conversely, if you grasp at unpleasantness, it tends to last much, much longer. We grasp at a negative experience when we think, “I don’t want it to be this way!” and when we try to will it to be a certain way. We’re now relating to the experience according to the way we think things should be, instead of how they actually are.

That created sense of self can seem very real and permanent. It can seem like we’ll never escape from that terrible feeling. But the length of time an experience lasts depends on the strength of our attachment to it. We create a connection to an experience by building a sense of self around that experience. We construct a sense of self around an experience by grasping at it. As we refrain from grasping at an experience, the mind becomes more and more transparent, thereby allowing the experience to flow through it rather than get stuck in it. When the mind is transparent, our experiences are empty of self. We still feel; but when we feel something, we remember: “This is not ‘me.’ This is not ‘mine.’ This is not ‘myself.’” So we practice emptiness by watching, by bearing witness. We see that the emptiness of experience is true. We also discern that the sense of self we built up around an experience is just a delusion, and that there’s nothing solid in it.

“Cessation” is an important word in Buddhism, and it’s one that I like to define as the fading away of the sense of self. The sense of self fades away when we don’t attach to an experience. Cessation occurs when we learn to look at experience objectively. For instance, if I’m becoming irritated while I’m talking with someone, I can notice my reactions as objects in the mind and feelings in the body. Just as I can notice changing weather patterns in nature, I can also notice the changing “weather” of the mind—that is to say, the changing inner patterns of emotionality, thought, and mood. If I don’t attach to the storyline, then I see that these habits of the mind are not ultimately real, but are part of changing patterns in nature. But even more importantly, I notice the absence of a strong sense of “me” and “mine”; the sense of self has ceased. There’s still consciousness, presence, sight, sound, and so on. Now, however, things are simply the way they are and the mind is at ease.

At times, the inner reactions are very strong and enduring. In this case, it’s very helpful to return to mindfulness of the body. When you feel a strong emotion, just witness its effect on your body; don’t go to the narrative in your head. The sense of a self and all the “me” and “mine” thinking is what keeps the reaction bubbling away in consciousness. When you just stay with how that emotion feels in your body, the reaction fades away as does the strong sense of a self. As the reaction subsides of its own accord, we have the realization of cessation. So we see that these reactive tendencies are not a problem.

When we practice in these ways, we’ve begun our journey on the path to liberation. By practicing cessation, the mind is freed from toxicity. It’s liberated from its habits, from its compulsion to cling. The mind is not liberated through denying, or through getting rid of anything, or through indulging. It’s liberated through knowing experience as Dhamma. It’s set free through knowing experience as anattā, as empty of self. Anattā—which is one of the three characteristics of existence along with dukkha (suffering or unsatisfactoriness) and anicca (uncertainty or impermanence)—is hard to understand conceptually. But if we watch closely, we can see it operating. We see the difference between “There is sickness” and “I am sick.” When we grasp at sickness and construct a sense of self around it, it can bring up a whole train of behaviors, memories, and reactions that are less than helpful.

We can counter our grasping tendencies by drawing on the teaching of not-self, which leads to the doorway of emptiness. And we can open the doorway of emptiness if we practice using our witnessing consciousness. We can notice how the sense of self changes when conditions change. When praised, a certain kind of self arises. When insulted, another kind of self arises. When our meditation goes well, a confident self arises. When our meditation goes poorly, a hopeless self arises. This sense of self comes into being in so many different ways. As we contemplate this, we see that this sense of self is just like a soap bubble. It isn’t real and it’s always based on conditions.

Earlier, I mentioned the khandhas: form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness. The nature of the aggregates is that they exhibit changing qualities. The pleasant feeling that comes from warmth is a quality; the unpleasant feeling that comes from cold is also a quality. If you’re walking down the street and you see a beautiful form, that’s a quality. If you see an ugly form, that’s also a quality. If we have the perception of being praised, that’s a quality. If we have the perception of being blamed, that’s also a quality. However, all of these qualities are uncertain, transitory, and subject to change. You’ll never find lasting peace in a quality because all qualities, all khandhas, are unreliable. But while we can’t trust qualities, we can trust the mind that knows changing experience. It’s not going anywhere, nor is it dependent on conditions.

As with anicca and anattā, we can also contemplate the five aggregates as dukkha. If we seek fulfillment through the five khandhas, we’re always going to be disappointed. Even if we get some satisfaction, in some way, for some period of time, that will eventually change. For example, if an actor or actress is attached to their physical beauty (form), they’re bound to suffer sooner or later because there’s no way to stop the aging process. So as they get older and their physical beauty fades, they suffer. Similarly, the feelings of pleasure or satisfaction they take in their beauty will change. Since those feelings are by their very nature subject to change, they can’t provide any lasting happiness. Therefore, becoming attached to them inevitably results in unsatisfactoriness.

If you keep relinquishing this delusion of “I” and this identification with the khandhas, where does that take you? It takes you from the head to the heart. If there’s a strong sense of self, we’re always thinking or worrying about “me.” We’re always engaged in thought as we create and perpetuate a sense of self. When we let go of that, our attention goes to the heart. Then we’re able to see how the wholesome things that we’re encouraged to do in this life support a mind that lets go. We can see how generosity, compassion, patience, endurance, and determination support the ability to be aware. It’s this practice of being aware, of bearing witness to unpleasant things rather than running away from them that leads to peace of mind. When something unpleasant arises, we’re able to think, “I’ll watch this. I’ll just be with this now.”

When we practice viewing unpleasant experiences in this way, the heart gets quenched. There’s this wonderful sense of freedom in which you realize that the heart is free. This kind of insight is not spectacular; it’s just something that creeps up on you. Just let it happen. And notice how the heart can experience an incredibly deep peace.