## Learning to Bookbind, Learning to Practice

Based on a talk given at a Day of Mindfulness at Tisarana Monastery in August 2009.

In our training as monastics, there’s a tremendous emphasis put on doing things well. As monks, we place a lot of value on being mindful of the ordinary, whether it’s washing an alms-bowl, sewing a robe, or taking care of your teacher—all very mundane sorts of things. But what this adds up to is a life of care. It’s a simple enough training, but it has a profound effect on a person over time. Staying mindful of your everyday activities encourages a continuity of presence, of awareness, of being with the way things are now, that keeps the mind from wandering into the past or future. On both the inner and outer levels, this training is important, since it’s what enables you to hopefully gain the ability to do things well.

I once had some notes I wanted to bind into a little booklet using a method of binding that was very simple, but which I hadn’t done for a few years. I bound four booklets of about twenty pages each. The first booklet didn’t come out so well, but the second booklet turned out better. By the time I finished the fourth booklet, I was quite happy with the result. We learn this way, don’t we? When we do something mindfully, and we’re really present to how things are unfolding, we see what it takes to produce a better result. For instance, we see how one way of sewing the thread doesn’t work, while another way works much better. In other words, we’re engaged in a process of learning simply by paying close attention to the mundane things we do.

Becoming Conscious of Our Inner World

The same principles apply, of course, to our inner world—although affecting change in this area is more complicated. It takes a great deal of patience and determination to turn a chronically anxious mind into a peaceful one. This kind of mindfulness practice is much more difficult than binding a few loose pages together, but the modus operandi is similar. If you’re binding a book, you need to be aware of how far the text sits from the edge of each page, the numerical order of the pages, and so on. In the same way, when you’re trying to transform your inner world, you obviously need to be aware of what’s going on there. But quite often we neglect to bring consciousness to the contents of our inner life.

In learning to know our inner world, we can start with the practice of naming things. For example, if I’m engaged in a physical chore and I’m rushing to get it done, I can inwardly name that mind-state by using the word “rushing.” This labeling of mental states is a very simple exercise, but it helps to make me conscious of my inner life. As soon as I label a particular state of mind, it has already become more tangible to me. If I never make conscious the frustration, restlessness, fear, or whatever it is I’m feeling, then I can never work with it. And if I never work with it, then it can never really cease; it will just fester. Very intellectual people, however, can sometimes get caught up in having to find the right name for a given mind-state. For instance, they might think to themselves, “Is this doubt or is this uncertainty?” But the point is not to obsess over finding the perfect description, but simply to make things conscious.

Becoming conscious of the inner world is a vital part of our awareness practice. How often do we feel frustrated about something, and then just continue feeling that frustration without truly awakening to it? Awakening to it means saying to ourselves, “This is frustration; frustration feels this way.” So we become fully aware of how frustration feels in the body. We can become more conscious of a difficult mind-state by dropping the storyline associated with it, and instead feel how that mind-state manifests as tension in the body. In this way, we become more objective towards, and less attached to, the mood of the mind. Although the frustration is still there, this more objective perspective allows us to apply effort in the direction of transforming that unwholesome mental state into a more wholesome one, rather than heedlessly following it in an ill-considered way.

If we don’t put any effort into becoming conscious of the inner life, we can get enmeshed in a whole range of reactions to a particular state of mind, including that of self-judgment for feeling this way to begin with. Life is a kind of interplay between what we sense and how we react, isn’t it? Life comes at us through the senses, through memory, and then there’s a response to this and a reaction to that. If I have no awareness of this impersonal process, then I’m simply a victim of habit or circumstance. And there’s no freedom in that. But if we can have the presence of mind to know, for example, that “This is uncertainty; this is how uncertainty feels,” then this gives the wisdom part of our mind a chance to operate skillfully. Quite often we’re simply too reactive—with a judgment, a distraction, etc.—to let that happen.

I was recently talking with some people about the uncertainties they’re facing in their lives. That led me to think about my own parents, who were refugees from Latvia. At the beginning of World War II, the Russians had occupied Latvia, followed by the Germans, and then, towards the end of the war, the Russians were coming in a second time. My parents were caught up in the whole mess. They, like all the other Latvian refugees, were rushing to the Baltic coast as the German army was holding back the Russians. There was bombing going on all around them. Somehow my parents and grandparents managed to get onto a refugee boat, although they weren’t too sure where they were going. At one point, their boat was being torpedoed. My father still had a whole set of keys from his life in Latvia, where my parents were quite well-to-do; my father was a lawyer there. But seeing the situation from aboard that boat, he simply said, “Well, that’s that.” And then he threw the keys into the ocean. In circumstances like that, you don’t know where you’re going to end up or what you’re going to do. You just think, “Wow, that’s uncertainty.”

My mother was pregnant with my older brother during this time. She gave birth to him towards the end of the war—around 1945. My brother was born in a little town about 50 km from Nuremberg, which was being carpet-bombed at that time. My mother said the sky was black with airplanes. Although my parents were well out of the way of the bombing, they could see Nuremberg burning in the distance. The town where my brother was born was mainly populated by women and children, and very old men, since all the other men had either gone to war or were dead. So when my mother gave birth to a boy, everyone was elated. My mother said she’s never been given so many baby clothes in her life! So there you go. You’re in the middle of a war, everything’s uncertain, and then you receive all these baby clothes. That was a nice moment in my parents’ story.

Sometimes it’s good to bear in mind how our uncertainties or fears compare to what other people have to go through. At times, this can help us to gain a perspective on our own situation. Nevertheless, we’re still affected by what we’re feeling. For this reason, it’s not particularly helpful to dismiss our own uncertainties or fears by saying, “Oh well, the people in war-torn Sudan are much worse off.” Yes, the people in Sudan are worse off, but our uncertainty or fear still has the feeling of being all too real. So when we have a life circumstance that brings up uncertainty or fear, the key thing is to practice with that mind-state. We can learn to bring awareness to the uncertain situation—whether it be our health, our job, or whatever circumstance brought about the uncertainty. Socially, we do our best to deal with this challenging situation. But we also need to look inwardly at our reactions around the sense of uncertainty, and then learn to train with them. This is true of any negative mood or emotion that arises: rather than getting lost in it, we use it to strengthen our understanding of it, which then gives us the wisdom to practice letting go of it.

Training the Mind

Once you’ve made conscious what’s going on in your inner world by either naming it or acknowledging, for instance, that “This is disappointment. Disappointment feels this way,” you can choose how to respond to it. And making choices is the way you train the mind. For example, you can make a determination not to follow some negative mood that comes up. This is important, because if you follow that negative mood through a lack of awareness, you can end up thinking in ways that cause unnecessary suffering for you and possibly for others, too.

When we observe our actions and their results, we can see quite quickly that it’s better not to follow the storyline that the reactive mind presents. Instead, it’s better to introduce into the mind input that will produce a good result. For instance, I might be feeling anxious about the future. Even though I’ve done everything I can to plan for a positive outcome, my mind wants to keep going to the future to try to figure out what will happen. It’s fear that’s driving my mind to want to try to solve this problem of the unknown future. So I say to myself, “This is what fear feels like. Don’t follow that thought.” Of course, I may have to do that hundreds of times, which makes the process of inner change seem almost as slow as the process of Darwinian evolution. But no matter how slowly things go, the miniscule changes that awareness brings about have a profound cumulative effect on human consciousness. That’s because the whole direction of our thinking—which was oriented towards fear and delusion—is no longer being encouraged. We’ve turned around and are heading the other way.

This other direction we’ve taken is usually tied to the development of new and positive habits of mind. When sitting in meditation, just think of all the wholesome qualities you’re cultivating. You’re certainly developing the capacity to be conscious of inner movement. And when sitting is difficult, you’re learning to acknowledge that you don’t want to be there. Whatever’s going on, you’re fostering this lovely strength to be awake to the experience of the meditation session. This doesn’t mean that you’re judging the quality of the sitting based on whether you have strong samādhi (concentration) or no samādhi. Rather, there’s just this quality of being fully conscious to whatever is presenting itself during the meditation period. That full awareness of whatever is arising in our inner world is what we want to extend into daily life. But remembering to do this is the hard part.

When a negative feeling like irritation comes up, it can be challenging to want to be truly awake to that irritation. At those moments, one just needs to trust in this practice because one’s intentions are good. Developing trust in that full consciousness is often all you have to do. You don’t have to get rid of a negative mood or emotion, nor do you have to hate yourself for having it; but you do have to be awake to it—all of it. By staying with a difficult emotion such as irritation, we begin to see the cessation of these negative, egotistical energies. Why? Well, because we haven’t invested in that difficult feeling. We haven’t reacted to it. We haven’t made more of it than what it is.

As your consciousness of the movements of your inner life becomes more consistent, you’ll find that right speech begins to function because you’re now awake to the impulses that would have otherwise taken you to wrong speech. By wrong speech, I mean speech that is abusive, divisive, slanderous, spreads gossip, and tells lies. The opposite of this is right speech, which is harmonious, soothing, truthful, and worth taking to heart. Ajahn Sumedho would often say, “Consciousness is the escape hatch.” The famous image he uses is of a group of prisoners within your mind who are banging on the doors of your consciousness, and you keep saying, “No, no, I’m not going to look at you.” Then, when you do decide to become conscious of them, they float away, they’re liberated.

The mind that doesn’t bring things into clear consciousness tends to murmur on and on, doesn’t it? How often, when we’ve been experiencing some sense of uptightness or annoyance, has there been a kind of ghostly whispering in the back of the mind—a whispering that we’re not fully aware of? Then, all of a sudden, we notice it and bring it into full consciousness. It’s like having a stone in your shoe when you’re walking. You’re usually so preoccupied with something else that you don’t think to take off your shoe to have a look inside. The stone is there, it’s somewhat bothersome, but we don’t really pay attention to it—much like we tend to do with negative mind-states. But when we do finally acknowledge the problem and address it skillfully, there’s usually a tangible sense of relief.

The awakened mind, however, isn’t necessarily a mind that’s always happy, peaceful, and compassionate. Instead, it’s awake to the way things are. The awakened mind has faith in the fact that full awareness of this condition or of that mental state does liberate the mind. This kind of awareness involves bringing a mind-state into full consciousness and simply observing it—as opposed to running with it, ignoring it, getting in there and re-organizing or fixing it, or trying to get rid of it.

Using Wise Reflection to Transform the Mind

In our monastic training, we try to create a very low standard of what we need in life. I took care of my elderly mother for about nine years until she died. During that time, I lived with her in her condo apartment in Ottawa. When an extremely old person died, it was sometimes mentioned on TV or in the newspaper. Once, there was a British airman who died at 113 years of age; my mum was ninety-three at the time. After she read his obituary aloud, we just looked at each other and didn’t say anything. The deluded part of my consciousness wanted to say, “How many more years can I live like this?” But then the training would lead to a voice saying, “Don’t go there; don’t pick up the future.”

In situations like that, I would reflect on the four monastic requisites of food, shelter, robes, and medicine—the only four things a Buddhist monastic can reasonably expect. The fifth requisite is not a vacation! So I would reflect on the fact that I had food, a roof over my head, and medicine and clothing. Everything was fine. That kind of reflection on the minimal standard of living held by monastics can be quite helpful because the mind can be greedy for the “extras” that we think will make us happy in life. We forget about how little we really need to live a good life. Therefore, when the mind starts wanting things to be other than what they are, reflecting on the four monastic requisites can be a powerful training.

In monastic life, we’re taught to work with very simple reflections that we try to bring forth at different times. For instance, before the main meal, we say:

“Wisely reflecting, I use alms-food not for fun, not for pleasure, not for fattening, not for beautification, but only for the maintenance and nourishment of this body, for keeping it healthy, for helping with the holy life. Thinking thus, I will allay hunger without overeating, so that I may continue to live blamelessly and at ease.”

Offering this as a simple suggestion to the mind day in and day out is comparable to having a mirror that shows a monk his own attitudes to, in this case, food. Naturally, his way of relating to food will sometimes be greedy, or ungrateful, or indifferent, and so forth. But rather than blindly operating from these habitual attitudes, the monk notices them more clearly because the daily reflection encourages him to be mindful of his inner world as he partakes of the meal. So day after day, he reflects on his inner world and then has the choice to take up the Buddha’s suggestions, which subsequently becomes a foundation for peace. It’s not rocket science. It’s more like tortoise work or earthworm work: you’re just inching along day by day, but the cumulative effect is very profound.

The monastic training that we receive in caring for our elders is another example of how we can train the mind in these small but ultimately transformative ways. One of the things I used to reflect on when I was looking after my mother was the way in which Ajahn Chah was cared for after he had his stroke. Ajahn Chah was paralyzed for the last ten years of his life, but he was beautifully ministered to during that time. For instance, a monk would never touch his body without first doing añjali, or a joining of the hands in a gesture of utmost respect. When serving as caregivers to Ajahn Chah, the monks would always talk to him, even though they couldn’t see any reaction from him. In the monastery, we’re trained to look out for our elders. For example, a novice or junior monk will be assigned a senior monk to care for. The reflection that’s used in this form of training is “How can I help this person? How can I make sure they’re OK?” This is an excellent training for the newer monks. Having to look out for the needs of someone other than yourself day in and day out can have a transformative effect on the mind.

In a more general sense, that’s what our training in monastic life and lay life is all about: doing little things that profoundly change us over time. Certainly, we can experience grand insights and life-altering events in the course of our lives. However, the moment-to-moment focus in our training is on these very grounded and wholesome small steps, which build a foundation for the larger things like freedom, happiness, and peace. In and of themselves, these small steps aren’t difficult to take; but remembering to take them can be tricky. Remembering to do our mealtime reflections and to bring forth gratitude and contentment with little can be challenging. And remembering to try to relate to the people with whom we live in a spirit of friendship and affection requires effort, especially since we don’t always feel that way. Nevertheless, the training is in amity and affection, and it’s in this way that we cultivate empathy in our hearts. We ask ourselves, “How can I help others to be free from suffering?” That reflection takes us out of selfishness.

Working with Difficult Emotions

It’s not that you don’t sometimes feel negative or at least conflicting emotions towards others in monastic life or in any other type of relationship. You do feel them. However, the task is to make them conscious and see them for what they are. Experiencing difficult emotions is normal. But those emotions are not to be believed or pursued. Instead, they’re to be known for what they are: changing conditions that can trigger a certain reaction in us. Once we recognize that a difficult emotion is nothing more than a changing condition, this allows it to end. And how does something in the mind come to an end? It ends when the mind doesn’t react to it—when the mind doesn’t put any energy into it.

At one of the larger monasteries like Wat Pah Pong, you might have twenty, thirty, or fifty monks living there at one time. As monastics, we have to learn how to be friends even with someone who “gets up our nose.” That’s an interesting situation because all the monks are very good people. So the first part of the practice is to watch the tendency to be judgmental. The next part of the practice is to respond to the other person in a spirit of friendliness and caring, rather than judgment and cynicism. It’s lovely that we can consciously make those kinds of choices. This enables us to use interpersonal conflicts as a way of training the mind. We can actually focus on a difficult relationship at work, at the monastery, or with family, and use it to make our negative habits of mind conscious.

Say, for instance, that monk A or monk B is making me feel annoyed or intimidated. Rather than simply shying away from them, or blaming either myself or them for the fact that I’m feeling this way, I’m going to learn more about this feeling. When an interaction with this person triggers in me some egotistical or negative state of mind, I can reflect: “OK, this is what arrogance, annoyance, dislike, or inferiority feels like.” In effect, this conscious knowing—which includes being aware of how this negative mind-state feels in the body—allows the mind-state to emerge into full consciousness, which then allows it to cease.

It’s a wonderful feeling to confront some habit of the mind that makes you suffer until you know it well enough that you’re no longer falling victim to it. When you see that your emotional buttons aren’t being pushed anymore, you have more confidence in your practice. But this change doesn’t come without some effort. You have to make the determination: “I’m going to really look at this unskillful mental habit. I’m going to see how it operates in my mind.” This training requires a lot of patience and, at times, it’s not fun. Yet seeing it as a worthwhile challenge can be quite helpful.

Ultimately, any state of mind that obsesses us also limits our capacity to relax into the spaciousness of the mind. That’s because whenever the mind is preoccupied or obsessed with something, there’s no space for anything else. So you can ask yourself: “What objects obsess me? What trains of thought and emotional attitudes grab my attention and take hold of my mind?” Then ask yourself: “What’s the way out? How do I free my mind from that?” This kind of inner inquiry is existential, not theoretical. It’s about our individual existence and the particular modes of suffering we experience.

The Buddha’s teachings give us seemingly abstract concepts to work with: the Four Noble Truths, dependent origination, the three characteristics of existence, and so forth. As a contemplative, you have to know what these things actually mean; that’s the only way you can find freedom from suffering. For example, as a model for enlightenment, the Four Noble Truths are peerless. However, if you leave them strictly at the level of thought, at the level of study, they’ll never liberate you. You have to see pragmatically—through the vehicle of your own practice—how the Four Noble Truths are not only true, but ultimately beneficial for your well-being.

So we come to see that training in working with difficult states of mind is a lot like training in the craft of bookbinding: if we pay close attention, we learn from experience how to do things well.