## Just the Sensed

Based on a talk given at a Day of Mindfulness at Tisarana Monastery in August 2008.

The Bahiya Sutta is a famous discourse of the Buddha that was given to the ascetic Bahiya of the Bark-cloth. Bahiya seemed to possess his own deep wisdom—so much so that he had his own disciples. At one point, he began to believe that he might be enlightened. The story goes that Bahiya was informed of his mistake by a deva, who suggested to him that he go see a truly enlightened being, also known as Gotama Buddha. So that’s what he did. Being very ardent, devoted, and sincere, he had a mind that was primed to receive the teaching.

Bahiya traveled to the Jetavana monastery where the Buddha was staying. But once he arrived there, he learned that the Buddha was away on alms-round in the village, so he set out to find him. When Bahiya finally located the Buddha, he prostrated himself and said, “Please, would you give me some teaching?” The Buddha replied, “This is the wrong time. We are on alms-round.” Bahiya then asked, “Please, life is very short. I could die at any moment and you could die any moment. Please offer me some teaching.” The Buddha replied for a second time, “No, not right now. We are on alms-round.” Bahiya then pleaded for a third time, and the Buddha relented and gave the following teaching:

“Herein, Bahiya, you should train yourself thus: ‘In the seen will be merely what is seen; in the heard will be merely what is heard; in the sensed will be merely what is sensed; in the cognized will be merely what is cognized.’ In this way, you should train yourself, Bahiya.

“When, Bahiya, for you in the seen is merely what is seen … in the cognized is merely what is cognized, then, Bahiya, you will not be ‘with that.’ When, Bahiya, you are not ‘with that,’ then, Bahiya, you will not be ‘in that.’ When, Bahiya, you are not ‘in that,’ then, Bahiya, you will be neither here nor beyond nor in between the two. Just this is the end of suffering.”

~ Udāna 1.10 (John D. Ireland trans.)

One of the many things I like about this sutta is that when the Buddha taught Bahiya, he gave him a training rather than stating a philosophical position. The training he gave was around the practice of emptiness. This practice is rather difficult for many of us to understand because emptiness—as it’s often understood in the English language—implies there is nothing there. In Theravada Buddhism, however, emptiness is a state in which our conscious experience isn’t infected by a sense of self.

But before we contemplate the more challenging aspects of the Buddha’s teachings on emptiness, we need to make sure that we’re well grounded and morally responsible in our ordinary, conventional lives. The Buddha asks us to live our day-to-day lives in a manner that is generous and not harmful to ourselves and others. This leads to a caring sensitivity to the people, animals, and environment around us, and also becomes the basis for self-respect. As much as possible then, we try to speak and act with generosity and moral restraint. Having established the right attitudes in terms of our actions and speech, we can then use the challenges of life and the Buddha’s teachings to understand ourselves and free the mind from ignorance and suffering.

Let’s return now to the instructions that are given to Bahiya. Imagine that you go to retrieve your car from the parking lot, only to discover that your tires have been slashed. In this situation, it’s hard to practice “in the sensed is merely what is sensed,” because in the sensed there is also “Bloody hell, my tires have been slashed!” Rather than simply being aware of things just as they are, the mind grasps at that shock and disappointment with anger. Instead of engaging with the world from the standpoint of functional necessity or equanimity, you’re reacting from a place of anger. When you engage with the world from a state of anger, a sense of self arises from the energy of that anger. And anger is an energy that causes suffering. Later, you might react to your earlier anger with a sense of guilt and think, “I shouldn’t have gotten angry.” But this only compounds the problem and leads to the sense of self being created again.

We “pick up” the world—that is to say, we operate within it in our usual, conventional ways—from a state of suffering because we don’t see clearly. If we don’t see that greed, hatred, and delusion are at the root of our unskillful behavior, then that limits our ability to correct it. It’s very important to be able to see these things clearly, because if we don’t, we’re forever reacting blindly to whatever is going on in and around us. Someone who doesn’t know how to abide in “in the seen is merely what is seen, in the heard is merely what is heard” and so forth, tends to be a compulsive consumer of experience. They’re always doing something, fixing something, or becoming something. They’re always consuming—not just in terms of material things—but in terms of buying into ideas, feelings, thoughts, notions of self, and all of that.

Extremes are useful to look at. If you consider a workaholic, for example, they can never really stop picking up the world in unskillful ways. They always need to be doing things, probably due to some unconscious fear that’s driving them, such as a fear of failure, boredom, emotion, etc. In other words, they’re driven by delusion to keep taking on more work. Grasping at the delusion of workaholism can lead to an inability to relax, and even worse, it can result in burnout, alcoholism, and other extremes of suffering.

Through delusion, you can even misuse the Buddha’s teachings to Bahiya. For instance, if you’re a monk in a large monastery, you can become somewhat institutionalized knowing that the laypeople will be bringing you food and generally taking care of things. As you get accustomed to this type of care, you might think, “Now I just have to meditate and get enlightened. I don’t need to look after anything else. So what if the dishes are dirty, no one swept the porch, or the abbot is ill? It’s okay because ‘in the seen is merely what is seen, in the heard is merely what is heard.’” You can really lapse into selfishness if you understand the instructions in the wrong way.

In terms of practice, it’s easy to apply the teaching of “in the heard is merely what is heard” when you’re sitting in the meditation hall listening to the rain pattering on the rooftop. It’s a lot harder to follow that teaching when you have a tent outside and you suddenly realize that your tent flap was left open and the rain is getting in. In other words, it’s a lot easier to stay with awareness when you’re experiencing something peaceful. The challenge is to be mindful of things just as they are when you’re experiencing something more difficult. Once you’ve established this awareness, you can try to develop the ability to notice the roots of skillful and unskillful behaviors. Once you’re able to do this, you can wisely choose when to pick up the world and when to let it continue on its way.

Training in awareness is a bit like bird-watching. I think of it as a kind of “Buddhist bird-watching.” You learn to step back and note the inner creatures of your consciousness. Imagine, for example, that you’ve just finished a 10-day retreat where you were working hard, and now you want to reward yourself with a treat—perhaps a movie rental. What has arisen in consciousness is a little bit of greed. So try to practice “in the sensed is merely what is sensed” by trying to know for yourself: “This is just wanting.” Try to watch greed arise and then cease. But since you’re now keeping five precepts rather than the eight precepts you observed while on retreat, you can indulge in a film rental if you want to.

So that’s what you do. You head off to the store, get the movie, return home, prepare your popcorn, stick the DVD into the machine, and finally settle in to enjoy the movie. Then you notice the screen is blank … the DVD player is broken! That’s the world that has just arisen for you. Thus you make an effort to practice “in the sensed is merely what is sensed.” But what you sense—in this case, keen disappointment—isn’t always what you want to sense. The content of the world doesn’t always end up conforming to your plans for it. In this instance, the world that came into being didn’t follow the expectations you had at the end of the retreat; it arose according to factors other than your desire. These things happen, since the content of the world is impermanent and unpredictable. So in a situation like this, you simply remember that “in the sensed is merely what is sensed,” and then you attempt to keep the experience empty of self. You don’t cling to disappointment and consequently become a disappointed person; you just let it arise and pass away. By not taking ownership of disappointment, you keep it devoid of self. Try to practice in this way even with strong disappointments.

For example, if you’ve made a mistake and been strongly criticized for it, you may feel a deep sense of disappointment in yourself. If this happens, don’t escalate it into self-disparagement by thinking about what a failure you are. If you do this, then you’re channeling more energy into the sense of self that’s already been born into the mind. If you can just bear with something unpleasant like disappointment or criticism, that keeps it empty of self. This is a more difficult thing to do, but you can see the value of not creating more conditions that lead to suffering. If you can learn to simply stay with the disappointments that life inevitably brings, and know that in the disappointment there is just disappointment, then, in being the witness rather than the participant in the situation, you’re practicing the roots of renunciation. What are you renouncing? You’re renouncing a desire to blame yourself or others. You’re also relinquishing a desire to distract yourself from the problem at hand. In other words, you’re letting go.

Letting go is more difficult than distracting ourselves because it requires that we bear with the unpleasant without getting involved in it. Our consciousness is conditioned to seek the pleasant and avoid the unpleasant—that’s natural. And as humans, it’s also natural for us to experience both pleasant and unpleasant feelings because the world presents itself in both pleasant and unpleasant ways. But if we’re looking for freedom from suffering, we remember that—pleasant or unpleasant—the experience will change.

We often act out of habit instead of clarity. Something might happen that triggers a memory. That memory might bring up feelings and attitudes that applied to a completely different time and place; or it might bring up grief or happiness. Then we might find ourselves reacting to the feelings that the memory brought up. But if we just react habitually in this way, we miss the chance to examine whether our motives and actions are skillful or unskillful. Picking up the world from clarity is different. If we pick up the world from clarity, then when there’s a movement in consciousness (such as anger or gratitude), we observe it before we grasp at it. We can now choose whether or not it’s something we should stay with. When we’re able to notice the movements in consciousness without attaching to them, that’s letting go. Letting go doesn’t mean that we never pick up the world—we can still do that. But now we’re picking it up very skillfully.

In Pali, the word for greed is “lobha.” Lobha has a much broader connotation than the English word “greed.” It refers to that aspect of consciousness that is always seeking the pleasant. This constant seeking of the pleasant makes experiencing the unpleasant more difficult. “Dosa” is the Pali word for aversion. It has also been translated as hatred or ill-will. Dosa refers to that aspect of consciousness that is continually trying to avoid the unpleasant. As such, dosa underlies all that which I am averse to, while lobha underlies all that which I am attracted to. Greed and aversion would be the causes, for instance, of fidgeting in meditation, since we’re greedy for comfort and averse to discomfort. If we fidget every time we feel discomfort, then we’re strengthening both the greed and the aversion. Of course, sometimes we have to move to avoid injuring ourselves. But if we need to move, it’s better to observe that need first, and then ask ourselves, “Is it really necessary to move, or am I just acting from greed and aversion?” In other words, when it’s necessary to move, it’s better to do it from a state of clarity rather than of ignorance. The same is true whenever we pick up the world.

The capacity to identify something and know it just as it is, without injecting a sense of self into it, is also part of “in the sensed is merely what is sensed.” It’s not about me having greed or thinking that I’m a terrible person for being greedy. Rather, it’s about noticing: “Greed feels this way. Aversion feels this way.” We do the same with the roots of the wholesome by simply noticing: “Compassion feels this way. Appreciation of others feels this way. Renunciation feels this way.” This is how we practice Buddhist bird-watching.

If you’re a bird-watcher, you can see the difference between a loon and a cormorant right away, can’t you? And yet their forms are quite similar. If someone hasn’t done a lot of bird-watching, they probably can’t differentiate between them. This shows us that we can become very attuned to distinguishing subtle differences between birds simply by training ourselves to tell them apart. We get a pair of binoculars, observe the birds, and then consult the bird-watching guide. After a while, we can identify the birds just by glancing at them. In the same way, the inner vigilance of Buddhist bird-watching allows us to become increasingly better at identifying which impulses of ours are skillful and which are unskillful.

But we need to be careful not to make a big fuss when we make a mistake. After getting upset with ourselves enough times, we come to realize that it’s more skillful to be self-forgiving rather than self-disparaging. After all, not filling the mind with self-recriminations is so much more peaceful than filling it with such difficult energy. By just observing what leads to peace and what doesn’t, we experience a natural movement towards letting go of suffering, towards compassion. When we practice in this way, our inner vigilance isn’t forced, nor is it harsh. It’s honest. It has integrity. We’re simply taking responsibility for what’s going on in our hearts and minds.

Of course, the more challenging the feelings are that are arising, the more challenging it is to notice that it’s like this. If you go home for Christmas and encounter a difficult relative who presses your buttons, this can give rise to very strong feelings. When intense feelings come up, it’s quite hard to practice “it is just this way,” and not create a sense of self and other around those emotions. So we can see how applying this teaching in some areas of life can be quite difficult. However, the more we apply this principle in the meditation hall, or at those times that aren’t too stressful for us, the more adept we become at it. Take pain, for instance. We all experience a certain amount of pain during meditation. If you can (without injuring yourself) apply the teaching “in the sensed is merely what is sensed,” then the pain remains simply a physical experience and not “you” having the pain. After you’ve watched the pain for a while, you can pick up the world and change your posture—that’s allowed. If you can learn to practice equanimity around a certain degree of discomfort, then when you eventually have to face more serious pain—whether it be physical or emotional—you’ll be able to handle it more skillfully because you will have trained in this way.

If we know that a particular situation is going to be taxing for us, we can set an intention beforehand to act more skillfully when confronted with it. For example, I was talking to someone who has an extremely difficult relationship with their brother to the point that simply having to see him makes the sense of self arise very strongly in them. In a situation like this, you can make a determination along the lines of “OK, when I see him, I’m really going to try to notice the arising of tightness in my stomach, and so on.” In essence, you’re pre-programming the mind to respond with a skillful approach to the situation, rather than succumbing to the unskillful reaction: “Oh God, I have to see him again. I’m not going to be able to handle it!” Then you do what you can to not follow any negative impulses that might arise when you see him. You do your best to cultivate thoughts of compassion, of loving-kindness towards him.

There’s tremendous freedom in abandoning impulsive mental habits and not picking up the world in the same old ways we have in the past. Picking up the world in the right way is rewarding and certainly makes sense. So remember: “In the seen is merely what is seen, in the heard is merely what is heard, in the sensed is merely what is sensed, and in the cognized is merely what is cognized.” Not making more of things than they actually are is something we can learn to do as we keep in mind that the way to the end of suffering is just this.