## Artful Awareness

Based on a talk given at a Day of Mindfulness sponsored by the Ottawa Buddhist Society in November 2013.

I was once at a retreat center that had a large-format book of thangkas, or Tibetan paintings, which were highly elaborate and beautifully executed. The reproductions of the paintings were about 2½ feet x 1 foot. My mind was utterly absorbed in the wealth of detail characterizing these amazing pictures. My thinking went something like this: “There’s a Bodhisattva. What’s this configuration? And what does that cycle represent? How does this connect to that? I wonder how this imagery compares with Theravada art? Wow, those Tibetans are far-out ….” My mind was totally caught up in the details.

This same retreat center had a few paintings of abstract art on its walls. One image was of a rather cloud-like shape, although this particular “cloud” was a curious mixture of pinkish, whitish, and purplish tones. When I looked at that painting, the first thing my mind did was ask, “This is art?” And so forth. But then when I stopped the critical commentary and just allowed my consciousness to be with the colors, letting the colors come to me, my mind was very calm. For me, this was an interesting insight into the different ways in which we can use the mind. There’s nothing wrong with focusing on detail; but allowing consciousness to be spacious and receptive can bring an inner peace that is not dependent on sense objects. Abiding in this sense of open awareness is probably more foreign to us. Perhaps you notice it more often at the cottage, in nature, or even at the end of a period of meditation, when, after trying for forty-five minutes to be peaceful, the bell rings and you suddenly let go of all the mental activity you’ve been engaging in.

If you just watch what your mind is doing during meditation, you’ll see that quite often it’s engrossed in thinking, planning, worrying, etc. Once you’ve noticed that, you can then bring your mind back to focusing on your object of meditation. And if you’re very diligent, you’ll completely let go of your storyline, at which point the bell rings. That’s not a nice scenario, but it does happen. So what’s going on with the mind there? Attention is jumping from one object of consciousness to another. These objects consist of bodily phenomena (such as discomfort, itching, etc.); emotions (such as annoyance, inspiration, doubt, and so on); and memories (which might include recollections about work, old TV programs, encounters we’ve had during the day, etc.). The mind can really spin off in many different directions: “When is this sitting going to end? Will the pain in my knee go away? Should I or should I not move? Did I turn the gas stove off? I should sit in a chair next time. There’s self-blame coming up ….” And that can last for a large part of the meditation session.

The other way of attending to these objects of consciousness is to be aware of them, but not engage with any particular object. This isn’t something we normally do. Let’s imagine that this room, with its various features, is analogous to consciousness. The room contains interesting light fixtures, a Christmas tree, a monk who is talking, different sounds and colors, a particular temperature, the smell of burning incense, and other objects of consciousness. To simply notice the space in the room, what do you need to do? You need to take your attention away from any particular object. When you don’t focus on any specific object while still keeping your eyes open, the visual field presents itself in a wide and spacious way. When this happens, you’re able to notice that as well as there being objects in the room, there is also space in the room, outside of the room, and everywhere else. So if you choose not to focus on any particular object and just let your mind relax into that sense of space, you’ll shift into this still, receptive state of awareness.

In the same way, we can also choose to focus on the space underlying all of our mental activity or “clutter.” When it comes to our meditation practice, listening is a very good way to enter into this more spacious mode of consciousness, rather than getting drawn into object consciousness. But the listening isn’t just about the sense experience of a sound: it is awareness itself. That is, the listening is synonymous with awareness.

As meditators, most of us have an object of meditation we’ve chosen that helps us to anchor the mind in the present moment. For instance, we can follow the breath or concentrate on manifesting the energy of loving-kindness. These are very fruitful practices because they make it easier for us to compose and collect the mind. But there’s also a form of meditation that we call “choiceless awareness,” which points to what I’m talking about here. Instead of choosing a particular object to pay attention to, you focus on whatever is arising in the present moment. You’re simply present with the way things are, thereby allowing them to change according to their transitory nature. Strictly speaking, this type of meditation isn’t really choiceless, since you’re choosing to abide in the present moment and not localize your attention on any particular sense object. In fact, what you’re choosing to notice is change. If you’re willing to be patient with this kind of observing, you might notice the space between thoughts—that is, the space before a thought arises and especially the space after a thought ceases.

As an experiment, say to yourself, “Tomorrow is …” and fill in whatever day of the week tomorrow is for you. Let a bit of time pass. Then stop your train of thought and just listen. Notice how quickly the space that succeeded the “Tomorrow is …” thought got filled with planning or anticipating the next day’s activities—in other words, with some kind of “doing.” Or maybe you started to question: “‘Tomorrow is ….’ Is that what he means by paying attention to the space? Am I doing this right?” Even now, the mind is thinking. But you need to stop trying to figure things out, since there’s nothing that needs to be figured out. Once you can get the thinking to stop, you have it. You have the silence, the space. In this way, you begin to emphasize the space and sense of awareness which are the background of consciousness, rather than emphasizing the objects of awareness which are the foreground of consciousness.

It’s relatively easy for me to practice this kind of listening and awareness in a neutral situation that’s free of pain, confusion, or any sense of threat. However, if I’m experiencing emotions that are quite strong, such as fear, anger, or greed, then to be aware of and receptive to these emotions just as they are is more difficult. This is because our usual attitude towards them is one of resistance or aversion. We either want to blame someone or something for making us feel this way, or we want to get rid of the unpleasant feeling. This push and pull of the mind re-engages us with objects of consciousness. We hate ourselves, we hate others, we worry, we become fearful—in other words, we start chasing our thoughts and emotions.

At this point, we usually seek compensations or distractions in order to try to bypass these difficult mind-states. We reach for a slice of pizza, a tub of yogurt, or our favorite musical recordings by Bach or the Grateful Dead. Or we work out or become a couch potato. But when our various forms of escapism are driven by fear, greed, hatred, or delusion, then they’re not going to lead to peace. In fact, they can lead to addictions in minor or major ways. In this way, the mind becomes entrenched in the object world of thoughts, emotions, and experiences. By and large, there’s nothing wrong with this involvement with objects. We certainly need to think and to analyze things to some degree. This other way of abiding, however, takes us to a deep space of silence whose being is not dependent on the arising of certain conditions. You don’t need to be feeling or thinking in a certain way to be in a state of receptive awareness. Moreover, this sense of open, spacious awareness can accommodate the most awful emotions, just as it can accommodate the most beatific ones. Awareness is like a gracious host who allows all the guests to come and go with the wisdom that whatever has the nature to arise, has the nature to cease.

Entering into that space of non-attachment and non-preference can be challenging though, since what usually arises for us is desire. This can be the desire for pleasant objects or the desire to get rid of unpleasant objects. And so we have various strategies in Buddhism for working with this kind of craving. One is restraint—or refraining from doing something that will lead to a negative outcome. Restraint can be a very skillful response to the surfacing of certain emotions. Consider the difference between anger and hatred. For me, anger is simply an emotional flare-up, whereas hatred is a more deep-seated and sustained toxic energy. To illustrate what I mean by this, let’s imagine that I park my car and then I find that someone has whacked it. Furious, I respond with “Argh!” That’s a flare-up. Hatred, however, is something more intentional, where I think, “I’m going to get that guy!” You’re deliberately fanning the flames of ill-will. In this case, hatred is what is driving the mind. So when we talk about refraining from acting on our impulses, we’re actually referring to those energies that are intended to do harm to oneself or others.

Restraint is a vital part of living a moral, civil life. It’s what stops us from physically or verbally lashing out at people for whom we’re feeling deep antipathy. Refraining from doing these things takes mindfulness. Mindfulness allows us to be receptive to an impulse and not act on it. That’s not repression—that’s wisdom. In order for me not to think that I have to clobber that guy who dented my car, what do I have to do? I have to go back to feeling the anger and observe what that anger feels like in the body. I have to be receptive to it in the same way that I was receptive to that abstract painting at the retreat center. If you can fully feel the energy, the heat, and the discomfort of the anger (or whatever emotion you may be experiencing) in your heart, in your viscera, then you’re allowing it to be processed. Awareness in the body allows these energies to run their course without our getting caught up in the tendency to repress or indulge them, thus making things worse.

This practice of fully experiencing the energies arising in the body takes a lot of patience and trust in the fact that it’s OK to feel a difficult emotion since we know it will change. You don’t have to analyze the emotion, nor do you have to fix it. And you don’t have to distract yourself from it either. You just have to bear witness to the feeling, and eventually it does cease. That experience of cessation, of liberation from suffering, leads to a beautiful kind of happiness, doesn’t it? We’ve all experienced that to varying degrees.

The great thing about having a meditation practice is that you can learn these lessons in the safe, non-threatening situation of sitting on a meditation cushion or in a chair. You can learn how to be open to everything that surfaces. Fears or annoyances might come up and you know it’s acceptable to have them and to feel them fully. So you first discover how to be in this still, spacious awareness in a place of safety. In the same way, you’re able to learn about how the mind works and what leads to freedom from suffering in a relatively risk-free environment before having to apply your practice (and the insight it yields) to complex life situations where your buttons will really get pressed.

Even if your meditation leaves you feeling very calm, it’s the insight that arises from the meditation that’s important, not just the experience itself. This leads us to an interesting point: the peace that comes from insight leads to the peace of the Unconditioned. To grasp this idea, we first have to consider what is meant by the term “Unconditioned.” If you think about that word, you’ll see that it’s not a word you can easily figure out. You have to approach it from a more contemplative mindset. So try asking yourself: “What is there that is not conditioned?” By conditioned, I mean reliant upon certain causes and conditions for its existence. For example, sound is conditioned by my sense organ (i.e., my ear) coming into contact with a sense object (i.e., sound). Anything that I perceive through the six sense doors of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, and thinking is conditioned.

So what is not conditioned? It’s awareness. Awareness is different from sense objects, isn’t it? When I ask you to listen to sound and feel that in the body, you have to stop thinking and just listen. Try that. Listen to sound. And then squeeze one of your hands. The awareness is there, isn’t it? But it’s not dependent upon the pressure of the hand or the volume of the sound: it’s ever-present. We generally don’t notice awareness because we’re so engrossed in our personal dramas, our sensory pleasures, our memories, our physical pain, our intellectual pursuits, and so forth.

Hence our mind is attached to all these different objects of consciousness. When those objects no longer satisfy our desire for pleasure, what do we do? We seek out other objects to replace them. The Buddha states that while this search might bring you a certain amount of pleasure, it has its limitations. This is not to negate the enjoyment of a nice dinner or a cooling swim on a hot summer’s day. You can still delight in life’s pleasures without feeling guilty about it. But you realize that sensual enjoyment is not the peace of the Unconditioned. So when you put on a few pounds from eating those delicious meals, that’s just the way it is: it’s unsatisfactory, or dukkha, as it’s known in the Pali language. In Buddhism, we say that even the pleasure derived from pleasant emotions, thoughts, and sensory experiences is unsatisfactory because it doesn’t last. This pleasure doesn’t last because the objects (or sources) of pleasure are themselves impermanent. However, you can still be grateful for the pleasure while it’s there. But if you’re looking for a deeper, more lasting sense of happiness that is not dependent on objects, then don’t put all your chips on pleasure.

The peace of the Unconditioned, on the other hand, comes from not attaching to that which is conditioned, changing, and unsatisfactory. As you realize what non-attachment is—which is simply knowing the way things are—your mind begins to sense a profound silence and stillness that is unconditioned. This is consciousness that is not enmeshed in sense objects. This is the peaceful, receptive state of awareness that allowed me to simply be with the abstract “cloud” painting without my getting lost in a like-or-dislike reaction to its details.

Before you know it though, your attention gets re-absorbed in the next engaging object and the restless mind takes off again. Then it crashes as boredom or disappointment sets in, and you find yourself going back to the meditative practice of listening. As more time goes by, that listening consciousness becomes sweeter, more interesting, and more attractive. Meanwhile, the world of objects becomes less and less appealing to us, but not because we don’t enjoy a tasty donut at Tim Hortons. It’s simply that we’re gaining more maturity as our insight into the uncertain, impermanent, and unsatisfactory nature of conditioned phenomena deepens.

When you’re a child, you enjoy playing with dolls or guns or whatever strikes your fancy. And when you’re a teenager, you want to race motorbikes or perform in a rock band. Does that mean that in your less active old age you’re condemned to a life of complete dullness and boredom? No. Maturity is about appreciating the Unconditioned, and the deep sense of peace and contentment that can generate in the mind and heart. I think that’s what the spiritual life is all about. As an older person especially, if you don’t have a spiritual path to turn to as an alternative to object consciousness, you’re in trouble. Your senses and other body parts will eventually start to fail, and then what do you have left? You always have awareness because it’s not conditioned by things. That’s the beauty of it. Open-hearted, receptive awareness is a key factor in the path to awakening. May your practice bear the fruit of liberation and bring you to your real home.