## Selected Glossary

Since most key terms are followed by their Pali forms I have not included every single term. I have also cross-referenced some common terms from English to Pali. For detailed explanations see the Buddhist Dictionary or PED for more technical information. Alternative translations are in square brackets.

Abhiññā: six kinds of psychic or supernormal powers: 1) superhuman abilities, i.e. walking on water, flying through the air, etc., 2) ‘divine hearing’, 3) mind-reading, 4) ‘divine seeing’: seeing the arising and passing of beings according to their kamma, 5) recollecting one’s former existences, 6) exhaustion of the outflows.

Abhijjhā: covetousness.

Absorptions: jhāna.

Acinteyya: inconceivable, not to be known by conceptual thought: 1) the sphere of a Buddha, 2) the domain of the meditative absorptions, 3) the results of intentional actions (kamma-vipāka), and 4) speculation about the nature of the world.

Anāgāmi: non-returner, the third stage of awakening.

Anatta: non-self, impersonality; one of the Three Characteristics.

Anicca: impermanence.

Arahant: the ‘worthy one’, the fourth and final stage of Awakening.

Ārambhadhātu: element of inception; one of the three forms of energetic exertion, together with nikkamadhātu (the element of persistence) and parakkamadhātu (the element of exertion).

Āsava: outflows (of selfhood): sense desire, becoming, ignorance and (wrong) views. [Taints, corruptions, influxes, pollutions].

Asubha: ‘unbeautiful’, unattractive [loathsome, foul].

Attā: self.

Attendings with Mindfulness: satipaṭṭhāna [Foundations of Mindfulness].

Avijjā: ignorance.

Avyākata: indeterminants, unanswered questions.

Awakening, four stages of: stream-entry, once-return, non-return and arahant, delineated by the ‘fetters’ which have been eliminated or reduced: see Appendix 2.

Basis of rebirth: upadhi : four sources - sensual pleasures, five groups of grasping, defilements, kamma. [Attachment, acquisitions].

Bhavarāgā: lust for existence.

Bhikkhu: monk, literally ‘alms mendicant’.

Brahma vihāra: four Divine Abidings; friendliness (mettā), compassion (karunā), empathetic joy (muditā) and equanimity (upekkhā).

Calm Meditation: samatha kammathāna – meditation practice with a strong emphasis on concentration in order to attain absorption.

Cintā-mayā-paññā: understanding from thinking; one of the three modes of understanding, together with suta-mayā-paññā (understanding from learning) and bhāvanā-mayā-paññā (experiential realization through meditation).

Concentration: samādhi.

Conceptual proliferation: papañca.

Conditional Causality: paticca-samuppāda – the Buddha’s teaching that all conditioned things arise from a cause and cease with the cessation of the cause; usually formally presented as twelve links. [Dependent origination].

Consciousness: viññāna – one of the basic functions of mind; usually defined in relation to the six senses.

Deva: literally ‘radiant’; celestial being, god, deity.

Dhamma: a) with capital ‘D’, the Buddha’s teaching, b) with small ‘d’, phenomena, things.

Dhammachanda: desire for Dhamma.

Dhamma-vicaya: investigation of phenomena.

Dhātu: four physical elements of earth, fire, water and air.

Disenchantment: nibbidā [Revulsion].

Dispassion: virāga.

Diṭṭhi: view, usually in sense of ‘wrong view’.

Dosa: aversion.

Dukkha: 1) pain, dis-ease, suffering, 2) unsatisfactoriness, imperfection, incompleteness.

Esanā: ‘longings’; three - sensuality, existence, spiritual life.

Factors of Awakening, the Seven: mindfulness, investigation of dhamma, energy, joy, tranquillity, concentration and equanimity.

Feeling (tones): vedanā.

Fetter: samyojana.

Five Groups of Grasping: pañcupādānakkhandha or khandha – physical form, feelings, perceptions, mental processes, consciousness.

Five Hindrances: sensual desire, ill-will, lethargy and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, doubt.

Five Precepts: refraining from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying and intoxication; the basic moral standard for a Buddhist.

Four Noble Truths: ariya sacca – dukkha, origin of dukkha, cessation of dukkha and path to cessation of dukkha.

Grasping: upādāna.

Iddhipāda: roads to psychic powers (see Abhiññā).

Ignorance: avijjā.

Impermanence: anicca.

Impersonality: anattā.

Indriya guttadvāra: guarding the doors of the senses or ‘sense restraint’ (indriya saṃvara).

Jhāna: four stages of increasingly deeper concentration, see Introduction.

Kāma: sense pleasures, sensuality; as Kāmabhava or Kāmaloka it also denotes the Sensuous Realm of existence, the other two realms being the Fine-material Realm (rūpa) and the Immaterial Realm (arūpa); for details see Bud. Dict.‘loka’.

Kāma-chanda: desire for sensual pleasure.

Kāmaguṇā: the five ‘strands of sensual pleasure’.

Kāmarāgā: lust for sensual pleasure.

Kāmesu micchācāra: inappropriate sensual/sexual conduct.

Kamma: intentional action which has the potential to produce a result (vipāka).

Kammapatha: ten wrong ways of action – killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, harsh speech, foolish speech, covetousness, ill-will, wrong views.

Karaṇiya Mettā Sutta: the discourse on Loving-Kindness or Friendliness.

Kataññuta: gratitude, most particularly to one’s parents.

Khandha: the five groups of grasping – physical form, feelings, perceptions, mental processes, consciousness. [Aggregates].

Lethargy and drowsiness: thīna-middha [Sloth and torpor].

Loka-dhamma: the eight worldly conditions – gain and loss, fame and disgrace, praise and blame, happiness and suffering (A.IV,157f).

Lokiya: worldly.

Lokuttara: supermundane.

Mental processes: saṅkhāra; as one of the groups of grasping its most prominent activity is intention, will, volition.

Mettābhavana: friendliness meditation.

Micchā vitakka: three wrong thoughts – sensuality, ill-will, harming.

Nekkhamma: renunciation, relinquishment.

Nibbāna: the ultimate ‘goal’ of Buddhist practice, the cessation of greed, aversion and delusion.

Nīvarana: Hindrances.

Ogha: ‘flood’, four – same as ‘outflows’.

Outflows (of selfhood): āsava, four – ignorance, sense desire, for existence, views.

Paticca-samuppāda: Conditional Causality. [Dependent Origination].

Paṭigha: repulsion, one of the underlying dispositions [aversion, repugnance].

Pīti: rapture, a Factor of Awakening and of absorption.

Puja: devotional observances, evening and morning chanting.

Rebirth: punabbhava. (literally ‘re-becoming’).

Restlessness and remorse: uddhacca-kukkucca.

Sabhāva-dhamma: natural phenomena.

Sakadāgāmi: once-returner, the second stage of awakening.

Sakkāya-diṭṭhi: identity view, one of the fetters.

Sammā vāyāma: Right Effort, sixth factor of the Eightfold Path, same as Sammappadhāna: Four Right Strivings - avoid unwholesome states, remove unwholesome states, develop wholesome states, maintain wholesome states.

Saṁvega: spiritual agitation or anxiety at becoming aware of the fragile human condition.

Saṃyojana: fetters, ten – see Appendix 2

Saṅkhāra: ‘making together’, 1) as a khandha: mental processes: various mental qualities, the main one being intention, will or volition, 2) as a factor of Conditional Causality: formative mental process, habitual tendencies conditioning consciousness, 3) conditioned phenomena.

Sañña: ‘associative knowledge’, perception, cognition.

Sīla: skilful conduct, morality, virtue.

Six internal and external sense-spheres; sixfold sense bases: salāyatana – six sense organs and six sense objects, the mind and mental objects being the sixth.

Sotāpanna: stream-enterer, the first stage of awakening.

Spiritual Faculties and Powers: faith, wisdom, energy, concentration and mindfulness.

Sukha somanassa: happiness and well-being.

Tanhā: thirst, three kinds - sensuality, for existence and for non-existence. [Craving].

Te-vijja: Three Knowledges – 1) recollection of one’s former existences, 2) ‘divine seeing’ – seeing the arising and passing of other beings according to their kamma, 3) exhaustion of the outflows.

Thīna-middha: lethargy and drowsiness.

Three Characteristics: tilakkhana - the ‘characteristics’ of all conditioned things: impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality.

Three Knowledges: Te-vijja – remembrance of one’s former rebirths; ‘divine seeing’: seeing the arising and passing of beings according to their kamma; exhaustion of the outflows.

Triple Gem: tiratana – Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha; also called the Three Refuges.

Uddhacca-kukkucca: restlessness and remorse/worry. [flurry and worry, restlessness and worry].

Underlying dispositions: anusaya - seven kinds: lust, aversion, views, doubt, conceit, lust for existence, ignorance. [Underlying tendencies].

Unsatisfactoriness: dukkha in its existential manifestation.

Upādāna: grasping, four forms: sensuality, views, rules and rituals, personality belief. [Clinging].

Upadhi: basis for rebirth.

Upāya: skilful means.

Vedanā: feeling tone.

Vicikicchā: doubt.

Vimutti: liberation.

Vinaya (Pitaka): the collection of the disciplinary rules and procedures for monastics.

Viññāna: consciousness.

Vipallāsa: distortions, four, either of perception, thought or view – regarding a) what is impermanent as permanent, b) what is unsatisfactory as pleasant, c) what is non-self as self, d) what is unattractive as beautiful.

Vipassanā: insight.

Vipassanā kammathāna: meditation practice with a strong emphasis on mindfulness and investigation, in order to see directly the Three Characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and impersonality.

Vyāpāda or byāpāda: ill-will.

Worthy One: arahant, one of the titles of the Buddha and all those who are fully awakened.

Yathābūtā: as it really is.

Yoga: bonds, same as four outflows.

Yoniso manasikāra: thorough, appropriate and wise attention.