## Sensual Desire

Just as, brahmin, if there is a pot of water mixed with orange, yellow, indigo or crimson dye, and a man with good sight should consider his own facial image in it, he could not recognize nor see it as it really is. So too when someone abides with their mind pervaded with sensual lust, overcome with sensual lust...

The first of the Five Hindrances is sensual desire. I wonder why the Buddha started with a hot topic like that? He could perhaps have started more coolly with one like doubt. I don’t wish to second-guess the Buddha, but my answer would be that the topic of sensual desire is the most important one in spiritual practice. Basically, it is preoccupation with desires of the sensual realm which distracts us from accessing the more subtle spiritual experiences. Also, sensual desire is the only hindrance which comes close to being pleasant, although Hanson (2009, p.39) points out its inherent suffering. Pursuing sensual desires, as long as it is done legally, is not criticized by society, in fact, the satisfying of sensual desires is the principal goal in life for many people.

I think I should be a little careful of what I say here, in order to be able to explain sensual desire without stirring up the reader’s desires; that is, to make sense of sensual desire without the desires. And that is really the chief issue regarding sensual desire, since we all have sensual impressions of various kinds and in varying degrees in the course of ordinary life. How can we relate to them without their becoming a hindrance, obsession or addiction? Also, I would say that for many people it is often quite difficult to engage with the subject, due to our ambiguous love-hate relationship with sensual desires. On the one hand, we all love the enjoyment of sensory gratification. Many of us also know the frustration and disappointment which are the other side of the story of pursuing sensual desires, and we usually hate to be a slave to them. However, it is necessary to understand these very influential forces in our life, otherwise we can be continually hijacked by them.

The Buddha had a very specific perspective on sensual desire. The Pali term used is kāma-chanda. Kāma literally means ‘sensual pleasure’ or ‘sensuality’. The best translation of chanda is ‘desire’, but it also has the meaning of ‘wanting, wishing, intention, will’. In various places in the teachings the more dynamic cousin of desire, rāga, ‘lust’ or ‘passion’ replaces it. Thus lust for sense pleasures (kāmarāga) is the fourth of the ten fetters (saṃyojana) binding beings to the cycles of rebirth, and the first of the ‘underlying dispositions’ (anusaya). The term kāma-chanda would more correctly mean ‘desire for sensual pleasure’, often shortened to ‘sensual desire’. So there are two parts to this topic, sensual pleasures and the desire or lust which can arise with regard to them.

#### Meditation

Sit in a comfortable position in a quiet, undisturbed place.

Place your attention on the breathing for a few minutes to collect and settle the mind.

When suitable, bring up in your mind an image of something desirable relating to any of the senses. (It is best to consider something just mildly desirable which you could obtain without too much difficulty, e.g. a hot relaxing shower, a bowl of your favourite ice cream, the sound of your favourite song, etc.)

For the moment set aside the object and try just to be aware of that wanting, desiring, longing.

How is it expressed? Is it strong, steady, pulsing, flowing, etc.?

Where in the body do you perceive it? What are its bodily expressions?

What are the feeling tones?

Do you notice any other mental conditions, for example, judgements, reactions, associations?

What are the feeling tones of those?

When suitable, bring your attention back to the breathing.

Open your eyes and relax the posture.

#### Sensual Pleasure

Sensual pleasure is mentioned in many contexts in the Buddha’s teaching. It is the first of the four objects of grasping (upādāna), the three ‘thirsts’ (tanhā), the four ‘floods’ (ogha), the four ‘outflows’ (āsava), the four ‘bonds’ (yoga), and the three ‘longings’ (esanā). It is one of the three wrong thoughts (micchā vitakka), and as a practice it is one of the extremes to be avoided in following the Middle Way. Although it refers to any form of sensual pleasure, sexual pleasure is always implied, and often sexual intercourse is specifically meant. For example, the third of the Five Precepts is almost always translated as refraining from sexual misconduct (kāmesu micchācāra), explained as refraining from inappropriate sexual intercourse (e.g. at M.I,286; III,46).

The most common reference to sense pleasures is to the five physical sense objects, the five ‘strands of sensual pleasure’ (kāmaguṇā): sights, sounds, odours, tastes and sensations that are ‘agreeable, enjoyable, pleasing, likeable, accompanied by pleasure, enticing.’ At several places in the Pali Canon (e.g., M.I,181;274;347) covetousness (abhijjhā) is used in place of sensual desire with reference to the Five Hindrances. Covetousness, which is synonymous with greed (lobha), would imply a broadening of the topic to also encompass mental objects. This would then include greed for ideas, concepts and self-images (fame, wealth, health, etc.), giving rise to views and opinions about self (‘ego pleasure’) which frequently manifest as a serious hindrance for some people (cf. S.IV,22f;65f).

The Buddha had a very specific and particular view regarding sensual pleasures. While acknowledging that they do give the gratification of happiness and well-being (sukha somanassa), he gave many teachings explaining the limitations and dangers of following them (M.I,86f), using some striking similes to illustrate his point (e.g. M.I,132). The main reason for this is that whatever one ‘frequently ponders on or thinks over, that becomes the inclination of the mind’ (M.I,116). Thus thinking much about sensual pleasures eventually habituates the mind to thinking that way consistently. Also, it is impossible to engage in sensual pleasures without having ‘sensual enjoyment, perceptions of sensual pleasure and thoughts of sensual pleasure.’ That is, sensual pleasure tends to overwhelm the mind (M.I,133). On the other hand, the Buddha, perhaps aware that human beings are instinctively beings of pleasure, praised and encouraged the experience of spiritual happiness. For example, two of the exercises for developing meditation on breathing specifically mention training the mind to follow the breath while experiencing rapture and bliss (pīti sukha; M.III,82-3).

When the Buddha-to-be was on his spiritual quest before his awakening, he reflected that thoughts of sensual pleasure led to his own and others affliction, ‘obstructs wisdom, is associated with distress, and is not conducive to nibbāna’ (M.I,115). He contrasted this with renunciation (nekkhamma) which he realized has the opposite effects and ‘is conducive to nibbāna.’ He had a similar realization regarding thoughts of ill-will and harming and their opposites.1 With these three kinds of skilful thoughts as the basis, he was able to develop the increasingly refined states of concentration (jhāna) which he experienced as resulting in a happiness far superior to sensual pleasure (S.IV,226f). He referred to this as ‘the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of calming, the bliss of awakening’ (M.III,233;I, 454), which should be pursued and is not to be feared. When one has experienced the bliss and rapture from jhāna, infatuation with worldly sensual pleasures is broken (M.I,91).

However, states of jhāna are only a temporary respite from the attraction of sensual pleasures. The Buddha did, though, discover a complete ‘escape’ from sensual pleasures. This is the ‘putting away and giving up of desire and lust for sensual pleasures’ (M.I,87), which occurs at the third of the four levels of awakening. In brief, the Buddha teaches that the way to experience the escape from sensual desires is to understand ‘as they really are’ (yathābūtā) the origin and passing away, and the gratification, danger and escape,2 regarding sensual pleasures. This is called ‘the severance of the bond of sensuality’ (A.II,11). Thus when one truly understands how unreliable and ultimately unsatisfying pleasures of the senses really are, desire and lust for them completely cease.

The key to ultimate freedom from sensuality is understanding it ‘as it really is’, that is, to the level of ultimate truth. However, it is really a matter of degrees. Understanding a little allows a little respite from sensuality, and the deeper the understanding, the more complete the freedom. As most of us can probably appreciate, this ‘escape’ is easier said than done. The complete ending of sensual desire is a very advanced level of awakening, so there is no need to worry about it too much. In fact, I would say that we need a certain degree of ‘sensual pleasure’ in the form of comfort in order to continue to live and pursue spiritual practice. If the body is uncomfortable we have a natural desire to relieve its discomfort or pain, or we succumb to ill-will and/or restlessness, two of the other Hindrances. The mind needs to experience a certain degree of safety and security before it can be non-defensive and open to new reflections or contemplations. We can, of course, sometimes move outside our comfort zone to some degree, although it is often hard to differentiate between what we need and what we want. Am I obsessing about food because the body is malnourished, or am I bored or lonely? How much are we furnishing our needs and how much are we nourishing our unsatiated desires? It should be emphasized that sensual pleasures in themselves are not hindrances, fetters or underlying dispositions; it is the desire or lust for them that becomes a hindrance, fetter or underlying disposition.

The key element in sensual pleasure is the pleasant feeling, the ‘happiness and well-being’ (sukha somanassa), which it induces. Pleasant feeling allows a relaxing and even melting away of self-reference with its stress and anxiety; people ‘lose themselves’ in pleasant feelings. In contrast unpleasant feeling pressures the self to find relief from the perceived threat to its existence; just listen to how loudly the self screams when in pain. Notice what you do when you are emotionally uncomfortable: turn on some pleasing music, watch a movie, look for something to eat, etc.; that is, try to escape into some form of sensual pleasure.

#### Sexual Pleasure

Of all the sensory pleasures, sexual pleasure is the strongest and most complex. It is complex in that it often involves all the senses in various ways, and has a biological aspect to it as well. The desire for sexual pleasure is the specific sensual desire which causes most people the most problems throughout most of their lives. Indeed, the meditation subject which is recommended for dealing with sensual desire is specifically for dealing with sexual desire. Sexuality is probably the most complicated and controversial human behaviour. Its biological function for procreation has been superseded by the desire for sensual pleasure from sex. It has also become intertwined with many self issues, such as identity, self-worth, power, love, etc. When we add to this the diverse socio-cultural views on and endless opinions of the role of sexuality in psychological and spiritual health, we have a very loaded topic.

In various contemplative spiritual traditions it was held that refraining from sexual activity was necessary in order to channel the energy into spiritual practice. In one well-known discourse the Buddha severely rebuked a monk who held the pernicious view that engaging in sensual (i.e., sexual) pleasures was not an obstacle to spiritual life (M. sutta 22). In contrast to a life of sensuality, the Buddha encouraged the principle of renunciation (nekkhamma), a fundamentally different attitude from that of the world. Without wishing to sound too simplistic, the average person usually aspires to find happiness in pleasures of the senses. The renunciant foregoes this ‘worldly’ happiness in order to experience spiritual happiness and, ultimately, complete liberation from craving and grasping the sensory world. Most specifically, this means foregoing the pleasures of sex for a life of celibacy. As well as helping to release one’s attraction to temporal sensual pleasures, this also avoids the complications of the home life of supporting a spouse and possibly children. Unlike the drives for nourishment and sleep, which if not satisfied will lead to death, satisfying the sex drive is optional. It is very humbling to acknowledge that much of our sexual desire and its related behaviour are just reactions to hormones pulsing through the bloodstream, as there is a very strong biological element to sexuality.

In one discourse the Buddha explained the causal dynamics of sexual attraction (A.IV,57). Females or males think about their own femininity or masculinity and its various attributes. They are excited by this and enjoy it. They then think about the opposite gender and its various attributes. They become excited by and find enjoyment in that. Thus excited, they seek union with the opposite gender, and thus are unable to transcend femininity or masculinity. However, if one does not delight in one’s own gender, one can become disconnected from the opposite gender, and thus one is able to transcend gender identity entirely, and at the same time reduce sexual desires. I once met a Cambodian woman who had been diligently practising meditation on the unattractive aspects of the body and joyfully exclaimed that now she was free of being a woman.

#### Desire

Desire is a very slippery subject, mainly because it is an energy rather than a thing in itself. In effect desire is morally neutral and is coloured by the object which is desired. It can have a negative connotation, for example in this context as desire for sensual pleasure. But the word chanda is also used in a positive sense, for example, in the factors for cultivating psychic powers (iddhipāda). It is also desire which brings us to spiritual practice or having an interest in working on the Hindrances. Desire is thus just the driver which goes wherever the passenger directs it.

To get to know desire directly, try the exercise of going through the senses and observing whether there’s any kind of desire response: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking. I tried this while sitting in meditation and noticed quite a lot of desire arising and passing. It seems to be there all the time. Well, perhaps not all the time, I do sleep sometimes (but even then I desire a soft pillow and a sound sleep). It does seem, though, that there’s a lot of desire going on continuously, but with a difference of degree. Much of the desire I had was not seriously distracting. I was a bit uncomfortable sitting, so there was some distracting desire for a more comfortable posture, especially since my leg went numb. Then there were a few distracting thoughts, but not too many. There was the smell of incense, but no sights with my eyes closed. Sounds? Nothing major. Taste? No, I’d already had some sweets! However, in general there was some desire of various kinds and degrees arising from the bodily sensations and thoughts.

Desires can be disturbances and distractions, and can really drag you in, spin you around and spit you out, too. But there’s also positive desire. There is desire, wanting, intending something beneficial, good or positive. During my meditation sitting there was also desire to bring attention back to the breathing. There was desire for a comfortable posture so that the mind could settle. So what charges your desire? Some people’s desire goes to sensual pleasure; they desire to have their desire for sensual pleasure completely fulfilled or satisfied. That can be their main purpose in life. Or the desire can be for spiritual practice. Desire for sensual pleasure is kāma chanda, but desire for spiritual practice is called dhamma chanda. It’s still desire, the same word (chanda) is used, but the object of that desire is quite different from desire for sensual pleasures; it is desire for Dhamma, for spiritual practice.

We could say that some form of desire is intrinsic to life. We all have and need the desire to exist in order to live. Desire (chanda as intention or will) is a central aspect of our sense of self which creates skilful or unskilful action (kamma). It is one stage of a continuum of energetic processes which starts with liking, moves into desire and then, if it gains strength, can become lust (rāga) and thirst or craving (tanhā). And desire is there in some form until final awakening - two of the last five fetters (samyojana) are lust for material and immaterial existence (rūpa and arūpa rāga). Through the seeing of things as they really are, desire ceases in the awakened being, since the objects of desire are understood to be ultimately impermanent, unsatisfactory and impersonal. It’s thus very important to become more aware of what this desire activity really is and its relationship to the possible objects of that desire activity.

In the context of the Five Hindrances sensual desire can be an obstacle, a disturbance or a distraction from being able to focus attention on the breathing, or to contemplate, investigate Dhamma. We have the desire, the chanda, the interest and the intention to practise Dhamma, but then sensual desires come in and pull us away, and the various desires become mixed up.

### Causes

#### Underlying Dispositions

The Buddha taught that lust for sensual pleasure is one of the underlying dispositions (anusaya), which even a young infant ‘who does not even have sensual pleasure’ has within (M.I,232f). When that quality has become steadfast and unsubdued, it becomes one of the fetters obstructing the realization of awakening. Thus if we are not aware of this predisposition to desire for sensual pleasure and do not work on it, it will continue to be unconsciously active in our life and very likely be the source of much distress and mental disturbance.

#### Inappropriate Attention

In one of the scriptures (AN.I,3) the Buddha is quoted as saying that he does not see anything which causes the arising and increase of sensual desire so directly as ‘inappropriate attention’ to the ‘sign of the beautiful’3. Basically this is giving excessive and unwise attention to attractive perceptions, which then dominate the mind, leading to the desire to enjoy them and hold on to them for further enjoyment.

Reality is the way it is, but we subjectively divide it into what is attractive and unattractive, with various gradations in between. As explained in the previous chapter, in the Buddha’s analysis of the act of perception, feeling comes before perception. What we call attractive is thus what gives us pleasant feeling, and the unattractive is what produces unpleasant feeling. Most people prefer what is attractive or beautiful (that is, gives the most pleasant feeling), and we seek this out and give special attention to it. However, that is in fact a distortion of perception. Reality is not exclusively beautiful or pleasurable. There is beauty but, sad to say, there is also much that is not beautiful, either downright ugly or just not attractive. It is one of the paradoxes of human life that in the course of ego development we subjectively distinguish what is pleasurable and attractive to us, and then we become obsessively attracted to it.

One of the duties of self is to provide us with as much pleasant feeling as possible. If the self is not providing us with enough pleasant feeling or is allowing too much unpleasant feeling to arise, it is failing in its primary duty and we wish we had a more efficient self. Of course, in the end this is fundamentally an existential issue; that is, if I wasn’t getting at least some pleasure out of life, I wouldn’t continue to live. If all your sights, sounds, smells, tastes, sensations and thoughts were just miserable, would you want to continue living? I’d go and try somewhere else, exit this world and try for a better rebirth in some other place. So the reason why we are attracted to, desire and grasp at pleasurable experiences is this old habit of self. It keeps seeking pleasant feelings and pleasurable experiences. Just on the visual level, most of us only want to see pleasingly beautiful, attractive things. You don’t usually go around looking especially at dog excrement, smelly trash or other ugly things. Usually you look for the beautiful things. You walk around the world wanting to see beautiful sights and attractive things. This is the nature of our sense of self. We should know that our desire for sensual pleasure from attractive things is fundamentally a desire for pleasurable feeling tone. Maybe there is a better way to achieve this?

#### Lack of Fulfilment

In a practical sense I would say that desire for sensual pleasure arises from a lack of fulfilment or a sense of incompleteness, which manifests as various forms of unhappiness or dis-ease. Someone who is emotionally/spiritually unfulfilled tries to fill the vacuum with sensory stimulation, or uses sensory stimulation as a distraction from painful unhappiness (S.IV,208), the basis of the addictive personality. The energetic movement of sensual desires reaches out through the senses for satisfaction and fulfilment. However, since self is an artificial creation and not an ultimate reality, it can never be fulfilled or complete. All such attempts only lead to further frustration and disappointment. This is the unsatisfactoriness, the incompleteness (dukkha) which the Buddha taught as intrinsic to the unawakened being.

When you are experiencing some dissatisfaction, perhaps you may notice what associated thoughts arise. Recently on a retreat, as I sat in a gloomy cave during a prolonged period of grey, overcast sky, I noticed that the mind was also becoming gloomy. And I noticed that as the gloomy mood increased, thoughts of food also increased. Since I was well-fed and not suffering malnutrition, I realized that the thoughts of the pleasure of food were a compensation for or distraction from the gloomy mood. This also helped to provide a cross-reference. So in this case the way to resolve the desire for food pleasure was to resolve the gloomy mood, which simply meant rousing some energy to climb up a pathway to a sunny plateau.

### Cessation

Through clear awareness of sensual desires and the investigation and understanding of their causes, some forms of sensual desire may cease or at least be reduced. However, this condition is very deeply rooted, primal or fundamental to our sense of being. Thus freeing ourselves from its powerful influence will require some concerted effort at a meditative re-alignment of our approach to reality. The main cause of the arising of desire for sensual pleasures is inappropriate attention to the attractive appearance of things. The way to be free from this tendency is to change our perspective; that is, to give appropriate attention to the unattractive aspects of reality. Firstly, we need to know what particular aspect of the sensual realm is attractive and stirring up desire. Then we need to find a skilful way to bring attention to its unattractive, unappealing side, in order to get a reality check. Take the example of being attracted to an item of clothing. It looks nice right now, but how will it look after being worn a few times? How often will you use it? How long will it be in fashion? Most things are actually not as attractive as they first appear, something which some wise reflection can hopefully reveal.

For many people the hardest and most enduring desire is sexual desire, so to deal with this phenomenon, some effort to contemplate its unattractive side needs to be made. In the Theravāda tradition this is facilitated by developing meditations on asubha or the unattractive aspects of the body.4

#### The Thirty-Two Parts of the Body

The first series of exercises for the development of mindfulness concerns body awareness, and one of them is awareness of thirty-two parts of the body, from the hair of the head, to internal organs, to bodily fluids such as blood and tears (see Appendix 1 for the full list). Not only does this allow us to see our own body more clearly, directly and truthfully, but it is also specifically useful when sexual desire arises, usually because of attraction to (particular parts of) someone’s body, often fantasized or idealized to some degree. I’m sure you wouldn’t fall in love with somebody’s liver, for example - or at least, it would probably be a bit harder: ‘She has a beautiful facial appearance, but I don’t know how beautiful her liver is.’ Because of this tendency to look only at the beautiful, we normally miss the other aspects of the body; we don’t get the whole picture, especially of the so-called unbeautiful, unattractive parts. If we develop this meditation exercise, it gives us the possibility to achieve a more balanced view of the real nature of the body, which in essence is not really so attractive.

The first five parts of the body in this list are given as a meditation theme in the ordination ceremony for all candidates to the celibate monastic life, who are advised by the teacher to review these themes regularly as an aid to dealing with sexual desire. Thus initially we make some effort to become familiar with these parts of the body so that when certain stimuli arise they may be supplanted by the new perceptions. A story is related in The Path of Purification of a monk walking for alms while developing the meditation on the perception of bones. A woman passing by laughed at him, and as he looked up he saw her ‘teeth-bones’, which then became a powerful image initiating absorption concentration and insight leading to full awakening. When asked by the woman’s husband following behind her if he had seen a woman, he replied that he only saw a ‘group of bones’ passing (PP. 21-2).

Rather than making this meditation too complicated or abstract, it can be more useful to try to integrate it into our daily life. Thus when combing your hair in the morning, bring up the perception of ‘hair of the head’; when applying cosmetics or medicine to the skin one can relate to the perception of ‘skin’. In one monastery where I stayed for some time I was able to contemplate the nature of teeth each time I brushed them before the mirror. On a few occasions this gave rise to a clear insight of non-personal teeth with no owner.

One side effect of developing this meditation is awareness of the composite nature of body. We normally relate to the body as one harmonious interconnected organism. However, in essence it is really an amazing combination of innumerable interdependent parts, each a uniquely complex and intimately constructed entity. It is actually quite miraculous that they can keep working and cooperating to make a human body survive. When broken down into its individual parts, where in essence is body?

#### The Decaying Body

The other exercise in the development of the unattractive meditations is on the body in various stages of decay. However, in most countries it’s hard to observe this directly these days, so you may have to use your imagination, or maybe look in a book. In the Buddha’s time bodies were often just put in a charnel ground outside the village, and so there was the possibility to observe them in various stages of natural decay or as food for scavengers. These days in Thailand some of the meditation monasteries may have a skeleton displayed in the meditation hall for people to contemplate the nature of the body. Most people, of course, want nothing to do with it. But that’s just our cultural heritage. That’s the way this body will be going eventually, maybe not specifically in the charnel ground, but to death and decay in some form.

Another less dramatic way to contemplate the body in stages of decay is to check the internet for pictures of various ailments to which the body is susceptible. Recently I had a skin ailment, and thinking to find some cure I looked on the internet for information. One website had photos and explanations of forty different skin ailments. After consulting the list and seeing all the horrible illnesses of the skin, I realized that my ailment was very minor. It did, however, provide some vivid images of some of the horrible things that can happen to the body.

Ideally developing this meditation helps us to get a truer perspective on this body. We often keep looking at it as something which is always young and beautiful, and is going to persist indefinitely, and any little ache or pain frightens us. But with more understanding we comprehend fully that it is heading for decay. The minute we’re born we’re moving towards decay, the body’s decaying all the time. I’ve lost a few teeth already, seen a few grey hairs, noticed a few wrinkles. But we don’t want to look at that, do we? We don’t want to look at the true nature of the body as it’s edging towards decay. However, the truth is that it’s not just born but also passing away. By understanding this we can have a more peaceful, harmonious and complete view of the body, which helps us reach a truer perception and understanding of our own body. Thus when sexual desire arises it can help us to relate more wisely to other peoples’ bodies too. When we are sexually aroused the other body is really attractive and exceptionally beautiful. But first thing in the morning before taking a shower, how beautiful is it? That’s also how the body is.

I would like to mention the need to be careful in developing these two meditations. I know various people who have tried them, but I think that unfortunately what they tried to do was use them as antidotes for sexual desire. In fact, sometimes the translation is not the meditation on the ‘unattractiveness’ but the meditation on the ‘loathsomeness’ or ‘repulsiveness’ of the body. So if somebody has lots of lust or sexual desire, they say: ‘Oh, I’ve got to bring some repulsiveness into this.’ And then they use these meditations, not to see the body more clearly and truthfully, but to try to counteract their lust or desire. This usually results in suppressing or denying the beautiful through imposing an artificial conceptual image of something disgusting or repulsive (called ‘reaction formation’ in psychology). But that’s not really going to work. It’s just like putting a chocolate coating on a mud cake (or vice versa). You’re distorting it rather than seeing it more truthfully in order to come to a balanced view. The beautiful exists, but reality isn’t only beautiful. There’s also the unbeautiful; there are two sides. If we use these meditations to balance our perceptions, we get a much more complete, truthful, honest view of beauty and ugliness, rather than conceptually distorting them. Imposing the repulsive on the beautiful may work for a little while, but then the beautiful starts seeping out again and we don’t know how to handle it, because our approach is based upon another misperception. We are not seeing more clearly the way things are, but just further distorting our way of looking at reality.

However, with a skilful approach it would be useful to practise these meditations sometimes. They aren’t really encouraged much in the West, and personally I don’t often talk about them in public, because they require a wise understanding of their usefulness and the right context for their development. Since they are subjects which run counter to our usual way of perceiving, it is most important to examine these themes within one’s own body. Also, if one wishes to pursue them seriously, always seek the guidance of an experienced teacher due to the danger of perceptual distortions. Our whole society is so obsessively focused on beauty and attractiveness that most people cannot understand the value of meditating on the unattractive, or on the ageing, sickness, death and decay of the body. In Thailand there’s a much more realistic and relaxed attitude towards old age and death. In the West, if somebody starts to get old: ‘Quick, rush them away to an old folks’ home.’ And as soon as somebody dies: ‘Quick, put them in the coffin and hide them away.’ Cosmetics are even put on corpses so they look alive, or at least look beautiful in death. But in the process we’re covering up the real nature of the body, life and death, ageing and sickness. We’re actually hiding from these truths. Then, when old age, sickness or death eventually happens to us, we’re surprised and shocked, because we don’t know how to handle them. We aren’t familiar with them because they’ve been hidden away from us.

While these meditations are specifically meant to deal with sexual desires, sexuality is a very complex issue. There are biological as well as emotional aspects to it. Thus when sexual desire arises, the first question should be whether it is mainly physically or mentally based. In most cases it is simply hormonal. If it seems to be predominantly a physical desire, and we remove ourselves from the stimulus and have patience, the hormones will eventually wash through the bloodstream. If the desire is very strong, perhaps some physical activity will help to flush the hormones out of the bloodstream, as well as helping to focus the mind on some more skilful activity rather than allowing it to fantasize. When Ajahn Tong Rat was disturbed by strong sexual desire he went out and chopped firewood.

If the sexual desire seems to have more of a mental/emotional aspect to it, try to investigate what its source is. Are we bored or listless? Maybe sexual desire arises to energize us, although perhaps this is not the best sort of energy. Are we frightened or anxious, so that sexual desire becomes a comforting sensation? Is this an old familiar story? And where does it lead?

So one way to deal with sexual desire is the development of the meditations on the unattractive aspects of the body. We need to put some effort into this, as it usually doesn’t come very easily to us. And as I mentioned, be a little careful how you approach it - not as a means to suppress the beautiful or counteract sexual desire, but to give a much more balanced perception of the reality of the body.

#### The Four Elements

When there is sensual desire for other things, a very useful reflection is upon the four elemental qualities (dhātu) of earth, fire, water and air. They represent hardness or solidity, heat and maturation, cohesion and binding, and distension and mobility. All materiality is composed in varying degrees of these four elements. Thus if we observe the mind obsessing about food, for example, reflecting that it is just the four elemental qualities may help to alleviate the longing. That piece of chocolate cake is actually just a combination of earth, fire, water and air, albeit in a tasty form. Reducing it to its elemental qualities can perhaps reduce the usually inflated taste fantasy – how tasty is earth or fire? Not only does this reflection help to reduce the desire for the object, it can also be a source of clearer insight into the truth of impersonality; this body too is just an impersonal composite of earth, fire, water and air.

#### The Sense Realm

You may recall (see above) that the Buddha taught that the ‘escape from sensual desires’ was to clearly understand their origin. Since sensual desires depend on the senses, developing awareness of the perceptual process as it occurs through the senses is a most important way to understand how desire for sense impressions arises. It is useful to know the process intellectually, in order to be able to observe more clearly the series of processes which occur, mostly exceedingly quickly. Of course, it is most useful to be able to observe the process directly, as there can be many nuances. Sense perceptions happen in the course of ordinary life, but one of the first things we observe is how much perception is merely functional, that is, occurs as a means of registering impressions; and how much is added on through our own subjective involvement, our own liking and disliking, wanting or rejecting. Some sense impressions may trigger memories, emotions, reactions, and these become mental impressions which trigger off more reactions.

The second thing we observe about sense perceptions is how different, varied and changeable they are. We can look at the same scene more than once and have quite different impressions of it. Is it really the same scene? Or the same eye that sees, or mind which perceives? If we understand that the senses and sense perceptions are unreliable, why are we desiring them? It’s as if we sometimes desire a mirage. Some of the things that we perceive are just fantasies or illusions. If we can understand more clearly the nature of these senses, not just intellectually, but by actually seeing clearly how distorted perceptions can be, we may realize that in fact we’re desiring stuff which is very unreliable - so it is foolish to keep pursuing it.

#### Feeling Tones

As mentioned above, in the process of sense consciousness feeling tones (vedanā) also arise. Awareness of feeling tones is the second theme of which to develop awareness in the development of mindfulness. Feeling tones are the basic emotional tone of our experience as pleasant, unpleasant or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant (i.e. neutral). The main thing we learn from this awareness is how insubstantial and changeable these feeling tones actually are. Sensual pleasures are pursued for the purpose of experiencing pleasant feeling. However, when we clearly see how fleeting and tenuous pleasant feeling really is, this endeavour becomes meaningless and inane (cf. S.IV,211f). Often you could more usefully employ your time in chasing the wind.

But this body is impermanent, conditioned, causally arisen. So for this body which is impermanent, conditioned, causally arisen, when pleasant feeling causally arises, how could it be permanent? Thus one abides in regard to the body and pleasant feeling contemplating impermanence, contemplating decay, contemplating fading away, contemplating cessation, contemplating giving up. Thus abiding, the underlying disposition to lust for the body and pleasant feeling is given up ... [similarly for unpleasant feeling and the underlying disposition to aversion, neutral feeling and the underlying disposition to ignorance] (S.IV,211f).

Another aspect of this clearer understanding of the nature of feeling tones is that you see they are fundamentally a subjective experience – they arise within your own mind, not from things outside. Thus the best place to look for pleasant feeling is in your own mind, and this is what spiritual practices, especially the development of meditation, help to facilitate (cf. S.IV,225f). Also, it is feeling tones which condition the arising of desire. If a sense impression gives rise to pleasant feeling, desire to maintain the pleasant feeling through prolonging that sense impression usually arises. We can clearly see how desire for sense pleasure is turned on and off depending upon whether the sense impression is attractive or unattractive. Thus we know the origin of desire for sense pleasures.

#### Desire as Energy

As we more clearly understand the conditioned nature of desire, we can see how energizing it can be. Perhaps everything appears grey and dull when you look around, but then you see some especially attractive sight such as spectacular clematis flowers: ‘Oh, aren’t they beautiful!’ Your whole mood changes and maybe desire arises, either to sustain that stimulating perception or to possess those flowers. Some people get a lot of stimulation out of sense contact. But if we see desire more clearly and objectively as separate from the object of the desire, as just an energy, we can get a wiser perspective on how it arises, what its effect is and what we can do about it. This requires some degree of understanding and stability within meditation practice. And then we can begin to use this energy.

A very practical example is when sexual desire arises. You may know something about the chakra system from Hinduism, of eight psychic energy centres in the body. Sexuality is said to be centred in the lower chakras. If you can separate the desire energy from its source in sexuality, you can then re-direct it. Very simply, the energy can be moved from the lower chakras to the higher chakras, up from the sexual centre to the heart centre, for example. This is one means of literally raising our level of consciousness; we become conscious of that energy in the heart rather than in the genital area. Even if we aren’t able to follow this procedure so directly, there are other things we can do to shift the energy once we can distinguish it from its source. Sometimes simple things such as changing our posture can be helpful. Desire is triggered by sense stimulation and then locks on to it. If we change the environment in which that stimulation occurred, the desire energy may still be there, but the link to the source is broken and can perhaps be re-established in a more useful way. For example, if there is strong physical sexual desire, engaging in mental contemplation or verbal discussion, or going into a place like a meditation hall or shrine room, can create a more skilful context and cause a shift in energies.

There are, of course, quite a few stories that have to do with ways in which people actually work with some of these things. One of the meditation masters in Thailand was visiting Bangkok and happened to notice a very attractive woman. Suddenly sexual desire arose in him. So he immediately went into the meditation hall and sat there for three days, meditating most of the time. He didn’t eat, just meditated, meditated, meditated. Maybe this is an example of transforming that sexual energy through meditation practice. Within the meditation hall he had a supportive environment, with the Buddha image in front of him, and he succeeded in at least subduing the overpowering sexual desire and became one of the most famous meditation masters in Thailand. Apparently, in his meditation he had the insight that this woman had been his wife in a former life, so there was still a strong ‘kammic connection’.

I think the Buddha understood this process of transforming energy, because one of the explicit pieces of advice he gave monks is that if they noticed they were sexually attracted to a woman, they should try to see her as their mother, sister or daughter.5 This creates a different kind of relationship. Maybe you’ve heard of the definitions of love in classical Greece, where three kinds of love are distinguished: eros, philos, agape. In English we just say ‘love’, but often when people say they’ve fallen in love it’s more likely they have ‘fallen in sexuality’. In classical Greek, however, there is a distinct separation. There’s erotic love or eros, and there’s also philos, the love for family, for friends, for comrades. This is quite a different kind of love. And then there is agape, the love of the divine, or spiritual love.6 When we understand that there are these different kinds of love, how we direct our energy is very significant. Sometimes a feeling of love arises from a close friendship, but then maybe it moves down to the eros level of the lower chakras, whereas if we understand what the processes are, we could raise it up to agape or spiritual love.

Our consciousness has normally been trained to observe objects or things rather than processes or flowing energies. So how do we deal with the way energy moves? What often happens is that it fixes on something. For example, desire energy arises, and before you know it, it focuses on a person who becomes the ‘object of your desire’. You may be just relaxing when a memory comes up, triggering desire, but then somebody walks by and before you know it, you fall in love with them. You dump your desire on the first object that comes along because you can’t handle this volatile energy of desire. We are so used to dealing with objects that we don’t know what to do with volatile energies; they are ‘too hot to handle’.

Through the development of awareness of bodily sensations, feeling tones and conditions of mind as outlined in the exercises for the Attendings with Mindfulness, we come to see these experiences as flowing processes. In the same way, we see desire as flowing or pulsating energy. Desire is a condition of the mind, an aspect of the constant flow of mental activity. It grows stronger or weaker, but it flows continuously. If you can observe these changing conditions of mind clearly, you begin to see processes rather than always fixing on objects and things. So when we begin to recognize what desire is as a particular energy, we can transform it into a more beneficial energy. For example, sexual desire can be transformed into compassion, an energy of the heart. Most people don’t understand their energies and thus have no control over them. So they have to repress or deny the uncomfortable ones, such as their sexual urges, but they eventually begin to leak out, and before long become displaced or projected in unforeseen or unskilful forms. Similarly with anger: people suppress their anger energy until some likely victim comes along and then they dump it on them. Through clearly seeing the processive nature of experience, we can learn how to engage skilfully with emotional energies in order to transform them; otherwise we end up being unknowingly controlled by them.

#### Further Supportive Practices

A number of supportive practices are mentioned throughout the scriptures. Three of the formal training practices are: ‘guarding the doors of the senses’ (indriya guttadvāra) or ‘sense restraint’ (indriya saṃvara); moderation in eating and wakefulness (cf. S.IV,103f).

Setting a guard at the sense doors and ‘not being led by images [of beauty or repulsiveness] or the detailed features’ of sense objects prevents ‘evil, unwholesome states of covetousness and displeasure from streaming in.’ When I was on retreat recently I occasionally heard some world news, and it was really painful - I should have had my sense doors better guarded. I contemplated whether that pain was something I should investigate, but what can I do about world events? It was just painful to hear about all the troubles in the world. Maybe at certain times we could open the sense doors and take a peek, but sometimes this can be quite psychically distressing. Sometimes you have to be quite careful how much you open your sense doors. If you put awareness there, you have a certain amount of control over how much to allow in to your senses. And sense impingement does have a considerably influential force to it.

The second training, especially useful with regard to sexual desire, is moderation in eating. Food is to be eaten only to nourish a healthy body in order to live the spiritual life, and to eliminate the sensation of hunger. In special situations, if you are really obsessed and overwhelmed with lust, just stop eating for a day and sexual desire will change to food desire, which is safer! There’s a sort of hierarchy of needs and food takes priority over sex. If you’re hungry you probably aren’t interested in sex. However, as a general principle, excessive eating or eating particularly rich foods can stimulate sexual appetite as well. Thus moderation in the amount and type of food can be a helpful principle to follow.

The third training is to develop wakefulness or vigilance. Formally this is by engaging in walking and sitting meditation continuously throughout the day and night ‘to purify the mind from obstructive states’, allowing rest only during the middle four hours of the night (10pm - 2am). As many people have experienced, engaging in periods of intense formal meditation practice can have a profound effect on calming and clearing the mind, and can sometimes give rise to deeper insights into some of the background attitudes which underlie much of our behaviour. Although four hours’ sleep is specifically mentioned, perhaps a more reasonable principle is to know just how much sleep is necessary to rejuvenate body and mind at any particular time. During a mostly sedentary meditation retreat perhaps four hours are sufficient, but when doing heavy physical work or during intense mental activity, the body and mind may need more time to recover.

A fourth supportive practice is contentment, learning to be content with whatever we have. Sensually pleasing things are endless; when do we say: ‘Enough’? Although modern consumer society is constantly saying: ‘More is better’, we may begin to appreciate the peace of mind that contentment can engender. Perhaps a helpful reminder is: how much do you really need and how much is wanting? The less one has, the easier it is to take care of it, to find what you need and to keep track of it.

### Summary

So there are different ways to approach sensual desires. First of all there are sense pleasures which are based upon sense impressions. Thus we try to understand the sense impressions themselves – seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, thinking. We begin to become more aware of these sensory processes. Today, for example, for some reason my eyes were a bit funny. I just wasn’t seeing very straight. I think I’d been looking through the camera at too many clematis flowers. So I know that the eyes are very unreliable. And what I was seeing, the consciousness, feeling and perception, was very unreliable too. Thus our perception of what is beautiful and pleasurable is conditioned by unreliable data. Certainly there are attractive sense impressions, but they are just impressions. Through understanding this more directly, we withdraw from dependence upon the senses and the perceptual process. None of our senses are very reliable, so how can we ever satisfy something which is so unreliable and impermanent?

Secondly, there is desire itself. Desire separated from its object is something quite different from what we usually experience. But watch out! You might be hit by this free-floating desire, this desire as energy. However, through meditation practice you can develop the concentration, the understanding, the ability to direct it. Where do you want to direct this desire now? Toward sensual desires or Dhamma desires? We have a certain amount of control over desire once we see the processes which are actually working there. It’s a matter of being able to become more aware of the real nature of sensual desires, and what turns them on and off. If we can observe desire mindfully, we can investigate it wisely: ‘What kind of desire? Desire for what?’ This is where we learn about this self which has particular kinds of desires for this and that. Then we can look beyond the objects: food, sex, intoxication, whatever, what’s behind them? We can see the becoming or existential realm where self is seeking to form, to come into being, to come into existence, to cohere as an entity. There is this urge for selfhood to express itself, and it comes out in sensual desire, or aversion, or sleepiness, or restlessness, or doubt. It seeks to take a particular form. When we look beyond the forms we get back to the processes, the forces, the energies behind them. The Buddha called this craving, grasping, becoming. And this is where we can put an end to the nourishing of selfhood, when the sense of self does not cohere any more as I, ‘me’ or ‘mine’, but is still functioning as a reference for consciousness.

The investigation of and working with the hindrance of sensual desires is a particularly fruitful endeavour since, as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, it is a key element in many areas of the Buddha’s teachings. Through understanding sensual desires we come to a clearer understanding of thirst or craving (tanhā), grasping (upādāna), the outflows (āsava), the underlying dispositions (anusaya) and the feeling tones (vedanā) which condition thirst and the desire for sensual pleasures. These are the keys to realization of the cessation of all desires and all suffering.

1 The three ‘thoughts’ of renunciation, non-ill-will and harmlessness were formulated as Right Attitude (samma sankappa) in the Noble Eightfold Path.

2 This threefold formula of gratification, danger and escape is a common expression in the scriptures: the world – A.I, 258; khandhas – S.III,28f;62f;102f; six-senses – S.IV,7; feeling – S.IV,220.

3 The Pali word subha literally means ‘beautiful’; however, for the sake of relating it to all the senses I have translated it as ‘attractive’. This also makes for more elegant English when referring to its opposite as ‘unattractive’ rather than ‘unbeautiful’.

4 A Referred to at A.I,4 and S.V,105 as ‘image of the unattractive’ (asubhanimitta, which the Commentary defines as the ten forms of the decaying corpse (cf. NDB, p.1593, n.29). At A.V,110 the ‘perception of the unattractive’ (asubhasañña) is defined as the thirty-two parts of the body. At A.III,323f the meditation on the thirty-two parts is said to lead to the giving up of sensual lust, while the meditation on decaying corpses is said to lead to the uprooting of the conceit ‘I am’.

5 Quoted by Venerable Pindola Bhāradvāja to King Udena, but not found as a direct saying of the Buddha, cf. CDB, p.1416, n.119.

6 This word was used by the early Christians to refer to the love of God. cf. Wikipedia: ‘Agape’.