## Lethargy and Drowsiness

Just as, brahmin, if there is a pot of water covered with algae and water plants, and a man with good sight should consider his own facial image in it, he could not recognize nor see it as it really is. So too when someone abides with their mind pervaded by lethargy and drowsiness, overcome with lethargy and drowsiness ...

The third hindrance is a double one, thīna-middha, often translated as ‘sloth and torpor’. According to The Path of Purification (PP.530) the first term, thīna, literally ‘stiffness’, means ‘paralysis due to lack of urgency, and loss of vigour’. It has ‘the characteristic of lack of driving power. Its function is to remove energy. It is manifested as subsiding.’ The term middha means ‘torpor’ or ‘sluggishness’. ‘It has the characteristic of unwieldiness. Its function is to smother. It is manifested as laziness, or it is manifested as nodding and sleep.’ Thus perhaps a clearer definition of the two terms would be ‘lethargy and drowsiness’.

There are, of course, a variety of ways in which lethargy and drowsiness can be expressed, physically, mentally or spiritually. Sometimes they may be based or manifested more physically, the body lacking strength or vigour so that it is difficult to get it to move or even sit upright. The body can seem to be made of jelly, not have fixed boundaries or have amorphous sensations. At other times the mental aspect may predominate. The mind seems to have no stability or not respond to directions. We experience it as being in a fog or a dream state, or sinking in a mud pool. If lethargy and drowsiness do not have an obvious physical or mental source, they are usually a type of spiritual lethargy.

Lethargy and drowsiness are basically a lack of energy, and the fundamental dynamic is firstly deflation (of energy), followed by collapse. It is thus helpful to be able to distinguish this deflation process: firstly, so as to be able to recognize it before it becomes excessive or habitual; secondly, so that we can determine what is causing this loss of energy; and thirdly, to investigate whether and how this deflation may be reversed. If lethargy and drowsiness become too advanced, it is very hard to have any energy available to investigate them. It’s a lot easier to top up the fuel tank in your car before it is totally empty and you are stranded on the highway.

#### Meditation

Sit or stand in a quiet, undisturbed place.

Bring attention to the breathing to focus and settle the mind.

Try to relax the body as fully as possible. It may be helpful to droop the shoulders and head as if you are completely exhausted.

Try to observe this lack of energy. How does it manifest in the body? Are there particular parts of the body where it is most pronounced?

What is the feeling tone?

Close your eyes or soften or defocus your gaze. Allow the mind to sink into a sleepy state with no control over thought. Can you abide in this state with just enough awareness to observe it?

Is there some relation to the condition of the body?

Can you observe the feeling tone?

Bring attention back to the breathing. How is the breathing at this time?

Open your eyes and adjust your posture.

### Cause

Lethargy and drowsiness are a lack of energy of some kind and may be due to a variety of causes. Sometimes we do not have much energy available, for example after illness or disturbed sleep. Sometimes we do not have the right kind of energy; for example, we may have energy for physical activity, but when we stop the activity and try to sit quietly, the energy stops as well. Or we initially have energy, but then somehow it dissipates and we lose it. Mind and body are interrelated, so lacking energy in body can influence the energy level of the mind, and vice versa.

#### Physical Energy

The two main ways in which we lose physical energy are over-exertion and under-exertion. We can have some degree of energy but then drain it by excessive effort, overdoing it, trying too hard, straining or stretching our limits. The other way in which we lose energy is by not exercising the body or keeping it properly nourished, so we don’t have the right conditions to sustain effort. In life and in spiritual practice we need a certain amount of physical stamina. The Five Factors for Striving include ‘freedom from illness and affliction, and having a good digestion that is able to bear the strain of striving’, together with faith, honesty, energy and wisdom (M.I,128). The monastic life which the Buddha recommended requires a reasonable standard of health and physical fitness in order to wander for alms-food and reside in remote and simple lodgings. The Thai Forest tradition emphasizes a lot of physical activity through walking for alms-food, sweeping and cleaning the monastery, and encourages walking meditation, which all help to maintain a strong and healthy body.

In certain situations some people may have quite a lot of dullness or sleepiness without realizing that it is due to a physical ailment. I know one monk who had a tiredness problem, and when he saw a doctor in the West he was diagnosed with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. He thought he had a defilement when in fact he had a physical ailment. So now he takes some medicine, some extra protein, manages his diet and can handle it better.

#### Mental Energy

Mental energy is often strongly influenced by physical energy. However, it also has its own sources. Some people are so active mentally that when they try to calm their mental activity in meditation the mind switches off and goes to sleep. They may be unconsciously mentally drained through excessive mental exertion, or have kept themselves awake through mental activity. I’ve met a number of very intelligent people who have had serious sleepiness problems when they tried to practise meditation. They could be energetically travelling all over the world in their thoughts and memories, but when they sit down to meditate with the monotonous breathing, they merely catch up on sleep. Sometimes this may have been due to a disconnection from physicality. So much attention was focused on the active mind that they were disassociated from the body and breathing, and thus unable to focus clearly on it.

#### The Tranquillity Trap

Some people also fall into what I call the tranquillity trap. They think that meditation is all about tranquillity, so they do lots of sitting meditation and follow a quiet, peaceful lifestyle. They may even eat less and be less active. They notice that when the body calms down the mind calms down, and when they see some results they adopt this as a habit. However, often the mind calms down not because of some positive development of concentration, but rather because of lack of stimulation. When the mind is undisturbed by the body it seems to be calm. But while the mind may be tranquil, it is often also lacking in clarity or energy. This kind of calm is closer to lethargy than to vibrant tranquillity. Also, there is the danger that the body may start to break down due to lack of exercise or attention, or proper care.

That is what happened to me when I began meditation in Thailand. I originally went there to find a suitable environment in which to do a meditation retreat. I had learned meditation in Sri Lanka, but on returning to university in Vancouver had much difficulty continuing the practice. A number of us students lived together in a large house, so there were constant music (my next-door neighbour was a rock musician!), stimulating discussions and socializing. I decided to take a year out from study and do an intensive meditation retreat in Thailand to get my practice back on line. When I finally arrived there after nearly six months of travel through Europe, the Middle East and India, I was eager, even desperate, to get on with meditation. I threw myself into an intensive schedule of walking and sitting for 16 hours a day. After some initial difficulty settling, I soon began to experience some peaceful states of mind. I was so obsessed with meditating that I barely ate and got little exercise other than slow walking meditation. However, after about three months of this my health suddenly collapsed, and with it my tranquillity collapsed as well. I found myself lying on the bed exhausted, with a flood of thoughts, memories and emotions cascading thorough my mind.

Looking at my situation, the first thought was: ‘This meditation does not work. I’m wasting my time, better pack up and go home.’ Soon after thinking this, however, I picked up a book and the first thing I read was: ‘The Eightfold Path comprises three parts: morality, meditation and wisdom.’ Oh, yes, wisdom. What was this wisdom part? Wisdom is understanding how the mind creates problems, not merely tranquillizing them away (as I had been doing). I suddenly had an entirely new perspective on my situation. Although my illness was an obstacle to tranquillity, it was actually a source of great wisdom. The first important lesson was that tranquillity is a conditioned and very impermanent experience. The second lesson was that I needed to study these mental disturbances in order to find out how they were created in the first place. And that required a healthy body and mind.

In the Pali Canon (A.I,3) the fundamental causes of lethargy and drowsiness are said to be ‘discontent (arati), weariness (tandī), laziness (vijambhitā), drowsiness after meals (bhattasammado) and sluggishness of mind (cetaso ca līnattam).’

#### Discontent or Resistance

Of course, if we are discontented about something we are usually not inclined to put too much energy into it. Thus if one has resistance to meditation or even a lack of interest in it, this can cause a decline in energy. This can often be quite unconscious. For example, some people know that they should meditate, that it is good for them, but then it becomes another excruciating task they feel compelled to perform. This attitude is generally not very conducive to an energetic approach. Sometimes, especially if awareness is close to revealing painful or uncomfortable aspects of self, some form of resistance may slip in to short-circuit the process. At other times we may inadvertently cultivate a negative or rejecting attitude, for example, when people misunderstand the teaching on ‘letting go’ and practise it as ‘pushing away’, or practise ‘non-attachment’ through rejection.

In my first year meditating in Thailand I developed a sleepiness problem during meditation. At first I thought it might be the usual suspects: tropical heat, physical fatigue, dullness of mind, etc. However, I tried various techniques such as sitting at times when I would normally be wide-awake, sitting in the open air, even taking caffeine before sitting, but the situation grew worse. It became so extreme that I would sit down and almost immediately become unconscious. I could sit for an hour like this, and, when I woke up, had no idea where I had been or what had happened. I realized that this was quite a serious problem and so arranged to go to a meditation centre to get some guidance. When I told the teacher there about this sleepiness problem he just said: ‘Oh, be mindful of sleepiness.’ I did not find this very helpful; however, I was there in the meditation centre with nothing else to do but watch sleepiness for three months! And it was very interesting.

In the first month I noticed that what I experienced was not actually just sleepiness, but rather that neutral feeling tone was conditioning sleepiness. In the second month I realized that conditioning the neutral feeling tone was indifference. I then saw the causal sequence which I had created. While meditating alone in the monastery in north Thailand I had been disturbed by what I defined as worrying thoughts. I was living in Thailand and didn’t have any plans: ‘What am I going to do? Should I stay? Should I go?’ When I looked in The Path of Purification, it said that the cure for worry was the meditation on equanimity; so I attempted to develop equanimity, but actually created indifference, the corrupted cousin of equanimity. At least I didn’t have any worries, but after a while the sleepiness became so bad that it gave rise to worries of a different kind. Thus whenever I meditated I would assume the attitude of indifference, which is a turning off from experience, and this conditioned neutral feeling tone, which conditioned sleepiness. What turned this around was being mindful of the conditioned process of sleepiness, which was really taking an investigative interest in it. Indifference created a dismissive attitude, which caused a disinterested, neutral feeling tone undermining any energy, and resulted in sleepiness. The lesson here was that sleepiness has a cause, and being liberated from it requires us to follow it back to the source.

#### Weariness and Laziness

Most people have experienced these at some time in their lives, maybe even often. However, generally they have some temporary cause and will pass. Usually when they are present it is not an appropriate time to try to meditate. Either allow the condition to pass or, if possible, find some other more active type of exercise such as walking. If either condition persists it may be useful to look into its causes, which may be a physical problem or possibly psychosomatic. It could be due to boredom, depression or unresolved grief. Laziness can also have many permutations. Some people may appear lazy, but their issue is really lack of initiative. Once they get some guidance or direction they can be very diligent. Others can be quietly energetic to plan the easiest solution but not demonstrative in the doing, while others value quality (of practice) over quantity.

#### Drowsiness After Meals and Sluggishness of Mind

Many people can relate to the experience of drowsiness after meals, particularly if one has eaten too much or it is a hot afternoon. Some drowsiness is fairly usual after eating, but may be compounded if one is then sedentary or inactive. Sluggishness of mind is probably also familiar to many people at some time, maybe especially first thing in the morning before coffee. This can have a physical aspect to it; for example, some particular foods are hard to digest. It may also be specifically mental due to disappointment, disinterest or a lack of inspiration.

#### Lack of Motivation

One source of lethargy is a lack of motivation or loss of purpose coming from not finding any joy in spiritual practice. If we are not getting any results from our efforts, we incline towards dissatisfaction and boredom. There are a few different causes of that too. One I call the spiritual doldrums. This is the stage when it seems as if our practice dries up. Usually this is more marked for people who are fairly new to the practice. The reason they keep practising is because they get some benefit from it. I don’t think it’s just the fragrant incense that inspires them. They get results and they want more: hopefully it’s insights and not just lights. Sometimes it is simply the newness of the practice, the interest, the fascination of discovering your inner world. But after a while you may notice that the benefits appear to diminish. Maybe even the insights stop happening, or the enthusiasm or interest dries up.

When we first take up a spiritual practice it is all quite new to us. But as we become more familiar with it, it becomes quite normal to be more awake, concentrated and peaceful in everyday life. It becomes our ordinary way of being rather than something especially spiritual. It can thus seem that nothing special is happening; the honeymoon is over and the doldrums have set in. But this may actually be a positive sign that spiritual practice is internalizing and normalizing within everyday life. As someone said: ‘When you light a match in the dark it appears very bright. When you light it in the daylight it is hardly noticeable.’

This is somewhat similar to living in a new country. In the beginning it is all very exciting. There are different kinds of food and different cultural activities. However, after a while life there becomes quite ordinary. Then our appreciation for this new environment changes. It shifts to a different level. Rather than just appreciating the outward expressions, the food, the sights and sounds, you experience something else. When I was first staying in Thailand, for example, I found it fascinating. The Thais make all kinds of very interesting and tasty food. Later I became more familiar with it and it seemed quite ordinary. Then I began to appreciate something else about the Thai culture: the Thais’ ability to go with the flow of life a lot more than Westerners. I had frequent reminders that everything is my nay, uncertain. This was quite different from my familiar Western values. Previously I had everything planned ahead, well-organized, the year’s calendar filled with activities. But Thai people would say, ‘Oh, never mind. We’ll see what happens!’ However, the other side of it was that they would say they’d come today but then they wouldn’t turn up: ‘It’s uncertain whether I come today or tomorrow!’ Nonetheless, there was a certain charm and good-naturedness to this. And it was very helpful for Buddhist spiritual practice, because they were not just talking about uncertainty and impermanence; they were living it, living with uncertainty every day of their lives. Maybe it would happen, maybe it wouldn’t. Whereas people in the West become anxious, frustrated and angry if something planned doesn’t happen. With my Western conditioning I’d get really frustrated when things didn’t work out, and then I would be reminded: ‘uncertain’, and the frustration could just dissolve: ‘Oh yes, right. The reality of things is really uncertain. It’s my own problem that I am putting this fixedness on things, wanting them to work this way because that makes me feel secure and in control.’

#### Motivation Fulfilled

Another possible cause of lethargy is that whatever motivated us to come to spiritual practice has been resolved. I have met a number of people who came to spiritual practice with particular difficulties or problems, and through the practice of meditation these problems were resolved. Then they wondered: ‘OK, now what? What next?’ Without some disturbing issue to work on or prod them further into spiritual practice, they would lose interest and motivation, and lapse into spiritual lethargy. Unless their practice went to a deeper level and they obtained some fresh spiritual nourishment, they usually didn’t continue with it.

#### Loss of Expectation

At other times the doldrums may set in because we had certain expectations which are not being fulfilled. Some people come to spiritual practice because of false promises: ‘When am I going to levitate?’ I remember hearing about that one. I am sure we all have expectations of some kind, but eventually we reach a point where we realize they aren’t being fulfilled, so we can become disillusioned: ‘It’s not happening like it’s supposed to’, or: ‘It’s not like what the book said.’ With disillusionment our energy becomes diffused or dissipates, replaced by spiritual lethargy. Unless we recognize this process and re-evaluate our expectations, we may soon be marooned in despair.

Interestingly, many years ago in Thailand a psychologist did a study on some of the monks. He had been a monk for a short time with Ajahn Chah and decided to do some psychology tests on the Western monks. Thus I once filled out the Minnesota Multiphase Personality Inventory. He was supposed to give us a series of tests over a period of time, to see our progress (or regress) in personality development, I think. However, he didn’t finish his project. Anyway, one of the results of his research was that he found that the people who came to Thailand with the most fixed idea of what they wanted to get were the ones who left the soonest. The ones who stayed the longest were the ones who came to Thailand only provisionally: ‘I will stay for a month or two, and see how it goes.’ They usually stayed another two months, and then another two months, and then twenty years passed. You would perhaps think that it would be the other way around. You might expect that the ones who came with the most commitment to be monks for the rest of their lives would have stayed the longest, while those who were just passing by to spend two months meditating in warm Thailand during the Canadian winter would have left sooner. But he found that it was the opposite, the reason being that the ones who had short-term plans could re-configure their plans according to how the practice was going. They could reflect: ‘Is it working? Is it useful for me? Yes, it seems to be going OK, so I will stay another two months.’ But the ones who had fixed expectations found that when they got to very culturally different Thailand, the reality didn’t match up to their expectations.

I heard of one man from Chicago who planned to go to Thailand and become a holy monk forever. He flew to Thailand and two weeks later he left: the dogs were too noisy for him! He never imagined the dogs barking all night in Bangkok. He thought he’d go to Thailand to a peaceful Buddhist temple where everybody was peaceful and Buddhist, but the dogs were barking all night and nearly drove him crazy. I thought that Chicago wasn’t actually all that quiet. I guess he got used to the Chicago Transit Authority train clanging around at all hours, but the dogs weren’t barking. Somebody else who came to Thailand hadn’t anticipated all the mosquitoes and bugs. It really shocked them. They came from England where there are hardly any pesky bugs, maybe a few flies. In Thailand you have to live with mosquitoes and ants feeding on you. So the point is that if we have very fixed expectations, it is hard to change, to adjust, to adapt to what is actually happening. Our expectations are not fulfilled, and this can of course lead to disillusionment, lethargy and possibly despair. It can also propel us into other Hindrances such as restlessness and doubt.

#### Spiritual Drought

A further cause of the doldrums may be a spiritual drought due to our being stuck in a spiritual rut. Some of the spiritual qualities, especially the calming ones such as concentration, tranquillity and equanimity, benefit from a steady and regular effort at cultivation. However, sometimes this can lapse into a habitual, ritualistic attitude which becomes perfunctory, without vitality. We just go through the motions but are often not really present with them. This results in a dumbing down or numbing out of spiritual practice, with a loss of energy and creeping lethargy. At other times we may religiously keep practising some technique, either one which some teacher has suggested, one from which we have previously had results or one which we like because we think it is good for us. After some time this can also change into a lifeless, energy-depleting ritual which numbs us into spiritual complacency-cum-lethargy. Our noble spiritual aspirations are worn out and drained of vitality, and we are left high and dry with empty rites and rituals.

### Cessation

Lethargy and drowsiness can cease through increasing energy. Most specifically, this is referred to as ‘the element of inception (ārambhadhātu), the element of persistence, (nikkamadhātu), the element of exertion (parakkamadhātu)’ (A.I,4). The Commentary on the Aṅguttara Nikāya defines these as ‘three successively powerful degrees of energy.’1 Frequently giving appropriate attention to these three degrees of energy is mentioned as the de-nourishment of lethargy and drowsiness (S.V,105) and the nutriment for the arising and fulfilment of the energy factor of awakening (S.V,104).

The Pali Canon also states that when the mind is ‘sluggish’ (linam) it is appropriate to develop the three energizing Factors of Awakening: investigation of phenomena, energy and rapture (S.V,113). Since developing energy is the main principle, it may be best to consider it first.

#### Energy and Effort

There are many kinds of energy, so it would be useful to know what the Buddha referred to as energy. Sometimes he gave a general encouragement:

‘Bhikkhus, the lazy person abides in suffering, full of evil, unwholesome states and great is the welfare which he wastes. The energetic person abides in well-being, separated from evil, unwholesome states and great is the welfare he supplements. ... Therefore bhikkhus, rouse energy for the attainment of the not yet attained, the acquiring of the not yet acquired, the realization of the not yet-realized ...’ (S.II,29)

The most frequent reference the Buddha made to cultivating energy is in relation to striving to give up unwholesome qualities and cultivate wholesome ones:

‘Then again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu has aroused energy for the giving up of unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; steadfast, strong in exertion, not putting down the burden of acquiring wholesome qualities.’ (A.IV,352;V,24;90)

At A.I,12 arousal of energy is said to be the single most useful thing for the arising of wholesome states and the decline of unwholesome states. This was formalized into the factor of Right Effort (sammā vāyāma) in the Eightfold Path or the Four Right Strivings (sammappadhāna). It is generating the desire (chanda) for the non-arising of evil unwholesome states; for the giving up of arisen evil unwholesome states; for the arising of wholesome states; for the continuance, development and fulfilment of arisen wholesome states. (S.V,9;244)

The Buddha’s strongest encouragement for cultivating energy was the determination he proclaimed shortly before awakening and which he suggested to both monastics and laity:

‘Surely, let skin, sinews and bones remain, let flesh and blood dry up in the body, whatever can be attained by human strength, human energy, human exertion, I will not relax my energy until I have attained it.’ (A.I,50; IV,190; S.II,28;276; M.I,481)

#### Willpower

For many people one of the most common ways of cultivating energy is willpower. Some people are very good at generating willpower; they are very wilful and have a lot of drive in life. Behind this drive is the will, and will is actually an extension of ego. Who’s doing the willing? ‘I’ am willing the doing, ‘me’ ordering the body about: ‘Sit there, do this, do that!’ And the basic characteristic of ego is that it always wants to get its own way. Thus it is narrow-mindedly focused on some ego-supporting goal, such as, ‘I want to get enlightened’ (in spite of the fact that enlightenment is ego-less!)

So here is a source of energy, but it has a false face to it: it’s energy powered by ego. It will get you through difficulty and we can use it in emergencies. However, spiritual practice is about seeing through the illusion of ego, rather than becoming dependent upon it or nourishing it. We must accept that it works sometimes, but ultimately it’s a false power. Thus it is important to be able to recognize when we’re depending upon willpower and learn to relax it. We do this by not being so obsessive about success or control, which are the goals of willpower. It manifests as a stubborn rigidity and lack of flexibility. Sometimes we can use it to push through hardships, but be careful not to become addicted to it or caught in it as the ultimate source of power. What do we want to succeed at: truth or attainment? What do we want to control?

#### Life Power

When we are more aware of the energy in the body and mind, perhaps we can recognize a different kind of power. When we are not dominated by willpower there is still life power, a fundamental life force. For example, we can’t stop breathing. You can wilfully hold your breath for a while but you cannot stop breathing. Breathing is an instinct which we all recognize to some degree in our lives. This is the instinct for survival, a very fundamental drive to survive. Most of the time it is very mixed up with the ego, so it’s hard to distinguish. But if you can put aside the ego part of it, the willpower part of it, you can recognize that there is another kind of power in the background, and you can give it more emphasis. This is the energy that has steadiness and continuity to it. Willpower is something we turn on and off at will and is hard to sustain for any length of time, as it is an artificial energy. Life power, however, continues throughout life at a life-sustaining pace.

#### Intentionality

Much more beneficial than willpower is the factor of intentionality. Thus rather than lock into self-directed willpower, we set up the skilful intention to practise founded upon life power. This gives us direction and motivation without the rigidity of willpower. Intention is more open-ended and able to tune into other factors, such as the present moment strength of the body, the condition of the mind and the external situation. It is like a background manager rallying the various physical and mental factors and guiding them forward. Thus for example, when you are sitting in meditation, set up the intention to sit and then try to determine just the right amount of effort required to sustain the body sitting upright. Be careful not to strain, push or force; use just enough exertion to keep the body from collapsing. That careful balance of ‘just enough’, carefully herded by skilful intention, is not as obvious as wilful effort, but it can be maintained for much longer. Right Aspiration or Intention as a factor in the Eightfold Path is the intention for renunciation, non-ill-will and harmlessness, factors which undermine the coercive ambition of willpower.

#### Awakening Factor of Investigation of Phenomena

The awakening factor of investigation of phenomena follows on from mindfulness. What precisely are these phenomena? In essence, we are trying to get out of the ‘paralyzing’ and ‘smothering’ effect of lethargy and drowsiness by changing our perspective from being enveloped in them to being the knowing of them. Once we can clearly distinguish lethargy and drowsiness in their various forms and intensities, we can make a thorough investigation of them. How and when do they arise? This process can bring some energy into the mind through: a) arousing energy to investigate, b) changing our consciousness to be the investigator, c) creating some ‘excitement’ from insight into the causes.

One of the practical ways to develop investigation is through generating exploratory interest in spiritual practice. It is very beneficial to approach meditation practice with an attitude of exploring body and mind, rather than having some preconceived plan of what spiritual practice should be like: ‘I’ll get rid of the Five Hindrances, develop the Seven Factors of Awakening, and I’ll realize stream entry!’ Spiritual practice never lives up to our self-imposed expectations, and holding those expectations usually results in disappointment, discouragement and loss of energy. However, if we can turn our disappointment into taking interest in what processes we are going through, we can generate another source of energy. We can break through the old stifling, numbing habits with an investigative enquiry: ‘Hey, what’s going on here?’ Meditative investigation is a tool for exploring body and mind in order to discover the truth of the way things are.

We can do this even with a common meditation object like the breathing. What if you take an extra interest in it, and rather than relate to it as some perfunctory exercise we do, start to investigate it more carefully: ‘What is this breathing process?’ There is a profound dynamic experience going on there, not just a repetitive concept of breathing: the breath comes into the body, it inflates; a moment of pause — the breath goes out. As we reach more clarity about what this process is, it can even be very exciting. Imagine breathing being exciting - maybe for the first few breaths, and then memory freezes it. But if you can actually stay with the immediacy of breathing, every breath is totally new. You never breathe the same breath twice, or you might asphyxiate! You notice that the way the breath changes depends on the state of your mind, on the state of your body. You can become more and more interested in how the body affects the mind, how the mind affects the breathing, and it becomes a really absorbing process if there is some interest in it. And this can generate energy. We’re actually turning watching the breath into something we are studying or investigating, rather than something we are just religiously doing.

We can thus apply this attitude to exploring the nature of lethargy and drowsiness, their cause and their cessation. Of course, the trick is to begin this investigative process before one gets totally engulfed in them. This is hopefully what mindfulness can reveal and allow us the space to explore. There’s a certain exhilaration in exploring something to really find the truth about it.

#### Awakening Factor of Rapture

Formally speaking, rapture (pīti) is one of the qualities of the meditative absorptions. However, lesser forms of rapture, bliss or joy may arise from either inspiration, insight into the teachings or some forms of concentration. The Path of Purification (PP.149), translating it as ‘happiness’ distinguishes five kinds from ‘minor’ to ‘pervasive’, with the fourth ‘uplifting’, capable of causing levitation! The ‘pervasive’ variety is a factor of absorption.

One of the most common sources of spiritual energy for many Buddhists is inspiration, which usually comes from their devotion and faith. Some people gain inspiration from the example of the Buddha or their own spiritual teacher. Some are inspired by the truth of the Buddha’s teaching or their own insights into Dhamma. Others gain inspiration from the Sangha or community of practitioners, either the lineage of previous awakened disciples or those diligently practising today. The Pali Canon mentions the rapture that comes from the meditative recollection of the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, one’s own virtuous behaviour, one’s own generosity and the celestial beings. At the time of devoted recollection the unwholesome qualities of lust, aversion and delusion do not obsess the mind, as it is ‘straight’ and focused on the theme. From this gladness arises, followed by rapture, tranquillity, happiness and concentration (A.V,329f).

Personally, I distinguish two kinds of inspiration: one which inclines toward encouragement and one which inclines towards admiration or worship. Take, for example, the life of the Buddha. If we view it, interpret it, understand it in one particular way, it can hopefully lead to encouragement. From a historical perspective, there was this person who lived 2,600 years ago, a human being just like you and I, who through his own spiritual striving could realize awakening. Isn’t that encouraging? Well, maybe we have a long way to go, but at least it is encouraging to know that a human being like you and me can also become enlightened.

However, we can also view it in a different way, for example, in terms of the miracles surrounding the Buddha’s birth, the auspicious dreams his mother had before he was born and all his special physical characteristics and mental qualities. Then the most we can do is admire, maybe worship him: ‘I’m down here on the ground and he’s up there in enlightenment.’ This might even discourage you or put you off Buddhist practice: ‘Well it’s impossible for me; this guy is a superhuman being’. This, unfortunately, is how some people think: they put the Buddha on such a high pedestal that he becomes out of reach. However, for some people it can still be inspiring that there is a spiritual hero, and through their devotion they can develop various wholesome qualities. While it is, of course, not easy to become a self-awakened Buddha, it is still possible to become a fully-awakened Arahant if we follow his teachings. Also, it can be helpful to keep in mind that coming across the teachings of a Buddha is very rare, so we should not waste this opportunity, as it may not occur again any time soon.

The energy of inspiration can sometimes be unstable or temperamental, and without a firm foundation can easily change. I’ve seen people come to the monastery very inspired to be monks, happily ever after. That kind of inspiration does lift people up, their eyes are wide-open and they become very energized. But it’s often only one part of themselves which is inspired. When things get difficult the shallow inspiration fails, they can’t keep it up. They can’t keep inspiration charged when they are no longer impressed with the life, or they are not succeeding, or not the centre of attention or always being encouraged. Or their inspiration is based on superficial curiosity, and once they get into the daily grind it starts to fade away. As one monk said: ‘The real source of success in the spiritual life is not inspiration, but desperation!’ Not quite so inspiring, is it? It all depends upon how grounded in reality one’s inspiration is.

After three years as a monk I lost my inspiration. My practice had ‘plateaued’ and no new insights were forthcoming. However, I was quite fortunate to then meet Ajahn Chah and Ajahn Sumedho, whom I saw as living examples of the fruit of practice. My inspiration for the monastic life was re-ignited, but after nine years it again faded away. But then I moved to live in the monasteries in England and had a different set of challenges to keep me going. However, after around fifteen years inspiration again waned. But I was quite canny and had anticipated such a time. I had read the main Buddhist scriptures a couple of times and that was inspirational. But there was one of the scriptures I didn’t read; I put it aside for special emergencies. That was a good thing.

The book I kept aside for my monastic emergency was the poems of the enlightened monks and nuns, the Theragāthā and Therigāthā. These are all the success stories of the monks and nuns in the Buddha’s time who realized full awakening. So when I lost my own inspiration I opened these texts and read these profound stories of different people and the dedicated ways in which they practised. And they all succeeded, they all realized enlightenment. One of the valuable lessons from this collection of spiritual poetry was the fact that insight into Dhamma can happen at any time. One nun, for example, was diligent but couldn’t realize awakening. Then one night she entered her hut to rest, and as she extinguished her lamp her mind was liberated. Nibbāna means ‘to extinguish, to go out’. As the lamp was extinguished, so her grasping of ego was extinguished. She uttered this poem of her awakening experience and it was recorded in the scriptures.2

Tending field with plough and whip, sowing seeds in the earth, nourishing wife and children, the young man enjoys wealth.

Why do I, complete in moral conduct, following the teacher’s doctrine, not acquire nibbāna? I am not indolent or proud.

I washed my feet and watch the water. I see the wash-water flow down the slope.

Thereupon my mind concentrates, as training a noble horse.

Taking a lamp I entered my dwelling; I considered the couch, then sat on the bed.

Taking the pin, I drew down the wick.

The extinguishing of the lamp — the liberation of the mind!

Another valuable lesson from reading these accounts was learning the diverse ways in which people practised. Some of them were already at a very advanced level of spiritual maturity, and only needed a short teaching from the Buddha or some initial instructions from a disciple to realize the truth. Others had experienced severe emotional trauma and sought refuge in the teachings, and were thus very motivated by their suffering. Yet others struggled for many years before they had a breakthrough. Some of these stories may prefigure our own path of practice, or inspire us to continue because our own problems seem paltry in comparison.

Another means of arousing rapture is to consciously cultivate it. One of the exercises in the discourse on mindfulness of breathing (M. sutta 118) is to breathe in experiencing rapture. Rather than wait for it to arise, we can make an effort to generate it ourselves. A more simple method is to cultivate a joyful attitude to meditation. Find ways to make it into an enjoyable experience. One suggestion I give to people who are practising on their own is to meditate only as long as it is enjoyable. Some people prefer to sit by the clock and perhaps spend the last ten to fifteen minutes enduring pain or discomfort. If we continue in this way the discomfort will create resistance, tension and displeasure, and maybe the only way out is to fall asleep! If you enjoy meditating, it will create enjoyment.

#### Other Ways to Rouse Energy

#### A Sense of Urgency

A particular source of energy and motivation for spiritual practice is translated literally as ‘a sense of urgency’, the Pali word saṃvega. This means to be spiritually stimulated, aroused, moved, usually by some existential crisis. Many people are stirred by a sense of urgency when they have a life crisis such as a serious illness, or the death or illness of someone close to them. However, then they are often so distraught that their spiritual energy is paralyzed. Thus it can be useful to review the dangers of being born and the inevitability of ageing, sickness and death as a special meditative theme while we still have energy for reflective practice. It is easy to practise when you are young and have healthy knees. As you get older it is harder to practise, not just physically but also mentally. We may not always be healthy and the mind may not be so agile. Most of us need a certain amount of physical strength and fitness, and to be free of diseases, in order to practise. You could say: ‘Well, ideally I can practise anywhere, even when I’m sick.’ But try it - it’s not so easy. What about when there are difficult situations, such as the news of a financial meltdown? Could you meditate then, when the stock markets are crashing down around you? Or how about your own life situation? I like comfortable conditions like warmth and enough food to be able to meditate. And yet those conditions can change.

Three of the other ‘grounds for saṃvega’ which are meaningful to Buddhists are reviewing the suffering in the hell realms, the suffering which we have (presumably) undergone in past rebirths and the (possible) suffering we will undergo in future rebirths if we are not diligent enough in this life. The last source of urgency is reviewing the suffering deriving in the present life from maintaining this frail body (PP.140; cf. A.II,115f). Special mention is made of developing the perception of a skeleton as a means to arouse a sense of urgency (S.V,130).

The Buddha outlined the ‘five favourable occasions for striving’: 1) being young, 2) being in good health, 3) abundant alms-food, 4) harmony in society, 5) when the Sangha is in concord without disputes (A.III,67). We have limited time, we have limited energy. Wise reflection on this can give us a little more impulse to practise. We had better put our time to good use. Minutes are ticking by, we’ve only got these sixty, seventy, eighty years to get enlightened. Quick, we’ve got to hurry!

#### Mindfulness of Death

It can also be helpful to develop to some degree the meditation on death. I don’t usually recommend this theme in public, since people relate to death in many different ways. For some people with unresolved grief it can be a source of renewed trauma. For others it can be one of the ways to generate energy or encourage more diligence in spiritual practice. If you find that you need that kind of stronger practice, it can be useful to contemplate regularly that death can come at any time. We just go on assuming that we’re going to continue living until one day we don’t; one day we’re surprised, and then it’s too late!

In one discourse (A.III,304f), the Buddha encourages the monks to contemplate death because it is of ‘great fruit and benefit’. He then asks if anyone contemplates death and one of the monks says: ‘Oh yes, I think, “May I live just for a day and a night.”’ Another monk says: ‘I think, “May I live long enough to finish my alms-food.”’ Another one says: ‘I think, “May I live just the length of time to chew and swallow a single mouthful of food.”’ Finally one of them says: ‘I think, “May I live just long enough to breathe in or breathe out.”’The Buddha says that the last two monks live heedfully and develop mindfulness of death keenly. We usually are not aware of it, but death can come at any time, it can be so immediate. Thus when we understand that if we doze off while meditating we might not wake up, we may generate a renewed respect for diligence.

#### Suffering

Whether we acknowledge it or not, suffering can be a source of energy. But we need to be careful how we approach it, because too much suffering can be exhausting and discourage us. To have constant pain, distress, disappointment, tribulation, can be very debilitating. On the other hand, if there is some stress, some discomfort, it inspires us to look for a solution. In one scripture the Buddha said that suffering either leads to confusion or to search (A.III,416). Some people just get confused by it, they become bewildered by what’s happening: ‘I shouldn’t be this way, I don’t want it to be this way.’ Maybe they waste energy in the struggle to conquer it. Others may stop and reflect: ‘I need to find a solution for this.’ Rather than try to deny it, ignore it or suppress it, they try to find a way out of suffering. It gives them extra energy to reflect, to contemplate their life situation and search for a spiritual solution. Without this spur we can simply drift along intoxicated by complacency.

#### Moderation

I’ve met some people who were very inspired and really serious about spiritual practice, and put a lot of energy into it. But often there is an over-emphasis on doing, on trying to get somewhere, attain something. Maybe this is helpful at the very beginning, like the enthusiasm of young people with lots of energy. But I would caution them: ‘Watch out; you might burn out!’ If you just keep emphasizing the energy part, you’re going to burn out. Better to rein it in, to temper it, to create some kind of moderating influence over it. Sometimes this means that we may have to relinquish the driving energy and relax more, or even to experience how we get by when there isn’t any energy. Sometimes energy makes us very focused on one thing, so that we become obsessed with it. We can get really high on energy, but eventually it will top out. We all know how it is when we’re in really good health and everything is going well: when you’ve just had a good cup of coffee, you can meditate all night. But what about the next day, and the one after? Remember the middle way?

A very insightful story in the Pali Canon illustrates the importance of balancing energy (A.III,374f). Venerable Sona was exceptionally diligent in his striving, but was unable to realize any benefit and thought about returning to lay life. Recognizing his great potential, the Buddha gave him a teaching. He questioned him on his experience in lay life with a lute. Sona confirmed that only when the strings were properly tuned, neither too taut nor too slack, was the lute suitable for playing. The Buddha responded that similarly, in spiritual practice, only when energy is properly tuned does it work. With this personal teaching Venerable Sona was soon able to balance his energy and realize full awakening.

Elsewhere (A.I,257f) it is advised, when developing the ‘higher mind’, to alternate between attending to the three qualities of concentration, exertion and equanimity. If applying only concentration, the mind tends to laziness; if applying only exertion, the mind tends to restlessness; and if applying only equanimity, the mind may not become properly concentrated for final liberation.

#### Drowsiness During Meditation

There is a discourse (A.IV,85f) in which the Buddha specifically addresses the theme of drowsiness during meditation. The Buddha’s left-hand disciple was Venerable Moggallāna, and one day the Buddha, with the ‘divine eye’, notices he is nodding off in the forest while trying to meditate.3 The Buddha comes to him (by means of psychic power) and gives him a very important discourse, a teaching in which he lists eight ways to deal with sleepiness.

The first one is to not give attention to whatever is causing drowsiness. This could be a meditation object which is especially tranquillizing or some suppressive-type attitude.

The second one is to reflect upon, investigate and carefully consider the Buddha’s teachings. This is a way to stimulate the mind skilfully. We think of meditation as trying to quieten the mind, but sometimes the mind needs energizing; we need to apply mental activity to something skilful such as reflecting upon Dhamma.

The third one is to recite the Dhamma. Technically, this requires, as in the Buddha’s time, having learned passages by heart so that one can recite them out loud. Particularly useful are inspirational passages, for example, the Three Refuges in English. If you have not learned the teachings by heart, perhaps you could read some of the teachings. One contemporary teacher who encourages all-night practice alternates periods of sitting and walking meditation with repetitive hour-long recitations which people have found very energizing.

The fourth way when you notice you’re nodding off and too dull to study or reflect upon the Dhamma, is to ‘pull both ears’ and massage the limbs. One of my methods when I am sitting and feel tired or sleepy is to quietly massage my fingers. This is a type of reflexology. If you massage your fingers you can stimulate the whole body. If I do it quietly nobody even notices, yet it can have quite a strong effect on increasing circulation and stimulating energy.

The fifth method is to get up from your seat, splash water on your face and stare up at the bright stars. We might, say, go outside to get some fresh air, or maybe do some stretching.

When you return to sitting meditation and drowsiness has still not gone, the sixth method, maybe not quite so easy, is to develop the perception of light. There are some meditation exercises dealing with creating light in the mind so that night is as light as day.4 I wouldn’t recommend this, though, because it is hard to put the light out! One monk I knew in Thailand was on a long intensive retreat and had a problem with sleepiness. His teacher told him about this meditation of developing light and he developed it so that there was light in his mind continuously. He could close his eyes and the light was always on. But then he couldn’t get to sleep! He told his teacher about this new problem and was advised: ‘Well, now you have to learn how to put the light out!’ So for the next couple of days he had to sit there, close his eyes and put the light out. Then he was able to sleep again. An easier and safer method is to open your eyes when you feel sleepy. You can open them just enough to allow in enough light to counter drowsiness, without looking around or focusing on any object. Try blinking vigorously for a few minutes, or do some eye-stretching.

If sleepiness still does not subside, the seventh suggestion is to get up and do walking meditation ‘with faculties contained and mind collected’. This can physically generate more energy. Your eyes are open and you need to be more attentive. It is much harder to doze off when you’re walking. But it can happen; be careful! There are also a few ways to modify this. One can adjust the speed of the walk and the length of the path. For some people vigorous walking can be invigorating, while for others it is exhausting. To increase alertness, some people benefit from a short walking path which means they must often stop and turn. Other people find a short path disturbing, as they are not able to reach a comfortable rhythm for concentration. It can also be useful to experiment: alternating the speed, taking very long steps, walking backwards, walking on a narrow or darkened path, walking beside a body of water or the sea, walking up and down a hill, etc. - whatever helps reduce drowsiness.

And finally, if all else fails, the eighth method is to lie down on your right side intending to wake up as soon as you are conscious again. Have a rest, but don’t oversleep, and get up as soon as you awaken. Perhaps you are tired because the body is physically exhausted. Maybe the mind is exhausted. Then you need to rest. Everyone needs to find out for themselves how much sleep they need. Someone once asked Ajahn Chah: ‘How long should I sleep?’ References in the scriptures indicate that the Buddha slept only four hours a night, so some teachers take that quite literally, and on some retreats you take a vow to sleep only four hours. Ajahn Chah answered: ‘I don’t know what you need. Find out for yourself.’ You are the best judge of knowing how much sleep you need. Some people may use lots of physical energy and perhaps need more rest. Others may have an active mind and need more mental rest. Rather than struggle with four hours’ sleep for the rest of your life, it’s more important to know your own mind. Even if you sleep ten hours a night, at least you know. And as you bring that knowing quality into your mind, the mind becomes clearer and you may find that you need less sleep. Your mind is becoming clearer through your own knowing about yourself. This is different from seeking the answer from outside yourself.

It might be helpful to add here a ninth method which some of the Thai Forest teachers used to deal with drowsiness. This is a rather extreme method which I personally would not recommend, as it could result in injury or even death. However, maybe some people might wish to try a modified version of it. The method used was to sit on the edge of a cliff or large rock, so that anyone who nodded seriously would be very likely to fall over the edge. Of course, we only have reports from those who were successful with this method! The theory is that one can get an extra charge of energy from the survival instinct to chase drowsiness away. Another, safer version of this was to sit on a very unstable raised platform, so that any nodding tipped you off for a rude awakening! Perhaps a modern version would be to sit on the edge of a chair or a slightly raised platform, or beside a pool or pond of cold water (somewhere where you will not suffer injury), just to test whether this method has any effect for you or not. For some people, perhaps doing sitting meditation in the open air, where there is a lot more stimulation through temperature changes, wind, insects and noises, may be a source of generating some further degree of wakefulness. This is one of the standard methods mentioned in the Commentaries on the Pali Canon (cf. NDB,1595 note 34).

#### Specific Methods

Sometimes working through lethargy and drowsiness requires the development of particular skilful means or the use of specific techniques to deal with your particular brand of them. Mindfulness should always be leading, but we can also be creative and give an ear to intuition.

One of the causes of lethargy and drowsiness mentioned in the scriptures is ‘drowsiness after meals’. As mentioned in the chapter on sensual desires, the practice of ‘moderation in eating’ is of great help for this. The Commentary on the Aṅguttara Nikāya explains it as stopping eating when there is still room for four or five mouthfuls of food (NDB,1595n.34). Also, engaging soon after the meal in walking meditation or some other form of activity such as sweeping or cleaning the lodging, may be beneficial for increasing energy as well as helping digestion.

Another cause of lethargy and drowsiness mentioned is ‘sluggishness of mind’. Firstly, it is helpful to distinguish whether this has a physical basis to it or not. It may be caused by changes in weather, particularly hot weather. I noticed during the particularly hot, humid afternoons in Thailand that my mind was very sluggish. This was such a common experience that I referred to it as the ‘tropical slump’, and the only effective method for dealing with it was to do more walking meditation and have a caffeine drink! Sometimes it may also be due to some digestive upset or sleep disturbance.

One of the common ailments encountered by meditators, especially in situations of long intensive retreats, is kidney troubles due to many hours of sitting. Sitting for hours can cause tension in the lower back and compression in the kidneys, so one of my monk friends, who was part-Chinese, told me about the Chinese water cure. This is to drink five glasses of distilled water first thing in the morning to flush out the kidneys. (If you ever try it, be careful to be somewhere where you can easily find a toilet). The theory was to flush the kidneys; however, I found it had another effect. The digestive system has to process all that water, so the circulation speeds up. I drank all that water first thing in the morning and felt as if I had drunk a strong cup of coffee. I was ‘buzzed out’, but very peacefully, and didn’t fall asleep again (partly because I had to go to the toilet every fifteen minutes). The paper my monk friend gave me on it claimed it cured many diseases by flushing out the toxins in the kidneys. While five glasses is the optimum specified, I suggest you should experiment to find what is suitable for you.

At other times sluggishness of mind may have more of a mental basis to it. Perhaps we have had a period of emotional distress or experience disturbing memories. Maybe we are under a cloud of disinterestedness, or feeling dispirited or depressed. The main method of dealing with this sluggish mind (as mentioned above) is to develop the more energetic of the Factors of Awakening: investigation of dhamma, energy and rapture (S.V,113).

#### The Spiritual Doldrums

The doldrums can be a cause for spiritual lethargy, but they could also be a positive sign indicating that the practice is really working. It can seem as if nothing is really happening if we’re still caught up in the spiritual materialism of ego values and waiting for some spiritual pay-off. However, when the practice begins to work, it is working outside the normal framework of ego and its rewards. It’s working behind the scenes at selflessness, undermining those ego-values or unhooking our selves from them. We no longer need a spiritual pay-off for the ego, we have seen through its game. So rather than worrying that there is no progress in practice because we don’t see obvious results, we appreciate that the practice has now actually progressed to a more refined level, where the doldrums are in fact an expression of more tranquillity and subtlety in our practice. This may require us to reassess our priorities in spiritual practice: stimulating rewards or deeper peace? Or we may give more attention to the internal processes rather than external benefits.

If we recognize that the doldrums may be due to our rigidity in following some technique, maybe we need to be more creative. The purpose of techniques is to help develop spiritual qualities. So what other ways can we use to develop them? Ajahn Chah never adhered to any specific techniques. He taught that there are all manner of skilful means (upāya) to use for the great variety of unskilful mind states. His watchword was: ‘If it works, use it.’ Thus by not adhering to any particular techniques, we can use them all as and when they are necessary. I think he knew how clever the self was at requisitioning anything to defend itself, even spiritual techniques. Also, even if we have had success with some technique, it will usually not work indefinitely because the nature of self changes. We need to keep one step ahead of the cunning ego.

#### Changing Routines

One way to keep ahead of the ego is to keep changing the form of practice. Ajahn Chah was a master at changing routines. Just when people got used or habituated to some monastery routine, he would change it. The self likes habit, it hides behind familiar routines. So sometimes upsetting routines can help to shift blocked energy and shake us out of dullness or lethargy. Instead of hunkering down with your usual staid routine, try going for a long mindful walk and see how that affects your energy level.

One time in my hut in Thailand I was struggling with meditation on a hot afternoon, not very successfully. I thought I would just step outside to get some fresh air. I sat down on the concrete walkway and leaned against the wall. As I sat there I noticed the patterns of sunlight on the ground, the leaves gently fluttering in the breeze, the insects parading past, and I noticed that the mind was very quiet and wide-awake! I sat there for about an hour experiencing a level of peace I had not attained after hours of formal meditation practice.

Another especially important and helpful approach to practice is to always bring mindful presence of mind to whatever we are doing, particularly our regular practice. I usually recommend that people observe the condition of body and mind at the beginning of every session of formal practice. What is the bodily and mental condition we are with at this moment? Once we are clearly aware of the immediate conditions, we can adjust our approach to practice accordingly to suit the situation in the here and now. Usually people take up their regular practice in some fixed methodical way, and then struggle to get it to fit with the present moment reality – and then they wonder why they are fatigued or why they fall asleep when they are just mindlessly following some dead routine.

#### Dependency on Thinking

Dealing with lethargy and drowsiness for those people who have cultivated the habit of depending upon thinking to keep themselves awake requires a change of attitude to how we relate to our thinking. On one of our three-month retreats in Switzerland a couple of people came to stay at the monastery. I gave them a few instructions on mindfulness of breathing, and after a couple of weeks I said: ‘OK, now let go of the breathing and just observe the states of mind.’ One of the retreatants was confused. He told me he couldn’t watch his mind. He was a reflective person and remembered that his first teaching on meditation was: ‘Meditation is not thinking’, so he’d been trying for five years not to think. Imagine that! Now he had two thoughts: the thoughts in the mind and the thought to not think them. He was chasing his thoughts around in his head, and it usually took him about a month of intensive practice before he was able to stop thinking. But then he couldn’t observe thinking or other states of mind because he had suppressed them. Then at the end of the retreat when he went back to ordinary life, the thinking programme started again, and his mind was out of control. The thoughts were thinking him again, and he usually fell into a deep depression.

To be able to observe the thinking process creates a different relationship with our thoughts. Rather than wasting energy trying to stop them, when we can observe them they sometimes stop by themselves. Maybe they’ve got a bit of momentum from all our old habits, but if we don’t keep encouraging them or trying to suppress them, they’ll eventually quieten down. We’re not feeding energy to the thoughts, but putting energy into mindfully observing and knowing the thoughts.

Similarly, some people have cultivated the habit of always trying to control their thoughts as their fundamental mode of functioning in life. There are all sorts of thoughts going on in the mind and you need to have some degree of control over them or they might drive you crazy sometimes, but it can be an exhausting struggle. This is often preceded by an insidious judging mind constantly commenting: ‘That’s an inspired thought, that’s a stupid thought.’ Meditation practice is shifting the energy to observing what’s going on in the mind rather than trying to control it. However, it’s not going to happen overnight. It’s a matter of de-energizing our habitual way of relating to thinking and energizing the new way of observing it. This takes some clear awareness of the mental habits of judgementalism and controlling. It took me a long time (and I’m still working on it) to be able to experience a non-judgemental awareness. I had a very strong habit of a judgemental mind, with the added complication that it was masquerading as a virtue. Of course, it is necessary to distinguish good from bad and then judge which is best for us, but most of the time it was someone else telling me what was best for me, rather than clear awareness and experiential wisdom. However, the more we can give energy to observing this mental process, the more it fades away or takes a back seat.

If you are able to observe the kind of thoughts occurring just before drowsiness sets in, you may recognize them as trying to deny or ignore something, or trying to resist, refuse or push something away. You have created a suppressive or denying state of mind. And the usual way for the mind, the psyche to deal with that is to fall asleep. If you notice this tendency, you need to do something about that underlying attitude. So it is helpful to be clear about your intentionality in practice. In the Eightfold Path, the factor of Right Aspiration is the intention for renunciation, non-ill-will and harmlessness. Is denial renunciation? Is pushing away harmlessness?

If you have over-emphasized or over-energized mental activity, it can be very helpful to try to shift awareness to the body. Investigate the sensations in the body, rather than looking at your thoughts whirling around. Try to broaden out awareness through the practice of mindfulness of bodily sensations, so you aren’t just dependent on staying awake by thinking, but expanding your repertoire of what the mind is aware of. In this way you can ground some of the excess mental energy in the body and come to a more even balance of energy in body and mind. You may notice that this has a beneficial effect for dealing with extremes of lethargy and drowsiness, or at least you are better able to shift energy between the physical and mental, depending upon which is more helpful.

#### Wisdom

Of course, ultimately the greatest resource for dealing with lethargy and drowsiness is wisdom. It is helpful, even skilful, to have a discerning faculty of mind. Wisdom is knowing what is skilful and what is unskilful. But to really know this deeply you need to know both sides. Usually we don’t want to look at the bad stuff; we judgementally don’t want to see it, we suppress it, ignore it, we look only at the good stuff. But then we never get to understand how the mind really works. Are you able to be clearly mindful of and investigate lethargy and drowsiness? Perhaps some friendliness may be helpful.

Wisdom evolves through several stages, from knowledge, to understanding, to ultimate wisdom in the sense of truly knowing the nature of self. Initially then, we gain some knowledge about lethargy and drowsiness: that they exist, are caused by a lack of energy and can cease through generating more energy. We are more vigilant about their arising, so they do not become too firmly entrenched. Then we gain some understanding of the various tools to use in dealing with them. We understand the benefits and value of energy as one of the Five Spiritual Powers and one of the Seven Factors of Awakening. Through continued experience all these things come together. We begin to understand the nature of energy, how the body works, how the mind works, how lethargy and drowsiness are created by self and its self-supporting antics.

### Summary

Lethargy and drowsiness are a very common experience for most people who try to develop meditation. They may be more of an issue for people from countries in cooler climates, who are used to a fair amount of activity and then take up the more passive exercise of sitting meditation. However, while the specific experience can be unpleasant and frustrating, in essence it comes down to developing a more balanced relationship with bodily and mental energy. Rather than struggling with the hindrance of lethargy and drowsiness, it can be more beneficial and interesting to investigate the nature of human energy. Where does it come from? How is it depleted? How can it be revitalized?

Many times it is precisely that attitude of trying to get rid of lethargy or drowsiness which makes us tired. Trying to get rid of something can be exhausting. But if we are able to stop and reflect: ‘What’s happening in this body and mind?’, this can bring more clarity and energy into the practice. Investigating what the true nature of things is can be exhilarating and energizing, and can lead to liberation through wisdom. So hopefully we can work with this hindrance in a skilful way to find a deeper source of energy within, not depending just on willpower or inspiration, but from the source of ultimate wisdom.

1 NDB,1595 note 33. Eleven ways of arousing the energy factor of awakening: 1) reviewing fearfulness in the Realms of Misery, 2) seeing the benefits of attainments from energy, 3) reflecting that one is on the path taken by the Buddhas, Silent Buddhas and Great Disciples, not by those who are idlers, 4) honouring the gift of alms through the fruit of practice, 5) reflecting on the greatness of the Master, who praises the energetic, 6) reflecting on the greatness of the Dhamma heritage, 7) removing lethargy and drowsiness through a) perception of light, b) change of postures, c) frequenting open air, 8) avoiding idle people, 9) associating with energetic people, 10) reviewing Right Effort, 11) resolution on energy (PP,137; cf. CDB,1907 note 87).

2 Bhikkhuni Paṭācārā, Therigāthā 112-116. Her tragic story of losing children, husband, parents and brother is told in GDB, 336f.

3 The Commentary on the Aṅguttara Nikāya says that he had energetically practised walking meditation for seven days (NDB,1783 note 1548; cf. GDB,77f).

4 The Commentary on the Saṃyutta Nikāya gives the instructions of giving attention to daylight, sometimes closing the eyes and sometimes opening them. When the light appears (in the mind) whether his eyes are open or closed, he is successful at creating the perception of light. cf. CDB,1946 note 273. However, Analayo (2012 p.68), referring to D.III,223, suggests that the ‘perception of light’ could mean ‘mental clarity’.