## Ill-Will

Just as, brahmin, if there is a pot of water heated over a fire, bubbling and boiling, and a man with good sight should consider his own facial image in it, he could not recognize nor see it as it really is. So too when someone abides with their mind pervaded by ill-will, overcome with ill-will ...

The second hindrance is ill-will (vyāpāda or byāpāda), which also means ‘desire to injure, malevolence’. In general, we might say that ill-will is one expression of the ‘rejection syndrome’, which manifests in a variety of ways: for example, dislike, annoyance, irritation, resentment, aversion, anger, hostility, hate, rage. Everyone has their own habitual mode of expression of ill-will, and different situations may trigger particular modes of expression. Ill-will is self’s primal defence reaction to any perceived threat of possible pain or harm. Thus, since every sentient being experiences pain to some degree, most people have a long, intimate and convoluted relationship with ill-will in its various guises.

Ill-will is one of the wrong thoughts (miccha vitakka) and wrong ways of action (kammapatha; A.X,174) which are not in accordance with Dhamma (M.I,286). It is one of the qualities which defile the mind and lead to an unhappy existence (M.I,36f;281). It is the mind of ill-will which wishes beings to be slain or slaughtered (M.I,287) and, if acted upon, leads to the result of rebirth in either a hell realm or, if in the human realm: a) a short life due to killing living beings, b) sickliness due to injuring living beings, or c) ugliness for those who are ‘of an angry and irritable character’ (M.III, 204). Angry despair is one of the four perils of the religious life causing a monk to disrobe (M.I,460; A.II,125). A monk who is angry and revengeful may cause a dispute in the Sangha which would be for the ‘harm and unhappiness of many’ (M.II,246). If a monk is prone to anger it does not lead to ‘affection, respect, esteem, accord or unity (A.V,165). There are also a number of variations on ill-will such as self-hatred and ‘righteous anger’.

At M.III,245 ill-will is mentioned together with malice (āghatā) and hate (sampadosa) with reference to the allaying of aversion (dosa), one of the roots of unskilfulness (M.I,47). As repulsion (paṭigha) it is the second of the underlying dispositions.

#### Meditation

Sit in a comfortable position in a quiet, undisturbed place.

Place your attention on the breathing for a few minutes to collect and settle the mind.

When suitable, bring up in your mind an image, thought or memory of something causing irritation, annoyance or mild aversion. (It is best to consider something just mildly irritating, preferably not involving a person or something which is a long-standing issue).

For the moment set aside the object or the story about it, and try just to be aware of that emotion of irritation, annoyance or mild aversion.

How is it? What are its characteristics: is it clear, steady, throbbing, heating, etc?

Where in the body do you perceive it? What are the bodily expressions?

What are the feeling tones?

Do you notice any other mental conditions, for example, reactions?

What are the feeling tones of those?

Can you observe what causes this irritation?

Bring your attention back to the breathing. How is the breathing at this time?

Now, with the out-breath, release, relax and let go of any residual sensations or moods, let them float away on the out-breath.

When suitable, you can open your eyes and relax the posture.

### Cause

Ill-will, replacing the standard term repulsion (paṭigha),1 was understood by the Buddha to be one of the underlying dispositions (anusaya) which even young infants have within them (M.I,433).

Formally speaking, the nutriment for the arising and increase of ill-will [and aversion (dosa) (A.I,201)] is inappropriate attention to the ‘image of the repulsive’ (paṭigha) (S.V,65). What we define as repulsive is whatever sense impression gives rise to unpleasant feeling tone (S.IV,208). Thus fundamentally the cause of ill-will is the experience of unpleasant or painful feeling, either physically or mentally based. And the unawakened being, unable to give appropriate or wise attention to painful feeling, experiences two kinds of painful feeling: a physical one and a mental/emotional one (S.IV,208). That is, there is the initial pain, and then the emotional pain of resisting, resenting and hating it (and perhaps further pain through feeling guilty about it or struggling to get away from it, etc.). Thus ill-will is a symptom that self is ‘hurt’, that is, experiencing pain (whether real or imagined), and is usually just one factor in a causal sequence.

The energy dynamic is twofold. First there is a recoil or contraction from the unpleasant feeling. We defensively contract or draw ourselves within, physically, emotionally, psychically. This is at least partly an instinctive response to a perceived threat, as evidenced by the extreme paralysis complex of trauma victims. Some people remain locked in this numbed, energy-depleting state (it requires a lot of energy to hold the contraction), which appears as if nothing has happened. If the stimulus persists, however, most people are propelled to react with rejection or pushing away in an attempt to escape. Some people can keep this withdrawn contraction going for some time (perhaps simmering along as resentment), until one day it explodes. As we say, people ‘blow their top’, or ‘explode in anger’. And this is how most people see ill-will; as an outburst of anger or display of rage. Basically it is that contracted energy seeking an outlet. And, of course, unawakened beings usually see the source as outside themselves: ‘You make me angry’, rather than: ‘When you say that it triggers anger in me.’

Often there is a complex causal relationship involved which is quite hard to decipher: what is that trigger which is somehow activated? Most of what we call pain is really the old habit of contraction or resistance to possible hurt based upon past experiences. We have a ‘negativity bias’ with a long memory, which exaggerates the intensity and effects of pain while predisposing us to be anxiously vigilant for any future pain. It’s important to recognize this, because unless we get back to the source we are never really going to succeed in resolving this hindrance. Of course, a substantial degree of patience and perseverance is required to undo the habitual pain contraction underpinning ill-will, as this goes against all the ego conditioning we have cultivated during a lifetime.

Ill-will often locks into an ‘aversion circuit’ which spins off a variety and intensity of ill-will reactions: there is an ill-will reaction to the unpleasant feeling, towards the resulting contraction, towards what appears to be the cause of the contraction. Then there is ill-will towards the experience of ill-will, since that is also unpleasant. Perhaps guilt arises about having ill-will, which is also unpleasant and generates more ill-will. Thus the proliferation of ill-will may spiral out of control, and before we know it we are in a maniacal rage, perhaps triggered by some absurdly minor incident. Unfortunately, all too often the end-point is pinning the blame or dumping the hatred onto something (object, person, group, ideology, etc.) and then seeking its removal, elimination, extermination. In truth the root cause is our own inability to understand the nature of unpleasant feeling tones and the ill-will reaction within ourselves.

You may imagine that if you dump your ill-will on somebody or something, it will be a relief to displace this disturbing energy. But the first mistake is that this is also very deluded because it denies responsibility: ‘It’s not my fault, it must be their fault.’ (And often the relief we feel from the discharged energy is taken as proof that the source is out there). Thus we can never get to the root cause within ourselves. The second mistake is that since most of us find it hard to relate skilfully to this volatile energy of ill-will, we tend to conceptualize it and find some excuse for it; hence the familiar righteous anger: ‘They hurt me, I must get even’, or ‘They deserve it’, or ‘I have to see that the law of kamma is fulfilled.’ That’s ‘Buddhist’ righteous indignation: ill-will with a little coating of ‘virtue’ on it.

However, if we take responsibility for our ill-will reaction and don’t displace it or conceptualize it, with the support of mindfulness and collectedness we may be able to tune into this powerful energy. There is a lot of energy trapped in the pain-contraction. That impending explosion can be tapped into as a source of potential energy for use in daily life and spiritual practice. Also, since ill-will is a survival strategy of self, if we can follow this reaction syndrome back to its source we will arrive at the heart of self-making (ahaṃkāra).

#### Self-Hatred and ‘Righteous Anger’

Two modifications of ill-will which are quite prominent these days are self-hatred and righteous anger. Self-hatred is internalized ill-will, which, while socially less reprehensible, is still not very skilful. Like self-doubt (and its shadow, narcissism), it has gained in prominence with the increase in the promotion of self-image and excessive thinking about self. However, this can be destructive and may lead to tragic consequences. Its dynamic is quite absurd: there is one sense of self which hates another sense of self. How did this come about? We all have aspects of our relative self which we are not proud of and maybe even dislike: who loves their hindrances? However, some people have a very harsh inner critic which often has a familiar voice: parent, sibling, teacher, spouse. Self-hate can also be a fairly complex interaction of guilt, blame, recrimination, etc. between the various ‘selfs’.

Righteous anger is a somewhat difficult emotion, since it appears to be a good thing or even virtuous. However, even though there is a ‘rightness’ about it, anger is not a skilful mental state. Just see how it ‘feels’ or how it affects your actions and speech. We have some perception of injustice or unrighteous behaviour, and feel a noble sense that something must be done about it. The anger arises because what we perceive is repulsive to us. However, are our perceptions correct? Does this trigger some hurt within us? Is it fuelled by frustration? When the Dalai Lama was asked at a conference of Buddhist teachers: ‘What can we do about the situation in Tibet?’, he surprisingly, but very wisely, said: ‘Keep informed.’ Too often we receive a snippet of well-polished propaganda which ignites passionate indignation to such a degree that it clouds wise reflection. Coming across a righteous fool is very disorienting; you don’t know whether to have compassion for them or their cause. It is indeed good to support what is right, but bringing in anger can often make it wrong.

### Cessation

#### Mindfulness

The first stage of of working with ill-will is to be clearly mindful of this condition of mind. This is very important, since we are usually very eager to avoid it, change it or in some way get away from it. However, if we don’t clearly understand what ill-will and all its permutations and machinations are, we are not able to work through them with any degree of honesty and true knowing. In the discourse on the Attendings with Mindfulness (M. sutta 10; D. sutta 22) we are instructed to be aware of the conditions of mind of both aversion (dosa) and ill-will. This may sound quite easy, but since this condition of mind is unpleasant in itself and arises due to unpleasant feeling tone, being aware of it is usually easier said than done. If we also factor in a lifetime of avoidance reaction and resistance to ill-will, we can appreciate the necessity of making a concerted effort to establish clear mindfulness around this topic. The power of mindfulness, once sufficiently established, can create an objectifying of this volatile emotion, so that we can non-judgementally, non-reactively observe the bare facts of its manifestation. Also, when mindfulness is reasonably well-established we are able to observe the beginning stages of ill-will before it becomes too empowered. We are vigilant about the initiating causes and can skilfully deal with them before they ignite the aversion circuit.

The most helpful method is to be mindful of the the bodily sensations associated with ill-will, in particular the physical contraction. While still mostly unpleasant, they are at least more tangible and stable than the mental expressions. Once we become more familiar with these sensations, we can use them as a base from which to observe some of the more ephemeral mental expressions, for example, avoidance. Perhaps you can notice that when there is awareness of pain, the mind tends to look somewhere else. It can be quite hard to keep the awareness on the pain. However, try to objectively investigate this unpleasant feeling tone and its ill-will response. This attitude can help us shift our relationship from being the subject of the pain to the observer of the pain.

One of the simplest ways of resolving ill-will is simply to be aware of what it does to you, physically and mentally. How does it ‘feel’ to have ill-will? Take a look in the mirror. How do you behave when you have ill-will? What do you say? What is your body language? Is it pleasant?

A special type of practice, which may require a sufficient degree of mindfulness, is to try to separate the energy of ill-will/aversion from the object. As you are probably well aware, there is considerable energy in the aversion reaction and, while there may be some specific trigger for it, most of the energy really comes from the back log of unresolved hurt we are holding. The triggering object is often not the real issue, but only the trigger. With more awareness of the conditioned nature of the aversion reaction we can perhaps focus less on the object of ill-will and investigate the energy of it. It has its particular forms and expressions, but where is it really coming from? And sometimes we may be able to tune into it and direct it in a more skilful way.

#### Friendliness

Once we have established some degree of clear mindfulness of the ill-will complex, we can support this mindfulness and investigation with the development of friendliness. Most references to the development of friendliness meditation are in the context of Calm Meditation, where it is developed to the stage of absorption. However, developing an open attitude of friendliness, perhaps deepened and stabilized by concentration, is also beneficial in the context of Insight Meditation. Since the cause of ill-will as repulsion is one of the deeply rooted underlying dispositions, it will require a significant change in our way of relating to reality to completely resolve the hindrance. Thus the Buddha prescribed and encouraged the development of the meditation on friendliness or ‘loving-kindness’ (mettā). Rather than allowing the underlying disposition of ill-will to arise and increase, meditation on friendliness creates an attitude of good-will through generating thoughts of well-being rather than ill-being. For example, by bringing up friendliness towards ill-will and the hurt which conditions it, we interrupt the ‘aversion-circuit’ and suspend the generating of further ill-will.

The meditation on friendliness is one of the four ‘Divine Abidings’ (brahma vihāra; cf. D.I,250), the other three being compassion (karuṇā), empathetic joy (muditā) and equanimity (upekkhā). When practised properly this meditation on friendliness, through accessing the power of good-will, can have a powerful and profound effect upon the mind and body, especially with regard to all forms of unpleasant experiences. Friendliness is one of those universal spiritual qualities which can be helpful in all aspects of life and with all types of experiences. Perhaps I should mention that developing this meditation is not merely some form of ‘anger management’ - whenever I feel anger I pull out the friendliness pill. Properly developed, the meditation can lead to the complete giving up of ill-will in all its forms, as it works to undermine our underlying disposition to react with ill-will to what we see as repulsive. We fundamentally change our way of relating to reality.

In Theravada Buddhist countries friendliness is the second most popular meditation subject after meditation on breathing. There are, however, a variety of ways of practising and means of accessing it. As mentioned above, most commonly it is practised as a form of Calm Meditation, which can result in the attainment of the third absorption. This is the radiating of friendliness progressively to various classes of beings, or spreading it to the ten cardinal directions, ‘abundant, exalted, immeasurable’2. Detailed instructions for this meditation are given in The Path of Purification, Chapter 9.

Friendliness meditation is also especially useful in the context of Insight Meditation, where it offers valuable support for bringing mindfulness into painful and ignored areas of our being. Insight Meditation is seeing clearly the truth of impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and impersonality in all aspects of our life. However, most people have an inherent block against seeing the unpleasant side of life unless they are forced to do so. The third subject of the Attendings with Mindfulness is conditions or states of mind. Here being aware of ill-will is specifically mentioned (as well as other states of mind, both positive and negative). But many people are particularly averse to observing negative states of mind, as they don’t have the tools to relate to them in a skilful way. So you can see ill-will, but now what? Thus just to be able to recognize, acknowledge or observe the emotion of ill-will can be quite an accomplishment for some people, especially if they have ill-will as a challenging personality trait.

Bringing friendliness into the picture can not only soften and lighten the negative emotions, but also enables coming closer to them and thus seeing them more clearly. Through relating with friendliness to the unpleasant we can learn to be non-judgementally receptive to so-called unpleasant experiences. They are only ‘unpleasant’ because we have subjectively defined them as unpleasant due to our own negative relationship to them. We each have our own accumulation of unpleasant experiences, although some are also quite universal. By developing friendliness rather than hostility to them, our relationship with them can change from negative to neutral (just a feeling) and, possibly, to positive (that is, they may become very interesting to study).

Although most references to the practice of friendliness emphasize spreading well-being to other beings ‘throughout the entire world’, the exercise begins by generating thoughts of well-being towards our self and all its various expressions. If one is not sincerely friendly towards oneself there is no genuine friendliness to share with others, and friendliness remains only a high-minded ideal. We begin by contacting a familiar sense of well-being within ourselves, and then expand it into more challenging areas of our life. We are in essence learning to gradually open a ‘heart of friendliness’ to the various forms of pain which condition ill-will. Thus the key to successful practice is to keep the personal connection to well-being ‘charged up’ to such a degree that it overflows into the world around us. Initially this may not be noticeable, but eventually one can actively generate ‘universal well-being’.

I heard about this practice of friendliness when I was meditating in Thailand many years ago and thought I must practise it, as it was obviously a very important meditation subject. And of course, there were lots of things to learn to be friendly to – mosquitoes, heat, spicy food, rising early, etc. So I tried to practise friendliness meditation. The instructions were to bring up friendliness and radiate it to the ten directions: right and left, front and back, this way and that way, up and down and all around. By the time I’d finished I was so dizzy that I had to lie down, and it didn’t quite work. I grew more and more frustrated, and so gave it up for a while. Some years later I tried to practise it again, and then realized that I had been so idealistic in spreading friendliness all over the world that I had forgotten to develop it within myself first. However, if you don’t have any friendliness for yourself to start with, it’s like using your flashlight without a battery in it. You can carry it around with you but there’s no power in it, so it’s not going to be effective. Some people might think that it’s very selfish to be friendly to yourself, but really that’s where your home base is. It’s ‘me’ trying to be friendly to the world. If that ‘me’ does not know friendliness, then friendliness hasn’t any power.

It may be helpful to keep in mind that we don’t need to especially like or ‘love’ unpleasant experiences (otherwise we would be practising masochism rather than Buddhism). We don’t have to like someone in order to be friendly to them. Personally, I think that the translation of ‘loving-kindness’ often imposes over-grand expectations upon the practice. I do not find it too difficult to relate with friendliness towards myself, but relating with ‘loving-kindness’ is still on the idealistic side of reality. Also, the word ‘love’ has the connotation of ‘affection’, and thus ‘desire’, which the meditation on friendliness is trying to avoid.

One of the teachings I received from Christianity when I was young was: ‘Love your neighbour as yourself’. However, I had a ‘crisis of faith’ when I realized that in truth I did not love my neighbour or myself, so obviously I couldn’t be a Christian. When I studied Buddhism I learned that the teaching really was: ‘Love your neighbour as you love yourself’, and that the way to do it was to learn to accept or appreciate yourself through the practice of friendliness. I mentioned this at a conference mostly attended by Christians, and one of the people there was awestruck. ‘I didn’t know that was how it’s practised,’ he said. If we have not established friendliness within ourselves, loving-kindness is impractically idealistic and never quite works (and often comes across as hypocritical, that is, talking about love but not authentically practising it).

This practice is a fundamentally different approach from our habitual reaction to pain. We have an ‘underlying disposition’ (anusaya) to react to pain with ill-will, but now we are trying to respond to it with good-will. For many people this may sound absurd, since pain is not something to be friendly to, but to be resisted, chased away or conquered. However, one of the Buddha’s most poignant insights was that: ‘Hatred (vera) does not cease by hatred, but only by non-hatred’ (Dhp. 5).

#### Friendliness: The Practice

We begin the exercise by retiring to a suitable (i.e. quiet) place and taking up a comfortable posture. We then initiate thoughts of well-being, whichever ones are relevant or meaningful, such as those in the Reflections on Universal Well-Being:

May I abide in well-being, in freedom from affliction, in freedom from hostility, in freedom from ill-will, in freedom from anxiety, and may I maintain well-being in myself.

Of course, it can be reasonably easy to bring up such thoughts, but developing the corresponding attitude or heart-felt sense of those words can be much more difficult. A very helpful way to shift well-being from thought to direct experience is to move attention from the thought centre in the head to the ‘feeling’ centre in the heart, and deeply sense well-being in whatever way you can. How do you experience it? Physically? Emotionally? Mentally? Perhaps you may need to recall a memory or imagine some situation which you find very comforting or conducive to well-being; whatever helps you connect directly with an experience of well-being.

Once you have connected with that personal experience of well-being, even if initially it is imagined, see if you can keep it nourished and charged up in your heart. One common way is to sense it being re-charged as you breathe in; as the chest rises on inhalation you sense well-being flowing into the heart. Allow it to fill your heart and radiate throughout the body, touching every corner and cell of your being.

With sustained practice you can become reasonably proficient in generating and maintaining this experience of well-being. Then you try to extend it towards whatever experiences mindfulness observes as unpleasant, or which cause resistance, tension or tightness. May that part of ‘me’ which feels that unpleasantness be well and free of suffering. You can send well-being into aches and pains in the body, allowing it to seep into those places and melt away the contractions and tensions. You can share this well-being with uncomfortable moods or emotions. Breathe well-being into them, welcome them, embrace them with friendliness. Over the years I have found that different approaches work for different people at different times. We all have a long and complex relationship with pain and ill-will, and have experienced pain traumas in a variety of ways throughout our lives. Thus different methods, attitudes and responses may need to be engaged for different kinds of hurt and ill-will reactions at different stages of practice. Ill-will can manifest in a variety of guises, some quite active and others more subdued. Some forms of hurt coalesce at specific places in the body, like the heart or throat. Other types of hurt are more diffuse, while yet others may exist only at the deep physical level. Some forms of ill-will can be identified clearly, while others are entirely energetic and non-conceptual.

Generally it is simpler (and sometimes easier) to practise friendliness to the painful sensations in parts of the body, as these manifest more tangibly in specific places. I say ‘sometimes easier’ because some areas of the body may be so frozen in contraction that there is no obvious sensation to relate to. If one is aware of this, that frozenness or numbness may be observed and friendliness applied to it more proactively. Other sensations may be psychosomatic expressions of highly-charged emotional pain, and thus we can be misled if we dwell too much on the physical level only. Some cross-referencing between physical sensations and emotional/mental responses is worthwhile. I have also found it useful to alternate between a more systematic, rational ‘left-brain’ approach (supported by theory), and ‘right-brain’ guided imagery, sound or movement. For example, we know that friendliness can be beneficial for releasing tensions in the body, and so we can keep systematically relaxing into friendliness. However, sometimes this no longer has any effect. If we can then imagine friendliness as a warm golden light shining into those tensions, or breathe into them with friendliness, we may find this more effective. It may be that the self has caught on to our earlier technique and no longer cooperates, or we have moved into areas of subtlety which the rational brain cannot touch, i.e. the non-conceptual area of experience.

The skill in practice is to not merely stay in the head and magnanimously direct thoughts of well-being into painful experiences, but rather to melt whole-heartedly into them; to step out of our pompous egoistic attitude of controlling or dismissing pain and learn to humbly surrender into it. Most pain is actually self-contraction, the threatened self throwing up a wall of contracted defensiveness which is also painful and contracted, thus generating further pain and contraction. Friendliness is like arranging a peace conference, providing a safe environment in which to open up the defences to reveal that the real cause of the pain contraction is grasping an illusory self. Through the friendly study of this pain we can learn a lot about the self and its defence strategies.

However, we should never underestimate the cleverness of the self in trying to co-opt the practice for its own ends. Even though defensiveness is painful, the self does not want to give up this familiar habit, its primal survival strategy. Thus we should proceed gently in the true spirit of friendliness, gradually winning self’s confidence and trust: ‘Yes, this does feel good’, but without being too idealistic: ‘I’m going to conquer my ill-will with friendliness.’ In this way we cultivate friendliness from the base of a trusting relationship, rather than from a mercenary relationship of using friendliness to get what we want. So rather than initially launching into friendliness towards all our unpleasant experiences, we can begin with a gentle receptiveness or non-judgemental openness: ‘Yes, this is what is.’ Next we could try to be more hospitable and accommodating: ‘Yes, you are also part of my experience.’ Then we may try different modes of friendliness: ‘Hello, please come in and take a seat. Is there anything I can do for you?’ Eventually we can proceed to cultivating a deepening friendship with the unpleasant: ‘How are you feeling? Have you got anything to tell me, comment on or advise?’ Ultimately friendliness can be developed into an unconditioned, unbounded receptiveness.

The result of this approach is that the unpleasant is disarmed and we begin to trust the process more. At the same time the medicine of friendliness heals the wounds of old pain traumas, so that what we define as ‘unpleasant’ can be unconditionally received with mindfulness and wisdom. Internally this is a progression towards attenuating self-reference. Self lets down its guard, possibly to such a degree that it is ‘out of a job’ and no longer necessary for defence.

#### Friendliness Extended

The formal instructions on the development of friendliness continue through extending it to a wider circle of beings. We create our own ill-will, but sometimes we may also be a dumping ground for the ill-will of others. Also, once we have seen the damage we cause ourselves through being enslaved by ill-will, we have compassion for others whom we see enslaved by it. When we experience other people’s ill-will we hear their pain, and are inclined to share the well-being we can experience with other sentient beings. We begin with someone with whom it is easy to share well-being, such as someone to whom we feel grateful. Once we are able to do this with some proficiency and wish to develop it further, we can gradually progress to sharing well-being with close friends, then a neutral person, and finally a person we dislike. (Initially thoughts of well-being should not be directed towards someone to whom we may be sexually attracted or towards a dead person). We can bring up thoughts of well-being for that person as we did towards ourselves:

May everyone abide in well-being, in freedom from hostility, in freedom from ill-will, in freedom from anxiety, and may they maintain well-being in themselves. May all beings be released from all suffering, and may they not be parted from the good fortune they have attained.

#### Meeting Resistance

Since ill-will manifests in a vast variety of ways, it is inevitable that we will meet resistance to cultivating friendliness, either towards certain aspects of our self or, more likely, towards someone or something we dislike. When this happens, the scriptures offer a number of practices or ways of considering the situation so as to help understand, get another angle on or give some support to friendliness, and hopefully clear the way for deeper practice. The author of The Path of Purification collected together a number of methods to help resolve this (PP. 324-332):

1) Develop friendliness to the level of absorption and then apply it to that difficulty. More simply, develop more concentration and mindfulness as a support for friendliness;

2) Reflect upon the Buddha’s teaching in the Simile of the Saw discourse (M.I,129), where he says that even if being carved limb from limb, anyone who harbours ill-will towards his tormentors is not following his teaching ;

3) Reflect upon the Buddha’s teaching at S.I,162:

Repaying an angry person with angerIs worse than being angry first.By not repaying an angry person with anger,One wins a hard-won fight.The welfare of both is promoted,Of self and other,Knowing another’s rage,Mindfully remaining composed.

4) Reflect upon the Buddha’s teaching at A.IV,94 on the seven things helpful to an enemy when one is angry: one is ugly, in pain, has no good fortune, is not wealthy, is not famous, has no friends and is reborn in an unhappy state;

5) Reflect upon the Buddha’s teaching at A.II,95 comparing an angry person to a useless log burnt at both ends and fouled in the middle;

6) Reflect on the good qualities of the difficult person as at A.III,186-90, i.e. bodily action, speech or meditative attainment, or all three; if there is no such good quality, have compassion for them so they will not be reborn in a plane of misery;

7) Reflect on the harm you are causing yourself by harbouring anger (cf. verses at PP. 326-7);

8) Reflect upon the ownership of kamma: All beings are the owners of their action and inherit its results. Their future is born from such action, companion to such action and its results will be their home. All actions with intention, be they skilful or harmful, of such acts they will be the heirs (A.III.186); a) the anger you harbour is your own unskilful kamma, comparable to someone ‘who wants to hit another and picks up a glowing ember or excrement in his hand, and so first burns himself or makes himself stink’ (PP. 327); b) the other person’s actions will bear their own fruit, without our needing to intervene;

9) Review the previous lives of the Buddha-to-be (stories detailed at PP. 328f);

10) Review the teaching that due to the continuity of rebirths it is hard to find someone who has not been your mother, father, sister, brother, etc., and thus it is not suitable to harbour ill-will towards them (S.II,189f);

11) Review the eleven advantages of friendliness: comfortable sleep; comfortable waking; no bad dreams; being dear to humans; being dear to non-humans; being guarded by deities; not being affected by fire, poison or weapons; the mind is easily concentrated; a serene expression on the face; dying unconfused; rebirth at least in the Brahma-worlds if no higher attainment (A.V,342);

12) Reflect on the elements: ‘What are you angry with in that person: hair of the head, hair of the body, etc.? Or it is one of the four material elements of earth, fire, water or air? Or one of the five groups of grasping, or six sense bases, etc.? Thus like ‘a painting on the air’, ill-will can find no foothold;

13) Give a gift to the difficult person.

Several other means are mentioned in the scriptures. Five ways to remove malice towards someone are to: a) develop friendliness towards them, b) develop compassion towards them, c) develop equanimity towards them, d) pay no attention to them, e) review ownership of one’s own kamma (A.III,185f).

Ten ways of removing malice are: 1) Reviewing that someone has acted for your harm, you conclude that nothing can be done about it; 2) and 3) Reviewing that someone is acting or will act for your harm, you conclude that nothing can be done about it; 4)-6) Reviewing that someone has acted, is acting or will act for the harm of someone dear to you, you conclude that nothing can be done about it; 7)-9) Reviewing that someone has acted, is acting, will act for the benefit of someone displeasing to you, you conclude that nothing can be done about it; 10) you do not give in to irrational anger (A.V,150-1).

Perhaps similar to 13) above, but much more direct, is practising forgiveness towards yourself and the difficulty or difficult person. It is important in this practice to include yourself, as any ‘difficulty’ is a result of the inter-dependence of self and other. Also, it is helpful to involve as much of your being as possible, either by addressing the difficulty or difficult person directly, or by involving body, speech and mind as fully as possible, perhaps through some ritual act.

A specialized practice for very challenging difficulties is to bring up a memory, an image or the physical sensation of the difficult experience into the calm, clear mind. For example, if you can contact a peaceful state of mind, particularly during a period of formal meditation, use that skilful state of mind as a background and actively bring the difficult experience into consciousness. Try to hold that experience and contemplate it from a variety of angles. If it starts to gain strength or triggers off reactions, put it down and go back to the principal meditation object again. The idea behind this practice is that we usually resist unpleasant experiences as much as possible, until they finally force themselves into our consciousness at a time when we are weak and vulnerable, and thus we feel overwhelmed and overpowered by them, or out of control and frightened of them. By intentionally bringing them up into an empowered, peaceful state of mind, we not only experience them in an entirely new way, but also cultivate more confidence in being able to deal with them more skilfully .

At a certain time in my practice I began having experiences of being taken over by irrational fear. Of course my usual reaction is to analyze, so I asked: ‘Where did this come from? What is the cause of this?’ However, even the most sophisticated answer did not resolve the fear. I then realized that it was irrational fear which seemed to arise at any time of the day or night. Just observing the physical reactions was very helpful for not letting it get totally out of control and end in paralyzing panic. I was living at Chithurst Monastery in England at the time, and every evening the community of fifteen monastics and five to ten laypeople would meet in the beautiful, quiet and comfortable shrine room for evening puja. The physical and spiritual atmosphere was very conducive to peaceful meditation. However, this fear was never far away, so I began to invite it into the meditation space, and then the experience was quite different. The fear was still there, but now that it was held in a field of well-being, it was no longer so frightening. I could then see it as just another mental state, albeit not at all pleasant or likeable, but just another state of mind. Then when the fear arose on other occasions it was no longer so difficult and I didn’t build up further problems through reacting unskilfully to it. Through my not reacting unskilfully and thus being able to respond with more non-judgemental awareness, the fear began to lose strength, and gradually faded into the background as just another state of mind arising and passing away. Fear is still there sometimes, but it is no longer empowered by negative reactivity.

#### When Friendliness Fails

It is not uncommon sometimes for friendliness to not seem to work. Either we cannot connect with it or it does not flow naturally. We may feel discouraged: ‘That’s the medicine the Buddha gave but it doesn’t work.’ My experience is that it does not work for one of two reasons: we are not applying it in the right place or we’re not applying it in the right way. For example, somebody says something to you which you take to be an insult, and you find yourself steaming with anger. Then as a devout Buddhist, you immediately apply friendliness meditation to the person who has insulted you: ‘May they be well. May they be free from suffering.’ (Obviously they need friendliness, since they are so imperfect as to have insulted you!) But they walk away and you’re left with your own disturbance. Although you’ve sent friendliness to them, the turmoil is still going around in your mind. The technique doesn’t seem to be working! So maybe we have to do some homework.

The first place to bring friendliness is your own anger, not as an antidote to it but to provide some non-afflictive space around it in order to see the bigger, non-contracted picture more clearly. If you can look mindfully at what is going on, perhaps you begin to see things differently. What really happened? Perhaps you heard wrongly? Perhaps it wasn’t the other person’s fault? Your own confusion and self-doubt are stirred up. Aha! Maybe the real cause of the upset is your own personal history of self-doubt. You heard them call you an idiot and it touched a sore spot. If they’d called you an oaf or some other name it would be no problem. But calling you an idiot triggers all your insecurities around your intelligence and stirs up some deep uncertainties in yourself. What is this aspect of yourself which is being so annoyed or irritated?

Within yourself is where friendliness can be most beneficial and effective. However, often that is the last place we look. We are often very quick to deflect the cause of pain outside ourselves. Ajahn Chah would constantly emphasize ‘bringing it back inside’, to keep looking at the source within ourselves. Or as the saying goes: ‘When you point your finger at someone, notice that three fingers point back at you.’ Of course, the self is instinctively defensive; however, now that we have more mindfulness and wisdom, we know these activities of self better and don’t fall for them so easily. Thus the first place to apply friendliness is to your own self-reactions. This short-circuits the reactive syndrome and can then allow an opening up to the causal processes involved in self-making.

As with the meditations on the unattractive aspects of the body, I would say that we need to be quite careful of our attitude when we develop this meditation. A common tendency is to use friendliness as a support for the self rather than as a means to surrender the self-reference. For example, we may use friendliness as a virtuous spiritual weapon or antidote to cover up the self-supporting habit of ill-will. We may sit on our spiritual throne and in our generous high-mindedness radiate friendliness at all the evil in the world. But the self is defended by ill-will towards threatening, unpleasant experiences. Thus in order to develop good-will sincerely, we need to come off the spiritual throne of selfhood and surrender our defensiveness. Rather than nourishing the ego defence of ill-will, we open our hearts to the selfless nature of pain. Pain is actually an impersonal causal reaction, not your personal problem. Sorry, you can’t even build a self around that one! In fact the practice is ultimately about giving up our ego-preserving habits through a total surrender to the absolute truth of suffering.

Energetically, friendliness is a receptive expansiveness. In order to develop it we need to literally ‘come out of ourselves’, to open up to the unpleasant experience as it is, beyond liking or disliking. As we come out of ourselves with friendliness, we surrender our old way of relating to that experience: we the subject, change and pain, the object, also changes. If we continue to develop friendliness, the subject-object relationship becomes more rarefied, being replaced by the quality of expansive friendliness until it can ultimately transcend the dualistic subject-object relationship completely: no subject, no object, no self, no other. This is also known as unbounded, unconditional love.

Mindfulness says: ‘There is some pain there.’ The self says: ‘Yes, but I don’t like it.’ M: ‘But it is there.’ S: ‘OK, I can acknowledge that.’ M: ‘Hey, there’s more to this pain than meets the eye. And it’s very interesting.’ S: ‘Really?’ M: ‘Yes, take a look.’ S: ‘How do I do that?’ M: ‘Relax your defensiveness, be more friendly and it will start to show itself.’ S: ‘Hey, it is interesting, and this friendliness is not too bad. Actually, it’s quite nice. And I notice that what I thought was painful is not as extreme as I first imagined.’

At one retreat I gave in Switzerland a woman was sitting in some sort of hospital chair. I had just arrived at the venue and did not know her or her condition. However, after the introductory talk I asked if there were any questions and she responded quite emotionally: ‘What do you do about pain?’ She continued: ‘I have osteoporosis and am in constant pain. I wake in pain, I eat in pain, I go to sleep in pain. Do you have any suggestions about what to do with it?’ I was at first quite taken aback by her emotional confession and, perhaps simplistically, replied: ‘Practise friendliness towards the pain.’ She aggressively shot back: ‘How can I be friendly to pain?’ All I could answer was: ‘Have you got any choice?’ At this she was silent, but looked thoughtful. I think I might have added that the retreat was a good opportunity to give it a try.

I was not quite sure how she would respond to this teaching. However, she came to all the sessions and seemed to be quite relaxed and comfortable. By the second day she was looking quite radiant, so I was curious about her experience. After the evening talk I asked her how the practice was going. She quite joyfully responded: ‘It works! The pain has not gone away but now I don’t fight it and can be more peaceful with it.’

#### Impermanence of Unpleasant Feeling Tone

Like the hindrance of sensual desire, the hindrance of ill-will has feeling tone as its source. Thus a wise understanding of the nature of feeling tone as impermanent and dependently conditioned reduces the tendency to give in to the ill-will reaction; or, if we are already caught in ill-will, can alleviate its intensity through knowing that it is not a ‘thing in itself’ but rather just ‘a feeling’, an effect of experiencing pain.

In Buddhist psychology pain is in the mind, and changing our state of mind changes the quality of the pain. A systematic contemplation when a painful bodily feeling arises is to reflect that the feeling is dependent upon the body and is impermanent:

‘He abides contemplating impermanence in the body and in painful feeling; he abides contemplating decaying, contemplating fading away, contemplating cessation, contemplating giving up. As he dwells thus, the underlying disposition to ill-will with regard to the body and painful feeling is given up by him (S.IV,212)’.

Similarly, when a painful mental feeling arises, reflect on just how changeable and fleeting this unpleasant feeling tone and the mood of ill-will really are, if we don’t react negatively to them. Instead of contracting around the pain, if we can observe it with more friendliness we may notice that in fact this physical or mental pain is very fluid: it fluctuates in intensity, it mingles with other feelings and moods, it ebbs and flows with bodily and mental conditions. We see directly that feelings are very insubstantial and thus unreliable for building reactions upon. By seeing in this way we can undermine the habit of the ill-will reaction. What are we angry with: an impermanent painful feeling tone? Not very reliable, is it?

#### ‘Unpacking’ the Pain Ill-Will Causal Sequence

One time during our three-month winter retreat at Dhammapala Monastery in Switzerland, we had a fresh overnight snowfall and the day dawned bright and sunny. It was one of those picture-postcard scenes in the Swiss Alps. I felt I needed to photograph it before the snow melted. The best shot of the snow-covered monastery and surrounding hills was from across the fields, and the easiest way to get there was to follow the groomed ski track. However, it is seriously frowned upon to walk on a track which is meant only for skiers. I knew this, but thought that I would only be using it for ten minutes and no one would be bothered. So I set off along the ski track, and just as I was preparing to take a photograph, a skier came along and aggressively berated me for walking on the ski track. I was somewhat ashamed for being caught out, but also keen to get the photograph, so I tried to explain my situation. However, he had no sympathy for me and continued his verbal attack. I eventually retreated and returned to my room, anger quietly simmering.

It seemed to be a relatively minor incident, but the next day I still felt the simmering anger and indignation throbbing in my chest. I tried a few rationalizations to dismiss the lingering effects, but to little avail. On the third day the effects were still there, seemingly as fresh as on the day of the incident. Since we were in the middle of our winter retreat, this disturbing event cast a shadow over the peace and quiet which are the primary benefits of retreat. However, it did occur to me that as this anger continued to persist even though the situation was seemingly quite minor, maybe there was actually more going on than appeared, so I began to pay particular attention to the physical sensation churning in my chest. Although not pleasant, it was in effect quite interesting. I kept observing this sensation, and since it was fairly obvious my attention remained there quite consistently.

As I was observing the sensation a few days later, it suddenly dawned on me that this was not actually anger, but rather resentment. This insight sent a wave of relaxing energy through the body, and a flood of memories, images and thoughts washed through the mind, revealing a long and sordid history of resentment. The sensations in the chest lightened and broadened out, but continued to resonate. I continued to observe this new type of sensation, and gradually the mental activity slowed down and a renewed clarity of mind appeared. Then just as suddenly as before, I had the realization that this was not actually resentment, but frustration. Once again a wave of relaxation washed through the body, and a cascade of memories of a long history of frustration flooded through the mind. At the same time the sensation centred in the chest became more diffuse and less impacted.

I continued this experiential enquiry into the sensations for several more days, and once again the experience shifted, this time into a fear reaction. (I knew that if there is fear, awareness must be very close to the root of self-identity). I could distinguish two kinds of fear. One was fear of the energy latent in anger, and the second was an amorphous fear of non-being. The sensations in the body were now diffused throughout the torso. I continued to observe the physical sensations and the fear pulsing throughout body and mind. And then the fear dropped away, and there was just free-flowing energy pulsing through the body. When I tried to grasp it the fear came back, overshadowing the free-flowing, selfless energy. Just allowing it to be, without any grasping, was blissful and boundless.

We understand that ill-will is an effect in a cause-effect relationship, so once you are aware of ill-will, investigate its details. How does it manifest: active or passive, confined or diffuse, compacted or pervasive? When we are more clear about its nature we enquire what the cause is, that is, what sort of pain or hurt is behind it. Firstly, is it mostly physical or mental, or both? What aspect of the self is feeling hurt right now? Often it is easier to investigate the physical expressions of ill-will overtly and subtly, externally and internally. For example, try to access the contraction -- how do you relate to a contraction? If you have a muscle contraction, you have to relax it in order to release it. Some of these contractions may be really locked and knotted. They may need activation: give them a shake, get some blood circulating. Maybe some contractions need energizing, stretching or discharging. Others may be frozen contractions which need warming up with some tender loving care and attention. Breathe warm friendliness into them. The main point is to find the right place to contact: the physical contraction, the mood, the attitude.

If you pursue this enquiry you will learn a lot about yourself. It’s quite humbling, and also quite absurd sometimes when you see all the little things you can get upset about. Of course, if you understand what this word ‘hurt’ means, you will realize that we have a long history of hurt and disappointment, and most of it remains ‘unprocessed’, seeds for ill-will lying dormant in the psyche, ready to burst into life with the right stimulus. To be able to unpack this stuff requires real openness of heart, real sincerity. Often it is much easier to react with righteous indignation and say: ‘Life is tough. You just have to grin and bear it.’ However, this doesn’t in any way shift the potential for aversion or anger to come bursting onto the scene. It’s only by going into it, through seeing the conditioned dynamics of the process, that it opens up from the inside out: what aspect of ‘you’ is it that is being hurt? Only by ultimately realizing the selflessness at the very core of our being does it begin to resolve. There’s still hurt, but no person being hurt. We aren’t taking it personally. There’s a body, there are feelings, perception, mental activity, consciousness, but there’s no person being hurt. So why get angry about it?

In the explanation of the practice of friendliness in The Path of Purification, a question is posed regarding the results of very advanced development. You are sitting with your best friend, a neutral person and your worst enemy (this is very hypothetical), and bandits come along and say: ‘We need to kill somebody for a sacrifice. You choose who it is.’ Do you choose yourself, your best friend, the neutral person or your worst enemy? Which person would you choose for the sacrifice? It’s not the person you might think, because friendliness transforms our whole relationship to reality, it dissolves all boundaries. We step outside our usual way of looking at reality as me and other, as subject and object. Practise friendliness meditation all week and you may get the answer to this question.3

#### Self-Hatred and Righteous Anger

It is very important to be able to distinguish the particular condition of self-hatred from all the related reactions such as guilt, depression, self-blame, remorse, etc. Then try to separate the self from the hate. Once we have some real clarity we can work on both aspects just as for other forms of ill-will, with increasing friendliness and investigation. Firstly, what is being hated, what aspect of self is disliked? Then, is it possible for the different ‘selfs’ to communicate with a bit more friendliness? Perhaps we can learn to be more tolerant or less critical of our imperfections. Investigate the nature of selfhood to understand its conditioned and fundamentally unsubstantial reality (explained further under self-doubt in the chapter on Doubt). Some degree of moderate self-criticism can be useful for deeper enquiry: why do I act in this particular way? Maybe this is the motivation for working with the Hindrances?

In working through righteous anger, which is often a conditioned reaction, it is important to be able to separate the sense of righteousness from the anger. We need to acknowledge that anger is not a skilful response, but what to do about the sense of righteousness, how to honour it? Can we open it up to connect with the universal rightness of the situation which will include everyone and everything? The anger shows that there is some energy in this situation. Can that energy be converted or transformed into something else? Can we discover a more skilful channel for that energy, doing something positive and empowering? As Gandhi said: ‘Rather than complain about the dark, better to make a light.’

#### Good Friendship and Suitable Conversation

Although discussed in detail in a previous chapter, it is worth emphasizing again that having good friends to encourage, support and discuss with is particularly important, because dealing with the powerful negative energies of ill-will can sometimes be very disturbing and challenging. We all have a long and convoluted history of pain and ill-will reaction, some people a lot more than others. When we start to unravel this history we may be surprised by what we discover, and occasionally it can be quite disorienting: who am I really, this energetic ill-will reaction or that embracing friendliness?

Suitable conversation is very significant with regard to ill-will, as off-hand critical remarks, malicious gossip or unkind comparisons can often trigger the underlying disposition of ill-will into action, bubbling to the surface or erupting into consciousness. This is an ideal to aspire to, mentioned in the Discourse on Friendliness:4

Let none deceive another, or despise any being in any state. Let none through anger or ill-will wish harm upon another. Even as a mother protects with her life her child, her only child, so with a boundless heart should one cherish all living beings.

### Summary

Initially we need to be mindful when there is ill will. For some people that is already quite a big step. How easy is it for you to acknowledge your ill-will? Of course, it’s quite normal, even instinctive, to be defensive. We acknowledge ill-will and then, with some collectedness and clarity, we follow it back to the unpleasant feeling tone. What aspect of my self is being hurt? Maybe it’s some aspect of my pride that is being hurt right now. That’s why I’m feeling irritated. Well, is that something to be encouraged, to preserve and hang on to?

Developing friendliness is a practice which can alter our whole attitude to reality; it opens our hearts to all aspects of life in an entirely new way. It’s not just opening our hearts to the things we like, but also to the things we were pushing away, denying, rejecting. The ultimate test of opening the heart, as one teacher has suggested, is to be able to: ‘Keep your heart open in hell.’5 It’s very easy to keep your heart open in heaven, and you have to work at keeping your heart open in the human realm. But the real test is keeping your heart open when you’re in hell. When you expose the hidden hurt in your heart, we say that psychologically you’re in hell. Can you keep your heart open then, keep the friendliness flowing?

If you can keep up with it, keep working at it, developing it, life’s unpleasantness can become transformed. Maybe some day you will be amazed that you don’t become so overwhelmed by ill-will; you don’t get so irritated, so angry at things. Those emotions seem to have just faded away, or at least are much reduced. You notice a shift in your attitude to difficult things. Sometimes it’s hard to see; maybe only afterwards do you notice: ‘Hey, I don’t get so upset any more. I don’t get so frustrated. I don’t get so resentful.’ However, don’t be surprised if the attitude changes. Sometimes we can be in a very up-beat mood and friendliness begins to really flow for us. At other times the mood shifts and it’s really hard work. Life can give us a lot of homework.

We can cultivate friendliness just as a mother relates to her only child. It’s like an instinct which we all have within us. We just have to access it more often. So hopefully, if we continue to cultivate it, we will transform those old attitudes from defensiveness and rejecting pain to more openness and friendliness, and be able to clear out our attic of unprocessed pain. Eventually we may be able (sometimes) to arrive at unconditional love. And some people say that unconditional love is the same as awakening. When there is no self blocking the way, that is when boundless love can really function. Non-self is unconditional truth.

It starts off in small ways: just being able to be more friendly to ill-will and our particular hurts that trigger it, physical, emotional, mental. But as we begin to understand how this process is working, it becomes transformed into a whole new attitude. We can never defend the self. We can try all we want, but we can never defend it because it is a non-existent thing. It does not exist in essence. It’s like defending a shadow. Have you ever tried to defend your shadow? So we start with self’s ill-will reaction to pain, opening it up with friendliness. Once we begin to see it working, we have confidence that there is a more skilful way of being, and those old habits become increasingly transformed into receptive expansiveness towards an ever-broadening reality.

1 Paṭigha, literally ‘striking against’; PED translates as ‘repugnance, repulsion, aversion’.

2 Cf. Analayo (2012) pp.289-91.

3 ‘But it is when he does not see a single one among the four people to be given to the bandits and he directs his mind impartially towards himself and towards these three people that he has broken down the barriers.’ PP.333.

4 Sutta Nipāta1.8. Also in the chanting book at most monasteries.

5 Stephen Levine, Healing into Life and Death; Gateway Books, Bath, 1989: p. 90 with reference to the Forgiveness Meditation, and p. 106 with reference to the Grief Meditation. This book contains many specialized meditations which may be helpful for people who find that they can benefit from forms of meditation other than that on Friendliness. Particularly relevant is Chapter 20 on anger and other ‘heavy emotional states’, with a guided meditation.