## Doubt

Just as, brahmin, if there is a pot of water that is stirred up, turbid and muddy, placed in the dark, and a man with good sight should consider his own facial image in it, he could not recognize nor see it as it really is. So too when someone abides with their mind pervaded by doubt, overcome with doubt ...

The last hindrance of the Five Hindrances is doubt (vicikicchā), also translated as perplexity or uncertainty. Doubt is a form of not knowing and thus closely related to delusion (moha) and ignorance (avijjā), and is expressed in a number of different ways. The doubt which is the main concern of the Pali Canon is sceptical doubt, in particular not being convinced about the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha and the training, but also including other themes. At the present time, however, especially with the preponderance of thinking, doubt manifests in a variety of different forms, such as self-doubt, confusion, worry and indecision, and in a particular form as fear or anxiety. This chapter is therefore more expanded than those on the other Hindrances, to include these other forms of doubt. Those who are not interested in these other forms can just follow the discussion under the heading of sceptical doubt.

Doubt is listed as one of the seven underlying dispositions (anusaya) which even a young infant has (A.IV,9; M.I,111), as well as one of the ten fetters (saṃyojana) (A.V,17). Its dynamic is wavering and uncertainty, leading to indecisiveness and, at the extreme, mental inertia or paralysis. Numerous things can give rise to doubt; everyone has their own special list. If we frequently give inappropriate attention to them, that only increases and compounds doubt. Thus for example, a common topic of speculation for many people is what will happen in the future, but it’s easy to see how you can become overwhelmed with doubt, uncertainty and confusion about that.

#### Meditation

Sit or stand somewhere in a quiet, undisturbed place.

Bring your attention to the breathing to collect and calm the mind.

When suitable, consciously bring up the thought, ‘What will happen tomorrow?’, and rather than try to think of some answer, see if you can be with the experience of not knowing, uncertainty, doubt, maybe even confusion, worry or fear which this question may elicit.

Be aware of the sensations in the body. Is there some specific place where the sensations are especially strong: heart, belly, neck, face, hands?

What is the feeling tone associated with those sensations: pleasant, unpleasant, neutral?

Observe the mental experience. Can you be aware of the experience of not knowing or confusion, or whatever it is? Or do you observe the mind furiously trying to fill in the blank, distract you from this state or refuse to allow this state of not knowing to manifest?

Are you able to peacefully observe whatever is going on in the mind?

What is the feeling tone associated with this experience?

Return to the breathing. How is the breathing at this time?

Now relax your posture and open your eyes.

#### Sceptical Doubt/Perplexity

Sceptical doubt is uncertainty, not fully knowing or not being confident about certain teachings or experiences. This may be with regard to specific things such as the Buddha’s teachings or one’s own experiences, or it may be of a less specific nature, such as not being sure or fully convinced about something, or about the context or meaning of things. In several places the Pali Canon (A.III,248f; M,I.101f) mentions the situation in which a monk has ‘uncertainty and doubt, is not convinced or reassured’ about the Teacher, the Dhamma, the Sangha and the training, and is ‘angry and displeased with his fellow monks.’ Thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance or exertion. These are called the Five Mental Barrennesses.

There are various ways in which we may have doubt about the Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha, depending upon our understanding of these concepts. Perhaps from a religious point of view we doubt whether they are truly the ‘Three Jewels’ in which we take refuge. On the other hand, if we see them as representing wisdom, truth and virtue, perhaps doubt does not arise. If we doubt the entire training, this of course undermines our commitment to and energy for practice, which then limits our ability to experience the truth of the Buddha’s teachings and realize the overcoming of doubt. If we maintain doubts about certain aspects of the training, this may lead to an incomplete, imbalanced or superficial understanding; for example, appreciating the logical explanations of the teachings, but harbouring doubts about the value of meditation.

#### Self Doubt

One presentation of the hindrance of doubt (S.V,110) mentions two kinds, internal and external. Unfortunately, this is not further explained, but the Commentary on the Saṃyutta Nikāya suggests, somewhat abstractly, I think, that ‘internal doubt’ is doubt about whether one’s own groups of grasping (khandha) are impermanent, etc., and ‘external doubt’ is doubt about the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, the training, the past, the present, the future and conditional causality (CDB,1910 note 99). I would suggest that ‘internal doubt’ could refer to self-doubt, which may be of a relative or existential nature. Relative self-doubt is doubting about one’s abilities to practise or gain some benefit from practice, or doubting whether one’s own experiences are indeed real, valid or right. Existential self-doubt is doubting the very nature of one’s self: who am I? What am I? Doubting whether one’s experiences are real is a serious form of doubt which can undermine any confidence or trust. Existential self-doubt can lead into an endless internal discussion covering the many forms of self-views.

A lot of us suffer from self-doubt, or, to be more psychological, lack of confidence: ‘Can I do it?’ Self-criticism, self-judgement, self-disparagement is a psychological epidemic in Western societies, compounded by social competitiveness: every race has only one winner and the rest of us are losers. It’s in the background all the time and manifests in spiritual practice. How many times have you heard yourself say: ‘I’m not good enough for this, I can’t do this’, or heard Buddhists say: ‘Oh, my kamma’s run out. I haven’t enough good kamma to do it’?

#### Confusion

A somewhat indistinct form of doubt is confusion. This may be specific, for example, being confused about certain teachings or areas of experience. Or it may manifest as unspecific confusion, such as having confusion as a general state of being. This could be in the form of having a busy, distracted mind, being somewhat ‘woolly-minded’ or imprecise in how we think, or not being clear about what we are doing or should be doing.

#### Worry and Indecision

Worry is persistent doubt about what might be, could be or should be, in a negative context (if it is positive it is called fantasizing). Some people may be of a fearful, suspicious or pessimistic temperament, which induces worry as a means of appeasing fears or suspicions, thwarting possible threats or preparing for impending problems. Unfortunately, this never really works, as most of these possibilities are usually the result of an over-active imagination rather than fact. And when we do meet difficulties, our mind is so frazzled by worry that we don’t have the mental capacity to deal with them efficiently

Closely associated with worry is indecision, the inability to decide on a course of action or a direction to take. A certain degree of circumspection is useful and even valuable, rather than rushing ahead impulsively. However, if this results in paralyzing indecision it goes too far.

#### Fear/Anxiety

Fear is the most primal form of doubt, since fear arises from not knowing. One of the main things we do not know is the nature of fear itself. Fear in some form is a common experience for everybody. Some of us have our specific fears, for example, of the dark, of snakes, of falling sick with some horrible illness, etc. At other times fear is triggered by the unexpected, such as when someone startles us. And then there are the conditioned fears associated with our self-reference: loss of face, humiliation, embarrassment, and the existential fears of not knowing who we are, where we came from and where are we going.

### Causes

Two related causes for doubt are given in the Pali Canon: inappropriate attention (A.I,4) and frequently giving inappropriate attention to things that cause doubt (S.V,103).

As mentioned above, inappropriate attention is the cause of many unskilful things. Particularly with regard to doubt, it is the cause of the arising of and increase in delusion (A.I,201) and (the outflow of) ignorance (M.I,7), the arising of and increase in wrong views (A.I,31) and the arising of various speculative views (M.I,8).

#### Sceptical Doubt

The main source of doubt for many people today is giving inappropriate attention to thinking, speculating or analyzing. Most of us have been educated to believe that clever thinking will yield all the answers. However, in the Buddha’s teaching thinking can be the cause of many problems. When the sense organ contacts a sense object there is sense consciousness, then feeling:

... what one feels, that one perceives; what one perceives, that one thinks about; what one thinks about, that one conceptually proliferates about. With what one conceptually proliferates as source, proliferating perceptions and deliberations assail a person with regard to past, present and future forms made conscious through the eye ....[and the other senses] (M.I,111f).

This passage explains that once the mind starts to proliferate conceptually, one is taken over by those proliferations. When we become enamoured of thought it is hard to turn it off. Thought can never entirely encompass reality, however, since it is based upon abstract concepts and ideas about reality. At best it can only approximate to it (see below).

Sceptical doubt is a form of not knowing, so if we attempt to know in the wrong way we only increase doubt. The three main ways in which this happens are: 1) trying to know by the wrong mode of enquiry, 2) trying to know about the wrong topic, 3) trying to know by the wrong assumptions. A fourth source of doubt is having wrong view(s) or holding onto a fixed view.

#### The Wrong Mode of Enquiry

This means that we enquire or investigate from one mode of understanding, whereas the answer lies within a different mode of understanding. This is most specifically expressed by the Buddhist designation of three modes of understanding: thinking (cintā-mayā-paññā), learning (suta-mayā-paññā) and experiential realization through meditation (bhāvanā-mayā-paññā) (D.III,219). Thinking and learning are types of understanding filtered through self-interpretations. Only through the process of quieting self-interpretations through meditation are we able to see beyond the limitations imposed by self-interpretation. Thus the most complete form of knowing is through personal experiential realization. Some people are very gifted thinkers and are able to articulate their thoughts in such a way as to appear very convincing to themselves and others. However, if these views are too satisfyingly convincing or do not include the unconditioned, if they encourage acceptance rather than pointing to direct realization for oneself, chances are that they are only an intellectually well-polished belief system, rather than coming from direct realization.

Over-reliance upon thinking inevitably results in doubt, since one never knows completely - although some people think they know, rather than knowing that they think. A practical example is trying to understand bodily sensations or emotions through conceptual thought. A sensation or emotion is not a thought, and thus can only be truly understood through direct awareness of it in its own mode of experience. If you want to know: ‘How is my body doing?’ and you use thought, you only get: ‘What do I think my body is doing?’ You have to go to the physical level, directly to the body, to get the real answer. The extreme case is mixing up the two levels of truth, conventional and ultimate. Thus someone asks, ‘If everything is not self [ultimate truth], who [conventional truth] gets enlightened?’ Knowing the conventional meaning of the word ‘enlightened’ is not the same as having an ultimate direct experience of it.

Understanding through learning can broaden our horizons and bring information which our self-contained thinking would not encounter. However, this is still a limited form of understanding, as it remains self-interpreted and concept-based, even though it may include other people’s interpretations and concepts as well. An over-reliance upon learning can result in intellectual conceit, to the degree that we believe (and convince others) that we really know all the answers, rather than humbly acknowledging that we only have answers we have learned. By trying to establish a definitive answer through concepts, we often end up having to hold on to fixed views and then try to defend them: ‘This is right and all else is wrong’.

After I had spent several years at Wat Pah Nanachat I was determined to find out who the ‘real’ Ajahn Chah was. What was his core teaching? What was his profound insight into Dhamma? I made a serious effort to learn the Thai language so that I could speak with him directly and learn his secrets (and especially to understand his jokes). However, I was confused sometimes because he was quite inconsistent in how he answered people’s questions. I assumed that since he was a great Buddhist teacher, there would be some kind of enlightened or wise coherence to his teaching. But when I was listening to him he would answer the same question differently each time; there was no pattern to it, no consistency. I began to have my doubts about him. And then one day as I listened to him, I suddenly realized there was no fixed entity who was Ajahn Chah. He was not somebody who had a fixed teaching he held on to. There was just a totally present being, responding mindfully and wisely to the situations that arose. One person came along and asked a question from their particular experience, and he could receive them just where they were coming from and respond with exactly what they needed. Somebody else came along and asked a similar question from their own experience, and he could respond intimately to them too. And so the answers were very different, but in terms of the context they were usually surprisingly astute, because he had the mindfulness and concentration to receive people just as they were. He also knew people very deeply; sometimes it was so amazing that people thought he could read their minds. However, I think it was more due to the fact that he thoroughly knew his own mind. Understanding our own greed, aversion, delusion, we can understand the greed, aversion, delusion of everyone else too.

#### Doubt and Belief

A source of confusion for those from the Judeo-Christian tradition is thinking that the opposite of doubt is belief: doubt is bad and evil, so just believe what you are told. Filtered through Cartesian dualism, this becomes a rigid either/or choice between damning doubt or saving belief. Buddhist tradition, however, recognizes doubt as a common experience for most people. We are encouraged to acknowledge it, and with some reasonable degree of trust or faith in the teachings, backed up by the Buddha’s logical explanation, we test them out in order to see the truth for ourselves. In fact the Buddha discouraged believing too easily, as he quite emphatically explained to the Kalama people in north India:

Now look, Kalamas, do not be led by oral sayings or tradition or hearsay; nor by the authority of scriptures; nor by reasoning or inference; nor by reasoned reflection; nor by accepting a view after pondering; nor by conformity; nor because you respect this teacher.

When, Kalamas, you know yourselves: ‘These things are unskilful, these things are blameworthy, these things are censured by the wise, these things, if undertaken, lead to harm and suffering’; then abandon them.

What do you think, Kalamas, when greed ... aversion ... delusion arises in a person, does it arise to their welfare or harm?

To their harm, Venerable Sir.

...

When, Kalamas, you know yourselves, ‘These things are skilful, these things are blameless, these things are praised by the wise, these things, when undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness’; then abide with them.

What do you think, Kalamas, when non-greed ... non-aversion ... non-delusion arises in a person, does it arise to their welfare or harm?

To their welfare, Venerable Sir. (A.I,188f)

#### Trying to Know the Wrong Topic

We usually presume that we can know virtually everything. However, there are some topics, themes or aspects of reality where we have only a limited ability to know. If we insist upon knowing more, we are then subject to doubt caused by reaching the limits of our abilities. The Buddha mentioned four topics which he termed ‘inconceivables’ or ‘not to be known by conceptual thought’ (acinteyya): 1) the sphere of a Buddha, 2) the domain of the meditative absorptions, 3) the results of intentional actions (kamma-vipāka), and 4) speculation about the nature of the world. If one tries to find a definite solution to queries about any of these themes, one only increases in doubt and uncertainty, or ends up grasping some incorrect view.

When referring to ‘inconceivable’ topics, some people might add a fifth, that of rebirth (perhaps included under 3)). Unless one has special abilities or has developed meditation to a level where psychic abilities are possible, the topic of rebirth is primarily a matter of belief, faith or trust. It is very hard to prove by logical reasoning, although some people have reached a conclusion of its truth through personal experiences.1

There were also ten questions which the Buddha refused to answer. These were referred to as the ‘indeterminants’ (avyākata) and seem to be a standard set of questions for establishing what type of philosophy a teacher adhered to. They cover the following topics: 1)-4) Is the world eternal or not?; Is the world infinite or not?; 5)-6) Is the life-force (jīva) the same as the body or not?; 7)-10) Does the Tathāgata (the Buddha) (a) exist, (b) not exist, (c) both exist and not exist. (d) neither exist nor not exist, after death?2

The Buddha said that resorting to any of these speculative views:

... is to enter the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the agitation of views, the writhing of views, the fetter of views. It is connected with suffering, with vexation, turmoil and distress. It does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calming, to direct knowledge, to awakening or to nibbāna. (M.I,486)

#### Trying to Know by the Wrong Assumptions/Asking the Wrong Question

Asking the wrong question is usually caused by having inappropriate assumptions. The Buddha pointed out that due to ignorance, we do not see the way things really are. Some common assumptions were formulated into four ‘distortions’ (vipallāsa) of either perception, thought (citta) or views: what is impermanent is permanent, what is unsatisfactory is pleasant, what is non-self is self and what is unattractive is attractive (A.II,52). Thus as unenlightened beings, our basic assumptions are based on permanence, happiness, self and attraction, whereas the truth of reality is exactly the opposite. If we hold on to these wrong assumptions, we invariably become confused and perhaps doubt our own perceptions.

The most common example of this is with regard to the usual assumption that we are or have a permanent self or soul. Thus once when the Buddha was explaining the series of factors of conditional causality, one monk would frequently interrupt with the question: ‘Who is it?’ - for example: ‘Who is it that feels?’ ‘Who is it that craves?’ The Buddha responded that these were not valid questions, as he was not referring to a subject, but rather explaining the causal factors arising sequentially. Thus contact causes feeling, feeling causes craving, etc. (S.II,14). Obviously the questioning monk kept assuming that there was a subject, person, self who was doing the action, whereas the Buddha understood that there were only impersonal factors interacting.

Another of the reasons why the Buddha refused to answer the indeterminate questions (see above) was that the questioner was asking from the wrong assumptions. Thus for example, most people understand the world to be the external world. However, the Buddha defined the world internally:

Rather, it is in this fathom-long body, endowed with perception and mind, that I make known the world, the arising of the world, the cessation of the world and the way to the cessation of the world. (S.I,62)

Or when they asked about whether the Buddha exists after death, they were understanding that the Buddha was some particular entity. However, the Buddha said that he was beyond the usual designation of humans and thus ‘immeasurable’ (M.I,489). He illustrated this through the example of a fire going out through lack of fuel. ‘When the fire was extinguished, to which direction did it go?’ he asked. ‘That question does not apply’, was the answer, ‘since the fire was simply extinguished.’ Likewise, an awakened being has extinguished the fuel for future existence.

#### Bringing Worldly Assumptions to Spiritual Practice

When we take up spiritual practice we usually bring along our worldly values and judgements. To a limited degree these are also valid in the spiritual realm; however, sometimes they no longer apply or are only partially valid. Of course, many people take up spiritual practice because of some worldly issue: reducing stress, resolving some emotional problem or in order to discover truth, etc. And while meditation can have some beneficial effects, often the real benefits are given to us by indirect and occasionally unexpected means. For example, someone may take up meditation to reduce their stress level. However, after some practice they may notice that their stress level has increased and give up meditation with the view that it has no benefit. In fact the real benefit of their meditation was to expose their stress-causing attitude, their compulsion to always succeed or their obsessive fear of failure, which they unfortunately were unable to acknowledge.

Worldly or mundane (lokiya) values are distinguished from the spiritual or supermundane (lokuttara) values, although we should be careful not to see them as opposites. The worldly values are enfolded in the spiritual values and are still applicable on the relative level of truth. Spiritual values are universal, encompassing the worldly but also the ‘non-worldly’. Some people tend to separate these two levels of truth, with unfortunate and unexpected results. That is, when they become ‘spiritual’ they incline to disembodiment, dismissing the material realm as non-spiritual or beneath them: they are on some higher plane. This can also, unfortunately, become an excuse for strange, outrageous or even immoral behaviour, since they are in another realm where the mundane rules do not apply.

The worldly values are formally expressed as the Eight Worldly Conditions (loka-dhamma): gain and loss, fame and disgrace, praise and blame, happiness and suffering (A.IV,157f). These invariably sneak in or spill over into spiritual practice and can lead us to a plateau of confusion and uncertainty: am I getting anywhere? Am I happier? For example, one of the sources of doubt to be wary of is the ‘progress trap’. After a period of practice we ask the familiar question: ‘What have I gained?’ However, maybe we are asking the wrong question. Firstly, when we conceive of gain we are usually thinking in terms of certain concepts of what we should gain, whereas the meditative process is learning to experience reality as it really is, beyond concepts. Secondly, asking what we have gained is an ego question, that is, what has my ego gained, which of course is how we would normally think in the worldly sense. Another aspect of this is trying too hard to get results. This usually means that we have strong expectations which we wilfully want fulfilled. And where there is expectation there will be disappointment, often followed by doubt and despair.3

#### Wrong View(s) or Holding on to a Fixed View

If we have a wrong view regarding spiritual practice as expressed by the Buddha, we will be unable to establish the correct basis for an effective practice to transcend all doubts, since Right View is the initiating factor for the arising of all the other factors of the Eightfold Path (M.III,76). It may seem surprising that doubt could result from holding on to a particular view. However, holding on to a view makes it difficult to receive feedback (M.I,97), makes one disagreeable (M.I,98) and may lead to disputes (M.II,246), conditions which do not conduce to being able to investigate the causes of doubt. Also, we may either face challenges to our views or perhaps come across new information which threatens them, and if we are inflexible in our views we are then vulnerable to doubting it.

When I was young I never had any experiences of or even heard references to ghosts, except at Halloween. However, when I was living in Thailand people often talked about ghosts. Initially I dismissed this as foolish superstition. Then when I was living at Wat Pah Nanachat, situated in a cremation ground, I heard about unusual experiences from some of the Westerners who stayed there and this caused doubt to arise. I eventually had a change of view. Firstly, I realized that it was very arrogant of me to assume that my view was right and other people’s view was wrong. Secondly, I realized that maybe, just maybe, I really did not know the truth about ghosts. I then began to be less rigid in my views about ghosts and, rather than doubt, to just say ‘maybe’. And then I had my own unusual experiences!

#### Holding Views to Prevent Doubt

Holding a fixed view is often a direct result of doubt. When faced with doubt, many people will quickly grasp a view to provide them with some stability or reassurance. This is frequently the basis of fundamentalism, either to replace doubt with a firm belief system, or to avoid the tensions of wrestling with wavering and uncertainty by affirming an over-simplistic view of right and wrong. One unfortunate result of this is that one is unable to recognize the inherent doubt and thus undertake the work towards resolving it through investigation. The worst form of this is holding wrong views. Even if one has some form of valid spiritual experience, one can draw the wrong conclusions and try to validate them through a wrong view of reality.

#### Doubt Due to Ignorance

A specific cause of doubt is not practising the training as outlined by the Buddha. We may start off with some degree of trust in the teachings and expectation of results. However, unless we carry through with the training we won’t see the results. Most particularly this refers to the formal training of guarding the sense doors, moderation in eating, wakefulness (see chapter on sensual desire), having insight into wholesome qualities and developing supports for awakening (A.III,70f).

In Buddhist psychology perplexity and doubt (about true Dhamma) are considered to be mental processes (sankhāra). They are conditioned by sense contact, which is based upon ignorance (‘ignorance-contact’), which conditions feeling and craving (in the sequence of conditional causality) (S.III,99). This implies that unless we have some understanding with regard to the nature of sense impressions and perception, it is inevitable that doubt will arise. It is usually twofold, doubt about what is happening and doubt about its effects of causing various reactive moods: ‘Why am I doubting? Because I don’t know that doubt is caused by not knowing.’

#### Self-Doubt

The root cause of self-doubt is, of course, thinking about your sense of self. Most of the time the two kinds of self-doubt, relative and existential, intermingle; the relative ‘what am I?’ gets mixed up with the existential ‘who am I?’ The natural outcome is to doubt oneself, since what ultimately is that ‘self’? For most people their relative sense of themselves is generally known as a lifetime’s accumulation of self-referenced experiences, some pleasant, some painful and most neutral. Unfortunately, because of our ‘negativity bias’ we are more prone to recall our painful failures, and thus are often over-critical of our abilities. Some of this is wise circumspection so that we don’t over-stretch ourselves. However, some is personal conditioning through education, socialization or memories of the horrors of failing: we are never quite good enough.

Unfortunately, focusing on ‘my self’ is very much emphasized in modern society, where self-image is so important and people are bombarded by so many conflicting views, models, examples and choices of how we should be, could be, might be, had better be. Then with our over-emphasis on thinking we approach everything with conceptual idealism, and wonder why we never quite measure up to the mark; why the reality never quite matches the expectation: ‘Why aren’t I one of the beautiful people?’

The cause of existential self-doubt is not understanding how the sense of a self or self-identity is created in the first place. In the Buddha’s understanding even a young infant has an underlying disposition to identity view, which takes form through ignorant grasping of any of the five groups (khandhas): physicality, feeling, perception, mental processes or consciousness. The fact is that a human being has sense impressions; for example, there is seeing. The fiction begins when the maturing infant, due to the predisposition, one day thinks: ‘Oh, I am seeing’. Then, with the arising of a subject, an objective world comes into focus: ‘I am seeing food.’ This is usually followed by: ‘I want food’ and ‘If I cry I get food.’ However, then the story becomes complicated, since sometimes the crying is rewarded and sometimes it is punished, so self-doubt arises: ‘Should I cry, or go hungry?’

The fact of the fiction is that there really is nothing (no ‘thing’) which we can pin down as ‘I’. The real fact is that what is doing the seeing is a dynamically changing collection of various physical and mental processes: physical eye, physical forms and colours; mental processes: attention, awareness, choice, moods and emotions; and perceptual processes: memory, cognition, etc. However, due to lack of understanding and mindfulness most people just say ‘I’. Then when the mood changes or there’s a lapse in memory, they are confused: what ‘I’ is this?

Views of self-identity (sakkāya diṭṭhi) are technically explained as any of twenty varieties, that is, any of four modes relating to the five groups: the groups are the self; the self possesses the groups; the groups are part of the self; the self is within the groups. In order to relate to ‘our self’, we have probably already unconsciously internalized some mode of identity, for example: ‘I have consciousness as my true self’. This identification process is reinforced by the three basic conceits which we often come across in social interactions: I am superior, I am inferior, I am equal. Or it plays itself out more philosophically in any of the sixteen forms of self-doubt (S.II,26-7; M.I,8). Five of these are to do with the past: ‘Was I ... Was I not … What was I … How was I … Having been what, what did I become in the past?’; five likewise to do with the future: ‘Will I be … Will I not be … What will I be … How will I be … Having been what, what will I become in the future?’; and six to do with the present: ‘Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? Where has this being come from? Where will it go?’ Once a self-identity becomes confirmed it spins out endless stories about itself, never realizing that this is actually a work of fiction. And, since in a work of fiction anything is possible, there is plenty of room for self-doubt.

#### Confusion

Confusion is sometimes due to certain unskilful habits we have accumulated. For example, not being well-organized externally can affect our internal state of mind: not having our physical environment organized can cause mental disorganization. At other times it may be due to different forms of being overwhelmed: 1) not having a good sense of time and place, causing confusion of temporality, 2) trying to do too many things at once, or multi-tasking (and thus not being clear about any of them), 3) not being able to prioritize (so that everything calls for our limited attention), 4) procrastination (continually putting things off which then crowd the mind), 5) accumulating too many things (possessions, views, ideas, plans, etc.), which then compete for our attention.

Confusion can also result from wanting to know completely or absolutely. I was taught that knowing all the answers was the key to success. It took me a while to realize that it is impossible to know all the answers all the time. Trying to always know just resulted in confusion.

#### Worry

While remorse (as in the previous hindrance) can be a source of haunting worry, there are also many other causes of worry. Since life is very uncertain and always changing, we could worry about virtually anything: ‘What if there is a bus strike tomorrow? What if there is an earthquake?’ Sometimes this is just a conditioned habit we have developed. Sometimes we are too perfectionist or over-responsible and must have everything planned ahead of time. Occasionally there may also be some underlying fear of failure or making a mistake.

Some years ago I was invited by Ajahn Sumedho on a retreat high in the Sierre Nevada mountains in the south of Spain. At that time I was the second monk at Chithurst Monastery in England. The second monk is the manager of the monastery, in order to leave the senior monk free to do the teaching. When the retreat began I observed what seemed like a big black cloud in my head. I thought it might be due to the high altitude or change in diet, but it persisted. Finally, on the afternoon of the third day I was on the walking path and brought my attention to this cloud in my head. What was it? As I was investigating it I suddenly realized it was actually worry. And as soon as I could recognize it as worry, the cloud in my head dispersed and the sun immediately shone more brightly.

What I saw was my worry about the monastery back in England. It was really quite absurd: here I was in Spain worrying about the monastery in England! And I was in a remote place in the mountains, with no telephone or other communication. I couldn’t even call and ask: ‘Is everything going well over there?’ My responsibility demon had followed me to Spain. It was ridiculous, like some perverse joke while I was having a meditative holiday in the sunshine. So I had a good laugh at it. However, it did give me a clearer understanding of how these responsibilities had become excessive and were now haunting me by creating a big black cloud in my head, even though I was far away. Just by being aware of that, the worry fell away. For the rest of the time in Spain I never thought about the monastery again (which was maybe being irresponsible), and the big black cloud never returned. This experience also gave me some incentive to become more aware of my ‘responsibility demon’ by initiating a friendly dialogue with it: ‘How are you today? Do you have anything to tell me?’

#### Indecision

Often indecision is caused by simply thinking too much, or worrying about every detail or every possible consequence. This leaves us hanging between numerous possibilities, unable to decide on any of them. Sometimes there may be a certain degree of fear involved, for example fear of mistakes, or failure, or of being criticized, etc. Two things which cause me to be indecisive are needing to reflect on the wider implications of a decision and, since everything is constantly changing, wondering what are the chances of my plan actually happening. While it is usually beneficial to not be compulsive and rush into a hasty decision, too much hesitation can also be an obstacle to moving ahead.

#### Fear/Anxiety

Fear is one of those debilitating, energy-dissipating, contagious emotions which is so unpleasant that we strenuously avoid it. But then we never come to really understand it. Also, it is often quite undifferentiated and hard to objectify (what is its real source?), so that we can be easily spun into a fear cycle or panic attack.

Generally there are two main types of fear reactions which are closely related: an instinctive reflex against any threat to our sense of ‘my self’, and an existential reaction by the self to any threat to its integrity. Some instinctive fear is natural and some conditioned, just a habit we have developed, especially for people who have had a very fearful or unstable life. They may have a big backlog of fear trauma.

Existentially, as long as we grasp a self we are going to have fear. Self is a functional illusion, not an ultimate reality, so it’s afraid to be exposed as a phoney. Thus it throws up the distraction of fear or other smoke-screens: ‘Worry about that. Don’t look so closely at me, worry about what will happen tomorrow.’ It wants to shift our attention to something over there, rather than look at the real issue here in our own mind. Experiencing fear could mean we are close to the core of self, and self is throwing up warning signals. So all kinds of fear relate to self-defence of some kind. There is, of course, a necessity to preserve some integrity of self. For example, the body needs to have some kind of fear or worry with regard to maintaining its physical health. At one level we are all latent hypochondriacs. So fear is instinctive in life, but we have to know what the limit of it is. When does it become excessive and begin to haunt us? There is a saying in English: there is nothing to fear but fear itself. However, if most of us look at a fear, we become frightened of it; and then we become frightened about the fear about the fear, and it becomes panic.

### Cessation

Formally, two ways lead to the cessation of doubt: appropriate attention (A.I,5) and frequently giving appropriate attention to wholesome and unwholesome states, blameable and unblameable states, inferior and superior states or dark and bright states (S.V,106). The second of these ways is also explained as the nutriment for investigation of phenomena (dhamma-vicaya), one of the Seven Factors of Awakening4 (S.V,104). Thus the main way to resolve doubt is to investigate the very nature of doubt itself, and one way to start is to distinguish what form of doubt it is.

Developing appropriate attention is, of course, helpful at any time. With regard to doubt, it can help to shift the focus from the reactions to doubt to observing the nature of doubt itself and its basic causes. Appropriate attention to wholesome and unwholesome states, etc. points us in the right direction to what is especially relevant to resolving doubt. The experience of doubt is like being at a total standstill, not knowing which way to turn. If we are not completely paralyzed or caught in enervating despair, considering what is wholesome or beneficial can be a way of starting to move out of the quandary. Even though our doubt may not be completely resolved, taking a step in a blameless direction can give us a new perspective.

#### Sceptical Doubt

One of the most helpful ways of dealing with sceptical doubt is learning about the topic one has doubt about, either by asking questions of learned persons or by systematic study. The Commentary on the Saṃyutta Nikāya (CDB,1909 n.97) mentions three of the six ways of dealing with doubt as: 1) much learning, 2) investigation, 3) familiarity with monastic discipline (Vināya).

If there are doubts with regard to the Buddha, one must rely quite a bit on trust, since he passed away long ago. Some study of his life and his everyday interactions with the people of his time, especially as presented in the Pali Canon, can sometimes be quite helpful for resolving some forms of doubt. With regard to the Dhamma, the Buddha laid down various principles which may at first require some degree of trust, but should then be investigated in order to be realized directly by oneself. The most important principle of Dhamma which the Buddha confirmed and designated was right view (M.I,288; III,72; A.I,269).

#### Right View

The main import of right view is that everything arises and ceases according to the principle of conditional causality, and that our intentional actions (kamma) have an effect (vipāka) upon this principle. Right view is also understanding what is wholesome and unwholesome, and their roots (M.I,46f.), and what are wrong and right view, intention, speech, action and livelihood. This then also supports right effort and right mindfulness, all factors of the Eightfold Path (M.III,71ff).

The Buddha was sometimes pragmatic in his explanation of right view. For example, in one discourse (M. sutta 60) he outlines various wrong and right views, and then very carefully and methodically explains why it is better to live one’s life in accordance with the right view, whether or not one believes it to be true: for example, one is praised now and (if there is another world) one attains a favourable rebirth.5

Right view is sometimes explained in the context of supermundane reality as understanding the Four Noble Truths (M.I,48;III,251); as fully understanding that the five groups of grasping (khandhas) are impermanent (S.III,51-2); or as seeing the six-fold sense sphere, contact, consciousness and feeling as they really are (M.III,288ff.).

Right view arises from either of two conditions: learning (literally, the ‘voice of another’)6 or appropriate attention, and when it is supported by the five factors of virtue, learning, discussion, calm and insight, results in deliverance of mind (M.I,294).

#### Conditional Causality

Conditional causality is one of the unique teachings of the Buddha and the key to understanding his profound insights. Not understanding conditional causality is the main reason why people have difficulty understanding the Buddha’s teaching on non-self and the effects of kamma-vipāka (action and result). Most people assume that there must be some permanent self or soul which persists at least through a lifetime. However, it doesn’t take too much reflection to notice that you are not exactly the same self as you were some years ago. There seems to be some continuity, but observing more attentively, you may see that you are not quite so permanent as you assumed.7 Most unawakened beings, however, insist upon, look for and confirm a permanent self or soul, and then take up the eternalist view (the fixed entity persists after death) or the annihilationist view (the fixed entity is extinguished at death).

Kaccāna, the world usually depends upon the duality of ‘existence’ and ‘non- existence’. But for those who see with perfect realization the truth of the arising of the world, there is not for them any ‘non-existence’ in the world. And for those who see, with perfect realization, the truth of the passing away of the world, there is not for them any ‘existence’ in the world.

Kaccāna, this world is mostly blinded by attachment, grasping and adherence. But those who do not obtain or take hold of that attachment and grasping, that obstinacy, adherence and latent tendency, do not take a stand upon ‘my self’.8 They have no doubt or uncertainty that what arises is only dukkha arising, what ceases is only dukkha ceasing, and their knowledge is independent of others. In this way, Kaccāna, there is right view.

‘All exists’ is one extreme; ‘All does not exist’ is the second extreme. Not going to either extreme, the Tathāgata expounds a teaching in the middle: With ignorance as condition, formative processes come to be; with formative processes as condition, consciousness ... Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering (S.II,17, abridged).

The Buddha awoke to the truth that there is no permanent abiding entity, self or soul, but only various continuously changing physical and mental processes appearing to be stable through causal action and result (kamma-vipāka). The principle of kamma-vipāka is ethical conditional causality, cause and effect applied to the realm of human behaviour. Actions have the potential to give results, depending upon the intensity of the action. The Buddha defined kamma as intentional or willed action, and since will is one of the primary elements of selfhood, the potential result will thus contain a seed of that selfhood. Thus unskilful or selfish actions result in continued unskilful self-ishness as a natural causal process. Skilful actions which incline to selflessness can give a result which reduces selfhood.

Some people think that we must reap the results of all our actions, but if this were the case we could never be liberated, since our actions are continuous. Fortunately, skilful actions can lessen the results and even cancel the potential results of previous action, leading to the complete cessation of suffering (A.I,249f). Thus our skilful actions to work through the Hindrances can reduce their strength so that we will not have to suffer their effects in future.

Doubt about conditional causality is initially a normal response, since the Buddha said that this teaching was very deep and profound (S.II,92). On a relative level most of us do accept the principle of cause and effect to some degree. That’s why you get up and go to work on Monday morning (cause) in order to earn your salary (effect). However, this also has many conditions: you must be on time, you must clock in, you must do a proper job, etc. If any of these conditions are not fulfilled, no effect (salary) is forthcoming. Are you able to observe the cause and effect relationships running through your behaviour? Perhaps you can observe some general principles, but it’s often hard to see all the direct causal relations. If we add to this the fact that often there are multiple conditions interacting, and that the quality of the mind has a major influence on the effect, we can acknowledge just how profound this teaching really is.

#### The Wrong Mode of Enquiry

Since one of the main causes of doubt is over-reliance on thinking in terms of concepts and ideas, it is very helpful to become more mindful of the thinking process and be able to distinguish when we are pursuing concepts rather than direct experience. The Buddha used ‘reflective thought’ or ‘contemplative thought’ to help him investigate the nature of reality. However, this was on a basis of highly-developed and stable concentration (which reduces and even temporarily eliminates discursive thought), in order to penetrate beyond the realm of self-supporting concepts to the selfless truth, thus arriving at direct realization (bhāvanā-mayā-paññā).

In the process of resolving doubt, it is useful to distinguish what mode of understanding will resolve which particular form of doubt. Some doubts may be resolved by some degree of careful thought, some by learning, while others may require some deeper development of meditation. These days there is much information available, sometimes too much. I thought it would be interesting to research Buddhist meditation on the internet – 12.3 million entries, and then I really had doubt about which one might be right. The one at the very top was Wikipedia. The second one was very smoothly written, and the author was only indicated after reading the entire article. However, then I had more doubts, since it was from a rather controversial organization. Thus when you try to answer one question, more questions sometimes arise, the usual way we work through the doubting process, peeling back the various levels of doubt. Through the experience, though, we ideally develop a more discerning attitude and are able to distinguish the information from the propaganda. One useful principle is to get as close to the original source as possible, such as consulting the Buddhist scriptures directly or consulting someone who has personal experience.

Sometimes the meditation tradition can come across as anti-book or anti-intellectual. Some people think: ‘Oh no, I won’t look at the book, I’ll just sit and meditate on this.’ Since they think meditation is the opposite of mental activity, they do not want to pollute their spiritual practice with discursive thought! But they become more and more confused, more and more paralyzed with doubt. Some people say: ‘I’ve got to solve this for myself, nobody else can answer this for me, I must find the real truth within myself.’ This is true to a certain degree; however, it also cuts off the possibility to obtain some useful direction.

If we really feel confused, the way out of confusion is to achieve some clarity, and there are a great variety of ways to do this: information, advice, suggestions. Look around, find out what’s possible. Even if it doesn’t really address the direct problem, it may at least give us some new opening to work with confusion in a more flexible way. Eventually doubt can then become a source of deeper enquiry. The opposite of this is when people avoid any doubt altogether by searching around for some easily satisfying answer. The result can be a conglomerate of do-it-yourself spiritual clichés, borrowed wisdom and feel-good philosophy which never really address the fundamental issue of: ‘Who is asking the question? Who is seeking the truth? Who is the knower?’ Easy answers strangle the spiritual quest.

#### The Wrong Topic

As we probably realize by now, some speculations will not reach a conclusion and we will be in doubt about them all our lives. It is thus important to know which sources of doubt are worth working on, which can be subject to some resolution and which cannot.

On a certain occasion the Buddha was staying in a forest and took up a handful of leaves. He asked the monks (bhikkhus) which they thought were more numerous, the leaves in his hand or those in the forest. When they replied that the leaves in the forest were more numerous, the Buddha responded:

Even so, bhikkhus, those things I have known directly are numerous, while those I have taught are few. And why, bhikkhus, have I not taught them? Because they are not beneficial, not relevant to the basis of the spiritual life, and do not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to awakening, to nibbāna. Therefore I have not taught them.

And what, bhikkhus, have I taught? I have taught, ‘This is dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the origin of dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the cessation of dukkha’; I have taught, ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of dukkha’. And why, bhikkhus, have I taught this? Because this is beneficial, relevant to the basis of the spiritual life, and leads to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to awakening, to nibbāna. Therefore I have taught this. (S.V,438)

Of course, some people today are often quite well educated and have more knowledge about a wide range of topics. Some knowledge such as psychology may have relevance for spiritual practice, and some, like some science, may be related to Buddhist topics. While some knowledge of these topics can be useful for cross-referencing and helping to relate spiritual or Buddhist themes to wider areas of our life, one also needs to be careful with the language and the cross-comparisons, as they may not specifically relate in detail. One example is the use of the term ‘self’ to define the Pali term ‘attā’. For most people ‘self’ refers particularly to the conventional self or personality, whereas ‘attā’ had the stronger connotation of ‘soul’, as well as including the conventional self. It was the attā that was believed to transmigrate from life to life, whereas at death most of the attributes of the conventional self were left behind. This also adds to the confusion regarding the teaching on non-self. If psychologists hear the term ‘non-self’, they usually hear ‘no self’, which to them is equivalent to psychosis: ‘What, Buddhists are teaching people to be psychotic, to lose their self?’ No, what the Buddha is saying is to not obsessively grasp at changing bodily and mental processes as a permanent self-entity. We should also be clear that the Buddha never said: ‘There is no self.’ What he said was, ‘All things are non-self’, that is, everything has the non-self-like characteristic; even our sense of self has ultimately a non-self-like, impersonal characteristic when you examine it thoroughly. Saying that there is no self would be mistaken for the annihilationist view.

#### The Wrong Assumptions/Asking the Wrong Question

#### Distortions

Knowing that our view of the world is subject to distortion allows us not to take it so seriously: it’s just a perception. Of course, this is the only perception we have to work with, so we do not reject it entirely either. If we notice that we are confused about some experience, perhaps we can reflect that possibly we may have a distorted perception of it, and that it is ultimately impermanent, unsatisfactory and non-self. One of Ajahn Chah’s examples was of a broken glass. After it has broken people will remember that everything is impermanent, partly to allay the disappointment. He said, however, that if you really understand impermanence you should relate to that glass as if it were already broken. Then when it does break you are not surprised, but relieved: ‘Oh, finally it is revealing its true nature as impermanent!’ The Buddha encouraged investigation of the processes which give rise in an ‘uninstructed worldling’ to grasping a self. Thus rather than ask: ‘Who am I?’, it would be more useful to enquire: ‘What makes up this sense of I?’

#### Worldly Values

Knowing the Eight Worldly Conditions not only helps us to notice when we get caught in them, but is also helpful for allowing us to see beyond them: they are only passing conditions. Spiritual practice can encompass the whole spectrum of experiences, positive and negative. The worldly approach to spiritual practice is to get something out of it. Spiritual values often do not fit into the usual categories of desirable experiences, or are their direct opposite. The Buddha gave the following summary:

The things of which you know - these things lead to dispassion, not to passion; to detachment, not to attachment; to diminution, not to accumulation; to wanting little, not to wanting much; to being easily satisfied, not to being hard to satisfy; to seclusion, not to socializing; to putting forth energy, not to indolence; to frugality, not to luxury - of them you should surely know that they belong to the Teaching, to the Training, to the Teacher’s instruction (A.IV,280).

How many of these spiritual values are surprising to you? If I turn around the usual worldly question: ‘What have I gained?’ to ask: ‘What have I given up?’, I have a completely different perspective on experience. To answer that question we must look outside the limitations of concepts, to another dimension of our being where we usually do not look. It points to the non-self, the non-ego, selflessness. And the answer usually comes out as positive, because, through spiritual practice the ego has usually given up some of its greed, aversion and delusion. As a spiritual question, what we’ve given up, what we’ve let go of, what we have freed ourself from, is more important. And the usual positive answer leads to encouragement to continue the practice since we see some beneficial results.

Bringing our expectations to spiritual practice will result in disappointment. Buddhist meditation is learning to see things as they really are, so if we can be more receptive to whatever arises in our experience, we are never disappointed. Rather than being blinkered by expectation, we bring it into awareness – yes, very interesting. Why am I being led around by expectations?

#### Four Ways of Answering

There are four ways in which a question may be answered: 1) directly, 2) after being analyzed, 3) by asking a counter-question, 4) by being set aside (A.II,46; D.III,229 cf. A.I,197f). Sometimes the Buddha did not answer someone’s question because he perceived that they would not comprehend his response. For example, one time the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta visited the Buddha and asked:

How is it, master Gotama, does self exist?’

When this was said the Revered One was silent. ‘But then, master Gotama, does self not exist?’ For a second time the Revered One was silent. Then the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta got up from his seat and went away. Now, not long after he had gone, the Venerable Ānanda asked the Revered One: ‘How is it, sir, that when the Revered One was asked a question by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta, he did not answer?’

‘If, Ānanda, when asked by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta: “Does self exist?”, I had replied: “Self exists”, would that have been in conformity with the understanding that all things are non-self? If, when asked by the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta: “Does self not exist?”, I had replied: “Self does not exist”, then, Ānanda, the bewildered Vacchagotta would be even more bewildered, thinking: “Formerly, I surely had a self, but now I have not!”’ (S.IV,400ff.)

Thus when we are seeking some resolution to doubts, it is important to phrase the question in the right way. Also, I have observed that sometimes when we clearly know what it is we are asking, the answer is often revealed. It is as if it was previously obscured by an imprecise question coming from an unclear mind.

#### Wrong View(s) or Fixed View

We all have views on things; however, it can be more skilful to relate to them with a degree of fluidity, just like going for a drive in the countryside and viewing the passing scenery. At this time and place we have this particular view on reality, and at another time and place we have a different view. Do you know what your views are? We have our views on politics and worldly affairs. We have views about life: is the cup half full or half empty? And most specifically, we have views about our self (detailed above under Self-Doubt), are you clear about them? Do you know that they are only ways of viewing? Through recognizing the liabilities of wrong views and the obstruction of fixed views, we may gradually release our dependence upon views and abide more peacefully with the viewing.

A significant point which the Buddha emphasized in one discussion (M.I,485) was that he had given up holding speculative views because he had seen directly the arising and passing away of the five groups of grasping. That is, through direct realization one no longer needs a view because one knows the truth.

#### Self Doubt

Investigating self-doubt can be a very useful exercise. It can not only reveal some of our self-conditioned habits and attitudes, but may also allow an insightful perspective on the very nature of selfhood. Thus it is very useful to become more aware of what the nature of one’s self-doubt really is. As mentioned above, often relative self-doubts and existential ones become intermingled, so it is important to be able to distinguish them. Some degree of relative self-doubt can be released through recognizing old conditioned habits. Existential self-doubt can be resolved through a meditative investigation of the self-identity process, which is entering some quite primal territory. Once we are able to see just how the sense of a self is causally conditioned, all such unrealistic thoughts cease (S.II,26). As the Buddha said:

I am’ is a conceiving; ‘I am this’ is a conceiving; ‘I will be’ is a conceiving ... When the sage has gone beyond all conceivings, he is called ‘at peace’. The sage at peace is not born, does not age, is not agitated, is not obstructed’ (M.III,246; abridged).

Basically, the more clearly we are able to see the process of ‘I-making’, the less we grasp at it as being some substantial entity. This is not a process of ‘getting rid of self’, but one of releasing our obsessive grasping and allowing the self-referencing process to flow in the conventional sense: ‘I’ still feel, but the ‘I’ reference changes with the feeling.

Some self-doubt is valuable. If you have doubt about whether you are benefiting from the practice, maybe you need to enquire: ‘Is this really working for me? Is this good for me? Is this useful for me?’ If we just have occasional glimpses of increased understanding, or there is no significant change in our behaviour or attitude, perhaps it is worth re-evaluating our practice. Is this type of practice suitable to my temperament? Is my approach to practice correct or appropriate? Some people doggedly plod along with a spiritual technique, hoping that it will eventually give some results. While some techniques do have intrinsic effects, the real value in them is to increase our self-awareness. What is happening in body and mind? Am I getting caught in the spiritual success game, trying to perfect this technique with an increase in spiritual pride, stress and fear of failure? Or am I able to explore the ego-activity spinning off from the challenges of pursuing this spiritual discipline?

#### Confusion

If we recognize confusion as a common experience, it is helpful to get some perspective on its causes. What triggers it off? How does it arise? Is it about something specific or is it a general condition of mind? Of most benefit, of course, is to focus and clear the mind through meditation. When you acknowledge confusion, try to do some meditation on the breath or walking meditation. Even a small amount can help to undermine the tendency to confusion, which otherwise tends to compound itself: confused about confusion.

Another helpful thing is to simplify your life. Simplify and organize your living and working places in order to have a clean and orderly environment around you. Try to focus on doing one thing at a time, and finish it before moving on to the next thing. Be more disciplined about how much you take on and try to maintain some continuity with your schedule. It is very helpful to be more clear and compassionate about what your priorities are. If we observe the tendency to try to know completely we can then learn to be satisfied with uncertainty, partial knowledge or temporary knowledge, which is a much more realistic way of knowing.

#### Worry

What am I really worrying about? If we can observe the nature of worry, recognize what the symptoms are and see how it is triggered off, we may begin to acknowledge it as an unwholesome conditioned process, just an old habit. Take it to its extreme and it becomes absurd, so you can laugh at it. Especially if we can open to the unpleasantness of it, we naturally learn to let it go, to de-condition this habit tendency. Personally, I was a real worrier, as I had been educated to always have everything planned out before hand. However, when I finally realized that this was impossible in a continuously changing world and only making me more anxious, I then re-educated myself to drop it and go with the flow much more. Sometimes worry may arise again, but now we have a new relationship to it, based upon clear seeing and wisdom.

#### Indecision

In fact we can never be certain about every consequence. Once we have weighed up certain courses of action, it may be worth at least trying out the most favourable one to test the water. In this way it changes from a mental concept to a concrete action, and we may get another perspective on it. As it is said: ‘The path up the mountain begins with one step.’ Rather than being too perfectionistic, it may be more useful to aim for merely a reasonable decision or a well-considered action, and be humble enough to learn from our mistakes. If we are really unable to decide, we could just follow our usual course. Then perhaps necessity will decide for us. Sometimes the feeling of having to make a decision is based upon some not very skilful cause such as restlessness, boredom, etc. If we stick with what we are doing, it will eventually pass.

#### Fear/Anxiety

To get a grip on fear and anxiety, it can be helpful to try to observe the fear process as an objective observer or interested investigator. For me the most obvious way is to look at the fear reaction in the body. The body is slower to change than the mind and expresses emotion in a much more tangible way. Thus when fear arises we can bring awareness to the physical sensations which are reasonably obvious: the heart racing, heat rising in the face, muscles tensing, whatever; there is some tangible expression of fear to be clearly observed. If I go directly to the emotion of fear, very easily a vortex of increasing reactions to the reactions to the reactions can arise, and soon I am having a panic attack or even heart failure. However, being an observer of the physical expression of fear can allow us to be aware of it without being caught in it. Of course, it doesn’t happen that easily all the time, since most of us have a long relationship with many different forms of fear. The principle is to try to access it to some degree, without being overwhelmed by it. If we are overwhelmed we are just thrown into more traumatic reactions to it. We can end up re-traumatized, reaffirming the old fear syndrome. However, if we can keep some access to it, for example through its physical effects, we can achieve a more objective perspective on the nature of the fear syndrome. This doesn’t mean that one becomes fearless, but being able to observe fear less fearfully gives us more confidence to actually work with it, and not be chased around by it all the time.

#### Good Friends/Teachers (Sangha)

Some kinds of doubts, although not resolved, can at least be alleviated by people who can give suggestions, direction in the practice or encouragement. Of course, it is especially meaningful if they are people with whom you feel some deep affinity, or who can significantly empathize with your particular issues. Some teachers may just respond: ‘You need more mindfulness’, while you sense that others have been through somewhat similar situations and can respond from personal experience.

An experienced teacher like Ajahn Chah was especially gifted at guiding many different people, including Westerners. When I was with Ajahn Chah I thought: ‘It would be very nice if he would tell me I was doing well.’ But he was a very skilled teacher, so he wouldn’t fall for that one. If somebody was really lost in doubt or totally confused, he would encourage them: ‘Yes, you’re doing well, keep going.’ But if somebody had some stability in the practice and came to ask Ajahn Chah: ‘How am I doing?’ he would answer: ‘I don’t know, how are you doing?’ He would encourage you to look at yourself, check out your own experience, check out your own mind. He would even make jokes about teachers who gave interviews to students: ‘If you don’t know your mind yourself, how do you expect the teacher to know your mind?’ At first I found it very hard to ‘interview myself’ or try to objectively evaluate my own experiences, especially after spending so many years as a student being evaluated by others. However, setting up this ‘self-knowing’ and gaining confidence in it are key elements in being able to fine-tune practice to one’s own unique path.

So we can learn to ask ourselves how we are doing, or at least, how we think we are doing, and then try to get a reality check from someone more experienced. Sometimes our perceptions of our self can be inflated. Of course, being with Ajahn Chah it was hard to be inflated – he was a really good deflater. Otherwise, it is valuable to have a good friend who can give some honest feedback. During a visit to Wat Pah Nanachat I had a talk with Ajahn Sumedho, and basically he answered my three-year backlog of questions in about thirty minutes (some answers I already ‘knew’ but needed confirmation for them). I then realized the benefit of having an experienced teacher to give some direction to our efforts, although we each still need to do the practice. One of the major causes of meditators going astray is not having a guide, good friends or other sources of getting feedback on one’s spiritual practice. When we are in the rarefied territory of spiritual exploration, it is easy to think that we are quite unique and special.

#### Don’t Know

Some doubts may not be answered very easily. We may need to put advice into practice in order to see for ourselves. Ajahn Chah once said: ‘I can’t give you any wisdom, I can only give you patience.’ That is, he could give us the encouragement to be persevering in the practice until we arrived at our own wisdom of clearly seeing the way things are. This would require some consistency in our investigation, as well as some reality-checking and cross-checking. And sometimes it is more peacefully honest to acknowledge that we just do not know. One of Ajahn Chah’s most frequent teachings was: ‘It’s uncertain’ (Thai: my nay). Since everything is ultimately changing and impermanent, it manifests as being uncertain and unreliable. Can you abide with that? What does not knowing feel like? Often, usually more often than we realize, we really do not know. But we can know that we do not know, and that is a form of knowing. We still have awareness of bodily sensations, feeling tones, conditions of mind in the present moment, and maybe some interest in knowing in knowing’s own time. The benefit of this is that when we know we do not know we can find out, we can search and investigate. If we think we know or pretend we know, this is not only fooling ourselves, but also means we cease from looking further.

#### Doubt as Enquiry

If we thoroughly investigate the nature of doubt, we could transform it into really deep enquiry. Rather than being caught in the doubt: ‘Is the Buddha enlightened?’, you could turn it around and ask: ‘Who’s asking that question?’ And this could lead to a much more meaningful spiritual investigation. You ask the question; then, rather than answering it, you follow the mind deeper into the inner silence. If you look at yourself within that context of: ‘Who is asking the question?’, you might see a deeper level of self. For example, you might see insecurity, the aspect of ego that wants to be re-assured, that needs propping up, that needs continued encouragement by having it confirmed that: ‘Yes, the Buddha is enlightened.’ And that’s what’s important to see, when you can open to seeing it. Whether or not you get the answer to your initial question isn’t really important. What is important is that it can lead us into a deeper enquiry, into the root of the self who is asking this question. Whether the Buddha is enlightened or not will not make me enlightened. The answer could give me encouragement, it could maybe give me direction, but it’s not the real issue. The really important issue is what’s happening inside yourself when doubt comes up.

Some teachers teach about actually encouraging doubt. When you really go into doubt, you get down to the sources of the fundamental roots of self: Who is doubting? Who wants to know? If we are mindful of doubt, we may sometimes notice that the mind is open and receptive to looking further, beyond the doubt to the doubter itself, and possibly to the ultimate pure, unobscured knowing. Self wants to at least appear to know in order to stay in control, and can create all kinds of illusions and delusions to give the impression that it knows, or thinks it knows, or assumes it knows. At the heart of it we don’t really know. If all of life is fundamentally impermanent, how do you know anything, other than that things are all constantly changing?

We begin to realize what real knowing is: knowing the ultimate truth. It’s not necessarily knowing all the details. It’s knowing what the real essence of everything is. Ajahn Chah said that rather than knowing all the trees in the forest, if you just know what one tree ultimately is, then you know all the other trees. You know this one tree is impermanent, unsatisfactory and non-self. If you know that, you know all trees are ultimately the same. That’s all you have to know. But most of us have been trained to look outside at all the diversity, rather than looking inside at the source. So perhaps we can use doubt to bring us back to the source, bring it home to where it’s really coming from, where the real questions are being asked.

### Summary

Doubt as understood in the Pali Canon is basically doubt about Buddhism: the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Sangha and the training. In the present time, however, with so much emphasis upon conceptual thought, a number of other forms of doubt have arisen. I have designated these as self-doubt, confusion, worry, indecision and fear-anxiety. Some doubts concern specific topics, which can then be researched and possibly some resolution achieved. Some arise due to ‘looking in the wrong direction’ or applying an incorrect method of resolution. Some of these are: 1) not using the right mode of understanding, either thinking, learning or meditative realization, 2) trying to know about that which is unknowable, for example, where an enlightened person goes after death, 3) enquiring from false assumptions: who gets enlightened? Some doubts arise due to our holding onto wrong views or rigid views, which then clash with new knowledge and throw us into uncertainty.

The principal way to resolve doubt is by investigation. We mindfully observe the nature of doubt to know its particular form. Some forms, like confusion, worry or enquiring only from an intellectual mode may be due to old habits feeding this tendency. Other forms may be due to serious enquiry into truth and may require some meditative development, perhaps with the support of a wise teacher or experienced friend. A form like self-doubt may require some review of habits, as well as study of the underlying dynamics of I-making.

Ideally, if we don’t become paralyzed with doubt it can be transformed into reflective enquiry: ‘Who is asking the question?’ Rather than having the question answered and leaving space for another question, we can look into the silence of the mind at a deeper level of self, possibly to the source of self. This is how we can transform a hindrance into a helper. One of the questions Ajahn Chah posed was: ‘If you can’t go forward, and you can’t go back, and you can’t stand still, where do you go?’

1 Some books relating to rebirth are: 1) Twenty Cases Suggestive of Rebirth by Dr. Ian Stevenson, 2) Many Lives, Many Masters by Brian Weiss, 3) Past Lives Therapy by Dr. Morris Netherton.

2 D.I,188f; see LDB, p.554, n.219 for more details.

3 ‘New meditators are overly eager for results. They are full of enormous and inflated expectations. They jump right in and expect incredible results in no time flat. They push. They tense. They sweat and strain, and it is all so terribly, terribly grim and solemn.’ Bhante Gunaratana, pp. 109ff.

4 The Commentary on the Saṃyutta Nikāya gives seven more conditions for developing investigation of phenomena: 1) interrogation (about meaning of aggregates, elements, sense bases, etc.), 2) personal cleanliness, 3) balancing the faculties (cf. PP.135-36), 4) reflecting upon the sphere of deep knowledge, 5) avoiding unwise people, 6) associating with wise people, 7) right resolution (CDB,1907n.86).

5 For a more detailed summary see MLDB note 621.

6 Parato ghosa: in the Buddha’s time there were no books available, so the only means of learning the teachings was by hearing them from another person. Today learning by hearing is supplemented by other means.

7 For an overview of the changeable nature of memory see John Kotre’s book.

8 I have been guided in this translation by Bhikkhu Bodhi, CDB p.736, note 32. See also his note 29, page 734 regarding ‘existence’ and ‘non-existence’.