## Acknowledgements

The original source for this book is a series of talks given at Bodhinyanarama Monastery, Wellington, New Zealand. Various interested people in Vancouver and Victoria, British Columbia, transcribed these talks, and I undertook the task of moulding them into a more coherent literal form. My wandering life-style did not lend itself well to doing serious writing, so the project has taken nearly two years to complete.

In the course of editing the talks, it became clear to me that the project would benefit greatly by giving a more thorough treatment to the topics than was originally possible in the original forty-minute talks. Especially useful would be a more systematic presentation, based upon a closer investigation of these themes as explained in the Pali Canon. Thus major portions of the original transcripts have been re-arranged and re-written. Since there is not a lot of detailed explanation of the Hindrances in the Pali Canon, I have often made reference to The Path of Purification, the English translation of the Visuddhimagga by Bhadantācariya Buddhaghosa. Although this was composed some nine centuries after the Buddha, it is claimed to be based on the earlier commentaries, some of which may date from the time of the Buddha (PP.xviii).

My intention was not to prepare a definitive manual on resolving the Hindrances, but rather to gather together relevant material from the Pali Canon and post-Canonical literature, and provide some practical advice from my own and others’ experience. I see this as an ongoing ‘Hindrances Manual’, with which interested people can start and then perhaps add to it in future. Each generation needs to find ways to deal with its own particular constellation of Hindrances, and maybe new ones as well (the next generation will have to deal with the Hindrances from technology). Thus it may be most useful to read the first two chapters introducing the theme and supportive conditions, and then go on to the hindrance which is most pressing for you at present.

Most books on mindfulness have information about the Hindrances, some very little and some quite extensive. Venerable Soma Thera has translated the Discourse on Mindfulness together with the Commentary, which contains explanations of the Hindrances. Venerable Nyanaponika Thera prepared a collection of relevant passages from the Pali Canon on the Hindrances called ‘The Five Mental Hindrances’. Bhikkhu Analayo (2012) has published a collection of his articles which include detailed analysis of the Hindrances as presented in the Canon. And most recently Joseph Goldstein has published a comprehensive book on mindfulness, with a thorough presentation of the Hindrances.

In order to present the Hindrances in a comprehensive way, I have followed the scheme suggested in the Attendings with Mindfulness of knowing the hindrance, knowing its cause, knowing its cessation and knowing what prevents it arising in future. Since the last topic is similar for each hindrance in terms of its being transcended at different stages of awakening, I have presented it in a concluding chapter, ‘Beyond the Hindrances’. I have added a meditation in each chapter on a hindrance, so that this investigation of them is more than just an intellectual exercise.

Most key terms are followed by their Pali form, as some translations may differ. For those interested in reading the original passages, references are given by text, chapter and page, or entire discourse (sutta), according to the Pali Text Society’s Pali editions. All Pali translations are my own unless otherwise noted.

The publication of this book is the product of many people’s efforts. I wish to express my appreciation to the diligent transcribers of these talks: Brock Brown, June Fukushima, Piriya Nowak, Liam Perdue, Eric Bedard, Grant Smith and Theresa Aspol. My intrepid editor, Jayasiri, has patiently kept up the editing through numerous re-writes. Ajahn Munindo supported and assisted in many ways. Anumodana for the sponsoring of the typesetting and layout by Nat, George and Yui Thanchaipat, in memory of her sister, Patoom Noyer. Many thanks to Venerable Nyanatusita for permission to use quotations from the The Path of Purification published by the Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy, Sri Lanka, and to Ajahn Chandapalo and Ajahn Karuniko for reading through the manuscript. And once again, Anumodana to the Kataññutta Group of Malaysia, Singapore and Australia for their continuing generosity in printing.

Ajahn Thiradhammo Chithurst Forest Monastery, West Sussex, UK.