Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery is the first monastery in the United States to be established by followers of Ajahn Chah, a respected Buddhist Master of the ancient Thai forest tradition of Theravada Buddhism.

In 1995, as Ven. Master Hsüan Hua, abbot of the City of 10,000 Buddhas, located in Ukiah, California, approached his death, he instructed his disciples to offer to Ajahn Sumedho, Ajahn Chah’s senior Western disciple, 120 acres of forest fifteen miles north of the City of 10,000 Buddhas, in Redwood Valley. Subsequent to this an adjacent parcel of land with some buildings was purchased to make up the 250 acres of land that now comprise Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery.

Abhayagiri is a centre of teaching and practice for people in monastic or lay life. Its heart is a community of monks (bhikkhus), nuns (siladhara), novices (sāmaṇeras), and postulants (anagarikas) pursuing a life of meditative reflection. Frequently monastics from the other branches of this global community come and stay for shorter or longer periods of time.

The Sangha lives according to the Vinaya, a code of discipline established by the Buddha. In accordance with this discipline, the monastics are alms mendicants, living lives of celibacy and frugality. Above all, this training is a means of living reflectively and a guide to keeping one’s needs to a minimum: a set of robes, an alms bowl, one meal a day, medicine when ill, and a sheltered place for meditation and rest.

Ajahn Pasanno is a highly respected and well-known Dhamma teacher. Ordained in 1973, he spent 23 years as a monk in Thailand, with the latter 15 years as abbot of the International Forest Monastery (Wat Pah Nanachat). He joined Ajahn Amaro at Abhayagiri Monastery at New Year of 1997.

Ajahn Amaro began his training in the forest monasteries of northeast Thailand with Ajahn Chah in 1978. He continued his training under Ajahn Sumedho, first at Chithurst Monastery in West Sussex, England, and later at Amaravati Buddhist Monastery, where he lived for 10 years. In June of 1996, Ajahn Amaro moved to California to establish Abhayagiri.

Between January 1997 and July 2010 Ajahn Amaro and Ajahn Pasanno guided Abhayagiri Monastery as co-abbots. In the summer of 2010 Ajahn Amaro returned to Amaravati, on the invitation of Ajahn Sumedho, to take up the position of abbot there.