# Chapter 1

AJAHN VIRADHAMMO
TISARANA  MONASTERY  • PERTH  • ONTARIOForeword u

M
y friendship with Ajahn Sucitto goes back almost 50 years. As young
 bhikkhus at the Hampstead Vihara in London and during the early 
years of Chithurst Monastery, we lived and learned together. Over the years, 
our friendship has remained close, though we have often found ourselves
living on opposite sides of the globe.
There are so many things that I love and admire about Ajahn Sucitto. His 
sense of humour and the banter we exchange over emails keep us close 
and connected at a personal level. His calligraphy, his skill with words, as 
well as his extensive authorship on various facets of the Dhamma-Vinaya 
leave me in admiration of his creativity and knowledge. The substantial 
effort he put into editing and publishing the collected works of Luang 
Por Sumedho speak volumes of his devotion to our teacher. Not to forget

the hundreds of trees he has planted at Chithurst which exemplify his deep love 
for nature and our environment.
Ajahn Sucitto remains deeply committed to the path of liberation, and this is 
so generously expressed by his availability to offer profound Dhamma teachings 
year upon year to many, many people throughout the world. His ability to listen 
deeply to the suffering of others is another mark of his compassion.
What I find especially edifying in Ajahn Sucitto’s style of teaching is his emphasis 
on an embodied spiritual practice, grounded in the ordinary experiences of being 
in the world. Rather than portraying meditation as an increasingly refined and 
rarefied process of disassociating from life’s realities, he grounds us in the body 
and centres us in the heart.

The book that you’re holding in your hands gives you a chance to sample a few 
nuggets of his Dhamma-presentations. It’s a collection of extracts from some of 
the talks, books and articles that he has produced in over 40 years of teaching, 
presented to coincide with his 75th birthday. He’d be happy if it supports
your welfare.
Meanwhile, I am sure you will all join me in wishing our beloved friend and 
teacher, Ajahn Sucitto, a contented day. I wish him the long-lasting benefit of 
serving the Dhamma with such a steady focus.
May all your hopes and longings come true.
May all your wishes be fulfilled.
May all misfortunes be avoided.
May all illness be dispelled.
May you be happy and live long.

Preface;
AJAHN SUCITTO • 2024
CITTAVIVEKA  • PETERSFIELD  • WEST SUSSEX

TO GET YOU ON TRACTO GET YOU ON TRAC KK ... ...
I
t may be that you don’t read prefaces – if so, go ahead and dip in. But if you’re
 interested, this introduction explains the wrap that binds the ensuing
passages together.
In Buddhist culture, one celebrates one’s birthday by making offerings and 
sharing the good kamma of such offering with one’s parents or departed relatives. 
So, as I was coming up to my 75th birthday, I was moved to consider what would 
be a suitable offering.
All I have to offer are my explanations of Buddhist teaching and practice; 
something I’ve been doing for a number of years now. But I rather like those 
collections of sayings and brief quotes that one can read in a few minutes and yet 
leave a point for recollection through the day. So I thought I would like to present 
such a collection.

This conclusion was supported by the fact that others had already selected extracts 
from books and articles and been sending them out. So I asked a small group of 
Dhamma-friends to select 75 of these; they came back with more, so that I could 
make the final selection. As I put the collection into shape, I also dug through 
some unpublished material to mould the collection into a coherent unity. In 
many cases where quotes overlapped I’ve spliced them to avoid repetition; in 
other cases, I’ve cropped in order to preserve pithy brevity. It’s also the case that, 
as the quotes are extracted from fuller presentations, they’ve lost the contextual 
exposition that they arose out of; so in some cases, I’ve added a sentence or phrase 
to fill in what the missing text would have provided. I’d recommend that you go 
slowly, take one and sit with it for a while.
The flow of the passages follows the classic sequential development called sīla 
(ethics), samādhi (mind training), and pañña (discernment).

In the culture of early Buddhism (approximately 5th BCE), ethics is the 
cultivation of moral order, both in terms of what one refrains from doing 
(violation, deceit and so on) and what one has a duty to do. Such duties 
would include those to family, to sages and recluses – or, for a ruler, wise and 
benevolent governance. This innate ethical sense, personally mediated with 
conscience and concern, keeps the world in harmony. This theme is underpinned 
by teachings on kamma (broadly speaking action and the results of action). 
One trains to make every act of body, speech and inclination ethically sound. 
Whatever the world makes of one’s actions, the internal results of this are
called ‘goodness’ or ‘value’ (puñña) – one gains clarity and brightness of being.
Mind-training proceeds from and supports this. Wise and benevolent behaviour 
depends not on an external law, but on the steady attention of the mind and the 
clearing of biases, ill-will, and recklessness from the heart. This ‘inner work’ is 
often called ‘meditation’ but is a training that is broader and deeper than that of

repeatedly focusing on an object. It ranges from the act of checking and reviewing 
mental and emotional momentum (appamāda- heedfulness), through careful or 
deep attention (yoniso manasikāra) into the causes and effects of one’s thoughts 
and aims, through ‘reflection’ (anussati) – a steady consideration of themes such as 
virtue, death and wise guides. Many people nowadays are aware of another crucial 
factor: mindfulness (sati), the act of sustaining dispassionate receptivity towards 
an area of experience. This leads onto samādhi, a deep and pleasant settledness of 
the heart. Mindfulness also focuses and steadies our common everyday awareness 
into the insightful discernment (pañña) of the nature of reality. 
Details of this training rotate around the intelligences that are called consciousness 
(viññāṇā), mind (manas) and heart, or heart-mind (citta). The Western use of such 
terms often varies, but the Buddha distinguished between a sixfold intelligence 
that brings sense-data into one’s presence – viññāṇā – and that sensitive and 
responsive presence itself – citta. Manas was held to be one of the six senses,

an organ (like the eye or ear) that sends data into the citta. These data amount to 
perceptions (saññā) – impressions of phenomena, and, because such impressions 
trigger feeling, they stir the heart. 
The overall aim of Buddhist practice is to steady the citta, so that it is aware of itself, 
and to liberate it from corrupt intentions and even sub-conscious ignorance. The 
final result, deathlessness or nibbāna, is a sublime peacefulness that is not of the 
sensory domain, and so can’t be described by the mind. However along that line 
of development, growth in personal stability and heightened discernment are both 
discernible and of immediate benefit. This discernment, rather than samādhi itself, 
forms the consummate tool for liberation.
As it deepens into mystical realization, discernment reveals citta itself to not 
be a thing or a self, but something akin to a light-show – it can be brightened, 
steadied, or turned off. In more accessible terms, any degree of resolute training

brings around a clearing of the ignorance that is the basis of dissatisfaction and 
stress (dukkha).
Another feature of this clearing is that the heart’s empathetic nature comes to 
the fore and strengthens. The teachings present this as giving rise to benevolence 
or non-aversion ( metta), compassion ( kāruna), appreciative joy ( mudita) and 
equanimity or dispassionate sympathy ( upekkha). These naturally link all three 
limbs of the threefold development and act as the motivating energies of our lives 
in this world.
What follows refers to, but does not attempt to cover, aspects of this Path. It 
is offered in goodwill because others have found these passages present some 
useful markers of that Path. It only remains for me to express my gratitude to 
Cittasubha, Douglas Jones, Margaret Jones, Anagārikā Jotakā, and Cathy Loeb 
for their careful attention. And to Nicholas Halliday for his work in terms of 
typesetting and design.





T
he Buddha’s teaching is based on the human capacity to refrain from what is 
harmful and to cultivate the good: on Original Purity rather than Original
Sinfulness. It’s only through reference to that fundamental goodness (which we 
get drawn away from through ignorance) that one can cultivate the good and 
clean out the bad.
We can’t clear out negative psychological or emotional habits through feeling 
negative about ourselves; that doesn’t provide the will or capacity to dispel bad 
mental habits. A more positive influence is required.
For example, one should consider that spite or pride is ‘unworthy of me’ rather than 
being honest appraisal of ‘how I really am.’ Otherwise, you don’t dispel negativity 
from the mind; when it comes up, you either obsess with it, punish yourself for it, 
deny it, or just distract. These reactions increase the weight and grip of negativity.

People become physically ill with moods like 
doubt, depression, worry or guilt, because 
the body’s energy is affected by mind 
states.  Their negativity saturates the body; 
then the aspiration that should carry us
along goes flat.
But the opposite is also true: the more we 
access and stay with good heart, the more 
it lifts us up. So before getting involved 
in notions of the goal, the first step is to 
recognize and trust in our own good heart 
as the vehicle.
NO.1

NO.2

T
he Buddha taught us to begin with
generosity and morality. Generosity is
about sharing – and not just in material terms. 
It’s an attitude to life; it’s a response to the 
interrelatedness that is the basis of all life. Most 
importantly, you share Dhamma by advice, and 
by example. Aiming one’s concern and goodwill 
for the welfare of others as much as for oneself 
helps to shift the ‘self-view’ to one that generates a 
shared blessing. The giver feels joy and the receiver 
feels the effects of kindness: everyone gains.

NO.3
M
orality – to not abuse or deceive others –
 leads to self-respect and the trust of
people around you. You are enriched by this 
mutuality; you realize the beauty of the heart. It’s 
then, when you see how lost and distracted people 
get in the sense realm and how unrestrained, for 
example, they get around sexuality, that you 
see the hazard of sense-based perspectives. This 
is not about puritanical handcuffs; rather it’s 
more: ‘I’m bigger than this. My heart doesn’t need 
this.’ Then we take responsibility over how we 
engage with the senses.

NO.3

P
hysically we’re very limited, but in terms of conscientiousness, caring and skill, our capacities are far 
greater than those of a tree or an animal. What we can give 
back are wisdom, love, and virtue. Bearing these in mind, how 
we participate in the world can be summed up in terms of 
generosity and sharing – dāna; morality, virtue, and integrity – 
sīla; and renunciation, the moderation of desire – nekkhamma. 
You can feel your life becoming richer because of dāna,
clearer because of sīla, and lighter because of that renunciation.
All these affect the world around us.
NO.4

When we share, we are blessed.
Our moral conduct, sīla, is the sensitivity to cause and effect that keeps goodness 
alive and practical.
Renunciation is a matter of reducing what we want to valid needs. This 
comes from the recognition that the planet itself needs to be respected rather
than exploited.
With these we care for the welfare of beings. This is the human contribution; 
everything material has to come from the Earth – whether it’s wood, metal, 
oil, or food. We can only produce the immaterial. But this is how the human
fits into the universal.

R
enunciation is not just a monastic practice, it’s everybody’s practice. It draws
   you out of the grip of the materialist energies that control much of society. 
So determine what you can say ‘enough’ to.
Wise renunciation goes against the current of gain – that very powerful assumption 
that happiness comes through having or storing up something, even a spiritual 
something. This assumption, which promises a way out of dissatisfaction, actually 
supports the nagging insecurity of assuming that we are fundamentally lacking, 
inadequate or needing to be propped up. As long as this assumption holds the 
mind, we can never realize the independent balance that is Dhamma.
This training is for your welfare; if you really want freedom from the suffering 
that the mind creates, you have to be prepared to challenge the assumption of 
gain and loss. Otherwise, you’ll be chasing its mirages and projections forever, 
and losing touch with the way to freedom.

NO.4 NO.5

NO.6

T
o see and respect the good in ourselves 
and to be keen to live that out – this
is conscience (hiri); then to see and respect 
the good in others, and to be keen to live 
in accordance with that – this is concern 
(ottappa). Conscience and concern are
called ‘the guardians of the world’ – 
and as long as we listen to their advice, 
our personal world is aligned to the 
integrity and empathy that support both 
foundational values in our society and 
personal awakening.

F
aster and more is not ‘better’, it’s just faster and more. This ‘business model’  
with its notion of constant material progress is productive of stress and 
psychological illness. These forces haunt the psycho-physical field we call ‘the 
world’. In the conditioning the worldly field encourages, we get obsessed with 
modes of measurement that are abstract and compress the heart. We get educated 
to listen to the media, but we don’t get educated to listen to the body. T o the 
body, ‘more’ means pressure. ‘Slower’ means allowing ourselves to linger and 
appreciate, and thereby be directed to what’s really important: being alive.

NO.7

NO.8

O
nce you’ve established values, you can recollect them, and linger on them 
until you feel the tonal qualities of non-violence, integrity, honesty, 
generosity and so on. These tones carry the energy of the value, and as you linger 
on them, you can discern a bodily effect: you feel cleaner, lighter and firmer. Worry,
anger, passion and despair, on the other hand, have negative bodily effects. 
In simple instances like these you learn a useful truth: heart and body share 
the same energy, and the purity of the energy of bright intentions clears and 
strengthens them both. This consolidated effect is called ‘goodness’, ‘inner worth’, 
or ‘value’ ( puñña). Puñña steadies and supports you, not only when it comes to 
meditation, but also with resilience in the face of crisis. So, the advice is to recollect 
bright intentions that you’ve sustained in the course of each day; linger on the
goodness and let the puñña sustain you. Shifts can then happen – if you let them.

I
n the Theravada tradition, there are ten transcendent virtues ( pāramī):
 generosity, morality, renunciation, wisdom/discernment, persistence, patience, truthfulness, resolution, kindness and equanimity. All these ask us to 
bring forth skill in response to what we experience; it’s a response which has
liberation as its aim.
It’s good to remember that liberation is not some ‘out there’ state; it is just the Path 
and the Fruit of letting go of any degree of greed, aversion and delusion – and of 
the basis on which they arise. Through the practice of pāramī, we cultivate action 
that places qualities, rather than self-image, as the guides on the Path. It’s pretty 
fundamental: without that view, and without sustaining that aim and resolve, 
you don’t have a reliable foundation from which to meet life.

NO.9

NO.10

F
rom time to time, we feel inclinations and attitudes that fall below what we 
feel good about. However, if you give attention to how and where faith arises, 
then that faith grows and causes qualities that inspire you to arise. This then 
causes disharmonious and unwholesome factors to wane and wear out.
So faith – encouraged, born in mind, steadied, and referred to in oneself and 
others – acts as a medium for the dispelling of doubt, agitation and restlessness. 
We feel confident. We support and encourage each other by our practice. This is 
how, faith, when properly attended to, causes other skilful factors to arise and is 
a root cause for development in practice.

R
esolve isn’t a small matter: if you’re looking for deep changes, 
  you have to do that with the understanding that this will most likely 
mean working at it and overcoming some resistance. And it will require 
the faith that you can at least try. So you start with the values and strengths 
that you have, firm them up, cultivate their growth and review what works. 
In this way, wise resolve supports strengthening according to feedback,
interest and capacity. It’s not blind doggedness.
It does however mean that you put aside the alternatives and stay with your 
central aim. The end result is a stronger and more skilful mind, but it means 
getting over the first hurdle: the idea that lasting personal development can
occur quickly with little effort.

Without using this wise resolve, you don’t give 
due time and effort to facilitate change in yourself. And you get the sneaky feeling that if you’d 
only done that, or bought that one, it would have 
been better. So resolve comes late on the list of 
pāramī, because to make a wise resolution re -
quires a mind that has sampled, practised and 
received the benefits of generosity, virtue and 
the rest. Then you know what’s useful to com -
mit to, because you know what these qualities 
feel like, and what their results are.
NO.11

P
atience has the gut-knowledge that recognizes that a problem or a pain 
is not something to run away from, get flustered by or be self-pitying 
about. It arises with the wisdom that knows we have to bear with things, and
undertake steps towards resolving suffering.
Our first effort is to draw a line between pain and suffering, take a step back and 
know ‘That’s unpleasant. So?’
It’s true that more negotiations and inquiries may be needed to resolve the problem; 
it may be that there’s a medicine that will ease the pain. But the first thing to do is 
to not react – to not rage, despair, or mentally proliferate. That’s patience.
Then there’s the possibility to recollect that we don’t have to take physical 
or emotional pain in and adopt it as final, real and solid. After that initial
recollection, we have the encouragement to investigate, and to draw out the
hook that snags our hearts on the rough stuff of life.
NO.12



W
e exist due to relationship; we all needed 
several people to even get born, let
alone to survive infancy and learn about 
being human. We model ourselves on other 
people – from whom we learn language and 
behaviour. A life without good friends is 
narrow and bleak, and families, friendships 
and communities thrive or splinter dependent 
on how skilful the relationships are.
Our lives as individuals are blessed by good 
people: we can’t see our own blind spots, so 
it takes wise and compassionate companions

to point these out in a way that is supportive rather than judgemental. For this 
reason, the Buddha greatly valued spiritual friendship – kalyāṇamitta.
Given the variable nature of social relationships, the most reliable thing to 
belong to is a field of value. T o belong to a group no matter what it’s doing, or to 
follow a leader because they make promises, is unwise: we enter a relationship of 
infantile dependence or of being dumbed down. Kalyāṇamitta is therefore not 
just a matter of friendship, but of a shared commitment to values that don’t harm 
or exploit others. It grows through cultivating relationships that steadily bring 
integrity, compassion and inquiry into a living focus. It means that rather than 
compete, compare and focus on each other’s personal idiosyncrasies, we attune 
to the bright kamma in ourselves and others, and develop through acting and 
interacting in its light.
NO.13

NO.14

T
he Buddha said there are two important supports for your awakening. One 
is your own careful attention, the other is the voice of another. Without
these two, it doesn’t happen. The ‘voice of another’ means another human being. 
Not just their words, but the resonance that reaches in from somewhere that isn’t 
you. This is why we establish kalāyaṇamitta, spiritual friendship – which the 
Buddha said is the whole of the holy life. We may think we learn from books, but 
we actually learn from other humans.
Through these, the other two necessary supports become available: hearing true 
Dhamma, and practice in accordance with Dhamma.

T
he direct practice of kalyāṇamitta begins with finding someone who 
models stability, empathy and clarity. A person who does more than
say some well-meaning things, but has the capacity to listen deeply without 
getting fazed or reactive. If you resonate with such a person, other qualities 
flow on: you meet, take in and feel the gist of what the speaker is saying. 
There is a non-attached engagement. Sometimes this is all that’s needed: to be 
able to speak, be heard and give deep attention to what occurred as one spoke.
A kalyāṇamitta may or may not act as a teacher, but in any case has the respect 
to not barge in with lectures and ‘ what you need to do is …’ This is because a true 
kalyāṇamitta understands that the heart-mind ( citta) can only learn from its 
own deep attention, and that the purpose of wise companionship is to help us to 
listen to ourselves with dispassion. Kalyāṇamitta is thus about encouraging the
Dhamma that’s ‘knowable in oneself’ (paccataṃ) and not about giving lectures.

NO.15

NO.16

E
thics in this training is not really 
 separate from meditation. It’s seamless. 
You can’t have ethics in Buddhism without 
meditation because otherwise you just 
get righteous and legalistic. Similarly you 
can’t have balanced meditation without 
ethics: you don’t have reference points that 
unite the internal domain of heart with 
the mind – that which is involved with the 
external domain. The precepts support 
that wholeness. Together, meditation and
ethics form a holistic paradigm.

T
o establish mindfulness and full awareness in daily life relies on filtering 
the input of stuff coming at us from all directions. The sheer deluge can
overwhelm us. So, because we build up psychological habits and programs based 
on contact, we need to be responsible about what we give attention to.
Part of cultivation therefore is about turning away from input and actions that 
pull the mind into craving, aversion or distraction. Hence the function of deep 
attention is to be discriminative. Rather than have the mind absorb into whatever 
is being pumped out by the media, we cultivate sense-restraint so that the mind 
doesn’t compulsively go out into the sense-fields without a filter. As in cases like 
the following: you’re walking down the street, or browsing the internet – do you 
need to gaze into the shop windows and advertisements?

Does that hand you over to the 
consumer demon? Do you need 
to immediately switch on your 
phone as soon as you get up in the 
morning – get busy, get out there 
before you fully know where you 
are? With wise reflection, you can 
recognize a habitual program, a 
saṅkhāra, and give attention to 
one or two long in-breaths and 
out-breaths as a counter-balance
to its impetus.
NO.17

NO.18

H
ow do we work on harmony? Often, we live in a state of disharmony – 
 with our bodies, with other people, and, as is painfully evident, with the 
rest of planetary life. As this discord runs through their lives, people become 
overwhelmed with anxiety, depression and other afflictive emotions. As
without, so within.
In the domain of our own embodied presence we realize that harmony doesn’t 
come around through the rule of law, but through undoing afflictive emotional 
reactions and psychological reflexes – such as frustration, controlling, craving 
and anxiety. It’s this undoing that brings harmony: rather than impose an 
ideal, we learn to find peace through undoing any imbalance in terms of our
own body and mind.

R
ecollecting Dhamma themes
   supports the mind and heart. 
Recollection entails bringing up 
a concept (such as the Buddha, 
or, one’s values) and dwelling on 
it steadily and repeatedly until 
it touches the heart. Then a felt 
sense is established that can steady, 
rein in or gladden our moods
and impulses.

This process goes deeper than merely thinking: people can think about anything 
without necessarily reflecting on how the heart has been affected. And we can 
forget to think deeply about what would serve us best – like attuning to integrity. 
So, when you have the five precepts, you can make a daily practice of checking 
in with the harmlessness, honesty, reliability and clarity that they signify, and 
what heart-tones they give rise to. You may have wavered from these, but with 
recollection, you repeatedly bring them to mind, gain their meaning and settle 
into that. From there you can review your kamma, that is, your actions and 
attitudes towards people, other creatures, and material resources: ‘ Am I living 
with an attitude of respect towards the world I inhabit?’ ‘Can I bring forth bright 
kamma – or at least turn away from dark kamma?’
NO.19

M
ortality is a heart-opening recollection. This is because the perception of
 mortality causes some of the sticky stuff the mind contracts around to 
lose its grip. Where’s the pressure to get, consume (or even be) something when 
everything you get, you lose? What is really worth giving time and attention to? 
If you are to die this very night, why hold grudges? Such recollection supports a 
clear perspective: it’s best to centre attention in your values and your inner worth.
The recollection of mortality also reminds us that our energy, mental agility 
and health are finite and dwindling. We must use such resources in a way 
that will enhance or free our lives, or we will waste the time in fantasies and 
frustrations. It’s a dying of the will to keep investing in the world of owning
and becoming something.
We die to the present moment. And when we die to the present we are born to the 
timeless; the heart is attuned to the good, the clear and the present.
NO.20





T
he future is just the unfolding of the present, and it’s unfolding 
in line with the current mood, intention or attitude. Knowing this,
one makes the future skilful by acting skilfully in the present.
So the first responsible and accessible action on this Path is to pause on an 
emotional response and ask yourself whether this response is reliable and 
is aimed in a wholesome direction. Even this brief breaking of the reactive 
link that engages fresh intention with an old habit, if done repeatedly,
can dissolve that link and cause that mental habit to cease.
NO.21

Y
ou’re not going to be free from anxiety by getting things right. Because 
then then comes the next thing – and you’ve got to get that right too.
Something’s always going to be new, and sometimes you’re going to get it 
wrong. So you never get confident through getting it right; confidence comes 
through establishing your roots – within, at your centre. You’re prepared to 
get it wrong. ‘OK, learn. Doesn’t matter, try again.’ Then your roots will grow 
and your balance will extend – because that’s the nature of things.  In this way,
the qualities of goodwill, aspiration, enthusiasm and joyfulness start to spread.
NO.22





B
ecome aware of the bounce strategy – we bounce to get away from
 unpleasant feeling. This very bouncing is what saṃsāra is. Any moment you 
feel that edge, that reactivity, step back, pause – and you’re already dismantling 
saṃsāra. The result is a spaciousness within which you can contemplate 
mental feeling. You find that you don’t have to retort, you don’t have to rush 
to the deadline, and you don’t have to binge. Then different responses can 
arise – such as patience, forgiveness and tolerance. In ways like this, you 
can get out of the gridlock of ‘ I’m stuck in this habit; I am this ’, and make
meaningful choices in your life.
NO.23

T
he Path is referred to as a Path of purity. 
That is, it’s not about adding things to
one’s self-image, or about gaining something 
that is not already here. It is about losing, not 
winning; about losing the conceit and the 
greed and the doubt and the delusions that 
prevent one from seeing things as they really 
are and living in accordance with the Truth. 
The Buddha said his teaching was for those 
with little dust in the eyes; what is needed, 
then, is a cleansing, not more makeup.
NO.24



W
e inherit a certain amount of bad resultant kamma from negligence 
and not knowing. We have probably blundered through life not being
that clear, and so bashed into things and got bruised and knocked around. 
Then, on becoming a little more conscious in the present, we begin to 
experience the dents and the afflictions of the heart. This is what we inherit.
So what can we use to push the dents out of the heart? What will repair
its wounds?
In Buddhism, the emphasis is to create good kamma in the present moment; 
to do good. That engenders the strength to repair the damage,  the wounds, 
or the afflictions from the past. That encouragement requires an act of

faith: faith that the state we are in now may be afflicted and negative but 
we can still bring around goodness; and that can increasingly clear and
restore the heart.
Of the images that the Buddha used, one of the most attractive and memorable 
is of a trickle of water running down a hill; how that trickle drops down the 
gully – where other streams flow into it. So, just as a stream will merge with 
other streams and grow, good qualities attract others, and the good stream 
grows until nothing is going to stop it. Eventually it reaches the sea, a great heart
beyond personal definition.
NO.25

W
hat really counts is intention. Moods, feelings, health and success 
come and go – but intention is something you can have some say over.
Intention, the immediate kamma of the mind, can generate the inner skills 
that take you through the rolling waves of life. And you can feel it. Hence what 
to look for is not the feeling that arises from sense-contact, but that which 
accompanies intention. This, along with the brightness and steadiness of skilful 
intention, encourages you to keep steering with clear awareness, and keep 
putting aside blurred assumptions or negative views. Your potential for good
heart increases accordingly.
NO.26





W
hen you are in an emotionally rocky state, the most skilful response may 
simply be to receive what you are feeling at the present moment with some
clarity and sympathy; to sit quietly and allow things to blow through. Whatever 
the state, the initial response has to be to stay present and cultivate spaciousness. 
The way that cause and effect work is that even five minutes of not acting on or 
suppressing the present mind-state results in a lessening of pressure. Then we 
begin to recognize a natural sanity, a seed of awakening that’s there when the 
doing stops. It’s not far off. But we do need to get in touch and encourage it.
NO.27

W
e need food for the heart, something that imparts inner well-being. If we 
don’t get that in Dhamma practice, then we look for it elsewhere: read
something, eat something, or go for a walk to relax. But that does depend on 
outward conditions.
The heart-food of cultivation comes through clearing energies that leave 
agitated or negative residues. We learn to soften our impulsiveness, to be more 
patient and receptive, and to cultivate goodwill and gratitude to brighten the 
heart. We clear the inner body to feel refreshed, and we mindfully widen our 
attention to include the entirety of body, mind and heart. As the energies 
in body, mind and heart combine, they keep us balanced and well-fed.
This unification of heart is marked by the happiness born of unplugging
one’s compulsions and inner turmoil and is the key to meditative concentration (samādhi).
NO.28





P
utting aside the topics and the energies associated with owning, planning 
and regretting is an essential part of meditation practice. It ’s not that 
such topics are morally wrong, but if they bring an agitated, hasty energy 
with them, or if they stimulate fault-finding and anxiety, heart and mind
aren’t going to settle.
If you find a topic can ’t be put aside, you should investigate more deeply the 
effect it has on you, and consider how to breathe calm energy into that state. Your 
identification with, or resistance to, the topic, can cease. Then the heart settles. 
This is how wise concentration comes around – through filtering and handling 
mental content, not through focusing on a point in the body.
NO.29

M
indfulness is the ability to be 
‘with’ but not ‘in’. Mindful 
attention stays still and whatever happens 
runs through it. That non-engaged 
space supports clarity, contentment and 
gladness. Experience all this in terms of 
energies, rather than thoughts. This allows 
things to shift and find balance. Keep 
your thinking system clean and light, with 
the ability just to name what’s happening
and listen to how it affects you.
NO.30





E
stablishing mindfulness is the action of pausing on the program and 
momentum of the mind and referring to it, not as ‘me’ and ‘mine’ and
locked in, but with dispassion. This skill shifts the kammic drive out of its gear 
and gives us a choice.
In meditation, mindfulness is generally set up with reference to the body – that 
is, by attuning to the overall sense of the body in terms of its form and energies. 
By not getting stuck in or reacting to sensations, the mind can focus on bodily 
energy as it settles; then one can adjust the mental energy of intention so that it is 
in sync with the more settled energy of the body. The body can relax or brighten 
its energy a lot more readily than the mind, and in this way, through mindfulness, 
the body helps to free the mind from its scurry or slump. This is the foundation 
for the mental ‘action’ (kamma) of meditation.
NO.31

I
n practising mindfulness of body, you’re aware of the body in a living 
connection with the ground beneath and the space around it: your sense of 
environment in the here and now. The obvious reason for this is that whether 
one is in a room or in a forest, this connection keeps you stable, unhurried 
and open. In meditation, this foundation gives you perspective on your inner,
intimate environment.  
Furthermore, after a period of meditation, we will arise within this full living 
environment, so it’s good to have established an orientation that is more truly 
connected to your heart than a point on a map – or the ongoing array of sights 
and sounds – can ever be. 
NO.32





M
indfulness of body, or mindfulness ‘immersed in the body’, takes aware-
 ness ut of the conceptual and abstract and into something that’s vitally 
sentient. The Buddha likened such immersion within the body to a stake to which 
one could tether the visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile and conceptual 
senses so that they no longer pull one’s heart-mind (citta) hither and thither. It has 
a non-conceptual intelligence that stands apart from the buzz and waffle of the 
thinking mind and the upheavals of the heart, and it’s not personally driven or 
engineered. It’s the sense of the whole body, settled in its space.
Whereas the personal and the emotional and the conceptual can get taken over by 
embedded anxiety or trauma, the whole body in its space accesses safety, a sense of 
belonging and non-compulsiveness.  It is an essential foundation within which to 
dwell and work.
NO.33

C
heck the language that you use in meditation and how it affects your 
attention. Do you watch the mind? Do you watch the breath? Is that 
quasi-visual focus zooming in to get high detail? Kind of tight, isn’t it? What 
about listening? It’s a different experience, isn’t it? Your awareness opens 
and is more receptive.
Here’s another angle: handling the flow of breath, handling the mind. That’s very 
different, isn’t it? It brings acute sensitivity because unlike the other focuses, what 
you touch also touches you. Frame your mindfulness as ‘wrapping awareness 
around your body.’  This encourages a focus on meeting, really getting what’s 
happening in a way that is sympathetic and responsive.
NO.34



T
he relationship of emotion and attitude to body is the key to understanding 
the relevance of mindfulness based in the body as a key to liberation.
This practice attunes you to embodied/somatic sensitivity. By means of this, 
the body senses that it’s in danger, or that it can relax. Similarly, when you’re 
re-united with an old friend, or receive a loved visitor when you’re sick, or 
win at a performance, or get wrongly accused – nothing touches your body, 
but there’s a somatic flush. It’s the same with skilful states of heart and mind.
At an energetic level, body and heart-mind are interdependent.

This dependency instructs the meditator; any wrong attitude such as 
pressurizing or trying to hold on to some fortunate state – however rational 
that may seem – will have a counterproductive effect on the bodily energy. In 
stressing the heart-mind, one stresses the body. However, in calming the body, 
one calms the heart-mind. Everything works together. Such learning is the
basis for ending suffering or stress, and the realization of nibbāna.
NO.35

I
f we only know our body from a visual impression of it, we measure it in 
 accordance with ideas of what it is and should be, and make it into a person. 
Then we only have a very partial experience of our own body – that it is a passive 
vehicle for that mind. At best, it’s a pedigree donkey – so feed it, bathe it, dress 
it and make it work. Meanwhile, the mind gets absorbed in its preoccupations, 
becomes obsessed and unbalanced.
Cultivating an embodied way of knowing curtails all this. It gives you a direct 
sense of what’s happening for you. This brings the mind out of its notions and 
into a relational living reality – and that’s a good place to start if you’re interested 
in truth and awakening.
NO.36



C
an you allow ten seconds for a pause in the midst 
of what arises? When you take note of instances
of people losing their temper or following impulses 
that lead to harm, even death, it’s obviously important.   
And it seems easy in theory, but the difficulty, and the 
learning, is that you have to face your planned drive, as 
well as meet the reflexes and reactions that arise when 
you do that: ‘ What’s the point of pausing?’ ‘Not now.’ 
‘I have to get going.’ Pretty convincing, aren’t they?

Meeting and investigating this urge to get on ( bhava taṇhā) is what meditation 
training is about.  Take mindfulness of breathing: the practice is to follow the 
exhalation into the pause phase where the abdominal muscles come to rest, as if 
there is no next inhalation. Then let the inhalation gather by itself, fulfil itself, and 
come to rest in its own time with the upper chest and throat lightly expanded. The 
pause phase is the crucial bit: it’s when the will lets go. That brings a relaxation at 
the end of the out-breath, and a bright opening at the end of the inhalation. As 
you tune into that pause, and trust letting go of the next moment, or of what to 
do, or even who you are – there is a growing sense of release.
NO.37

W
ith mindful walking, we’re undoing mental perspectives wherein we 
lose balanced presence – such as the notion of getting somewhere, either
in terms of physical space or a mental state. This spacious unhurried state is 
enjoyable. If you tune in to how the whole body walks, you pick up a flowing and 
rhythmic process; it’s something you can sustain, it’s not tiring. Mindful walking 
has an ease and vitality that calms mind and heart; and because that is enjoyable, 
sustaining an interest gets easier.
The point is to let the body do the walking in a way that feels light and poised. 
This is not based on sensations, but on balance and synchronicity. If you sustain 
awareness of these, the mind is guided towards its own balance, free from the 
pressure of time and destinations. Thoughts may arise, but they’re less tightly 
bound, and they lose their grip on your heart.
NO.38 NO.38

By bringing bodily and mental 
energies around the experience of 
a flowing balance, it is possible to 
touch into a place that is open and 
alive but not associated with sensecontact, thought or emotion.
This place of presence is worth 
hiking a long way for. It is the 
place where the tides of pressure 
and aimless vacuity, of overwhelm 
and stagnation, don’t go.

I
n meditation, we’re learning from
 Nature rather than from society, 
so you have to train in terms of 
wilderness awareness: to learn from 
your bodily intelligence. Otherwise, 
if you’re trying to get your businessmodel, ‘get it done’ mind to take you 
to samādhi, it’s like riding an elephant 
as if you’re driving a taxi: you implant 
stress onto a natural process, and that 
constricts your awareness.

This is why mindfulness of breathing is the great exercise for cultivating 
the right kind of attitude or mental approach. Whenever we try to hold the 
breathing it goes wrong. When you just sit back and look at it like you’re a dead 
fish or it’s a dead fish, it goes wrong. When you want it to obey you, it goes 
wrong. But, when you get a handle on it, it starts to teach you things. It starts 
to teach you about staying in touch rather than controlling it or zoning out.
This helps to change one’s attitudes – because with a rhythm and a flow there 
we’re not aiming to get somewhere. Stay with the flow. The abstract structures 
of time and place – of ‘Monday morning, nine o’clock’ and ‘getting on to the 
next’ – have no organic flow. But if you stay with the flow, the discordant mental 
attitudes that come through these mechanical life-structures start to flake off.
NO.39

NO.40

H
eart and mind take on the energies of what you give attention to, for good
 or for bad. Bury yourself in media and you absorb that buzzy and
stimulated energy – to the point where the mind can barely function without 
stimulation. On the other hand, if you attend to steady and bright bodily energy, 
your awareness becomes steady and bright. This is a crucial point: meditation 
allows the citta to feel good without force or stimulation. This hinges on referring 
to the interconnected system of body, thought and heart.
We want to direct our lives with the full set, so that we’re not just acting on 
whims and reactions, and our thoughts and ideas are supported by good and 
steady heart. That heart is where kamma arises, so you want to make sure it’s in 
good shape and is on board with what you’re proposing. Get it grounded in the 
body before you let the tide of thought rush in.

A
lot of attention in meditation goes into how to quieten the thinking mind.
   B u t  t h i n ki n g  i s  n o t  t h e  r o o t  o f  t h e  p r o b l e m  –  i t ’ s  j u s t  t h e  f r o t h  o n  t h e
surface. It gets stuck because of underlying emotional or somatic problems – 
the places that haven’t been able to speak. We don’t sense they’re there, but all 
of a sudden, we find ourselves reacting as unspoken stuff starts to arise. So it’s 
important that the unspoken be encouraged to speak, in order to be released.
When you experience emotion in your body, what is the felt sense? T une into that 
felt sense of the body; not to the interpretation, but to the emotional effect – the 
tightness or sinking or fluttering – in the body. Can you be with that in a spacious 
and kindly way? Can you breathe through the energies of passion or dread, and 
extend compassionate attention?  Allow whatever is felt to move through. This is 
the key that unlocks the door.

NO.41

NO.42

U
nless we cultivate letting go, unless we can stop accepting habitual patterns 
of the heart as unbiased truth and ‘my self’, the issues of the past will be the
basis for further kamma.
The difficulty is that letting go requires the presence of an awareness that can 
receive, contemplate and release these impressions. It depends on grounded 
goodwill, clarity and spaciousness – qualities that can steady the heart in 
something safe and comfortable.
In life-scenarios of chronic abuse, or performance-driven stress, the heart-pattern 
of ‘safe and comfortable’ may be rare. So when we go to the Buddha, Dhamma 
and Sangha for Refuge, this isn’t just a catch-phrase; it’s a practice of sensing 
the felt meaning of the Triple Gem, attuning one’s heart to it, and opening 
one’s embodied presence to the quality of Refuge. A true Refuge is that which 
remains when your world goes upside down; this is why people with great faith
can survive disasters and tyrannies.

S
pace is a fundamental need, and embodied space is always available: 
without it you’d be crushed and unable to feel. But our hearts and minds 
disconnect from it, and in the consequent absence of spaciousness we get 
overwhelmed, tense, and unreceptive – and resort to opinions, routines and 
plans to feel secure. None of these reflex strategies enable us to step back 
from our mind-states, release their pressure and consider a suitable course
of action. This is because there’s no space within which to operate.
What is needed then is to be aware of space as a sense of absence of pressure 
and compulsion. This is connected space; it’s not the dissociated space of not

feeling anything. It’s not a numb nothing; this spaciousness is alive with freedom 
and potential for movement.
So, take the time to check out the space around your body – above, behind, in front 
– any resistance there? Behind you, it’s the same: safe, warm, and free. Resonate this 
theme time and time again until the body senses it. 
Focusing on the embodied experience of space and openness, take that spaciousness deeply into the heart. A spacious heart feels it has some ground; there’s trust
and an allowance to make mistakes and work things out as you go along. Accordingly, the mind feels there’s time to reflect deeply and not jump to conclusions.
NO.43

T
he felt meaning, the perception, of being in Refuge, may be evoked by 
attending to what is not urgent or threatening right now – even if that is just
the space of an open sky. Even a visual sign such as this can evoke the tone of ‘being 
safe in this’, a tone that allows your body to breathe freely. However, the tone of 
Refuge can more skilfully occur through reflections on bright actions (kamma), 
that of others or one’s own. The sense of Refuge arrives by being receptive to a 
supportive pattern, whether that is a memory or a presence. It can then provide 
the container wherein distressing memories can arise and pass, and thus assist in 
de-conditioning the mind.
NO.44





T
he point of deep learning is to go to the 
edge of what we know and where we
control. There the nobility of our life, the 
nobility of our purpose, the aspiration of 
life says, ‘Keep going past the area where you 
can’t control it anymore – and trust.’ And that 
for me is the heart of devotion. That is not 
a surrender of responsibility but a profound 
recognition of what the responsibility of 
our being actually is – to live in accordance 
with Truth, to honour Truth and trust the 
truth of our life as it opens.
NO.45

C
hanting, devotion, and contemplation of the Refuges of BuddhaDhamma-Sangha are not just ceremonial acts. We’re practising puja –
that is, bearing in mind the awakened intelligence, the purity, the clarity 
and the vastness of the Buddha’s awareness, we offer ourselves. We use our 
bodies with the fullness of breathing to open the chest and throat, and we
bow – making a full body offering.
When we are chanting, be conscious of whether or not there are feelings of not 
getting it right or of the voice not being very good.  Relax all that; just open up. 
It’s not an opera.
NO.46

As you chant, you have to breathe into the belly, chest and throat. You begin 
to reclaim the embodied sense. Your voice can shift the linguistic domain 
from the written to the spoken and the heard. Feel your words as trembles in 
the throat, as movements in the heart, as embodied experiences that flow and 
pass with no punctuation and free from grammar.
In this way, we offer our aspiration, our commitment, our endeavour, and 
so the puja becomes the resonance of the sacred, the good intent, the blessed,
the welcome. And as you sit with these resonances, you reclaim the sacred.

T
he ‘measureless (appamāna) states’ of good- 
will, compassion, glad appreciation and
equanimity are inflexions of awakened love.
It takes time and inquiry to find out what that 
word ‘love’ really means.  Love doesn’t begin 
with a pleasant feeling – it is the wise response 
to sentiency. It looks out for and establishes 
safe boundaries within which a being can be 
nourished and grow; boundaries marked by 
respect. From there empathy and goodwill can 
flow naturally.

This reference to empathetic awareness is essential for true growth, let alone 
awakening.  But most of us have to work through the idea that love is about 
having fun, being sentimental or getting flushed and heated with passion – along 
with their accompanying downturns.
T o me, real love is not about deserving it, or being perfect, or even being in 
agreement with another. It’s about respect for another as another. Then the 
heart can stop grabbing, or being seized by, images of self and others, or by 
what it wants and rejects, and it opens into a fluent warmth. Love is a natural
energy  – if we linger, recognize and authentically connect.
NO.47

T
he qualities of great heart are based on natural empathy, ‘ anukampaṃ’, 
the quality that aroused the Buddha to teach. With this, you see the good
in others and that encourages you. You have compassion when you see other 
people’s vulnerability. You have equanimity: the ability to bear with, stay with 
other people and yourself through the ups and downs.  These qualities apply ‘to 
others as to myself’; great heart has a holistic awareness.
Such a heart also has conscience and concern regarding your integrity and 
vulnerability. You recognize that you are fallible, but this encourages you to be 
careful rather than critical. You are compassionate towards, and less demanding of, 
yourself. And with equanimity you realize that sometimes you and others just have 
to go through difficult stuff, and it’s important to not lose faith, to not lose heart.
NO.48





C
ompassion is the quality that willingly draws close to suffering and 
embraces it. It’s a quality that in its purest form isn’t even asking that
things get better. In this way, it is boundless and free of harshness, indifference, 
and sorrow. Compassion is one of the ways the heart extends its precious resource 
of goodwill.  And the experience of the great heart is world-saving – even when 
it’s the experience of the great heart of others.  One’s perspective on suffering 
changes, and the sense of impotence shifts. For myself, even hearing of such acts 
of compassion lifts the spirit with another of those world-savers, muditā – the 
rejoicing in the goodness of human beings.
NO.49

W
e can recognize the harm that 
comes from neglecting what is good
in ourselves and others, or even through 
taking others for granted. Then the intent 
to appreciate goodness can arise. It’s 
important to not neglect this: the stream of 
good deeds that you did do, the kind words 
that just seemed natural, but were the right 
thing at the right time, the acts of courtesy 
or generosity that other people manifest. 
It’s important not to overlook muditā/ 
appreciation – because we often do.
NO.50





E
quanimity holds the empathetic 
space and allows things to unfold. 
It doesn’t ask for results, but attunes to 
how things are right now. It is where the 
issue of self comes to an end, because we 
understand kamma. With this, we realize 
that ultimately no-one did anything: 
it’s just that patterns and programs 
get established based on reckless 
actions, and on what each person has
had done to them.
NO.51

A
s a Dhamma practice, we sustain and deepen the intent of kindness,
   irrespective of the various impressions of self and other that arise in 
awareness. That’s enough. We establish clear awareness, and sustain kindness in 
the moment where impressions occur and where responses arise. It’s not about 
conjuring up a lot of emotional warmth, but a process of staying in touch, 
of not blaming oneself or others, and of not going into the past to rehash old 
issues. The patient ‘staying at’ that point of hurt or ill-will then begins to carry 
the awareness across to compassion (karunā) and transpersonal wisdom.
Compassion sweeps over judgements of others or ourselves. When entering 
into this sphere of compassion, it is not a matter of doing anything, blaming 
or feeling sad about it, or wishing it were different. Instead, it is about entering 
that place where one touches the pain, but the mind can’t do anything, has no 
remedies, ideas or philosophies. It then comes out of the position of ‘me’. The 
small, localized state of mind opens out of the default self-and-other sense 
and into the great heart. 
NO.52





M
ost of us are trying to believe that we are, or are going to become, better
  th an  w e  b e li e v e  w e  ar e  n o w  –  al th o ug h  w h a t  w e  think  w e  ar e  is  j us t  a
point of view. We can get depressed believing that we’re not good enough, without 
really questioning: how good do you have to be to be at peace with yourself? Isn’t 
every talent, act of service, or development a plus on top of that?
Being at peace with the way you are right now does require an ethical sense, 
and clarity with regard to the heart-mind, its energies and moods. So being at 
peace doesn’t mean there’s no room for development, but that the interest in 
development can come from the wholesome wish for truth and self-acceptance 
rather than from an ungratifiable need to be something.
NO.53

O
nly connect’: it’s a useful memo for meeting the stickier pieces of mind or
 body that arise in meditation. That is, rather than think about the problem 
and why you have it, and what you should do to get rid of it, the first piece 
of advice is to connect to how it feels. This careful process has three aspects: 
Recognize, Accept and Refer.
First, recognize: instead of creating a long story about me and her and how things 
should be, turn your attention to the impact the event is having on you. You try 
to recognize the tone of the thought – say as ‘irritated’ or ‘prickly’ or ‘weighed 
down’. That simplifies matters and gets you out of your head and into your heart.
Then: accept the presence of a quality that you don’t like and shouldn’t have – 
but do have! That relaxes the grip on the issue as well as the self who is struggling
‘
NO.54

with it. This does leave you with some emotional turbulence – but you refer that 
to your body. As in: ‘ How is my body feeling with this?’ ‘Where is this in my body 
right now?’ or even: ‘Where is my body now?’
Lingering in that embodied connection, spread a patient and sympathetic 
awareness over the stress; feel the feeling directly as a feeling. Then ask, ‘ What 
is needed right here, in this embodied condition?’ Wait, and feel within the body’s 
sensitivity; the heart will do the rest. Its nature is to arrive at harmony – if we let it.

T
he acknowledgment that ‘there is suffering’ is not a matter of feeling 
wretched, but of learning to know and accept that this realm is one of
limitation; to wake up to how it is, and to respond to that.
This acknowledgement helps to catch the instinctive reactions of blaming 
ourselves, blaming our parents or blaming society. Instead, there is a focus 
on that recurring sense of ‘it’s not right’ – and the knowing of it as a mood. 
Not to deny it, but to know it as it is. Then there is realization, the insightful
knowing that in itself is not suffering.
This way of insight can help us in daily life situations such as when we 
feel bored or ill at ease: instead of trying to avoid these feelings by buying 
another fancy gadget, we can look into the heart and develop a gentle and
nourishing response to any sense of inadequacy.

NO.55

NO.56

L
earn to release stress when it arises: acknowledge the behaviour patterns
   that generate it, and the personality that gets formed around it. The main 
behaviour pattern we’ve adopted is to get onto the next thing, to move forward 
in time – the business model. This reduces the stability of presence, but we don’t 
notice that because we’re in our head. So come out of the trance, come into the 
body. Widen and linger in the body, that’s your orientation. There you find 
presence – and the Path to eliminate stress.

B
ear in mind the territory you’re crossing, however tenacious and confusing
 it may seem, is there to teach you something .... You’ll learn something
about spaciousness or compassion or patience or resilience. Remember everything is an opportunity to learn the bits that you didn’t learn, and that 
you needed to learn: stuck habits are like judo teachers who push you 
into corners until you learn the skills that are necessary to flip them over. 
Something you hadn’t touched into has to be revealed – and it’s going to come
straight from the heart.

NO.57

F
or most people, for most of the time, mental awareness is held in place by 
energies (saṇkhāra) that add a bias – we expect, we want, we’re disappointed. 
Because of this, the heart-mind can lock into anxiety, overreach, and holding on. 
And, although the states change, the sense of being held by some mind-state or 
another becomes the norm of ‘how I am.’
So I may feel spaced-out, under pressure, tight or scrambled. The heart is therefore 
restricted by these energies and that restricted heart becomes the norm, ‘me, my 
self ’.  Accordingly the mind’s responses get based on my attitudes. And with that 
restriction, that ‘self-centre’, no matter how much we order our world, we remain 
prone to dis-ease and stress.
NO.58

So it’s not a matter of finding a better stronger self or eradicating the one we seem 
to be, but of getting in touch with an awareness that relates openly to experience 
rather than operating from a personal bias. And that’s what mindfulness does: it 
gives awareness a place, a settled and conscientious place in relationship to what 
arises internally or externally.
Even more curative – if we sustain mindfulness in relationship to the selfconscious tangle that we take ourselves to be, an unbiased awareness can start 
to unravel that. And with that comes the happiness that is the flavour of release.



M
editation is about finding a centre, and from there sweeping awareness
 through the wilds of the mind, until there is a sense of space, relief, and 
subtle uplift. We can’t clear the whole wilderness in one go. But a little release is 
a precious thing; and every time we come out of being the problem to seeing and 
being with the problem, every time we come out of being entranced by a memory 
or fighting with it to know – ‘oh, it feels like this, and it’s there’ – there’s a shift to 
that free centre. Every time we widen with kindness and awareness to see that the 
self-position I’m coming from, or the self I’m trying to get rid of or defend, are 
objects over there and not a subject, something stops and there’s a touch of release. 
That’s the process. And it’s marked by happiness.
NO.59

A
s you hold to the values of a skilful life, that purifying process reveals
  dispositions and tendencies that are latent and unresolved. These latent 
tendencies (anusaya) include basic inclinations such as sense-desire, irritation, 
opinionatedness and conceit – which may not be revealed as such if our ways 
of operating avoid a thorough investigation of our inclinations. This is why 
we resolve not to follow the casual slide into worldly values. Instead, we make 
commitments to acts of value and integrity.
In this respect, Buddhist practice isn’t about peak moments. It’s about training. 
It’s about strengthening and broadening commitment to standards and virtues, 
even when the peak experiences aren’t rolling in and your unacknowledged 
tendencies are rising up.
NO.60

In fact, the ordinary situation of living with 
others is a great opportunity for developing 
pāramī. Through aware interaction, we get to 
see that our interpretations of what is normal 
or friendly, our attitudes around responsibility 
and independence, or our sensitive areas – differ 
from those of others. Really fathoming that and 
basing one’s responses in accord with that truth 
gives life a transcendent purpose: it’s about 
freeing the mind from narrow-mindedness, and 
projections about others and what they think of 
me – all aspects of ‘self-view’.



S
eeing yourself as separate from everything else is an illusion. Acting in that 
way brings pain, restriction, fear – dukkha. Listen to the world as it is and 
find the balance in your own mind. Find the place where there is no ignorance, 
no avoidance of the way it is. Abandon the desire that things be your way. For 
each one who does this, there will be harmony, serenity with the difficulties, and 
delight with what is wholesome. Such a balance will immediately benefit the 
world and provide the inspiration for others to cultivate the Way.
NO.61

V
iew is the instigator of kamma: as you believe, so do you act. View is a
magnet that attracts the energy of will and inclinations: develop a certain
attitude and you can be sure that your mind will assemble a reality out of that. 
But if we notice how the view ‘I am’ attracts energy ... and how energy creates a 
pattern ... and a mental pattern becomes a conviction ... and a conviction becomes 
a standpoint – that’s how the isolated self arises. So as long as there is the need for 
a standpoint, a need to be, and to prove, then that need will support a self-view.
Then if there is holding to that standpoint, conflict with others, grievance 
and resentment will follow in due course. But if energy can go another way, 
generating a pattern of groundedness, of empathy, of great heart, the view can 
shift. It clears with the insight that: ‘ All this is changing and insubstantial; there 
is no self in this, and no self can be established apart from this. ’ We therefore act
with integrity and don’t hang on. And there’s no stress, no weight in that.
NO.62





T
his Path is a way of living; it’s not 
a little time that you carve out of
a busy day. Nor is it a matter of going 
somewhere for a day or a year until you 
‘get it.’ That’s still the habit of grasping. 
The word ‘ sammā’ (generally translated 
as ‘right’ but also meaning ‘full’) that 
describes every factor of the Path implies 
living with truth and completeness. It 
carries the aspiration to see things as they 
actually are and respond fully.
NO.63

M
eet everything with three criteria:
1 • Fundamental primary sympathy. This sympathy, 
or empathy, is the artery for communication.
2 • A sense of groundedness – to stay with what’s felt.
3 • Spaciousness, have ‘all the time in the world’; 
linger, be timeless. It doesn’t matter how long
it takes.
These form your daily foundation.
NO.64





H
eart is naturally empathetic; and you can direct it to the incapable, the
 failing, the self-critical – wherever and in whoever they arise. Learn how to 
meet and relate to qualities before doing anything else. In fact, it may be all you 
have to do.
Just to abide in that awareness, not fixing, not blaming and not changing 
anything, may be exactly what’s needed – because then you’re not acting from 
a desperate, judgemental basis. Then you don’t have to perform that well to feel 
warm and balanced. You don’t have to look like a supermodel to feel comfortable 
in company. You don’t have to have things go your way to feel content. You 
don’t need to have one special person in order to feel loved. What is needed is to 
cultivate great heart. And this arises through accepting and responding to the 
unsatisfactory condition of personality.
Through this great heart we come to great freedom. It teaches us to rise above 
self; and yet it’s yours, not anybody else’s. This is your intimate Dhamma door.
NO.65

I
n meditation, the ongoing endeavour is to find balance: a dispassionate sense 
 of right response and right relationship with the phenomenal world – 
internalor external. This doesn’t mean trying to push it away, change it, hold it, 
find something within it or extract something from it.
Our effort in meditation doesn’t demand that the phenomenal world should 
express some profound truth. Right effort has no demands, no expectations, no 
judgements; it’s the firming up that allows allows you to contemplate everything 
as change. Then it becomes unnecessary to defend, judge or otherwise react to 
things. There’s an emotional cooling. We can live in harmony, in balance, in 
peace with it all.
NO.66





T
he nature of life’s energies is to change and fade, and reflection on death 
gives us a chance to recognize this and have a change of heart. We begin to
consider that one of the most important abilities in our lives is the ability to let 
go of things, to let them drop like the leaves in autumn, rather than always be 
searching for a new spring, a new arising.
Autumn is a truly important season, the time of fruits and new seeds, the time 
when the results of birth can be tasted, harvested – or not. In the autumn, in the 
changing, we put aside the unskilful kamma, the grasping, the anger, the greed 
and the restlessness – all the hot, rising energies that go hand in hand with me/
mine attitudes – not by rejecting them, but with forgiveness. This is a wonderful 
preparation for conscious dying.
NO.67

A
s our meditation develops, it becomes ‘meditation without an object’ because
   it’s not focused on any particular thing. Instead, it’s attuned to the place 
where things arise. With that focus, there is the sensitivity to feel for balance, for 
harmony – or for any bias in attention.
For example, when we’re wanting something, hanging on or avoiding, if we’re 
attuned to the heart itself, then we can recognize those inclinations. And 
there’s something to be learned in all that arises; even from experiences that we 
think are pathetic or useless or blameworthy. We learn to be patient, firm and 
not get reactively involved with what arises. There’s something to be learned 
from our tendency to try to dismiss certain kinds of experiences – something 
we have been doing all our life. They arise in the heart – and who doesn’t
want to meet their own heart?
NO.68





I
n terms of the liberation of the heart, the focus is not on what appears or
 disappears, but on the change.  When a thought ends there’s a moment of
pause, a moment of space. When we don’t know something or we don’t have 
an opinion, there’s a moment of emptiness, of silence. At that moment we’re 
listening, we’re tending to the present experience, rather than creating something.
This enables us to allow perceptions and feelings to go through us. We watch our 
fears, doubts, discontent and sorrow arise. We become much more transparent, 
allowing feelings to pass through without holding on to them or pushing them 
away. This means opening the mind, sensitizing ourselves to the movement and 
change of things. Then other beings and the world around can move through us 
and teach us without taking over.
NO.69

T
he unenlightened practice is to smother one set of self-images with another: 
drive oneself hard to prove that one isn’t lazy; be austere to prove that
one isn’t greedy; be indulgent in order to be a more fun kind of person ... keep 
becoming somebody to suppress the doubts, guilts and anxieties that are an 
inevitable feature of self-centred life. The mental congestion gets pretty dense. 
That’s why the realization that ‘there is suffering’ is such an important one. It 
stops you taking your defective self personally, acknowledges that that image is 
the problem, and, instead of searching for a new image, causes you to investigate 
the hunger and insecurity that print one on your mind and heart.
NO.70





T
his desire to become something is 
the myth of progress. What’s progressed? Is there any less greed, jealousy, 
delusion? Otherwise we’ve just changed 
the toys. In terms of heart-mind ( citta), 
the energy that’s trying to progress and get 
more is what needs to cease. What’s more 
important is what’s been left behind – a 
turning away from hankering, wanting 
to become something or another; a 
progressive dispassion.
NO.71

T
he rarest experience for a human
being isn’t bliss; but feeling that they
and life are good enough ….
Daily life practice is therefore about meeting that black hole of ‘not enough,’ rather 
than attempting to fill it with activities 
and stuff. This is because although the 
gloomy inadequacy feels like a hole, a 
lack, it’s actually a block, a constriction. 
What is needed then isn’t filling it, but
releasing it. This is matter for a great heart.
NO.72





L
ife may not offer what you want, but what happens if instead of seeing
   i t  f r o m  a  ‘ m e ’  ( o r  a  ‘ w h y  m e ? ’ )  p e r s p e c t i v e ,  w e  u s e  i t  a s  a n  o p p o r t u n i t y
to develop wholesome qualities of mind. T o combat the indulgence, the 
obsessiveness, the self-centredness and impatience that drag us down. With this 
approach, we can then look at sickness, pain and separation from the loved as 
opportunities for learning. Through these experiences we can learn about the 
limitations of that self-focus. You could say it’s a hard lesson, but these gifts of
Dhamma don’t always come with nice wrappings around them.
NO.73

A
n understandable response to being apparently locked into a fragile and
    mortal existence might be fear and depression. But the awakening memo
is: it is risk, not security, that brings us together – individually and socially – in 
the richest way. It reminds us of where we really are, and asks heart and mind to 
bring forth their strength.
Then with skilled attention, guidance and persistence, the contraction and 
holding on can be relaxed; the tendency to fear can be rolled back, and a heart 
thus opened and revealed can rise up. With the shift to deep attention that this 
brings about, one can view the conditioned process as it is – and not as me, mine; 
not a fixed or personal reality.
That’s a vital change of view.
NO.74



C
an you begin the day 
with a dedication towards
bringing skilful qualities into 
being, commit to that and not 
ask for results?
Can you acknowledge at the end 
of a day that whatever state of 
being has occurred for you, it’s 
just that, and not a person, not 
a fixed thing? That the praise, 
the blame, the elation   and

dejection are perceptions, felt meanings, patterns and programs? Meet them, 
know them, then settle the mind. Like this, you relinquish. Can you mentally 
share whatever good has arisen, and release wherever dukkha has got stuck?
Like this, you relinquish.
If you develop a practice like that, do it more often: whatever comes into being in 
the morning ... in the afternoon ... in the evening – you relinquish it, you let it go. 
Even as you’re doing it, in every act, relinquish the actor.
Like this, we practise for no result. We practise in purity, with qualities of clarity, 
goodwill and what knowledge is necessary. And we keep the end result quite 
light. Rather than having an end result in mind, we practise properly and arrive 
where that takes us.
NO.75



Photograph Credits
AJAHN SUCITTO
FOREWORD, 1, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 17, 20, 21,  
22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 39, 40, 42, 43,  
45, 46, 48, 50, 51, 54, 59, 63, 65, 69, 72 & 73
NICHOLAS HALLIDAY
PREFACE, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, 13, 15, 18, 19, 25, 30, 32,  
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 44, 47, 49, 52, 56, 57, 58,  
62, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71 & 75
OTHER
 6 • M. SHEEHY-SKEFFINGTON
53, 55, 60, 61 & 74 • ANONYMOUS

DHAMMA TRACKS
75 REFLECTIONS  • A J A H N  S U C I T T O 
2025 © AMAR AVATI PUBLICATIONS
ISBN: 978-1-78432-073-7
THIS BOOK IS OFFERED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION .  PLEASE DO NOT SELL THIS BOOK
COVER LETTERING: AJAHN SUCITTO
COVER, BOOK DESIGN AND FORMATTING: NICHOLAS HALLIDAY .  HALLIDAYBOOKS.COM
ANY TR ANSLATION OF THIS TEXT MUST BE DERIVED FROM THE ORIGINAL ENGLISH.
FOR PERMISSION TO REPRINT, TR ANSLATE OR PUBLISH THIS CONTENT IN ANY FORMAT OR MEDIA
PLEASE CONTACT AMAR AVATI PUBLICATIONS AT PUBLICATIONS@AMAR AVATI.ORG
ALSO AVAILABLE AS A FREE DIGITAL PDF DOWNLOAD AT FSBOOKS.ORG
 
THIS WORK IS LICENSED UNDER THE CREATIVE COMMONS
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-NODERIVATIVES 4.0 INTERNATIONAL LICENSE
THIS EDITION PRINTED IN THE UK, 2025

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit: creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
YOU ARE FREE TO
• Copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format.
The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms. Under the following terms:
• ATTRIBUTION:  You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made.
You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
• NON-COMMERCIAL: You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
• NO DERIVATIVES:  If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you may not distribute the modified material.
• NO ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS: You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.
NOTICES
You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the public domain
or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for your intended use.
For example, other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may limit how you use the material.
