## 11 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Question: When you were talking about feeling someone else’s suffering but not suffering ourselves, it reminded me of a teaching about being ‘affected’ but not ‘infected’. But the word ‘infected’ frightens me because that is what happens to me. In wishing for this open, attentive, disentangled state, I’m afraid of becoming entangled of becoming infected. So then I get defensive, and when I’m afraid I go blank and dissociate. So could you help me with my deep fear of becoming infected?

Answer: The word ‘infected’ has an alienating tone to it. We all experience diseases, but we forget that in fact our bodies are occupied by all kinds of interesting flora and fauna. We call it ‘my’ body, but it has all these other beings in it. Our body is really a metropolis. The inner committee is not just a mental thing. Our bodies are actually a vast, multi-layered collaboration and need all kinds of glorious intestinal flora as well as other bacterial presences. Some people drink live yoghurt in order to keep their flora going, to keep the inner gardens flourishing. So when we talk about an infection, it just means that some part of the inner population is causing an effect that we don’t like, or is harmful or obstructive in a certain way. But it is a misperception to think that this is ‘my’ body, and that disease means there is some alien thing invading ‘my’ space. Certainly we should look after ourselves, we should try to keep our being as healthy and integrated as possible, but ultimately there is no ‘other’. It is all ‘us’.

So that is one little piece of the puzzle – certainly if your experience is that of fear and threat – the relative nature of ‘self’ and ‘other’ is up front.

Sometimes we may think that if we could just get to a place where we didn’t feel this fear problem or this grief issue that we have, we’d be happy. Often we’re trying to climb over a ‘this’ to get to some imagined ‘that’; we’re trying to climb over the present in order to reach some imagined future where there’s ‘me’ without ‘that thing’. I’ve had to work a lot with this in the past, particularly with fear. I came to realize that my mind would be thinking: ‘Somewhere off in the future there is an Amaro who doesn’t feel so much fear. And won’t that be nice?’ I’d think of fear as ‘my fear problem’ or ‘my anxiety problem’, and that would lead me to wonder: ‘What can I do to get rid of that, get rid of my infection, so that then there will be “me” without “it”? And won’t that be grand!’

This was what my mind was doing. And I realized I was casting the whole thing into ‘me’ and ‘my problem’, imagining that there was a real, separate, individual person and that there was this real thing which was genuinely owned by that person.

But that is a misrepresentation of the felt experience. Rather than a ‘me’ who owned this thing and needed to get rid of it or was burdened by it, what was being experienced was simply the arising of fear. Fear appears within awareness. That is what is happening. There is not a real concrete ‘me’ who is the owner and a real concrete ‘thing’ which is being owned. That is just a convenient fiction. It is just a way of phrasing things but we have become habituated to phrasing things in that way. However, when there is a direct looking at what we know and feel, we can simply say to ourselves: ‘This is a feeling of fear. It is not a permanent presence. It is not my possession or my permanent problem. It comes and goes. It is a cyclical experience – it arises, does its thing, it blossoms and then it fades, like our intestinal flora, like the bacteria on our hands.’

At this moment your thinking mind might be saying: ‘But my fear is permanent, let me tell you!’ But that is just a thought, a habitual impression that arises and ceases; a judgement, a diagnosis we have become accustomed to: ‘I know what’s going on here. I do have a fear problem. I’m honouring it.’ Which we might genuinely and sincerely be trying to do, trying to be ‘real’, but what we are actually doing, rather than being real, is reifying that experience. We are believing it to be a solid, permanent presence but when it is explored and reflected on we begin to recognize: ‘Oh, look at that. It’s not there all the time. That was just my presumption. That apparent continuity was deceptive.’ And when you make some close scrutiny of it you see: ‘It does arise and cease, like everything else.’

The genuine felt experience is: ‘This is a feeling of fear,’ and the felt experience right in that moment is the thing to listen to and receive. Know that fear reaction. Feel it. Where is it in the body? Let that be known. The more we are able to feel our emotions or our charged thoughts, the more helpful it is to know them as physical sensations. Where do you feel fear in the body? Is it in the throat? Is it in the belly? Is it between your shoulder blades?

We’re all different. We feel it in different ways. I’m a gut person myself, a solar plexus fear person, so I bring the attention to the solar plexus and the gut and think: ‘This is the fear feeling.’ I feel fear, I know it. When you do this, you can consciously relax with fear. You recognize that it is only an impermanent impression – it arises, it ceases. The thinking mind may say:

‘Oh yes? You’re just trying to weasel out of it. You’ve got a real fear problem and you have to take responsibility for it. You can’t get out of it like that.’ At least, that is the kind of thing my mind would say. That is the blaming, critical, self-creating habit wading in. But that too is impermanent and empty of self. The voice can grow even louder: ‘You can’t get out of it like that! This is just a mind game!’ But then you let the wisdom of your heart calmly say to it: ‘Thank you very much for sharing.’ You keep coming to the position of receiving the voice and knowing it, recognizing that it is making a valid point. Maybe what the voice is saying is true, but even if it is telling the truth it is still an impermanent condition that is arising and ceasing. That is what this thought is. That is what this feeling is. It can’t be anything more than that.

You are coming to a place of realism with that experience. You are not trying to wish the fear away. You are not trying to just stifle the habit. There is an honouring: ‘This has arisen, this is the habit, this is the conditioning. Here it is. This is the shape of it, it feels like this.’ You let it come into being. You know it. You know the physical tension and sensations that go with it; you know those qualities, you let it do its thing, and then you let it fade. And then something in the heart, that intuitive wisdom knows: ‘Look at it, it does actually arise and cease.’ Maybe another fear comes along immediately afterwards, but that too is impermanent. It cannot be a solid, permanent thing that is owned by a ‘me’. There is awareness. There is the flow of feeling. And it is like this. In that way you are learning to develop the refuge of wisdom, the refuge of Buddha; Buddha wisdom – being that knowing. You’re not suppressing the feeling, blanking out or trying to get rid of it.

As pointed out before, there are two subtle kinds of craving, self-centred desire. One is the desire to ‘become’ or the desire to identify, bhava-taṇhā. Its partner is the desire to ‘get rid of’, to blank out, to not feel, to not ‘be’, vibhava-taṇhā. What we set out to find is the Middle Way where ‘yes, there is this’ but ‘no, it’s not who and what I am’. It is here, it is felt, it does its thing and then it fades, and we are developing a different way of relating to this.

Question: You’ve explained that fear arises and passes away, but I know that for many of us it arises and it stays. It doesn’t seem to be something that comes and passes. Is that because we’re setting up a sort of standing wave of thought in our minds, so that we’re focused on it and we keep reintroducing it?

Answer: Yes, that was exactly how I used to experience it. My feeling was that I was always afraid. I felt anxious all the time. That was the story I told myself, and it seemed quite normal and realistic. It was only when I turned the magnification on the microscope up and looked really closely, that I began to see that I was saying to myself that I had a fear problem, that I was always anxious, because whenever I looked it seemed to be there. But then I asked myself:– Was that really the case? So first there was examination and exploration. Then I began to see how there was a habit of naming that experience: ‘This is my anxiety problem.’ It was so normal for me to feel anxious that I didn’t even realize I was feeling anxious. I’d already been a monk for about six or seven years before I realized that my default relationship to the world was: ‘If it exists, worry about it.’ That was the fundamental programme: ‘If it exists, there is cause for anxiety.’ It’s funny now, but it was not very amusing at the time! But once I had noticed this incessant anxiety, I found it astonishing. I noticed that I could worry about anything – even if it was hearing a PA playing a song I didn’t like, there was a feeling of: ‘That singer must be very unhappy because their song is not popular,’ and I’d be upset for them or worried that their song was going to fail. It was not my responsibility, I didn’t even like the music, but I was worrying about their song being a failure.

I began to notice that there was an apparently continual sense of anxiety based on every experience. It was the default. Then I began to think I had a ‘fear problem’ because the fear was so pervasive, it was like the force of gravity. Fear was so normal that I didn’t even notice it. Then for a few years I saw it, but I couldn’t do anything with it. It just seemed that:

‘It’s my problem, what do I do with it?’ And then there was the feeling of: ‘This is my problem and wouldn’t it be nice if I didn’t have it?’ Fortunately, I was living in the same monastery as Ajahn Sumedho. I had heard him give the same teachings many times. He would say over and over again: ‘It is not “me and my problem”, it is “the Buddha seeing the Dhamma”.’ And eventually I reflected: ‘I think I’ve heard him say this before...’ It was the Buddha-mind seeing the way things were, rather than ‘This is me and these are my problems.’

This is a paradigm shift that we need to make. In the introduction to The Island, a book on Nibbāna,2 Ajahn Sumedho says the same thing: ‘We need to make this paradigm shift from ‘me and my problems’ to ‘the Buddha seeing the Dhamma’, the wise mind seeing the way things are.’

So at some point I clicked and realized that maybe this applied to ‘my problem’. I began to look and recognize exactly what I was doing. I had been saying: ‘This is my fear problem,’ thinking there was a real ‘me’ who was the real owner of that real problem. I was thinking there was something real and it was mine. That was the paradigm that was being set up. So I listened to what Ajahn Sumedho was teaching and said to myself: ‘Let’s see if I can deconstruct the problem. Is it really true? Is it really a problem?’ I examined that mind-set closely; because I’d been meditating for a long time, I knew how to do that. Bringing that quality of close attention to the paradigm, I began to recognize that the ‘problem’ wasn’t there all the time. That was just my assumption; all the dots had seemed to join up, but that was just because of not looking closely.

This is like what the brain does with perceptions. Neuroscientists are realizing that a lot of what we think we experience is in fact merely the brain patching in an impression from memory and imagination. When you see two football players kicking the ball to one another, you think you see it going from one set of feet to the other, but you don’t. The visual cortex actually only registers a blur but because you’ve seen a still football before, your brain says: ‘I can see the ball going from that person’s feet to that other person.’ But that is not what is registering in the brain. The memory patches that image in and creates a facsimile, so that is what we think we see. And that is life – a lot of patchwork, guesswork and supposition, and memory and imagination, that are woven together. So there may be a feeling: ‘I’m always afraid’, or ‘That’s always there’, but that continuity is deceptive. When you bring up the quality of close scrutiny, you begin to see that the feeling of ‘my’ problem is just an impression that is arising and ceasing.

The felt experience is that: ‘Here is the feeling of fear; it feels like this in the body, it has these kinds of qualities.’ That fear is aimed at an object (fear of being caught in traffic, fear of someone not liking me, fear of being late for a meeting, whatever it might be) but the practice is to withdraw the attention from the object and bring it back to the experience itself: ‘This is the feeling of fear.’

For two or three years the experience of fear was the sole focus of my meditation. It took that length of time to really home in on it. But by looking at it with that kind of scrutiny and working with it in an active way, finally it was fully clear that fear was just a passing experience. It was a strong habit, but it was not who and what I was. What I used to do was this. At the morning sitting every day I would say to myself: ‘Whenever a feeling of fear or anxiety about anything whatsoever arises during the day, it is my intention to take my mind off the object, the thing that I’m afraid of, and bring it back to the feeling of fear itself, and to notice where that feeling is in the body.’ I said that intentionally over and over again at the beginning of every day; and I would try to stay with that intention. And over and over again I’d find the feeling was just tension in my solar plexus.

Ajahn Sumedho would talk about this kind of practice a lot. He would tell us to just let go of the feeling and then see if we could relax the body, let the solar plexus soften, and then go back to the thing we were afraid of and see what it was like. Nine times out of ten, or ninety-nine times out of a hundred, there was a moment of groping to try to remember: ‘Now… what was I worried about? Was it this? No, was it that?’ Without physical tension, fear has a problem taking hold. I’ve been told that one of the reasons why Valium is an effective tranquillizer is because it is a muscle relaxant rather than a psychoactive drug. It works because you can’t keep a good fret going if you’re physically relaxed; you’ve got to be tight to do that. That is why we say ‘uptight’. If you just tighten your gut now, immediately you’ll feel anxious, but then you relax and the world gets better. It’s weird. It seems almost magical.

This practice, for me, took a long period of application and focus, but it worked and I would suggest it is the same for everybody. You need to be desperate, but it does work. Challenge the presumption that ‘this’ is something ‘I have’ that I need to ‘get rid of’, and that ‘I’ am ‘this person’. Challenge those mind-sets, because if you don’t, you’re reifying the sense of an individual ‘me’; reifying that there is a real problem and that there is a ‘me’ who can be the permanent owner of it. Bring the quality of investigation to bear and use insight meditation to look at it. Then wisdom itself breaks up those presumptions and you see the reality of mind states. But you can’t just snap your fingers and make them go away in the space of one sitting. I was desperate enough to want to apply my mind in that way but it helped enormously. Now I can’t get as anxious as I used to – and I was quite a fretter.

Question: I find meditation calming and relaxing, but I fall asleep a lot. Do you have any suggestions?

Answer: This is one of the great ailments of the meditator, because often it’s only when things are exciting or frightening or irritating that we stay awake. And yet the mind’s fundamental

nature, when free of all obscurations, is both perfectly peaceful and perfectly awake. With meditation what we’re trying to do is uncover that fundamental quality.

To be both peaceful and alert simultaneously might seem anathema to us. If we’re alert it’s usually because we are excited, interested, frightened, annoyed. We think that the excitement, interest, fear or annoyance is what makes us alert, so if there’s nothing much going on and nothing to be excited about, frightened of or annoyed by, we doze off. That’s what we think of as relaxation. So it takes a bit of effort to learn to find the place that is totally peaceful but also very alert.

One thing that can help is this: when you meditate, don’t close your eyes. Keep your eyes open. Dullness in meditation is a sleep state and sleep works in waves. If you can stay awake during that first wave of going into a dull state, if you can ride that wave and not get swept away by it, it is much easier to stay awake. So keep your eyes open.

It’s also helpful to put a lot of attention into your posture, because the more upright the position of the spine, the more that helps the mind to be bright and alert. If you pay attention to the posture, that’s going to help too. In addition, if you know that your mind is prone to dullness and you are using mindfulness of breathing as a focus, it is good to lean towards the in-breath, because that is, literally, the inspiration – bringing in oxygen, brightening the mind. The out-breath is more relaxing – letting go, calming. If you’re getting sleepy you don’t need more calmness, therefore pay closer attention to the in-breath, lean towards it, brightening the mind and sharpening it. That could be helpful.

Question: I would be interested to hear you talk about anger and triggers for anger. I am a very calm person normally, but in some specific situations I find myself really struggling against anger. So I’d be curious as to any insights or thoughts you have about how to deal with that.

Answer: It is good to distinguish between being angry and being fierce, because they are not necessarily the same thing. When we are angry there is a definite quality of being lost and a harming intent. Anger is always going to bring a painful and negative result. But we can be fierce and speak in a firm, loud manner from a place of great kindness and with no harming intent, with benevolence in us. We don’t always have to be sweet and nice. Sometimes it is necessary to be fierce or act in a forceful way. If your kid is running out into the road, you shout, or you grab the t-shirt and you pull, because you care about the child. Or if your eight-year-old decided it was a great idea to take your four-year-old tree-climbing – loud and fierce words might well be suitable to convey that that should not be done without some safety measures.

Learning to understand anger is a different kettle of fish. We might look at anger and think: ‘I’ve got an anger problem. Wouldn’t it be nice if I didn’t get angry?’ But then we’re not actually meeting the experience when we’re feeling it. We’re trying to climb over it to get to a place where we’re not bothered by it or where it doesn’t happen. But like other intense or painful emotions such as fear, anger is an intense feeling that has a very distinct object. If we are able to see that there is a bit of space around both the emotion and the object, we don’t have to take action immediately. When a feeling arises, just bring the attention into your body and ask yourself:

‘What does this feel like? What is the experience of anger like?’ You’ll recognize that it is uncomfortable and then, on its own, the wise reflection arises: ‘Why would I want to dwell in this? Why would I want to do this to myself?’ If you can have the presence of mind to remember that, it will help.

If you want to develop this as a skill, it’s not very helpful to wait until something is driving you nuts. In the privacy of your own room you can use meditation to deliberately think of an incident where you were made angry, or focus on something that is currently happening which rouses that emotion within you. Bring the mind to a quality of calmness and then deliberately trigger that angry feeling, but withdrawing your attention from the story, the memory or the fantasy. Bring attention into the body. The cause of anger isn’t around, nobody else is there, it’s just you by yourself, so it’s a benign situation. But you are watching, feeling the patterns as they happen. Watch that angry state arise – where is it? What does it feel like? Learn to see it, feel it, know it.

It might come as a surprise but, at this point you often find that compassion arises: you recognize: ‘This is really painful. Why do I do this to myself?’ This isn’t just compassion for those on whom you’ve vented your anger, but compassion for yourself – why would you want to make yourself so miserable? Why would you want to harm yourself like this? Then you incline away from that habit not just because it’s something that ‘I shouldn’t do’ because it’s non-spiritual and bad, but more because: ‘Why would I want to stick my hand in a fire and burn it? That’s a painful, pointless and destructive thing to do.’ The letting go thus comes from a much more fundamental place.

Question: I wanted to ask you about feeling fierce versus feeling angry. It seems to me that if you’re feeling fierce there’s an aspect of benevolence, like the example you gave of rescuing a child. But sometimes, although you might be feeling fierce, the person who is receiving your fierceness may think that you’re just angry and out of line. It may be subject to interpretation in terms of who is receiving either your anger or your fierceness. How do you deal with that?

Answer: In the long run it depends on being truly unbiased in your intention. You could say to yourself: ‘I’m just doing this for their own good. I’m not really angry,’ and then let loose with a vicious roar. You’re labelling your behaviour as ‘being mindfully fierce’ or ‘being cruel to be kind’, but that could be in truth be giving yourself an excuse while what you’re really thinking is: ‘You need to be punished. I’m going to set you straight.’ In such instances the intention is hiding under the cloak of benevolence, but really it is  destructive.

My experience is that if you are genuinely coming from a place of kindness, even if you are forthright and fierce in that way, then although the other person may feel threatened or take it  badly on one level, something in them knows that you are coming from a place of caring. So it might be that if you criticize someone or you make some comment that they find painful, their immediate reaction may be: ‘Who are you to say that? What do you mean? That’s not right! Who do you think you are?’ And then they defend themselves because what they’ve heard is not what they want to hear. But after they’ve cooled down a bit or they’re away from the situation, or sometimes even right in the middle of it, they can have a shift of view wherein they acknowledge to themselves: ‘They were right, darn it.’

If you are on the receiving end of such criticism, often your immediate reaction is to defend yourself, to push it away because it’s not what you like. But if it really is coming from a place of kindness, of a genuine caring, there’s a part of you which knows, which recognizes benevolent intention even if it doesn’t want to, even if it shuts it out for weeks or months or decades.

To give you an example, back in the early eighties when we only had one monastery in England, one of the novices who was supposed to be wearing white robes showed up at the morning meeting one day sitting back among the laypeople and wearing lay clothes. Ajahn Sumedho asked why he wasn’t wearing his whites, and he blithely said: ‘Oh, I disrobed last night.’ Ajahn Sumedho really let him have it: ‘This is DESPICABLE!’ He did not approve of this because there is a certain procedure to be followed, a polite way of asking your teacher if you can disrobe, rather than just carrying it out by yourself. I was in the room at the time and there was quite a force that crossed the room.

I’d been quite friendly with this anagārika and, predictably after this event, he told me that he felt like a chicken with its head cut off. He felt hurt and defensive, and he disappeared, left the monastery within a couple of days. Later Ajahn Sumedho said that when he was giving him that delivery he was trying to control himself from breaking into laughter, because he wasn’t really taking it seriously himself, but something in him knew he had to let the anagārika know his behaviour was out of order.

Twelve years later a letter arrived at Chithurst Monastery. It was addressed to ‘the abbot’. It said, ‘Dear Abbot. I used to be an anagārika at Chithurst Monastery twelve years ago. I want to know if you can tell me where Ajahn Sumedho lives, because I want to express my gratitude to him. I left in a pretty bad way and I nursed some pretty negative feelings towards him. I have been going around justifying to myself how bad and wrong and stupid he was. And after all this time it has begun to dawn on me that actually he was right. I behaved in a really stupid way, and I want to express my regret for the way I acted, and express my gratitude for all the wonderful teachings he gave when I was in the monastery.’ So it can take a while. But I thought that was really wonderful, because the novice was a sincere and committed practitioner and had stayed close to the Dhamma community in the States. He’d stayed with that feeling, and slowly something had percolated to the surface. There may have still been a sense of pride, but he had the wisdom and the humility to climb over his pride and make that gesture.

So the main thing, I feel, is being clear about your own intention, and not just listening to the convincing voices of the committee that wants to justify your righteous anger. Ask yourself: ‘What’s really going on here?’

Question: Lately I seem to have become the sounding-board for some of my friends’ problems. When they’re stuck in something they’ll tell me at length about their suffering. These are people who don’t meditate. I once heard a Dhamma teacher say something like, ‘If you don’t practise there’s just no hope.’ That’s a paraphrase, but basically he was saying that there’s no hope of really fundamentally changing the mind without paying attention to it. So do you have any suggestions about how to speak to people and comfort them, besides saying: ‘You should really start meditating’ – which I have said many times?

Answer: I’d say there’s no fixed formula for the right way to handle this. There isn’t really a single ‘right’ thing to do, apart from bringing mindfulness. Sometimes what’s needed is just to be an ear, simply to listen if someone needs to off-load, and that’s the most helpful thing to do – let them go full speed and off-load, and be a good listener. That was Kondañña’s teaching, as described earlier. At other times just being there and listening to them doesn’t help. Instead it’s more useful to chime in and say something like: ‘Well, if you want to know what I think about this, what I’m hearing is x-y-z’; stepping in and giving a bit of direction. And sometimes the right thing to do is to say: ‘I do care about you but I just don’t have time for this right now. This isn’t the time or the place. I would love to be able to help you but there’s nothing I can do right now.’ Sometimes that’s the most appropriate thing, if you really don’t have time, or you’re upset about something yourself, or you’re just not in the mood and so not able to listen properly. Then it can be helpful to say: ‘Look, I’m terribly sorry, but I’m preoccupied by something else. I would love to be here for you, but right now this is the limitation I have. Perhaps we could talk about it another time soon? Can you suggest when?’ True helping can take shape in all sorts of different ways, and it’s most beneficial for us to not have a fixed manner of going about helping, or having a certain agenda, but instead to try to attune to the needs of the situation.

In terms of encouraging people to meditate, setting an example is more useful than telling people that they need to meditate. If someone says to you: ‘How come you’re so calm?’ or: ‘You don’t get upset as easily as you used to,’ or: ‘I wish I could be like you; how do you do it?’ these are openings for talking about meditation. But people have to want to change. Sometimes when somebody is unloading, and you say: ‘Well, how about this…?’ and they reply: ‘That’s no good because of...’ And then you say: ‘What about…?’ and they answer: ‘That doesn’t work either.’ Essentially, whatever you say is wrong, it’s not good enough or it’s out of place. I’ve even had the experience where a conversation goes on so long that you end up suggesting something the other person advocated half an hour before and they say: ‘No, that’s not going to work either.’ You take the words out of their own mouth and repeat them back, and they still disagree with you. Then you realize they just need to have someone to disagree with. When you recognize that kind of thing is happening, you can say something like: ‘I’m not sure how useful this conversation is.’ Or you can carry on, knowing that you are keeping them happy by feeding their need to be a contrarian.

I’m compulsively polite – usually – and incline to trying to please everyone. But I’ve learned to take that little step back sometimes and ask: ‘Where is this going?’ or: ‘How helpful is this? What can I really offer here?’ Mostly, what we can offer above all is our empathy and letting our words come from that place. Sometimes the most helpful thing to say is: ‘I don’t know what to say here,’ because that’s the truth and the person can recognize that perhaps there isn’t an answer; or: ‘Why should I be able to tell anyone else what to do?’ That in itself can be comforting and helpful. It is a relief.

I come from a quintessentially English family. When my mother was 83 years old she came down with jaundice. Apparently, at that age this means there’s some kind of obstruction to the bile duct, probably pancreatic cancer. So my sister took her to the doctor. Because my mother was blind she couldn’t actually see her own skin colour. Her friends, being English, of course wouldn’t say anything like: ‘Pat, you’re a very weird colour!’ So they said to my sister: ‘Your mother’s gone a very strange shade of yellow. We think you should go and see her as soon as possible.’ My sister popped round and found that my mother was indeed canary yellow. So she said: ‘Mum, I think you need to go to see your GP.’ Immediately my mother, being very intuitive, knew what was going on, so she had a very panicky ride to the doctor, saying: ‘This is the end, isn’t it? This is the end! Let’s go to this restaurant – it’s my favourite. It’ll be the last time I’ll ever...’ My sister tried to be comforting: ‘We’re just on the way to the doctor. You were fine this morning. You’re probably going to make it to tomorrow. We can go to the restaurant tomorrow.’

Then they got to the doctor, and of course the doctor, also being English, couldn’t say to her: ‘Mrs. Horner, you’ve probably got pancreatic cancer.’ She said something like: ‘Mrs. Horner, this might be serious.’ That was the code. That was as much as was ever said. But the doctor knew, and my sister knew, and of course my mother knew. When I found out I said: ‘You mean you didn’t actually sit down with her and say: “Yes, you’ve got pancreatic cancer. It’s inoperable, untreatable, and you’ll probably live no more than six months.”?’ My sister said: ‘Well I talked about it with the doctor, but we both recognized that it wouldn’t help.’ I thought, that’s ridiculous! and I got on my soapbox and said, ‘We’ve got to have a proper conversation! We need to talk things through!’ But then I went over to England and went to see my mother, and sat there with her and my sister, I realized they were right. Everyone knew what was going on, but it was too invasive, too cruel, to say it, because that was her conditioning.

My visits to my family customarily lasted about four days, but that spring I just happened to spend six weeks with my mother, though we never mentioned why I happened to be around. There was this thing that we were not mentioning, but that was fine. It was a kind of dance that we did. I kept finding myself thinking: ‘If only there was some way that I could help her.’ She’d have waves of anxiety and would obviously be a bit unsettled, and I’d think: ‘After all these years she has never had any interest in Buddhism and meditation, and it would be really good if I could just introduce a few themes, a little something here and there.’ But the more I thought that, the more I realized there was no entry point. And it was also arrogance on my part, just like Ram Dass with his stepmother, to think: ‘I’ve got the answer for her,’ when actually what was needed was to go and walk in the woods and enjoy the spring. It wasn’t possible to say: ‘This will be the last spring – her last bluebells,’ even though everyone knew it. We were all there together walking through the bluebells and thinking: ‘This will be mum’s last spring.’ But we couldn’t say that.

It was a strange dance, but I realized that it was far better to go with the flow of what was comfortable and what she felt at home with, and surrender my own agenda to that. It was best to simply be around, to pay attention, to help out, to be supportive. If she didn’t want to talk about what was happening, fine. It was her prerogative. She knew what she wanted. In the five months between when she was diagnosed and when she died, she actually got herself ready, in her own unspoken way. You couldn’t say that was what she was doing, but in truth she was preparing herself. Reality had descended so suddenly, out of the blue; she was having an ordinary day and then she became aware she had a date with death. That was a big shock to the system. It really shook her. It took those five months to take it in and digest it in her own way. As her death approached, while I had been away for a few weeks, my sister said they had had some really great times. She’d take both my sisters out for meals. She loosened up. She told a lot of her war stories, some of which we had never heard before. Her life in the army was not quite so pristine as we had formerly been led to believe. So my sisters were privy to a few stories that I never heard about her. She was ending her time in her own way.

Listening to her needs rather than acting from my sense of what she needed was a really good lesson. She didn’t need to hear about Buddhism or meditation; she just needed to have presence and attention and friendliness, and the quality of our ease with what was happening, and our readiness to be with the ending of her life. That was the gift, that was what was most helpful. So pay attention to where the other person is and attune to that as much as you can, and be ready to lay aside your own anxieties or concerns or agendas. Then, mysteriously, this helps in the very best way.

Question: I tend to suffer a lot from compassion fatigue. I try to help with so many things – my mother has been a major commitment too – but there’s only so much you can do and, after a time, something in me just wants to switch off. I get exhausted. And the rest of my family can get pretty tired of it as well! Earlier on you talked about a kind of spiritual by-passing – where you distance yourself in a bad way by saying: ‘It’s all empty and impermanent, don’t bother me with this stuff’ – I can recognize that but more often for me it’s an experience of going numb. I’m not even using ‘wisdom’ as an excuse, I simply crawl into a mental hole. Any advice?

Answer: Ironically, it can be because we care so much that we make it into a problem. As long as there is a solid fixed perception of a ‘you’ or a ‘them’ that it’s my desire to help, that subtly feeds the solidity of the ‘me’ that’s got to do the helping. The more solid the ‘me’ and ‘you’ the greater the cause for burn-out.

Just as, if there is no self-view in the mix it’s impossible to become bored; if there is no self-view it’s impossible to become stressed and fatigued in the way you describe. If action is energized and guided by sati-pañña, mindfulness and wisdom, rather than by ‘me trying to do something for you’, lo and behold, it all lightens up. I’m speaking about this from experience as a compulsive helping type… When Right Effort is engaged, the process of helping is stress-free. I apply this principle on a daily basis and, for me at least, it really works.

Question: I’m very new to practice and I do more walking meditation than sitting because I’m able to be in my body more when I walk. I’m more able to let things arise and let them go. I think, though, that most people do more sitting meditation than walking. I find sitting quite difficult, mostly because things come, and I absolutely can’t let anything go. The idea of inviting an emotion such as fear in and dealing with that in my body seems a much more proactive way to meditate than just passively letting stuff hit me like a freight train. Is that how everyone else does it?

Answer: it’s like the difference between sending out invitations to a party and just having people show up under their own steam. If you’ve sent out invitations there is some kind of preparedness. I don’t know how many people work with emotions in a systematic way, but I’ve found it extremely helpful because it changes the dynamic and makes the emotions something that you’re interested in exploring, rather than the crisis management that happens when an emotion just kicks the door in and makes itself at home. If you’re sending out invitations, you decide who you want to invite and what time you want them to arrive.

Question: In endeavouring to develop a constant state of mindfulness, do you ever schedule times for your mind to wander and do whatever it wants, like the antithesis of scheduling meditation?

Answer: I’ve taught it and practised it. But the trouble is that when you try to let your mind wander, it’s like having a camera focused on you: someone says: ‘Okay, now look totally natural. There’s only four million people watching. Just relax.’ It is hard. But I have often taught a practice of letting the mind wander. That can be useful because we can be very controlling and think that the practice equals control, and if things are not in control, not fitting the expected pattern, they are ‘wrong’ or we ‘aren’t practising’. We can unconsciously create very narrow perspectives on what ‘the practice’ is. But sometimes a lack of control, mindfulness of things being out of control, is really important. That’s one of the reasons why we have all-night sittings once a week. We have an all-night meditation on full moon, new moon and half-moon nights. When it gets to two in the morning things can become pretty blurry, and strange strings of thought wander through and odd sorts mental images pass by. That prepares you for when you are ill and feverish, when your mind is out of control, when you are exhausted or when the mind is deranged, or when you have Alzheimer’s or dementia. If you have learned how to be mindful of ‘the mind out of control’ you won’t suffer in those circumstances, because you won’t assume that you are your thoughts.

If we develop that quality of awareness, we can be perfectly aware of an utterly deranged mind without it being disturbing.

I’ve had that experience. It’s quite marvellous. I was taking some Tibetan medicine some years ago. It had an extraordinarily powerful effect. I was living in a little log cabin at Abhayagiri Monastery with a stream running by it, and the stream would produce music – one day it would be Wagner, next day it was Led Zeppelin, then it was Bach, then it was Beethoven. It was clearly audible music playing away all day, all night long. My mind was wide awake, having these bizarre auditory hallucinations of music. I could have thought: ‘I’m going crazy,’ but instead I thought: ‘This is interesting medicine. My mind is hallucinating and creating all these weird perceptions. They arise. They pass away. They are not self.’ So it’s extremely helpful to be able to simply listen to crazy thoughts and deranged feelings, and to not identify with them.

There’s a beautiful little book called ‘Mister God, This Is Anna’,3 in which there is a passage of dialogue between little Anna, a visionary five-year-old, and an old guy called Woody who is a ‘gentleman of the road’, a street person, whom Anna has encountered, gathered with some friends round a brazier. Anna asks him: ‘What are you doing up in the middle of the night? Why aren’t you sleeping?’ Woody says: ‘The day is the time for the head and the senses; the night is the time for the heart and the wits. In the day you can only see as far as the sun. At night-time you can see all the way to the stars.’ If we let go of the world of the head and the senses and don’t make them our refuge, but make the heart our refuge, when the head goes berserk we’re fine, because awareness is not affected by that deranged thinking or erratic moods.

All along we’ve been able to see beyond all this day-stuff; our heart already knows that behind the blue mask of the day’s sky lie the stars and the measureless space that is their home.

2 An anthology of texts on Nibbāna with commentaries by Ajahn Pasanno and Ajahn Amaro, first published 2009 by Abhayagiri Monastic Foundation, since reprinted.

3 ‘Mister God, This Is Anna’, by Fynn (pseudonym of Sydney Hopkins); Harper-Collins, many editions, including a recent one with a foreword by Rowan Williams.