## 2 ‘DON’T DIAGNOSE, JUST BE AWARE’ – DOING AND NOT DOING

Our thinking mind loves to diagnose. I confess to having a thinking mind that loves to figure things out, loves to have a nice map, a description; this mind delights in lists and even the ‘Tables’ function of Microsoft Word. Certainly the intellect does have its place; it is truly useful to be able to figure out how things work but we can be over-prone to that. We can unwittingly take refuge in having an explanation. The mind can race forward: ‘I know what’s going on! I understand this. I read a book about it. I did a course on this. I know what’s happening here!’ We immediately go to the memory, the idea, the concept and in so doing we again miss what is before us, what we are in the middle of, what we are part of. Because we have absorbed our attention in the diagnosis, we miss the actuality. I’m not saying that we should never push, make an effort or diagnose. It is not that we should stifle the intellect or suppress our recognition of patterns, rather it’s a question of holding these things in perspective.

When we’re faced with suffering, particularly other people’s suffering, we can feel: ‘I’ve got to do something!’ Everything is telling us: ‘Don’t just sit there, do something!’ When we’re facing difficulty there is a strong compulsion not to leave things alone. We think that if we leave things alone, that shows we don’t care. The very words ‘leaving it alone’ make it sound as if we’re disconnecting or we’re not doing our bit. But that urge to help and to do can often be coming from our own insecurity or our own need to be a helpful person. Our need to help may form part of our identity; as CS Lewis once put it:

She’s the sort of woman who lives for others – you can always tell the others by their hunted expression.

‘The Screwtape Letters’, Ch 26

If you are a professional helper, social worker, therapist or Buddhist monastic, your trade is to be helpful, so when you see someone suffering, you think: ‘I should be doing something here!’ The ‘don’t push’ principle points to that tension in our own heart which is often over-eager. We may be doing what we think is the best thing we can yet not realizing what’s happening in truth in the here and now.

Ram Dass tells a story about when his stepmother was dying. He is a meditation expert. Death and dying is his area of expertise and he really knows his stuff. At the end of her life his stepmother was lying on her death-bed, her breath quite shallow. She was drifting in and out of consciousness. Ram Dass was giving her extensive meditation instructions, saying to her things like: ‘Go to the breath. Feel it. You’re breathing in the universe, breathing in the light of the universe. Breathing out, let everything go. You’re one with the tides of life. As the light arises, just go to the light and feel the breath coming and going.’ After a considerable period of this stream of good advice, as Ram Dass paused, his stepmother inclined her head toward him and said: ‘Ram Dass – be quiet.’ He was trying to help, but the tension of trying was marring his effort. He may have been thinking to himself: ‘I’m the helper. I’ve written books about this, this is my trade, so I should be doing something here. She’s my stepmother, she’s dying, so I’ve got to help.’

So yes, when there is a need to do something, there may indeed be things that we can do, but that very urge, that agitated tension which wants to jump in and fix something, may be the very element that gets in the way. When we talk about not trying to help, not trying to fix or not trying to diagnose, this can come across as indifference. But I’m not trying to encourage a quality of dissociation. I’m not promoting a frigid Dhamma that thinks: ‘What’s the problem? All things are impermanent. Everything arises and passes away. Get over it.’ Like Lucy at her ‘PSYCHIATRIC HELP’ stand: ‘Snap out of it! Five cents, please.’ This teaching is not a cold distancing or an attempt to alienate ourselves from feeling the suffering of others. I don’t advocate adopting some kind of false objectivity; I’m not trying to encourage that. What I am hoping is that through our spiritual practice we can find that place which is fully empathetic with the suffering of others and the difficulties that we experience, while not suffering on account of them.