## 8 THE PLACE OF PEACE

This is one of the reasons why the Buddha, after he became enlightened, felt there was no point in trying to explain what he had discovered to anybody because it would go so much against the grain. People relish becoming. They are addicted to becoming. They cherish only becoming.

This world, whose nature is always to become other,

Is attached to becoming, is afflicted by becoming

And yet delights in that very becoming,

Yet what it relishes brings fear

And what it fears is pain.

(Ud 3.10)

So he said: ‘The world is totally lost in thirst for becoming. There’s no point in my trying to teach anybody. No one’s ever going to understand what I would say.’ The Dhamma seems completely anathema to our ordinary sensibilities. This is a subtle but critical point. In that same discourse the Buddha uses the phrase: ‘Abandons the craving for being without relishing non-being.’ That’s the Middle Way: to abandon the cherishing of being without relishing non-being. Can you find that way by GPS? The pulsing blue dot on your iPhone? Where’s the address? It’s a tricky place. But that’s the place of real happiness, the place of real peace.

Sadly but habitually we shuttle between those two, the cherishing of being and the cherishing of non-being. I speak in this way because I freely confess to being a ‘becoming’ addict. I think there should be a Twelve Step Programme, like those for alcoholics and other addicts, for those of us who are fully acculturated, fully addicted to becoming, because it is a powerful force in our life. And yet one of the definitions of Nibbāna is that it is the cessation of becoming:

Bhava-nirodho nibbānaṃ. (A 10.7)

Perhaps this suggests that all we need to do is: ‘Just let go and allow life to live itself.’ However, this is easy to say but very hard to do; that word ‘just’ being somewhat loaded.

It is important to understand that this ‘letting go’ doesn’t mean some kind of vacant dissociation. It means that the ego and self-centred habits are not allowed to take control. Then life lives itself, and our intentions and actions, guided by mindfulness and wisdom, become part of life living itself. That little gesture of relaxation, letting go of the ‘trying’, letting go of the doing; just that little relaxing of the grip enables us to walk freely. And then the walking does just happen. We’re not going anywhere. We queue easily for our food, but we’re not ‘waiting’. It is a subtle shift of attitude that makes all the difference. It brings a profound quality of satisfaction.

Sometimes this is difficult to express and so we find paradoxical statements which allude to it, like: ‘Close your eyes and you’ll see clearly, cease to listen and you will hear truth.’ What they are pointing to is that if we stop ‘trying’ to see, ‘trying’ to listen and to ‘get’, trying to ‘have’, if we just loosen the grip, then we will see and hear, then we will truly have. Then the heart will sing; we will know. Then there will be relaxation. ‘Seek no contacts and you will find union.’ If you’re not needing other people, if you let go of everyone, you ironically find yourself connected to everyone. But you’re not ‘needing’ others or for them to be a particular way. When you let go of that neediness, you find yourself at home with everyone. There is a quality of belonging. Be still and, lo and behold, you find yourself moving forward. For myself, I find this is such an extremely useful area to focus on, and so liberating, that it is something I like to bring up and share with everyone. To me it’s a defining principle.