## 5 NATURAL ATTUNEMENT

Years ago I came across a Taoist teaching in a Tibetan Buddhist monastery in the north of England. It carries the same tone as the advice given by Kondañña.

Close your eyes and you will see clearly

Cease to listen and you will hear truth

Be silent and your heart will sing

Seek no contacts and you will find union

Be still and you will move forward on the tide of the spirit

Be gentle and you will need no strength

Be patient and you will achieve all things

Be humble and you will remain entire

I was particularly struck by this teaching because it has the same sort of paradoxical tone and ring of truth to it as the advice not to push, particularly the line: ‘Be still and you will move forward on the tide of the spirit.’ It’s pointing to that same trusting that this is a self-adjusting universe. The phrase ‘the tide of the spirit’ is not very Buddhist, but it conveys very accurately that natural attunement of our heart to the way things are. When the self-centred habits get out of the way, that attunement, that intrinsic quality of the relatedness of our life to all life and all things, becomes active. That is what guides our actions.

So notice the habit of ‘doing-ness’, of ‘me trying’, ‘me getting’, ‘me hoping’. This habit is so ordinary and everyday that it goes completely unremarked. Buddhist books or guides to meditation instruct: ‘Try to concentrate your mind. Try to let go of your distracted thoughts. Try to develop loving-kindness. This is the way to bring compassion into being.’ There’s a lot of ‘doing’ and ‘trying’ and ‘making happen’: concentrating the mind, developing jhāna, developing insight, letting go of greed, hatred and delusion, and so on. All these instructions can be confusing. If we are supposed to be developing all this stuff or getting rid of all that stuff, how are we supposed to find a natural easeful attunement? And what is the problem with trying? What is the problem with doing? What is the problem with putting effort in? I’d like to explore the question of what is getting in the way, what is snarling these things up.