## 4 FINDING EQUIPOISE

In meditation practice we learn to listen to the different feelings, energies, different thoughts within the mind, and to discern and not blindly react to the things that we feel and hear; instead to find that place of listening, and then let wisdom be the chair of our inner committee. If you have ever chaired or taken part in a committee meeting, you will know that it is important to allow all the committee members to be heard. There is a respectful quality to a well-run meeting where all the voices are allowed their say. But if we have a flailing three- year-old saying: ‘I want more ice cream!’, we don’t necessarily give that voice the chair, or say: ‘Let’s all do what the three- year-old wants.’ Or if a high-minded intellectual member chips in with esoteric pontification, we may just say: ‘Thank you for sharing.’ We find a way to let wisdom be the meeting point for the different voices of the inner committee, those different feelings and moods.

As said before, we often feel we have to ‘do something’ to make things right. I’d like to suggest that often the most appropriate thing to do happens when ‘I’ gets out of the way; that it is ‘me’ trying, ‘me’ doing, the ‘me-ness’ and the ‘trying’ that is the obstructive element. This is a self-adjusting universe, and if we let the ego-centred perspective drop we can develop a certain trust in its self-adjustment. When we let there be a quality of awareness, wisdom and acute attentiveness to the present, the universe will adjust itself. There is a quality of intuitive wisdom that recognizes when things are or aren’t in balance; it’s our musical ear for the way things are, for the harmonious or disharmonious quality of what is experienced. You might think:

‘Well, I’m tone-deaf so I might as well give up,’ but I would suggest that on that spiritual level none of us are tone-deaf. You wouldn’t be listening to this talk if you were totally tone-deaf. What this means is that when we notice some kind of difficulty or imbalance, some sort of distortion or discord within others or ourselves, we bring the quality of awareness to bear on it. The effort is to be aware; then things will adjust on their own.

Try a little experiment. Put your physical body in a slumped and uncomfortable posture in which you feel out of balance; now bring awareness to that feeling in the body and then let the body adjust itself. Don’t ‘do’ anything to help it adjust. The sole effort you need to make is to bring attention to the feeling of the body, and you’ll find that the body will adjust itself to a balanced posture on its own. Do you see how it works?

Try that until you get the sense of it, a bit like learning to ride a bike – and then apply it to the whole of your life. This exercise is about learning to bring awareness to the moment and not letting ‘me’ be the thing that grabs the reins: ‘I’m running things! I’m operating this life! I’m in charge here!’ If we recognize the voice of ‘I, me, mine’, loosen the grip and let wisdom say to that inner voice: ‘Thank you for sharing, dear, there’s your seat’ We let ‘me’ have its say, but invite the quality of awareness to be the guiding principle.