## PREFACE

This small book is the second in a series of four, consisting of reflections and practices related to the ‘sublime abiding places for the heart’ – the four brahma-vihāras, in Buddhist parlance. These qualities are also known as ‘the four immeasurables’ on account of their boundless nature.

The vision for the series is to explore these sublime abidings via the somewhat oblique approach of looking at what counters or muddies their activity. The four brahma-vihāras are listed in the Buddhist scriptures as:

Mettā – loving-kindness, benevolence, radical acceptance, non-aversion.

Karuṇā – compassion, empathy, appreciation of the suffering of others.

Muditā – sympathetic or altruistic joy, gladness at the good fortune of others.

Upekkhā – equanimity, caring even-mindedness, serenity amid all turbulence.

In this second book we will be investigating karuṇā through the lens of that kind of anxious helpfulness that feels like we’re never doing enough, or that wants to fix others so that we will feel better, or the attitude that we don’t deserve ever to feel peaceful or happy while others are still suffering. The other three books in the series similarly explore the remaining brahma-vihāras through aspects of mind and behaviour that oppose or confuse them.

The material published in this book is largely based on a workshop that was given in the USA in the spring of 2010, at Spirit Rock Meditation Center, California. As they were at that daylong workshop, and as with all teachings offered in the Buddhist tradition, the words here are presented for the reader’s contemplation rather than being intended to be taken as absolute truths. Those who pick this book up and read it are therefore encouraged to consider whether these principles and practices feel true to life and, if they do, to try them out and see if they bring benefit. Do they help you to work with the noble urge to help more easily? Do they lead you to a recognition of the balance of the Middle Way? Do they help you to be a force of blessing and ease rather than one of anxiety and disappointment?

If so, that is to be rejoiced. If, however, these words don’t help you, then may you find other wholesome ways of relieving suffering in others and within yourself.