## 10 GUIDED MEDITATION

Settle down and feel your body on the chair, the mat, the cushion, the stool, wherever you might be sitting.

Leave the memory of external conversations and everything else aside and turn the attention inwards. Feel the body, the mood of the mind, and the reverberations of the internal conversations. To begin with, don’t try to do anything. Notice what is here in this moment, this ordinary, perfectly imperfect life – here it is. It feels like this – this body, this mind, this day. Here it is.

Centre the attention on the body and the spine. Allow the spine to lengthen to its full, comfortable, natural extension. This helps you to rouse the quality of alertness, bringing brightness to the mind, tapping in to the energizing, brightening, alert quality of our being. And then around the spine, allow the rest of the body to soften, to relax, to be fully at ease.

Take the breath, the natural rhythm of the breath, and let this constellation of feelings be right at the very centre of attention. For a few minutes, consciously lay everything else aside. There is nothing you need to figure out, calculate, plan or remember. Let the breath be the very centre of your world, in the space of awareness – let the breath fill that space, right here at the very centre. Breathing in, brightening, enlivening the mind, arousing alertness, attentiveness. The out-breath relaxing, releasing, relinquishing.

When you feel the attention is centred, stable, when you find that settled steadiness, allow the breath to be part of the whole array of experience – the ambient sounds in the environment, patterns of thought, memories of words said earlier today, conversations from last week, anticipation of this year, next year, memories of last year, childhood, whatever it might be. Allow the heart to be that open listening space receiving all the different patterns of perception – the heart receives them, knows them, lets go of them, every one, without discrimination.

Now open up the space of the heart in this way.

This isn’t just about developing a quietness of mind. This is a fertile space. We call it ‘space’ or ‘empty’, but actually it is also full of wisdom – just as the physical space of the universe is filled with electromagnetic waves and the influence of gravity. We can invite different feelings, attitudes or memories into this space, to explore them, to understand them. So bring to mind some memory of an encounter or some incident of the past, some friend or family member; or even a social situation, something on a larger scale that has particularly touched your heart, that moves you to compassion – a loss in the family, a global issue, family struggles, the death of a loved one, your own failure, your incompetence; whatever it might be that has formed a strong and painful presence in your life. Take a moment to consciously invite that quality, that memory or that idea, the image of those involved, into the heart. To listen. To listen to the cries of the world. Allow the heart to be open to that presence and see if you can find the spaciousness, the receiving of that suffering, your own suffering or the suffering of another. But you are not suffering on account of it now – this is that mysterious Middle Way between being swept along by the current and sinking beneath it, that mysterious point of balance.

When you have brought a particular image or memory to mind, make a deliberate decision to not be caught into the story-ing of it. Instead, come into the body. Where do you feel it? Can you discern that suffering and your open, compassionate response to it? Can you find that in your body? Can you feel it? However you sense it, whether it’s an ache in the heart, a knife between the shoulder-blades or a feeling of weight, just open the heart and bring the attention to that. Allow it to be as uncomplicated as possible. Just rest with the feeling, knowing the texture, the tone, the tenor of it. Don’t try to help, don’t try to fix, don’t turn away, don’t diagnose. Just be aware. Your own fearfulness, your own aversion, your own turning away, rejecting; whatever it might be, go to the physical feeling of it, sense it, hold it, see if you can get to know it exactly as it is.

Wherever we feel it in the body – however that perception, that painful memory, that painful knowledge is held – bring the attention to that and then bring the breath to that same area. Let the out-breath, the exhalation, help to carry it away, help to erode it, bring it to a closure, a finality, each out-breath a relaxation, a letting go. No matter how strong the feeling might be, allow the breath, invite the breath, to encompass it, enfold it, wash it away, like the tide carrying away a sandcastle, wave after wave gently washing in, eroding, smoothing, dissolving. We’re not trying to ‘get rid of’. We’re letting the tide of the spirit carry that feeling to dissolution; being still with it, being patient, and then its dissolution is achieved, the natural erosion of all things. Gently, steadily it fades.

Each out-breath gently, steadily flowing to cessation. Gently fading and pausing before the next in-breath begins, so there’s only the rhythm of the breath here in the space of our awareness – with it, the weight of the body, the sounds that we hear, the calling of the distant birds, different resonances through the mind and body. Here it is. This moment. This body, this mind – perfectly imperfect, just as it is.