## 9 REFLECTIONS ON ALMS-FOOD

Theravada Buddhist monastics live entirely dependent on alms-food. This is not a particularly common term in the everyday world, but ‘alms-food’ means food that is given or donated. That is how our monasteries run, and how monastics have traditionally been supported ever since the time of the Buddha. I’ve been a monk for well over thirty years, so by now my body is an entirely donated body. It’s considered, at least by popular opinion, that all the cells in our bodies are replaced every seven years, so this body has come out of my alms-bowl. This body is built up of all the good offerings people have made over time; it has been donated, and I’m very grateful.

It is good to reflect that our minds are very similar to an alms- bowl. We sit or stand with our bowls and then people come and offer food. As monks in the Thai Forest Tradition we’re not allowed to cook or store food, or even give instructions to the cooks. We are very strictly hands-off when it comes to preparing food. So we have to live in a very receptive mode in terms of relationship to eating, and therefore to our life- support system. Part of this is learning to live on faith, but another part of it is learning to appreciate that we do not live nourished by our food preferences; rather we learn to live on kindness, because we are receiving the results of people’s kindly acts and generous intentions towards us.

When we receive alms-food, it is our training that we should receive everything with appreciation, but we don’t have to eat everything we are given. This is an important dynamic. Learning to receive everything with appreciation is a very good symbol for our approach to our minds and the spirit of our practice. Whatever shows up in our mind, we receive it appreciatively. Suppose we are having a quiet meditation, and suddenly a horrendously angry impulse comes washing through, or we suddenly feel like throwing up, or have a flash of anxiety such as: ‘Oh my god, I did leave the gas on!’ All kinds of stuff can show up in our minds, some of it expected, some of it unexpected, some of it predictable, some of it very unpredictable. That’s similar to the alms-food we receive. The training is to receive it with appreciation, and that is what we’re nourished by.

I feel it’s helpful to consider that receiving food which has been prepared by all sorts of people and has come from all sorts of places is just like receiving the thoughts and feelings that come into the mind. They’re constructed of all kinds of experiences and events in which many beings have participated, they are not all just due to what we’ve done or what we like or dislike. They are an intricate complex of materials.

Importantly, as I said, we don’t have to eat everything that comes into our bowls. We choose which foods to eat based on whether or not they are appealing, nourishing or helpful. We avoid eating foods that are harmful, destructive or unhelpful in some way. And we make decisions about the right amount to consume of a particular food. Similarly, if you have a wildly angry impulse, you don’t have to act on it. If you suddenly have a strong fear reaction, you don’t have to jump up and run out of the room. Instead you can say: ‘OK, that feeling has this particular quality, this particular texture. So what is it going to bring with it?’

It is just as with the breath: taking things in, knowing them, letting them go, taking things in, knowing them, letting them go. Again, that’s exactly the same as with food, or the conversations that take place between yourself and your friends. During a day retreat, I don’t insist on people keeping Noble Silence during a meal. People are free to speak. But take in the quality of conversation – listen to each other, and hear the noise of the mixture of different voices around the room. Recognize that you pay attention to certain voices, and other voices you leave aside. This is how it works.

Another training the Buddha described with regard to food is that to eat appropriately you should eat one mouthful at a time. That may not strike you as a novel concept. It means you eat the mouthful of food that is in your mouth, without lining up the next spoonful in a holding pattern like a plane hovering round an airport or waiting for take-off on a runway. Instead, simply be with the mouthful you are eating. The Buddha also recommended that when five more mouthfuls would be enough, you should stop eating and finish off with a drink of water.

Now, you might think: how do you know when five more mouthfuls will be enough? It is interesting that, if you pay close attention, you’ll see your body does actually know how much is enough. If you are able to lay your eating habits and preoccupations to one side and listen to the body, there’s a moment when you know, when intuitive wisdom tells you: ‘That’s enough.’ When gauging how much food is the right amount, the most reliable judge is our own intuitive wisdom. So just pay attention and feel it. Bring the mind to what you’re doing and then pay attention to what you notice. The real problem is putting down the spoon or fork when you’ve had that ‘this is enough’ feeling, because there may be a voice saying: ‘I should just tidy up my plate. I don’t want to leave any leftovers. Wouldn’t want it to go to waste.’ Which is a reasonable intention, but just see if you can listen to what is the ‘right amount’ and leave it at that. In the monastery, when we’ve received the food for our meal of the day1 we chant a blessing. This is not so much blessing the food to make it holy, but rather an expression of our delight in the good that has been done through the giving of the food. It is a traditional chant called Anumodanā, which literally means ‘rejoicing in the good that has been done’. The sense is that we are delighted for those who have made all this good karma by nourishing us for another day. The Buddha points out that when we create good karma based on generosity, it returns to us in the form of ‘āyu vaṇṇo sukhaṃ balaṃ’, which means ‘long life, good looks, happiness, and strength’. He doesn’t say when or how it will return, but it will create these karmic resonances.

1 Theravada Forest monastics generally eat only one meal a day, between dawn and noon. In some monasteries there is also a light breakfast.