## 1 ‘DON’T PUSH – JUST USE THE WEIGHT OF YOUR OWN BODY’

The words ‘Don’t push – just use the weight of your own body’ come from a letter sent to Abhayagiri Monastery in California after the passing away of a very good friend and associate of ours whose name was Barry Kapke. He was a member of the small group called the ‘Community of Abhayagiri Lay Ministers’ (CALM) who help the Monastery in various spiritual modes around the USA and Canada. He also had the Pali name, Kondañña. As an innovative massage therapist he was involved in developing various types of body-work and he was also one of the early pioneers of Buddhist websites back in the early 1990s. He was ‘Mr. DharmaNet’.

He was one who was very quiet, very shy but very active. He contracted bowel cancer in recent years and, after many ups and downs, eventually died in a lovely hospice in San Francisco. I was with him at the end of his life. We held a memorial ceremony for him at the monastery and a former student of his, called Rachel Starbuck, sent us a very beautiful, touching letter about him:

Kondañña was my teacher. I had the good fortune to study shiatsu with Barry at the San Francisco School of Massage. He really did teach body-work as nothing less than a spiritual practice. He said the heart of our work is simply to offer our presence: ‘Don’t push, just use the weight of your own body. Don’t diagnose, just be aware. Don’t try to help, but also don’t turn away. Just be with the person. That’s all you have to do.’ And Barry really practised what he preached. You could see it as clear as day watching him work. It was an amazing and beautiful thing.

When I attended my first week-long silent retreat at Spirit Rock, Barry was there too. The retreat wasn’t easy for me, and on the last day I felt quite overwhelmed. I couldn’t stop the tears streaming down my face even when it was time for lunch. I remember standing in line holding my plate weeping and embarrassed to be weeping, thoroughly miserable. I took my food to the furthest corner of the furthest table and sat down, but I was too upset to eat. Then I noticed that someone had come to sit with me. It was Kondañña, Barry. He didn’t say anything. He didn’t do anything. He didn’t even look at me. He did exactly what he always taught us to do. He just sat there slowly eating his lunch, being with me in my suffering, neither trying to help nor turning away, but it was so profoundly comforting to me, even now tears come just to think of it.

Some years later, my sister was birthing her first child at home and I was there to assist her. I’d taken a special class on massage for birthing mothers, but once my sister’s labour had started she couldn’t stand for anyone to get near her, much less touch her. All she did was scream and scream and there was nothing we could do. Then, I remembered what Barry had showed me. I sat down next to her on the floor. I didn’t say anything. I didn’t look at her. I didn’t touch her. I just sat there with her while she suffered through her labour pains, neither trying to help nor turning away. I don’t know how long we sat together like that, but later, after her son was born, she told me how profoundly comforting it had been for her, how my just sitting there had somehow allowed her to relax and feel less afraid.

Now Kondañña has died, but what he taught is still moving through those of us who had learned from him. Now when I see my sister quietly holding her son after a bad dream, neither trying to help nor turning away, and I then see the comfort he feels as his little body starts to settle and relax, then I see Kondañña’s work alive.

That’s a wonderful account and a very fine expression of the principle of compassion in action. When we are trying to work compassionately in our lives, to actualize our noble intentions so that they genuinely bear fruit, that’s extremely helpful advice to take in: ‘Don’t push, just use the weight of your own body.’ There’s a leaning, an intentionality, but we’re not pushing. We are not creating an imagined goal, an imagined good place over ‘there’ that we’re trying to reach, and hence ignoring what’s actually ‘here’. As long as we imagine that there is somewhere we need to reach, we imagine there is something blocking us; there’s a knot, an argument, a tension: ‘If only this wasn’t here, we could be in that beautiful place over there.’ We create an imagined ‘there’ somewhere off in the future and we miss what is actually here and now. When you’re walking, if you’re day-dreaming about where you’re going, that is when you’ll trip and sprain your ankle – and I speak from repeated and painful experience here. We fixate on an imagined goal; our tendency is to push, to press for that imagined future. And so we miss where we actually are.