## 3 ‘DON’T TRY TO HELP, BUT DON’T TURN AWAY’ – COMPASSION IN ACTION

Compassion in action means working with the painful conditions in ourselves and others, and seeing how they mingle. Often a period in our life is not just one single shade of pleasure or one single shade of pain. In many if not most instances we experience mixed feelings, and sometimes a difficult condition, something that we would never have chosen, ends up bringing immense riches with it. Even when we think of things as perfect, we don’t realize that part of their perfection is their impermanence. We have to see the glass as already broken. Ajahn Chah would hold up a glass and say: ‘If you can see that this glass is already broken, then when it breaks you won’t suffer.’

Compassion, karuṇā, in Buddhist psychology, is not a state of suffering. The Buddha points out that if you are suffering on account of the suffering of others, that is not true compassion. It is a distorted compassion, a false compassion, a compassion that is not really complete or purified. It is not whole. The English word ‘compassion’ literally means ‘suffering with’. Passio/passionis is a Latin word meaning ‘suffering’, as the passion of Christ relates to the suffering and death of Christ. And the prefix ‘com’ means ‘with’. But the Buddhist principle of compassion is talking about something else. It is fully attentive and open to the pain of others, but does not suffer on account of that pain. I think most Westerners would agree that, culturally, this is hard for us to comprehend, let alone achieve. Usually we either turn away and remain indifferent to the suffering of others, or we feel upset or angry on their behalf and desperately try to help. We have an interesting cultural tendency to show that we care by getting angry or upset. But when we are faced with the suffering of others, or with our own suffering, our own feelings of grief, there is a place we can find in our heart which is fully attentive and appreciative of that pain, but not swept up in a reaction against it or carried along by the current of it, which knows the pain fully but does not suffer on account of it.

One significant aspect of compassion is expressed in the figure of Guan Yin Bodhisattva, who comes to us from the Northern Buddhist tradition. Guan Yin is the Chinese name (the Sanskrit is Avalokiteshvara) for a spiritual entity who is ‘the one who listens to the sounds of the world’. To me that is an extremely meaningful name for a being who is the embodiment of compassion, because it doesn’t mean that he or she is necessarily out there doing anything. The primary role of compassion, its primordial attribute, is not getting out there and ‘doing’. Its primary attribute is listening. The Tibetan name for the same great being is Chenrezig. In some of the classical iconography the figure of Avalokiteshvara has a thousand hands and each hand has an eye in it. This kind of imagery represents the capacity for ‘doing’ that arises from having listened but the name has the same meaning. This Bodhisattva is still the one who listens to the sounds of the world.

The quality of empathetic engagement is actualized through the practice of listening. We learn to listen, and in particular we learn to listen to our own thoughts and feelings. We often associate compassion with strong emotions. We associate it with being in the presence of the suffering of other beings, when facing terrible tragedy, but there are also smaller, more local difficulties and sufferings in our lives. The primary quality of compassion, the root of compassion, I would suggest, is learning how to listen, to attend to what is here, to what is present. And from that attending, a capacity to do the appropriate thing arises. So from the root of listening, the thousand eyes are watching what’s going on and the thousand hands can offer help. Guan Yin has a lot of hands to lend. That multiplicity of hands represents the thousands of ways, the ten thousand fingers that can help – but the help stems from the root of listening.

Along with listening to the needs of those around us, we learn to listen to our own thoughts, our own feelings, our own body, and we discern the different voices that we hear – what some people helpfully refer to as the ‘inner committee’. The voice of reason, the voice of kindness, the voice of the three-year-old in a tantrum, they are all in there: the rationalist, the sensitive one, the excited child, the fretful child, the depressed and unhappy cynic, the ever cheerful, and the voices of unbiased kindness and unbiased wisdom.