## Lesson Six Hurdles and Pitfalls

The theme of this lesson is Hurdles and Pitfalls. This might sound like now we’ll hear all the bad news – we’re finished with the good stuff, and now we’ll hear all about the difficulties and the headaches that come with trying to practise meditation. But in order for our practice to progress, it’s essential to know about some of the difficulties that might arise and the methods we can develop and use to counteract them. So, the purpose of this chapter is to assist us in making our practice more effective and useful, and to enable us to integrate these themes of mediation so that we can live more peacefully and joyfully and with greater understanding.

Previous Themes

The main themes examined in the previous lessons have been:

Establishing the quality of concentration and focus,

Developing insight and wisdom,

Cultivating loving-kindness,

Understanding how wisdom relates to compassion,

Practising contemplation and reflection, and

Examining how these different elements all fit together.

These lessons have covered a broad range of essential elements of Buddhist meditation. The aim of this final lesson is to identify the kind of difficulties we might encounter while training in these aspects of meditation.

Commonality of Difficulties

The concept of meditation crosses religious boundaries. When Buddhists discuss meditation or contemplative prayer with Christians, for example, and mention these themes, everyone starts nodding in agreement. Everyone, no matter what their religious background is, has trouble with either keeping the chattering mind from taking over the entire show, or with falling asleep and missing the whole thing. This was illustrated at the ordination ceremony of a young man in our monastic community. His sister had been a nun in a Hindu tradition for about 10 years; she wore very dramatic bright orange robes and a really spiffy turban. Everyone thought she was a really serious yogi. Halfway through the ceremony, people started noticing her nodding off, and realised that Buddhists and Hindus have a great deal in common. Hindu dullness is not very different from Buddhist dullness. All paths lead up the same mountain, as they say…

Five Standard Obstacles

The Buddhist scriptures mention five standard obstacles, hurdles and pitfalls that we are likely to encounter in meditation.

Sense Desire (Kāmacchanda)

The first obstacle is sense desire, which is described as the mind hungering for pleasure. For example, we sit down to meditate and, rather than the mind staying on the appointed meditation object, we hear a sound, like a piece of music playing from a building nearby, and the mind gets enraptured by the music. Or perhaps there is no music actually playing, so we conjure up some of our own and start singing songs to ourselves. Or maybe we are hungry – oftentimes on meditation retreats there are specific disciplines in terms of food and mealtimes, so there is no supper in the evening. My teacher, Ajahn Chah, said that when he was a novice in the monastery in northeast Thailand, he would visualize Chinese noodles – hallucinate noodles. His imagination was so strong, he could taste them going into his mouth, feel them sliding across his tongue. Or he could smell these little fruits they have in Thailand called “fragrant bananas,” gluey hom. Sitting in the meditation hall, his mouth would be pouring with saliva, and he could smell them, taste them, feel them on his tongue. It was just the hungering of the body for something to eat, and Ajahn Chah fantasising, “Wouldn’t it be marvellous to have a fragrant banana.” What he wouldn’t have done for a bowl of Chinese noodles!

This exemplifies the obstacle of sense desire. The mind is drawn by the appeal of a sound, or smell, or taste; a thought or a passion.

As another example, before the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas monastery in Ukiah, California, opened, the monastics lived in another monastery in San Francisco’s Mission District in an old mattress factory. One of the novice monks had been in the U.S. Navy, and he was a big strapping guy. They had a strict, one-meal-a-day rule. Because he was a novice monk, he could still use money. Every so often, because the monastery could not satisfy his desire for food, he would go to the neighbourhood pie shop. One day he went to the pie shop and gorged himself on many pies. After he was full, there was still one pie left for which he didn’t have room, no matter how hard he tried. So he stashed the pie in his bag and went back to the monastery. Even though he’d stuffed himself and couldn’t imagine ever being hungry again, at around 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon, the familiar rumbling in his stomach started, and the next thing he knew he was fantasising about this pie. They kept a very strict discipline in that monastery, and it was totally forbidden to eat anything in the evening. But all through the evening meditation and the Master’s Dharma talk, he kept thinking, “The pie… the pie… I’ve got a really juicy berry pie in my bag.” That pie was burning a hole in his bag. Finally, as one does sometimes on these occasions, he thought, “I don’t care what the karmic result of this is. I can’t stand it. This is too much to bear. I’m just going to do it.”

He planned it all out and, after everyone had retired for the evening, he went up the fire escape, onto the roof of the monastery. He settled himself down behind the chimney stack and got the pie out of his bag. He took one mouthful and thought, “Ahhh … this is nirvana… this is absolute total bliss… this is really worth it!” Then he heard the sound of feet on the fire escape. He thought, “It’s ten o’clock at night. No one comes up on the roof at nighttime. Quick! Do something!” So he started pretending that he was doing walking meditation around the top of the building, very diligently and very dignified, in an austere manner. Over the parapet, Master Hua appeared, the abbot of the monastery. He came up the fire escape and, mimicking the exact same posture as the novice, he started doing walking meditation in the opposite direction. The novice kept his eyes down on the ground, and the master walked past him once, twice, in exactly the same posture, diligent, ardent, focused completely on the meditation. By this time the novice’s heart was beating about 200 times per minute and he was pouring with sweat. Finally, on the third round, as they passed each other, the master stopped, looked him in the eye and said, “How does it feel?” He gave the novice a big smile, and said, “Eat your pie!” And they both laughed, and Master Hua walked off and left the novice in peace.

The Buddha used a number of analogies to describe these obstacles or obstructions. In one, he described them in terms of water. Sense desire is similar to water with dye in it, when the water has been coloured red or green or blue. The clear water of the mind has an added pigment in it. It has been coloured – changed from its original state. The Buddha also used an analogy of being in debt, when the mind is caught up in a state of sense desire it’s like being in debt.

We can free the heart from sense desires. We can say to ourselves, “I know that pie is burning a hole in my bag, but I could probably survive the night if I didn’t eat it,” or, “Certainly I will feel a lot happier if I resist this desire, if I let go of this desire rather than pursue it.” We can experience the moment of letting go, of recognising the desire but choosing not to be drawn in. We can recognise the painful or embarrassing result of following it. Then we can break free of the thrall or the pull of the desire. The Buddha said that having this quality of relief is like being free of debt, the heart having let go of the pull towards a sense desire.

Negativity, Aversion, Ill-will (Vyāpāda)

The next obstacle is negativity or aversion, ill-will. For example, music is playing in the house next door, and it’s really irritating you, and you wish it would stop. You think of all the things you’re going to do to the neighbours to force them to stop annoying you, because you’re trying to meditate – and you know all the terrible karma they’re creating by interrupting your spiritual life. So you create a whole diatribe of negativity as a result of hearing the sound.

In an earlier lesson, I told the story of Ajahn Chah visiting the little monastery in London in the heat of summer, with the music playing. The first thing Ajahn Chah said to the meditators when he rang the bell to end the meditation was: “You think that the sound is annoying you, but actually it’s you that’s annoying the sound! The sound is just what it is. It’s not there trying to upset you; it’s just doing what sound is supposed to do. If there is annoyance, it is only coming from you.”

The mind moves easily into ill-will and negativity towards external objects or pain in the body. It seems natural and reasonable to resent the pain in the knee that comes with trying to sit on the floor for more than ten minutes. The mind then produces a train of thoughts like, “If only I didn’t have that pain in my knee, I would be happy.” “If only I could get rid of this obsessive thought, I’d never ask for anything else ever again. I’ve got to stop thinking this ridiculous thought.” “I’d be happy if I could stop thinking of that irritating pop song, if I could get rid of that terrible tune.”

Oftentimes on a meditation retreat, the mind obsessively churns over something we do not even like. Joseph Goldstein, a well-known American meditation teacher, tells the story of being on a solitary retreat in a cabin by a stream one time, and he became obsessed with the way the stream seemed to be playing “The Star Spangled Banner.” He actually went out to the stream and rearranged the rocks so it would stop playing that aggravating tune.

But the problem is usually not the rocks. Most of the time, it is the mind that is the problem. When speaking of this quality of aversion and negativity, the Buddha used the analogy of water that is boiling, that is heated and bubbling. He also compared it to being in a state of sickness or disease. When we see the aversion in the mind, to the neighbour’s loud music, for example, we can then recognise that the sound is just a sound. We can recognise that if I put that music on, I enjoy it; when the neighbour puts it on, it “ruins my meditation.” We can analyse the situation in this way and see that the mind is just creating a problem when there really isn’t one.

In the same way, we can recognise the tension and fear and aversion towards physical pain and then relax the body and the attitude towards the pain. We realize that we can let go of the negativity and just let the pain be the pain, recognise it as a sensation, rather than making it a big problem or imagining it will lead to a trip to the emergency room. We can leave it alone and relax with it, allow it to be the way it is. When that happens, the actual level of pain diminishes rapidly and, even though it might still feel uncomfortable, it’s no longer a problem. We can let go of the aversion and, instead, experience that feeling of relief.

Sloth and Torpor (Thīna-middha)

The next of the obstructions and hindrances to meditation is known in Buddhist jargon as “sloth and torpor.” This refers to a dull, heavy, not-quite- asleep-but-not-quite-awake state of mind which often arises when one practises meditation.

In the beginning of our practice, the mind is often busy and agitated and bouncing around all over the place, and the body is tense and uncomfortable. The mind feels very alert simply because of this level of agitation; it’s in a very keen state, or very aroused. After a while, when we have trained the mind to focus a bit and the body gets used to sitting in a cross-legged posture, the mind and body calm down somewhat. The arousing, painful, stimulating influence abates. Then the mind shifts into this other mode, because we rarely experience anything between full speed ahead or dead stop. “Feeling alert” means we’re excited, frightened, or irritated. “Feeling peaceful” means we’re zoned out, not feeling anything, switched off. We don’t know how to be alert and peaceful at the same time.

Dullness is especially problematic in meditation because we are often so dull and sleepy that we can’t apply the antidotes; there is usually not enough sharpness even to think of how to work with that state of mind when we are experiencing it. This state of mind can also trick us, as it can be very peaceful, and we are fooled into thinking we are meditating well. When I was a new novice in the monastery in Thailand I thought my meditation was much better in the morning. In the evening, I was always in a lot of pain and being eaten by the mosquitoes. It was very uncomfortable, and it felt like the sittings went on for hours. In the mornings, my meditation was so much better, and it went by in a flash. But another novice pointed out to me that I was fast asleep, with my head halfway down to the floor, semi-conscious. So this dullness can be deceptive; we can feel like we’re meditating really well, feeling so peaceful, but really be falling asleep.

Sleepiness comes in waves, and the trick is to catch it at the first wave. One way to do this, as mentioned in the Questions of Lesson Two, is to hold an object, a matchstick for example, in your hands, between your thumbs. As soon as your mind starts to get dull, the fingers start to relax, and the matchstick will fall into your hands. The first wave has arrived. At that point, open your eyes and straighten the spine. Usually, another wave will come right after, and the eyes will start to blur and the body will start to droop. If you can resist and not give in to the sleepiness, after maybe one or two more little waves, it will disappear. Another technique involves using your visual perception. Open your eyes and focus on a candle flame or another object in front of you. As soon as the vision starts to blur or to separate, you know you’re falling sleep, and when this happens, refocus the eyes until the visual image is sharp-edged once again.

There are many other tricks you can try, liking taking a match box or a book and putting it on your head. As you start to nod, it drops off. This works well if you’re sitting with a group of other people. You don’t want to look bad in front of others, so you use vanity and pride to counteract dullness. This might be offsetting one problem with another but, nevertheless, it is a very effective technique to use with dullness.

For a mind overtaken by dullness, the Buddha used the analogy of water covered with a layer of algae and pond-weed, scummy water that is sludgy, impenetrable to the eye. He also compared it to being in prison. When the mind is free from dullness, when we have broken through it or learned how to prevent it from taking root, it is like clearing the waters of that scum or being released from prison.

Restlessness (Uddhacca-kukkucca)

The next hindrance, which is the opposite of dullness, is restlessness, agitation, fretting – the agitated, restless, worrying, fidgeting mind, characterised by too much energy, which causes the body to be out of balance. In describing this, the Buddha used the analogy of water being blown by the wind or stirred up and agitated. He also used the analogy of being enslaved; when one is free from restlessness, it is like being freed from the state of slavery, from the state in which one is subject to the demands of another.

The main antidote for restlessness is to bring the attention into the body, particularly using the kind of body sweeping described in the guided meditations in earlier lessons in which one relaxes each part of the body in turn. We can also use the breath, particularly the out-breath, to help relax the body and calm the stirred-up, agitated, turbulent quality. But this technique is not just used for physical restlessness. Continually coming back to the breath, calming and relaxing the body, is a good way of dealing with mental restlessness as well, with the agitated, restless quality of the mind. Ajahn Chah would also recommend going out and doing walking meditation, walking as quickly as one can, even to the point of exhausting oneself physically, to burn off a lot of the energy. As with dullness, there are many cures and ways to work with this.

Doubt (Vicikicchā)

The last of these classic hurdles and pitfalls is the quality of doubt, the mind caught in uncertainty. This is not the uncertainty of wise reflection on the transitory and unstable nature of all things. Rather, the type of doubt that is a pitfall in meditation leads to questions like, “What should I do next? Should I move now? Should I not move now? Who am I? What am I? Where do I come from? Where am I going? What shall I have for supper? Should I change my career? Should I change my partner? Should I change the wallpaper? Should I dye my hair? Change my glasses? Should I stop asking myself stupid questions? What should I do to get rid of this doubt?” Doubt is present when the mind caught in endless questioning and speculating and indecision, the state in which we’re caught in endless dilemmas.

When doubt takes over we think incessantly, attempting to think our way out of the doubt. Doubt is like a courtroom battle: No matter how much evidence is built up on one side, the lawyers will always come up with an argument to counteract it, because that’s what lawyers are paid to do. Even when a judgment is handed down and the case is finally decided, one side appeals and it all begins again. After that, the case can be taken to a higher court, and a higher court, and a higher court. In a similar way, the doubting mind will always pile up evidence. The fact is, we can’t analyse our way to the end of the doubt.

The best way to deal with doubt, to get the mind to drop the endless speculating and uncertainty, is to step out of the doubt; in essence we simply recognise, “This is a state of doubt.” The voice of doubt tells us that there is something missing, that when we get the answer to the question, we will be complete. Just like the belief that when we get rid of this pain in the knee, we will certainly be happy; when we get hold of some Chinese noodles, we will be happy; when we remember the words to the song, we will be happy. But it’s not true. Rather than believing in the story of it, the falsehood of it, one simply recognises, “This is just a doubt.” Our experience is complete in and of itself. Doubt is telling us that there’s a piece missing, but the actual reality is fully complete already. How could there truly be anything missing from the universe in this moment?

One last story: A number of years ago, myself and another monk were the secretaries and “Mr. Fix-its” of a large monastery in England called Amaravati. Amaravati at that time had a resident community of about 50 or 60 people and a lot of stuff was always happening there. People would come to the office when anything needed to be done or fixed or decided, asking, “What are we going to do about the roof on the nuns’ vihāra?” “What are we going to do about the water tank?” “What are we going to do about this teaching engagement?” Over and over again, I would find myself taking responsibility for the problem and looking after it myself. The other monk, who had an equal set of duties, always managed to avoid taking on the responsibility. I would wonder how, every time, he seemed to manage to do that. Then I noticed that when someone brought a question or a problem to us, I would come up with solutions or advice and take it on as my own concern. He, in contrast, would respond by saying, “Good question,” and asking what the person was going to do about it themselves. He wasn’t being lazy or evasive; he’d simply realised the value of this very skilful form of response that I just hadn’t ever thought to use.

So when the mind begs for an answer, we can respond with “Good question,” or simply recognise that this is a doubt. Doubts arise and pass away. Use any skilful means you can to get some leverage and step out of the story line of the doubt, out of that structure that says: “If I just had the answer to this I would be happy.” We can simply recognise that “this is a feeling,” that “there’s a question.” Although it seems like the universe will not be complete if we do not get the answer to the question, we can recognise that, in truth, the universe is complete already. It’s just that there is this one thing that happens not to be known. Then, we are able to shed all the turmoil that the doubting mind can generate.

Some people have very little difficulty with doubt; for others, it can be a major obstacle. The Buddha said doubt is like making a long journey through a desert. Getting to the other side of doubt, dropping doubt, is like getting through that desert safely. He also used the analogy of the mind in doubt being like cloudy water, muddy water. And not just any muddy water – he said it’s like muddy water in a bowl in a dark cupboard.

I once heard the Christian monk, Brother David Steindl-Rast, talk about the three principle vows of Christian monasticism: renunciation, celibacy, and obedience. He spoke of them in terms of three different conundrums. For “renunciation” there was “When I lose myself, I am more truly myself than at any other time”; for “celibacy” there was “When I am most intimately alone, I am most intimately one with all.” He talked about obedience in terms of the conundrum of, “When I drop the question, the answer is there.” Obedience is about listening. It comes from the Latin ob audiens, to be completely listening.

It’s similar to the way we work with compassion, as described in Lesson Five, and with intuition, as was discussed in the Questions of Lesson Three. We get through doubt by employing the same kind of process, by dropping the question or being able to say, “Good question,” or, “This is only a question. My experience is complete in and of itself.” When we approach doubt in this way, what we find is that the answer often appears. If you allow a bit of space around a doubt, then the answer arises from the intuition of your own heart. You cannot think your way to the end of a doubt, but when you leave it alone, when you give it some space, you can tap into your own intuition a lot more easily.