## Lesson Four The Giving and Receiving Heart

The theme of “The Giving and Receiving Heart” is very significant in Buddhist meditation, particularly in the southern Asian Buddhist countries in which the Theravāda tradition is practised, that is, Thailand, Burma, Sri Lanka, Laos, Cambodia and India. In the language the Buddha spoke, “Theravāda” means “the way of the elders,” as it aims to follow the standards of the earliest students of the Buddha. It is one of the oldest schools of Buddhism in Asia.

The quality of loving-kindness, or mettā, which is called here the practice of the giving and receiving heart, has been sustained in this tradition along with the other elements of meditation practice – concentration and insight – that are covered to some extent in the previous lessons. This quality is very heavily emphasised in this tradition. In the guided meditation at the end of this chapter, a few methods of developing it will be explored.

There is really no English equivalent to the word mettā. It has been translated as “loving-kindness,” “loving friendliness,” or “universal kindness.” To explain the character of this quality, the Buddha used the example of the love a mother has for her only child: unquestioning, unconditional affection. The aim of mettā practice, of loving-kindness, is to cultivate and develop that quality so that we will have that same kind of unquestioning benevolence, of unconditional kindness, towards all other beings regardless of their relationship to us or their qualities, whether they are humans or animals, whether they are friendly, indifferent or hostile, whatever their nature; the aim is to develop this kind of caring and friendliness towards all beings.

Developing the Giving Heart

One way to develop this quality is through a particular meditation technique that begins by imagining or thinking of someone we love dearly, someone towards whom we feel an automatic sense of affection and kindness or warmth. This can be, for example, a child, a partner, or even a pet. We bring to mind an image of that being in order to arouse that quality, an instinctual, complete and unequivocal sense of affection and kindness.

Spreading the Quality Spatially

We make the feeling fully conscious and then begin to extend it. There are different ways to do this. First, for example, we can extend the mettā in a spatial way.

We begin by spreading loving-kindness towards ourselves. Oftentimes, in the Judaeo-Christian culture in which we live, “number one” is lost on the affection list. We think of loving ourselves as a gross indulgence or an inflated quality; liking ourselves is unseemly and definitely unspiritual. But the Buddha pointed out that if we cannot have loving-kindness towards ourselves, then we cannot possibly have real loving-kindness towards any other being. So, all the different styles of practising loving-kindness meditation begin with kindness towards ourselves.

Everyone has certain personality traits they would rather do without or wish they could eliminate. So, in the beginning, it can be easier to relate to the idea of generating loving-kindness towards the body rather than to try to develop loving-kindness or benevolence towards the personality. We can feel the kind of friendliness and affection towards our own body that we have towards a pet, for example, towards our dog. When the master treats the dog with affection, the dog responds with great glee and is incredibly happy because the master is paying attention to it. The response is joyful, vigorous and friendly. Similarly, when we fill the body with the quality of attention and kindness, the body responds. The body cheers up a bit, and there is more energy and vitality, a quality of balance and vigour.

After beginning by filling our own being with this quality of kindness, we can expand it spatially. First, we extend the loving-kindness to other people in the room, then to the other beings in the building, and then slowly spread it out through the area of the town, the district, the county, the state, and all over the country.

Depending on how graphic the imagination is, we can witness this spreading as a warm, golden light slowly expanding across the face of the nation, north, south, in all directions, slowly and gently encircling the entire globe. Everywhere it reaches, it touches all creatures: plants and animals, insects, birds, fishes, all creatures small and great, and all human beings. This includes those in a good situation or in a painful situation, those who are beautiful or ugly, those who are sick, who are just born, and who are just dying. The imagination can play with all kinds of images. We can visualize the quality of loving-kindness encircling, embracing the entire planet, and even beyond that – spreading out from this little blue ball floating in this particular patch of the cosmos throughout the universe.

Using Different Categories of Beings

Another methodology to develop this quality is to go through the different categories of beings. Having begun with ourselves, we extend the feeling of loving-kindness to the beings we love, those who are very dear to us. Then we extend the feeling to those to whom we are indifferent. We then extend the feeling to those with whom we have conflict, or people who dislike us, or people towards whom we have feelings of aversion and negativity. We then spread this quality to the rest of the human realm, to people we do not know, those whom we admire, those to whom we are indifferent, those by whom we feel threatened or towards whom we feel aversion, even if we don’t know them personally. We extend this feeling to all different categories of human beings: the attractive, the neutral, and the unattractive.

After going through all types of human beings, we work our way through all of the other categories of beings. We can have a lot of fun imagining all the many-footed creatures, or the tiny microorganisms, or even the non-sentient elements of our world, the plants and the rocks and the streams. Or we can imagine the great beings, the elephants and whales; imagine creatures of all sizes. The idea of “all beings” also includes beings in other, invisible realms. These can be ghosts, or angelic beings, or demonic beings in other dimensions of the cosmos.

Depending on what is most effective for us, we can do this visualisation in this particular order or be more free-form and sculpt it as we choose. However we want to do it, we can create different patterns of spreading this feeling from the heart, the centre of our being, which is the generator of this beautiful sentiment and intention. We send forth the noble aspiration to meet every being with a quality of kindness and friendliness. This is the giving heart.

The Receiving Heart

During a meditation retreat, whether it is a day-long, a weekend, or a 10-day retreat, there is usually a guided meditation on mettā or loving-kindness. At this point, it is not uncommon for a participant to report that, until the mettā meditation, the retreat was going really well, but with the mettā meditation, enormous irritation arose. The participant felt annoyed at being asked to spread affection over the world when all that was felt was the inner grouch, the inner Scrooge that didn’t want to be bothered with any such sentimental nonsense; enormous resistance arose to the idea of glossing everything over with loving-kindness.

It can happen that the inner cynic gets roused as soon as we feel that we must be nice to everyone. This can result from a misunderstanding or misinterpretation of what is meant by loving-kindness. We can feel as though we are forcing ourselves to like everyone, as if we are obligated to see the world through a Walt Disneyesque pair of glasses. We think that we are supposed to have an attitude that “everything is nice.” Something in the heart can recoil from that.

It is important to understand that loving-kindness is not an attitude of trying to make oneself like everything. Having loving-kindness towards other beings – towards those who are harmful and destructive as well as those who are cuddly and pure-hearted – does not mean that we approve of their actions or pretend to like them. Rather, we are working to accept that this is the way things are right now. This is the receiving heart, the heart that accepts the way things are. We are also not trying to pretend that the bitter is sweet, or that cruelty is beautiful, or that anger is a wonderful thing. Bitterness, cruelty and anger are a part of life, however. Violence, selfishness, and jealousy are part of nature. They exist as elements of the natural world.

The Buddha often got the attention of his students with stories or similes with very graphic images, because this is one way that allows people to remember things easily. In this vein, one of the main teachings the Buddha gave on loving-kindness was a story that contained a simile. The Buddha asked the listeners to imagine that they were kidnapped by bandits, and that the bandits were sawing their arms and legs off with a two-handled saw. He then said that anyone who gave rise to a thought of hatred towards those people on that account would not be practising his teachings. The Buddha was not teaching that we should enjoy this torture or that we should be apologising to the bandits for the fact that our sinews are so tough, that we should not have eaten so much protein because it wouldn’t be so much work for them to chop us up. His teaching is intended to point out the self-centred gesture in the heart that makes somebody “other” or “evil,” that makes them intrinsically and absolutely bad or wrong, and to recognise that any movement of the heart in that direction is fundamentally out of accord with reality.

Even though what is happening can be painful, shocking, or unwanted, by practising loving-kindness we are able to find the space in the heart where we do not dwell in aversion or negativity towards other beings. This is something that we can do. The Buddha used this particularly graphic example to highlight the tendency we have to believe that at times a little bit of hatred may be reasonable or justified. But the Buddha teaches that this is never true, that as soon as we make someone “other,” as soon as we discriminate and make another being into something intrinsically apart, separate, or wrong, then we have at that moment lost touch with the reality of the situation.

Practising Mettā to Establish Peace in the Mind

Practising in this way is not a special kind of technique that one uses alongside of concentration practice or insight practice. It is more a matter of establishing the qualities of real kindness and acceptance as the basis of all meditation. We may consider ourselves to be nice and kind; mild, gentle people; to think that we don’t experience problems with violence or anger. But we may also find that in starting to practise meditation, unwanted thoughts and feelings come up and, in turn, we discover ourselves feeling extraordinary aversion towards them. We try to make the discursive mind shut up and go away. The meditation becomes a fight to wipe out thought, feeling, anger or distraction so that we can be peaceful and experience a more spiritual life. The very method we have chosen to establish peace is completely disturbing.

An important element of Buddhist practice is to understand that the means and the end are completely unified. In Buddhist understanding, the means does not justify the end. Rather, the means is the end. If we use harsh and aggressive means to control the mind, to wipe out distraction, to force the mind not to feel fear or aversion or desire, that fierce, aggressive, discordant attitude will influence the result. Whereas if we use a gentle, peaceful and harmonious means to work with the mind, the natural result will be that the mind will reflect those same qualities.

Kindness towards Oneself

Working with kindness towards oneself in meditation does not mean just sitting back and thinking that whatever happens in the meditation is fine, just letting the mind do whatever it wants. Instead, practising mettā in this way is similar to the way a mother trains a child or an owner a pet. The mother doesn’t simply let the child do whatever the child wants to do; some discipline needs to be established. Similarly, in meditation, we establish the basis of kindness by first recognising that everything belongs in our meditation, nothing should be left out. The distractive thought belongs. The focus on the breath belongs. The wave of anger belongs. The wave of fear, the restless sensations, the fantasies, they all belong, along with the benevolent and pure thoughts.

That quality of absolute belonging, that everything has its place, is the basis of loving-kindness, of wholehearted acceptance. Then, on that basis of wholehearted acceptance, we bring in discriminative wisdom. This means that we recognise the value of training the mind to focus, like seeing the value in training a three-year-old how to handle a spoon, how to feed herself; or in toilet-training a child; or housebreaking a puppy. Seeing the need to train a child or an animal in this way is not solving a spiritual problem, but is, rather, seeing the value in a practical necessity. Similarly, we can see that there is a value in training the mind to develop awareness. But this training does not happen by starting a war against thought or by hating emotions.

For example, if we want to drive to a particular place that is north of where we are, we drive north, not south. That does not mean that south is bad or wrong or evil. Similarly, in meditation, we do not hold the attitude that a thought, an emotion, or an idea is evil. We simply do not want to follow the mind in that direction. We want the mind to focus on the breath rather than on plans or memories or problem solving. So the discrimination is made on the basis of practicality and simplicity, not on wanting the thought or feeling to be eradicated because it does not belong or by trying to force the mind to behave using a Draconian methodology. We direct the mind by applying intention and effort with wholehearted acceptance and benevolence. It’s a cooperative effort with our nature, not a struggle against it.