## Lesson Five Wisdom and Compassion

The subjects for this lesson are wisdom and compassion. In the last lesson, we talked about the first of the Brahma vihāras or divine abidings, which is loving-kindness, or mettā in Pali, the language of the Buddhist scriptures. The second of these sublime qualities is karunā, which is compassion, and in many ways, compassion and wisdom are necessary counterparts.

Compassion

We tend to think of compassion as a state of empathy. Oftentimes, when we feel compassion for other people, or other beings, we experience suffering along with them. As mentioned before, the word “compassion” in English literally means “to suffer with.” In contrast, the Buddhist concept of compassion involves a profound and complete empathy, but not suffering along with the other person. The Buddha pointed out that if you experience suffering because of your practice of compassion towards another, you haven’t got it quite right. In true compassion the way it’s practised in Buddhism, one feels profound empathy for the suffering of other beings, yet one is not experiencing suffering oneself. As with many areas of Buddhist practice, in the Western English-speaking Judaeo-Christian mindset there is no conceptual framework or word that quite encompasses that idea. Empathy is close, but the Buddhist concept is much more extensive than that. So, to understand compassion in the Buddhist sense, we have to describe how this quality works and then just let a sense of its meaning formulate within us.

One of the best ways of getting an insight into compassion is by using imagery from the northern Buddhist tradition, which includes Buddhism as practised in China, Japan, Tibet and Korea. A key figure in their spiritual life and practice is the figure of Quan Yin, often represented as an elegant, feminine figure. Her full name, in Chinese, is Quan Shi Yin, which literally means “the one who listens to the sounds of the world.” In Sanskrit, the name is Avalokiteshvara, meaning “the one who regards the sounds of the world.” So the name embodies the real spirit of what is meant by compassion in Buddhism, the listening heart that can attend to all things, that receives and takes in the beautiful as well as the ugly, the painful and the difficult. The heart is attentive to and knows, and allows all the aspects of life without reacting to them. The heart does not get swept away by the beautiful, swamped by the painful or the ugly, carried off on a tide of tears for the pain that other beings are experiencing. The heart fully listens and attends to it all.

In Buddhist iconography, Quan Yin is the bodhisattva, the embodiment of compassion. In the Buddhist world, icons or religious statues, such as a Buddha image on a shrine, are revered. Buddhists respect Gotama Buddha as the teacher, but the point of Buddhist practice is to internalize what these images represent. If one does not internalize the qualities of these enlightened beings, the practice becomes ineffective and is missing the real point. It’s not just a matter of looking at external beings or objects and idolising them, or looking up to a compassionate ideal. The main point is to internalize the compassionate ideal and to discover that quality, the listening heart, within ourselves, to cultivate and develop that.

In a sense, this quality of compassion involves identifying with the whole universe, with all other beings, feeling that everything is self, expanding the heart to include everything. One creates an empathy or an identification with, an attunement to all things. That said, this principle may be confusing in light of the wisdom teachings, which are discussed below. With the development of wisdom, one takes the opposite approach, which is to consider that nothing is self. This apparent contradiction is true to form, for even during the Buddha’s lifetime, there were people from different sects who complained, “It’s impossible to get a straight answer out of the Buddha or his disciples!”

One way to hold these seeming contradictions is to see wisdom and compassion as being like the wings of a bird. We need to have both of these elements. The word “lama” in Tibetan, as in “Dalai Lama,” which means spiritual teacher or figure, illustrates this. “La” comes from the Tibetan word for wisdom, and “ma” comes from the word for compassion. These two qualities are reflected right in the very name for a teacher. The Third Zen Patriarch from China said: “In this world of suchness/There is neither self nor other than self,” thus pointing to the mysterious ineffable reality that we are. So, we can look at it from the side of compassion and say, “Everything is self! I am the universe. What I am is connected to everything in the universe – mental and physical.” We are not just isolated entities, but we are connected with all of nature, to all things through the natural order, both physical and mental.

Wisdom and Compassion Working Together

The counterpart of the idea that “everything is self ” is that “nothing is self.” There is nothing one can point to that is truly and absolutely the essence of what one is as an individual. So the wisdom teachings emphasise this aspect of the nature of reality. Suppose I hold up my hand and I say, “I’m pointing to the left.” You’re facing me, and you say, “No, you’re pointing to the right.” We are both looking at the same thing, but from different perspectives. It is like the left wing and the right wing of a bird – they are the opposites of each other, mirror images of each other, yet their shape is also identical.

Wisdom and compassion work like this. In a way, they are mirror images of each other, but they emanate from the same source. They are like the wings of a bird, which the bird needs in order to fly, and both of which emerge from the body of the bird.

The Development of Wisdom

When we talked about knowing and thinking in Lesson Three, we touched on this aspect of insight meditation practice, developing the quality of wisdom. This involves drawing upon the quality of knowing, an awareness that understands, that sees all of the patterns of experience in terms of evanescent changing phenomena.

In developing wisdom, we look at the world of thought, of feeling, of mood, of memory, of ideas; we look at the feeling of self, at the impressions of the world outside through sight, sound, smell, taste, or physical sensations. We begin to look at the process of experiencing all of these as things that are within awareness rather than focusing on the content, such as whether the object of experience is beautiful or ugly, pleasant or unpleasant. We withdraw the attention from the content of particular experiences, and, with the development of wisdom or insight, look at the very process of experience itself.

We deliberately withdraw the focus from the specific characteristics of the sense objects and look at all experience in terms of the universal characteristics of transience, of change, of uncertainty, of selflessness, and of unsatisfactoriness. We learn to see that no aspect of our experience can truly be who and what we are – not even the sense of self, the feeling of I, me, and mine, which seems so solid and matter-of-fact, an unquestioned aspect of our everyday reality.

Where Is the Owner?

When we really look, we can begin to discern that the feeling of self arises and is known by the quality of awareness in the mind. There is a feeling of self, but this feeling of “I” is just a feeling like any other feeling. It arises, it is experienced and then it fades away. What is it that knows that feeling? If what is being known is the feeling itself, who is it that’s knowing it? And who is it that knows the knowing of that? And so on:

So naturalists observe, a flea Has smaller fleas that on him prey; And these have smaller still to bite ’em, And so proceed ad infinitum. ~ Jonathan Swift, Poetry; a Rhapsody

These successions as we try to identify the knower can seem endless. We come to realize that the back wall is actually the quality of knowing itself, and not the idea of knowing. We can rest the heart in the quality of awareness and begin to see more and more of the features to which we ascribe the quality of self or other, like a thought, or a feeling, or a shape or a sound, a memory, or an idea. One cannot actually find any quality of permanence or stability or individuality within any of these. All the things we normally think of as me and mine – my possessions, my name, my social security number, my story, my future, my body, my thoughts, my emotions, etc. – when we try to look for the thing that is the owner, we cannot find any separate definable substance, quality, or located factor that is the owner. There is the knowing and the parade of experiences out of which we form “me,” “the world,” “you” – these different conventional realities.

When we investigate, we can see that the feeling of solidity that the sense of self possesses is something that has a conventional reality. There is a partial truth to it, but we solidify it and say, for example, “I am this person. Everyone tells me that I am this person, when they call my name and are referring to me,” and then we feel that this is what we are in essence, truly.

An interesting meditation is to just meditate on one’s own name. Concentrate and calm the mind, focus the attention and then just say your name, very clearly and steadily, just once or twice, without even saying “I am…” first, just the name, like, “Mary,” “Amaro.” Suddenly, the name starts to seem a little peculiar. We begin to see that the thing to which we refer is much bigger than the collection of personality, the body, the memories and ideas that we habitually think of as “me.”

With the wisdom teachings, we are trying to break down the habitual limitations that are created and imposed on the idea of “me” – that we are this individual, live in this place, are this body, this personality, etc. We let the heart awaken to the reality that is much bigger than that, much more than that.

Staying Balanced

If one obsesses on the wisdom teachings, one can get a bit too spacious and disconnected from the world, from the body, from the simple practical realities of living. On the other hand, obsessing too much on the compassion side can make us incredibly busy and burnt out with all of the good works that we’re involved in and with caring for all beings on the planet.

So, even though it can seem paradoxical to hold them both simultaneously, it is important to keep in mind that we need to do just that; the two qualities support each other, even though they are each other’s mirror images. To the rational mind, this can be highly frustrating – we want to know which one is true and can’t quite believe that they both can be. But this is the wonderful thing about the Middle Way: it encompasses both of these aspects as partial or conventional realities, as contingent or determined realities.

Compassion and Listening

Once you have established a degree of concentration, with the attention able to stay reasonably steady in the present moment, you will notice a certain amount of chattering in the mind. This is an internal monologue, dialogue, multi-logue, in which the members of the internal committee do not wait for each other to finish before they chime in with their own views and opinions and chatter merrily away. As we train the mind to concentrate, we find different inner voices coming up, such as voices of excitement (“What I really want is…”), or voices of criticism (“She’s a really useless person”), or voices of anger (“When I get my hands on him, I’m going to tell him!”), or voices of regret (“If I hadn’t done such-and-such, back when I was 19, it would all have been really, really different; if I hadn’t done that one really dumb thing; if I could just re-write the past…”).

As an example, for probably the first five or six years of my monastic life, I spent incredible amounts of time scripting the future. I stopped because, after five or six years of watching this happen, I realised that not one single time did reality comply with my plans. At times I would very determinedly follow my script – even when the other actors didn’t get their lines right, I would continue with the script that I had written. But after five or six years of seeing that this relentless planning never worked, something in the heart shifted and just give this strategy up – perhaps it was a version of the law of natural selection!

Working With the Internal Committee

On a very personal and internal level, by practising compassion and wisdom, we learn how to listen to our own minds, to the voices of the internal committee. This committee has a great variety of opinions and voices: the assertive-aggressive ones, the logical-reasonable ones, the emotional-feeling ones, the quiet-sensible ones, the passive-aggressive ones, the outright wild ones. We can effectively ground the practice of compassion for ourselves in learning to listen to all the different voices of our character as they arise.

Often, we try to get the internal voices to just be quiet. However, we find, generally, the more we try to suppress them or push them away, the more life we give them. Pesticides are a good analogy. Pesticide manufacturers are usually about one year or 18-months ahead of the bugs. They have to keep developing new poisons, because the bugs with resistance to the pesticide survive, so in effect the pesticide manufacturers are breeding super bugs! The mind is exactly the same. If we use mental pesticide to try to make our issues go away, we just keep making the problem stronger.

Rather than pushing away the repetitive thoughts and habitual voices of the mind, the judgements, or the things that are seen as irritating intruders, we get can them to speak up, to take centre stage and tell their story. That gesture itself can be enough to make the voices quiet down. By giving them centre stage, we ruin the show. With all the bright lights on, we can see all the wrinkles and the strings that are pulling them.

For example, the thought “I’m a terrible meditator” murmurs in the back of the mind. We concentrate the mind, make it quite clear and steady, and then say, “I am a failed meditator. I am useless at this. This has no value whatsoever. Other people are good meditators. I go to retreats, to classes. But everyone is much more peaceful than me.” In saying this and making it conscious, we become aware that the heart knows this is not the whole story. But when it is not fully conscious and clear, we can still believe it and be guided and influenced by that belief. Even though the mind might be saying something we don’t want to hear, by saying it out loud, we can hear it most clearly, and its power over us diminishes. This is only one example; there can be many things the mind obsesses on. Self-criticism is just a particularly common one.

One of my teachers, Ajahn Sumedho, often referred to an obsessive thought he had in his first year as a novice monk, when he was living in a hut by himself for a year in northeast Thailand. Out of nowhere, he had the thought, “Gwendolyn, what are you to me?” Then he thought, “Gwendolyn? I don’t know any Gwendolyns. I’ve never met a Gwendolyn in my life! That’s just a stupid thought – get out of here!” Then the thought, “Gwendolyn, what are you to me?” came back. The more he tried to push this thought away, the more it kept returning. He had to learn a lot about obsessive thinking and this method of reflection. Eventually he found that only by acknowledging the thought fully was he able to release it and allow it to fade on its own.

Watching the Mind Create the Sense of Self

In these ways, the mind creates a sense of self. We can use this technique of expressing and acknowledging our thoughts, instead of repressing them, to become fully aware of them. We may experience the flip-side of the self-criticism example described above and think, “As meditators go, as spiritual people go, I really have to admit that I am ahead of pretty much everyone I know.” For most of us, it’s almost impossible to imagine having this thought. But for those who are prone to becoming arrogant and inflated, by mentally expressing these thoughts clearly, the heart realizes that they are no more the whole story than the self-criticism is.

Without articulating these thoughts, the heart cannot know the reality. Without learning to listen, one does not really tap into the heart. By developing this kind of direct compassion and by listening to thoughts, judgments and obsessions, one can tap into the intuition underneath the habitual beliefs and judgments.

The wisdom aspect of the meditation, which was touched on in Lesson Three, empowers this process of looking at every thought and every feeling. When a thought comes to mind, one can apply and develop wisdom by noticing that these thoughts are ephemeral, changing, and selfless. One uses insight to then reflect, “This is something that is changing,” “Who does this really belong to? Does this have an owner?”

For example, the feeling of pain in the leg arises. We sense the feeling and then, by watching it, realize through its arising, changing and passing that feelings come and go and change. We notice the qualities of the feeling, such as a cramped or strained quality. We inquire as to what it is that knows that; we look to see if the feeling has an owner, if it is really “mine.” If it feels like “mine,” what is the quality that makes it mine? What is it that is the owner? In meditation, we take these little lines of inquiry slowly and steadily and watch the effect of this investigation. Calling the feeling “the experience of pain” creates some space around it that wasn’t there before. Knowing that it’s just a feeling of pain is what is meant by insight or wisdom; we recognise the spacious natural quality that all experience has.

Letting Go of the Sense of I, Me and Mine

One goal of Buddhist practice is to let go of the sense of I, me and mine in relationship to experience, as the possessor of experience – the sense of a concrete self having the experience. In meditation, we dig layer by layer to uncover the attributes which we assume without question are “mine,” such as “my” memories, “my” ideas, “my” personality, “my” heart. We go right down into the nitty-gritty, into the deepest reaches, and keep dropping in the gentle reflection: “When I say ‘my,’ what does that mean? Does this really have an owner? Who is it that owns this?” With these kind of questions we do not look for a verbal answer, an answer provided by our conceptual mind. In fact, if there is a verbal answer, it’s necessarily the wrong one.

We ask a question like, “What is it that knows this?” to deconstruct the habitual response: “Me.” Posing that kind of question in the spaciousness of awareness allows the heart for a moment to know that there is just the knowing. There is not really a person or an individual who is doing the knowing. The awareness is a formless quality of being. We ask the question, or make the statement, to break down the habitual response. The point is then just to let the heart rest in that quality of knowing. This way we draw together the aspect of compassion – which allows everything in and listens to all the different attributes of our being and of the world – and the wisdom aspect, which is what sees through them. This is what brings us to the sacred, wonderful middle.