## Lesson Three Knowing versus Thinking

In the first two lessons, we examined the qualities of focus and concentration in meditation: how to bring the mind to a single point, to train the mind to be able to attend to the present moment. However, focus and concentration by themselves are not particularly liberating qualities. Being focused or concentrated can be very peaceful and pleasant, but through them alone one does not develop the type of understanding that is the goal of insight meditation.

Concentration and Insight

The Buddha distinguished between two levels, or layers, of meditation practice. In the first, which was covered in Lessons One and Two, one lays a foundation of calmness, tranquility and focus. The second level, which is liberating for the heart in the deepest way, is the development of wisdom or an actual understanding of the way things are – what we truly are, how we exist and how we fit into the universe.

Sometimes the two levels of meditation are presented as distinct or separate from each other, with each level having its own techniques. However, Ajahn Sumedho, an American monk and the head of the Thai forest lineage of Ajahn Chah in the West, and Ajahn Chah himself have both stressed that it is more accurate to see these levels as being part of a natural continuum rather than seeing them as unrelated, distinct qualities. It is more accurate to describe them as a single, fundamental actuality with different phases or attributes, like the blossom on an apple tree and a bite of the fully ripe apple. They appear different from each other, just as the flower is not the same as the apple, but in a way they are elements of the same process.

Developing Insight

Insight is developed on a basis of calmness, because only when the mind is calm and steady can one begin to let go of the particular meditation object that has been used as an anchor and attend to the fabric of experience in the present moment. Lesson Two discussed letting go of the breath and stepping back and witnessing the space in which the breath moves, experiencing that spaciousness. By developing the meditation in this way, its steadiness becomes firmly established, i.e., the boat is steady in the water. Then one can let go of the meditation object and start to employ the natural faculties of wisdom or knowing. One lets go more and more deeply of the content of experience and learns to witness the process of experience.

How it Works

This is how it works: the meditation starts with focusing on the breath on a particular object. Once the mind is clearly established and firmly placed in the present moment, one lets go of focusing on the breath, or the other meditation object, and opens the heart to the whole flow of experience. This flow might include hearing sounds of birds chirping, or feeling a sensation in the legs, or having a sudden memory, or remembering something that’s in the refrigerator to have for a snack after the meditation. There are lots of different stray thoughts, ideas or feelings through which the mind can wander. But with the development of insight meditation, rather than focusing on the content, whatever it might be, one focuses instead at the whole process of experience. Rather than trying to figure out what kind of bird made the sound, one notices sound arising and passing away, or one notices a thought arising and passing away or a sensation in the body, such as a feeling in the leg, arising and passing away.

The idea is to look at the quality of the changing nature of experience and to deliberately turn the attention away from the content, even if the mind is greatly interested in the subject, such as what to have for a snack later. During the meditation period, one doesn’t pay any attention to the content of one’s thoughts. For example, there is no interest in what one’s grandmother is doing but just in the fact that a thought or memory of one’s grandmother arises, abides and fades away. One uses the model of letting go from Lesson Two to release the mind’s involvement in the stories it tells, to stand back and watch the waves of events, the patterns of experience coming and going and changing.

Steadying the Awareness

As was described in Lesson Two, one begins to find that the quality of knowing, of awareness, holds steady. The awareness becomes clear and spacious. One begins to witness the flow of events and patterns of thought and feeling, both in the world inside and the world outside. Everything happens within the same spacious arena.

The True Nature of Experience

By letting go of the content of the experience and training the mind and heart to rest in the spacious, accepting knowing, one begins to notice that the content isn’t all that interesting. When the heart is firmly established in the quality of knowing, it is immaterial whether what comes into that arena is attractive or painful, interesting or boring, or whether the same thought has arisen a thousand times already. One can rest in this spacious and knowing quality and feel the process of experience. One begins to understand that the nature of experience is to change, while one begins to see the fundamentally selfless quality of experience as well.

For example: the thought of an experience unique to one’s life or a very personal memory arises. Then the sound of a bird or a car driving past arises. One can notice that the memory seems to belong only to oneself, to be an integral part of one’s identity, part of “me.” But the sound of the car going past does not feel like “me.” It seems external to oneself.

However, when one is firmly established in this spacious quality of awareness, one realizes that the personal memory and the sound of the car both arise and pass away; they both happen in the same space. One has the insight that the labels one puts on experience, such as “me” or “not me” or “outside of me,” are just labels tacked onto the experience and not the experience itself. Stepping back far enough from the content of the experience allows one to realize that all experience arises and passes away; the personal thought, the deep emotion, the random noise, all arise and pass away. They are all patterns of nature welling into being and subsiding.

The Impersonal Nature of Experience

With this insight comes the intuitive wisdom of the heart that recognizes these phenomena are all just patterns of nature. Before the realization happens, one is inclined to label some phenomena as “me,” some phenomena as “not me” or “the world,” and for some phenomena we are unsure whether they are internal or external or just what they are. But with the development of insight, this wisdom of the heart, one begins to realize that all phenomena that arise and pass away are just patterns of nature.

With this realization, one is able to begin letting go of taking things so personally. For example, one can remember a wonderful, blissful experience, or a great achievement, or a moment when one was truly loved. These seem like moments when we got it right, perfect moments. And one can remember a terrible, shattering experience where it all went wrong, such as the breakup of a relationship or a failure. These were moments of terrible pain. Then one can remember something thoroughly mundane, like the sound of a car going past. One begins to see that whether something is experienced as inside oneself or outside of oneself or as “the world,” the mind and heart can awaken to the fact that calling it “self ” or “other,” “inside” or “outside,” is just a conventional designation. It is really just the patterns of nature coming into being, unfolding, and fading away, and it is all held within a unifying quality of knowing, awareness.

What is being discussed here is not a doctrinal, dogmatic truth that one is supposed to believe in. Meditation in Buddhism is a process of investigation; we find out the nature of experience for ourselves. The guided meditation at the end of this lesson is designed to lead to this type of exploration, to enable one to discover the same kind of impersonal quality of experience for oneself. This type of exploration is not a mind game in which one tries to rearrange patterns of thinking or experience just for the sake of the rearrangement itself. The point is that this re-visioning of experience can have a very radical effect on the way one experiences who and what one is.

Working with the Self

Ajahn Sumedho is a great meditation master. At times, he would say to his monks and nuns, “As soon as I think about myself, I feel depressed.” The natural response is to think that Ajahn Sumedho has a problem with depression. But if one practises meditation in this way for some time, one begins to notice that as soon as one thinks about oneself, as soon as one looks at life in terms of one’s preferences, what one likes, what one wants, or what one is, or could be, should be, might have been, might still be, etc., a contraction happens in the body and mind around the “self.” If one shifts the frame of reference from the self to nature as a whole, one finds that nature has a naturally spacious and calming quality to it. On the other hand, one feels a stickiness or density in the presence of “me-ness.”

Human beings long for freedom. We all try to find a place, a position, a livelihood or a relationship within which we can be a free person. But meditation helps one discover that “I” can never be free. The person can never be free because the person, the ego, is the prison.

It is important to remember that the ego is not an enemy, an evil monster that one must get rid of. The ego is very useful. It is a very handy social tool. We need individual identities to function in society. For example, if one did not have an individual identity, when getting pulled over on the highway by a police officer or trying to cash a check at a bank and being asked for identification, how would one respond? Identities are necessary in order to function in the world.

But with meditation one starts to investigate the feeling of “I-ness” and “me-ness” and “my-ness.” One comes to realize that this feeling is ephemeral; it comes into being and it fades away, just like everything else in nature. As one develops the meditation, one starts to see more and more layers of what one thinks one is – the memories, the thoughts, the moods, the feelings, the ideas that make up what one perceives as the self. One sees that these memories, thoughts, moods, feelings, ideas, are not who and what one is.

One begins to look at what it is that experiences that feeling of I, me and mine, to reflect on that and work with it. By investigating what it is that knows, a quality of relief and ease arises with the knowledge that the memories, thoughts, moods, feelings, and ideas are not who and what one is. They are just passing patterns of experience.

Knowing What We Are is Not the Point

In the 45 years during which he taught after his enlightenment, the Buddha was quite determined not to create an idea of precisely what we are. Instead he was very clear about what we are not: our thoughts, our body, our ideas, our moods, our achievements or our faults, our problems. The question may then naturally arise: What am I? What is the self?

The Buddha kept reiterating that this is the wrong question. Rather than trying to define what we are, we learn to let go of what we are not. And then the reality of our nature becomes apparent. As soon as one tries to define what one is with concepts, to define an essence of the self, one is bound to be frustrated. Just as if we try to pour three-dimensional tea into a two-dimensional drawing of a tea cup, the reality cannot fit into the proposed container – and it’s not as if a better drawing will help! Intrinsically, it cannot do the job that is being asked of it.

Not finding a conceptual answer to the question of who we are, what we are, can be frustrating to the ordinary mind. People would beg the Buddha to give a direct answer. But the Buddha was absolutely resolute in saying that the important thing is to train the heart to understand and let go of what we are not. Through that knowing, the reality of the fundamental nature of how not only we but all things exist will become apparent. He was clear that the experience of reality cannot be put into concepts or words.

That said, we might come to the conclusion that all conceptual thought is of no substantial use; ironically, the truth is far from this.

Using the Conceptual Mind in Meditation

When one starts to meditate, one begins to notice that the initial experience can be like having three or four radios on simultaneously, all on different stations. One may feel that it would be nice just to stop thinking, to be able to switch all of the stations off, that this would be peaceful. In that way, one can start to believe that the goal of meditation is wiping out all thoughts.

It is true that in meditation we train the mind to become calm and focused in order to reduce the thinking to a degree, or even on occasion to make the mind completely quiet. But, just like having a conventional identity, rational thought can be an extraordinarily useful tool. A few well-placed thoughts can save one a lot of confusion, even in meditation. One can use thought in meditation, for example, to realize that one is suffering because one is not getting what one wants and to see that this has been going on for quite a while. This realization can ease that suffering, as one begins to let go of wanting what one is not getting.

The Nature of Contemplation

Even though ordinarily, we think about knowledge, ideas, and understanding in terms of rational, discursive thinking and having a good conceptual framework, in this context, contemplation does not mean using the mind to try to sort things out logically. Rather, when the mind is focused and steady, the quality of the attention one can then bring to whatever is arising is spacious, open, and embracing. The focus is not on a particular object like the breath. Rather, a thought or feeling arises naturally, and the mind can investigate it within that space of openness. One can do this with any attribute of life or aspect of spiritual teachings.

For example, one notices the arising of terror at the thought of dying, or the arising of excitement at the thought of a particular kind of experience. Or the thought arises that one feels most genuine and fulfilled when helping someone else. Through the meditation as practised in the first two lessons, one has established a steadiness in the mind that allows for an open field of experience, the fertile space of the mind. Then, within that space, a thought arises naturally, or one chooses a thought to drop into it, like the thought of dying or of helping others. One allows the intuitive wisdom of the heart that is present in that open and fertile space to be seeded by that thought, and then examines the nature of one’s experience within the quality of that space. For example, one can look at why it feels good to be praised but uncomfortable to be criticized. One drops the question or reflection into the pool and then watches what crystallizes from it.

This is very different from trying to figure things out logically; it’s a much more spacious process. When one contemplates in this way, the thought or pattern being contemplated takes shape for a moment and then, as one contemplates it, one touches into the nature of all things. This is because the heart and mind are of the same nature as the universe which, in Buddhist language, is described as Dhamma. The fundamental nature of our being is Dhamma or reality, which is intrinsically related or connected to the nature of all things. In this way, through contemplation, we discover our intrinsic attunement to all of life.

Being with the Mystery

As human beings, we are constantly asking questions like, “What is this about?” “How does this connect with that?” The response may arise in the mind that the connection is a mystery, that we can’t understand it. With ordinary conceptual thought, we try to replace the mystery, or the not knowing, with an idea or a belief, or with an answer we derive by using logic. When the ego meets the unknown, it experiences fear, anxiety or terror, and wants to fill it up with knowledge or belief, or a plan, with something that makes it feel secure. But with contemplation we find the heart is more at ease in not knowing, in leaving these questions as a mystery. We approach them from the heart rather than from the ego or the thinking mind. The heart is much more at ease with not knowing, with experiencing the unknown as a mystery and with a feeling of wonderment.

The fundamental distinction between the ordinary conceptual mind and the mind in contemplation or insight practice, between thinking and knowing, in the way that we use this term in Buddhist practice, is that this type of knowing is not a knowing about something. It is not about acquiring facts. It is the quality of awareness itself; this is the key piece. We usually think of knowing as having data, recognizing a pattern, knowing how something works. However, the aim of this other approach to knowing is to establish the heart in pure awareness, in intuitive wisdom, in the pattern that recognizes the quality of our being that is intrinsically attuned to the whole of the living universe.

Even Just for a Moment

This is not an easy practice. But this awareness can arise as even just a momentary realization; it can happen in half a second or less. In the time that it takes to snap one’s fingers, as the Buddha taught, one can have the realization that one is not one’s thoughts or moods, that everything is changing, or that nothing can really be possessed, or that the story of experience is really just happening inside oneself.

In the Buddhist view of the world, one’s actions have results, and one tries to act in ways that are good so that the results of those actions will also be good. This is the idea of “karma.” In Asia, where the Buddha lived and taught, the making of offerings, especially to monastics, is a very important practice for creating good karma, and therefore is a major part of the practice of Buddhism for laypeople. And holding in the heart an attitude of what Buddhists call metta or “loving-kindness” is another very important practice for creating good karma. The Buddha taught that making offerings of valuable gifts to the poor, to the spiritual community, or even to the fully enlightened Buddha would not be as spiritually beneficial as bringing forth loving-kindness in the heart for the time it takes to milk a cow (which is about 20 minutes).

Even so, the Buddha taught that one creates even more good karma by holding the insight that everything is always changing merely for the duration of a finger-snap. One finger-snap of clarity into the nature of how things really are outweighs the good karma of any quantity of material offerings. Now that’s something to think about…

Vipassanā: Insight Practice

In Pali, the language of the Buddha, this practice is called vipassanā. Vipassanā simply means “looking inwards” or insight. Vi here means inwards, passati is the verb “to see.” The looking inwards is vipassanā.

In addition to referring to the methodology used to look inwards, vipassanā also means the change of heart that comes with the realization of freedom, of inner spaciousness. This insight is the most important piece. In the guided meditation that follows, we’ll aim to look at this in some depth.