## On Walking Meditation

In amongst the various aspects of spiritual training in the Forest Tradition, of those that emphasise the physical dimension, one in particular stands out – walking meditation. This is not that well known as a method of mind training outside of certain Buddhist circles.

For most people the word “meditation” immediately brings to mind an image of someone seated in the lotus posture with eyes gently closed, back erect and countenance serene. Even when the most materialistic of corporations, such as car manufacturers, credit card companies or life assurance dealers, want to convey a spiritual element to their promises, this is the archetypal image that they use.

In many systems of Buddhist meditation, and particularly in the Forest Tradition, however, it is customary and considered highly beneficial to intersperse the periods of sitting meditation, which usually last about an hour, with corresponding periods of walking meditation, of an equal duration. This was a practice that the Buddha developed and sustained throughout his life.

The methodology is very simple:

You establish a path on as flat a piece of ground as you can find – ideally about 20-25 yards long – and determine what your two end points will be, say between a certain rock at one end and a large tree at the other. Before beginning the walking practice you stand still at one end of the path and sweep the attention up and down through your body, to establish an awareness of the body’s presence and to relax before beginning. When a mindful awareness of the body has been made firm, you start walking.

There are a variety of different objects of focus that can be used for walking meditation – just as with sitting meditation – but generally the most accessible is simply the feeling of the feet touching the ground as one walks along at an easy, natural pace. As the mind wanders into memories and plans, or is distracted by the varying sights and sounds, you just keep letting go and returning the attention to the present moment, returning to the sensation of the feet along the path.

In this way the body and its movement, oscillating between the two ends of the path, becomes like the feeling of the breath, oscillating between the inhalation and the exhalation. This natural cycle thus serves to be a focal point, bringing the attention to the reality of the present, and is a calming influence for the many kinds of distracted thought.

When walking meditation is well-developed, there can be found within it a stillness of being, a spiritual restfulness that is easily equivalent to that found in the more stationary mode of sitting meditation. You find that there is a clear awareness of the movements of the body but, since awareness is always “here,” there is a motionlessness that forms the environment within which the motion is taking place. This is what Ajahn Chah would call being like “still, flowing water.”