## Lesson One Posture and Focus

The themes for the first lesson are posture and focus, the foundation for a beneficial meditation practice. These elements are the main starting point for meditation practice, and they apply to both the mind and the body.

It is easy to have the impression, whether reading or hearing or thinking about meditation, that the practice is concerned simply with the mind: we think of it primarily in terms of a mental activity. In today’s culture, we see more and more advertisements using images of people sitting cross-legged with their eyes closed as a symbol for the meditation process – the cross-legged, closed-eyed yogi. If one has attempted meditation before, however, one realizes very quickly that as soon as we try to sit like the person in the advertisements – in that sort of upright, ever so attentive, beautifully-balanced posture – that, first of all, the legs need a little persuading to get into that position. And, once the legs are crossed and one is holding the body upright, within a few minutes one encounters a protest emanating from the knee joints, or from the back or the hip joints. It becomes very apparent, very quickly, that the body is involved with the meditation – it’s not just something that is a function of the mind.

This is not an accidental and unfortunate circumstance – at least from the traditional Buddhist perspective. One sees right from the very beginning that the training, which is what meditation is, involves both body and mind. So, just as meditation does not relate solely to the mind, “posture” refers not just to physical posture, but also to mental posture. And similarly, the idea of “focus” involves both the body and the mind. Essentially, for both posture and focus, one is aspiring to cultivate a quality of balance of two particular elements: an element of energy or alertness, balanced with the element of relaxation, calmness or peacefulness. For example, the meditation posture we see most commonly, such as in sitting Buddha images, in which the Buddha sits cross-legged with his back upright, has been found to be one of the ideal ways to achieve the balance of energy and relaxation, which in turn assists in development of the qualities of calmness, wisdom and attention.

Energy and Relaxation

When we try to meditate, it is easy for us to veer unconsciously to the extremes, just as when learning to ride a bicycle at first we wobble and lurch from side to side. One such extreme is experienced when the body and the mind are too energised to establish the qualities of calmness and attention. They can be very charged or excited, with the mind revved up, very interested or alert, and the body restless. This is usually caused by something that is frightening or exciting. In the usual run of events the quality of arousal or alertness is brought about by some kind of emotionally charged stimulus.

Conversely, relaxation is generally epitomised by the image of being flopped in an armchair. It’s a lazy Sunday afternoon and the feet are up, and maybe there’s music playing in the background or the TV is on. One is not really paying attention; the mind is dozing and drifting, and the mind and body are completely relaxed. There is an intrinsic implication of being half-conscious, of being not quite with it, or being half asleep. Relaxation is generally viewed as just switching off.

From a Buddhist perspective, the idea is to find that quality of being, that quality of mind and body in which the elements of relaxation and energy are both maximised and in balance with each other. It is a principle of Buddhism – and also what one finds with investigation, when one looks at the mind – that when one learns to calm the mind and look into its nature deeply, it becomes more and more alert and more and more peaceful. The attention is attuned to the reality of the present much more acutely. Briefly, the more and more clearly one sees the way things are, the more one recognises that the fundamental nature of mind is intrinsically both completely awake and completely peaceful, simultaneously. The two do not occlude each other; they are qualities that can exist simultaneously.

In some ways it goes against our common sense, or our habitual experience, to think of being both alert and relaxed at the same time. We feel that we have to be one or the other. But when one looks at the mind’s nature, when one looks very closely and holds the attention on the fundamental nature of mind and body, one experiences the mind as completely alert, utterly attentive and wide awake, and also completely peaceful.

When one is totally new to meditation and new to Buddhism, one must take this as an article of faith, or approach it as a suggestion. The spirit of these lessons is that one can take what is said and experiment, find out for oneself, consider it for the time being as a sort of working hypothesis.

It may be easier to grasp this principle while working with the physical posture, to see its validity on a physical level. If one has practised yoga, one may have a natural sense of this. Yoga practitioners may find when crossing the legs, closing the eyes and paying attention to the body that it’s possible to hold the body in an upright position. One can hold the spine quite straight, and the posture has an upright, dignified quality. The base of the spine is pulled in slightly, the chest is opened up a little, the eyes are gently closed. The posture has an energetic quality that is achieved without holding the back rigid and tense; it’s not as if one had a bolt of electricity running up through the spine or had just been dunked into icy water. Within the feeling of uprightness – just as with any yoga pose – the body relaxes into the pose. The pose is the framework, and within that framework, one can soften the body. It’s the opposite of, for example, a sculptor pouring the wet plaster of Paris into a mold which then hardens. With meditation, one starts with the contents hard and then relaxes, and there can be an extraordinary softness, an ease within the body even though it’s held in this firm and steady upright posture.

These are the elements of energy and relaxation that find balance with each other. If one tries to analyse with the rational mind, it may be difficult to understand this balance; it doesn’t seem to make sense. But feeling it with the body, one can recognise, “Oh yes, this is where I’m wide awake, the body is alert – energised – but yes, I can relax.” This doesn’t mean to relax the posture so that we are flopping over, crumpling into a heap, the spine bending, the nose on the carpet! There is a way the framework of the posture can sustain itself, and then within that there is ease, relaxation and softening.

At the end of this chapter is a guided meditation that can be used to experiment with this balance of energy and relaxation and see how it can be attained, to experience it, to see if it feels right intuitively. The practice is designed to help one feel both alert and awake and yet at ease. As one begins to discover these qualities in the body, that process enables one to discover and establish those qualities in the mind, and that then informs the relationship between the body and the mind ever more deeply.

The Purpose of Meditation

With meditation, one starts out in slightly forced or contrived ways to achieve that balance of body and mind. One decides to meditate or decides to put the body into a posture, or one tries to be concentrated or to be peaceful.

It’s important to understand, however, that one is not trying to create some sort of unnatural state. The purpose is to bring these aspects of life – the body and the mind – into alignment with their fundamental nature. It’s not about trying to become, to make the essence of the mind become peaceful or alert. From the Buddhist perspective, that’s already the case. It is already utterly peaceful, utterly pure, utterly awake, it has always been alert and peaceful and wise and kind. But those qualities get occluded – covered over and obscured – by the flow of one’s days and activities: waking, sleeping, engaging with others, and the ten thousand things that we do. Meditation is not about trying to create something special, to get to a special state; meditation is more about uncovering what has always been and always is here. One is simply trying to bring the external conditions into alignment with that fundamental reality of human nature.

These lessons don’t require taking this on faith. The goal is to discover during the course of these lessons that, when one looks and sees, when one searches inside using meditation, the practice will enable one to calm down, to focus attention on the present. By looking and seeing, over and over again, one finds the qualities of peace and clarity within the heart that underlie everything, that are always present. By seeing this over and over again, faith in that reality arises on its own. By seeing for oneself that whenever the mind is not caught up in wondering about the future or ruminating about the past (planning a shopping trip, reworking plans for the next holiday or remembering the last one, etc.), when one pays attention to the moment and relaxes and sees clearly, there is peacefulness, purity, wakefulness, and a kind of bright, radiant quality to the heart. With the evidence of one’s own experience slowly seeping through, finally one begins to see and trust that underneath all this there is a pure, radiant, peaceful quality.

Mental Posture

Mental posture is the attitude with which one works with the mind in meditation. One might be inclined to believe that it is easy to get the mind to slow down and be peaceful. But in sitting down to meditate, one may find that the mind is chattering away, proliferating thoughts about this, that and the other thing, recreating the past, planning for the future, forming opinions about everything. One may be tempted to create a division between oneself and one’s mind, between the meditator, trying to be peaceful, and the mind, the chattering maniac that keeps commenting on everything. One can unconsciously develop a combative attitude towards the mind, viewing the thinking mind and stray thoughts, emotions and reactivity as the enemy. One may try to make the mind shut up and behave, unconsciously drifting into a very draconian, authoritarian, fascist mentality towards one’s own mind. Even if one is generally peaceful – dedicated to harmlessness, peacefulness and kindness on the social and political level – when it comes to dealing with the mind, one’s attitude can become completely repressive. This is a bit of an exaggeration, but one can get very contentious with the mind, and meditation can therefore become very stressful.

It is very important when trying to calm the mind to bring the attention to the present, to develop these qualities of relaxation and focused energy, so that one works with the mind and body in a very collaborative way. It is important not to set up the mind as something one has to force into obedience. Working with the mind is like working with children or animals. If one tries to force a pony or horse to behave, one is bound to end up on the ground very quickly! With children, as soon as one gets forceful and belligerent and domineering, the child ends up in a stressful state of tears very quickly. A tense and painful relationship develops, and everybody loses. There may be some obedience with a certain begrudging compliance, but as soon as one’s back is turned or there is an opportunity, the system will crack; in any event, both the child and oneself feel miserable, all because of the tension that’s been created through this aggressive interchange.

On the other hand, there is a big difference when we work collaboratively, for example, when collaborating with children to help them learn to use the potty or write or follow the rules of the house or clean up after themselves, or working with an animal’s tendencies and guiding and training it with love. One uses persistence and strength, but comes from a place of basic affection and love and cooperation. One shows a quality of kindness, not force. In Buddhism it’s a standard principle that the way that one does things is unified completely with the result that one gets. The means and the end are unified, so that if one uses forceful or violent or aggressive means, then the outcome will be painful and stressful. The cause and effect are necessarily tied to each other. So, when working with the mind, one works with effort, with energy, and with persistence, but one works with the energies and tendencies of the mind, with a fundamentally affectionate and collaborative attitude. The mind is one’s friend, not an opponent that has to be beaten into submission.

Physical Posture

In the basic meditation posture, one is seated with the body upright – this may be on the floor, while sitting cross-legged on a cushion or kneeling on a meditation bench – however, one need not sit on the floor, sitting on a chair or a stool is also fine. The main thing is to find a posture in which one can sit still for at least half an hour.

On the physical level, the main thing to pay attention to is the spine, which should be straight. When sitting in a chair, don’t lean against the back of the chair but try to hold the body upright. Use the spine as the centrepiece of the sitting posture. The spine is the axis of the world in meditation; it is the central element around which all the rest revolves or is arranged.

Starting to Meditate

To start a period of meditation, sit down and bring the attention into the body. Feel how the body is holding itself, using the instructions given in the guided meditation at the end of this chapter, noting where there is tension or heaviness, gently adjust the body, moving towards the qualities of uprightness and inner relaxation.

After spending a bit of time focusing on the posture, start sweeping the attention through the body from the top of the head down to the feet and back up a few times, just to get acquainted with what the body is feeling. What sort of energy does the body have? What kind of posture is it holding?

Starting with that raw material, use the loving attention of the meditation to help guide the body towards a more refined, balanced quality of the upright posture where there is energy and relaxation combined harmoniously with each other. Our approach to training ourselves in the posture should be similar to, for example, the attitude we bring towards housebreaking a puppy or teaching a child how to write. We take the raw material of the child, the paper and pencil, and the child’s hand and then gently show how it’s done. Similarly, with gentle patience and application, slowly train the body. Just as with the child in the example, we are taking the raw material and guiding it towards something that’s more beneficial for the body, for the mind.

Meditation Techniques

The main point of meditation is training the attention to focus on the present moment. It is easy to miss the fact that reality only happens here and now, in the present. The past is a memory and the future is unknown, but here in the present is where life actually takes place. If the mind is constantly wandering off to an imaginary past and an imaginary future, one misses a lot of one’s life.

Many meditation techniques are taught in the Buddhist tradition. Most of them employ a training of bringing the attention to the present moment.

There are many objects of focus one can use to bring that about, what are called in Buddhist jargon “meditation objects.” There are words or phrases one can repeat, such as a mantra. One can visualize an image; for example, some techniques involve using visualisation of a particular coloured light or shape. One can use physical feelings. One can follow the practice of sweeping the attention through the body for the whole meditation period, using the sensations throughout the body as a focal point.

Probably the most commonly used, accessible, and helpful focus of meditation practice is the simple rhythm of the breath. The point of a meditation object is to help bring attention to the present. If one has to remember a word, then one has use the conceptual mind to create it – it is the same with generating a light as a meditation object. But simply by being alive, the body generates the breath, so it’s not something that has to be specially created. Also, it’s not something that grabs the attention, like a favorite magazine or a gripping spy novel. Magazines and novels draw the attention, but the attention is scattered, drawn towards the images, the plot, the turning of the pages. This is a kind of attention that is not very conducive to peacefulness.

The breath is a simple object, and it is calming. It does not leap up and grab the attention like an advertisement or an interesting story or compelling music, so one must make an effort to attend to it. It requires the meditator to rouse the heart to attend to it, because it’s not very gripping. Imagine a TV program that just showed somebody breathing. It would be like one of those Andy Warhol movies of someone sleeping for eight hours. It might appeal to a certain kind of audience, but to most people it would not be very interesting. Similarly, looking at the breath one might think, “That’s not very interesting.” But just making the effort to attend to the simple, the normal, the familiar, the peaceful, serves the meditator very well in helping to cultivate the quality of acute attention to the present moment in ordinary everyday life.

When one trains oneself to attend to the peaceful, one steers away from the habit of only being attentive when one is frightened, excited, stimulated, lustful, full of irritation, etc. When something is not exciting or interesting, one generally drifts off into the imagination and conjures up dream worlds.

By focusing on the breath, using that simple natural feeling as a focal point or an anchor for the attention, a blend of ever-present simplicity and peacefulness imbues the mind. When the mind begins to settle on the breath, when there’s more of a quality of focus, one can be less forced or rigid about it. But in the beginning, one must pick up the attention and place it consciously on the breath. Before starting a meditation session, it might be useful to state the intention to focus on the breath and say to oneself something like: “For half an hour, after I’ve got my body settled and the posture well established, I’m going to focus my attention on the breath.”

How to Work with the Breath

There are all kinds of different methods that one can use with the breath. Different practices, such as Hatha Yoga, have techniques like pranayama in which the practitioner alters the breath in particular ways. In some forms of meditation or relaxation practices, there are also techniques in which one breathes very deeply, or very slowly, or changes the breath in different ways, such as by hyperventilating or making a seamless continuum of the breathing process by having each inhalation and exhalation follow each other immediately, allowing no pause between them. One can also read all sorts of symbolism into the breath. In some traditions or scriptures, one can read about the breath being the rhythm of the universe or the cosmic wave of prana.

However, in this form of Buddhist meditation, one does not look at the cosmic, symbolic aspects of the breath or try to bring about any sort of energetic effects with the breath. One simply takes the natural rhythm of the breath as it happens to flow, whether it’s short or long, deep or shallow, whether it’s a consistent rhythm or changes over and over; however the breath happens to come is accepted and used as the object of meditation. One stays with the breath just as it is, letting the rhythm and the feeling of the breath, and all the different feelings of the body, be as they are. The attention focuses on the simple cluster of feelings that embodies the process of breathing, and then one invites the attention to settle there. This will be explored further in the guided meditation and in the lessons that follow.

The mind can be very agitated or quite peaceful; the mind can calm down quite quickly or resist calming down. One cannot control these things, and there’s no hard and fast rule about how meditation will work at any given time. People vary, situations vary, and moods vary. However, as a general rule, the more one trains the attention to settle with the breath, the easier it becomes to do. Making the effort to develop this skill with application and persistence, with constant repetition, leads to the practice slowly sinking in, and one begins to train the heart to be more clearly attentive to the natural flow of the breath. After practising for some time, the attention can stay with the breath without wandering off into thought or distraction too much. One is able to stay focused with the attention resting on the breathing.

When the attention moves off the breath or is drawn to, for example, a noise or to something irritating, instead of getting frustrated or following the feeling of irritation, one is able to recognise that the attention has wandered off to thinking about the noise and then possibly has moved off onto other things from there. Then, with great gentleness and patience, one lets go of whatever it is the mind has grabbed hold of, such as the plan for next week, the memory of the holiday, an argument with a child, and comes back to the feeling of the breath again. When one realizes that one has lost the connection with the breath, there is forgiveness and a readiness to begin again. No matter how many times we drift away like this, the present moment never gives up on us. The present moment is the ultimate faithful companion. No matter how many times one wanders off, it’s always here to come back to. Each time, one wakes up, lets go, and comes back to the present.

Insight Meditation

As time goes by and one is better able to keep the attention steadily with the breath, one finds that the mind has the ability to stay in the present moment without having to focus on the breath at all. The breath is there, but the mind gives up its wandering and is quite happy to be alert, open, attentive and accepting of the present.

The breath has been what one has used as an anchor to bring the attention to the present. When the mind rests easily with the present, one can let go of the breath as a special object. The whole of the present moment then becomes the focus. This is because the point of the exercise is not to become an expert breather or someone who is totally obsessed with the breath. The point is to train the attention to focus on the present.

As a result of this training, there is an openhearted awareness of whatever is arising in the present moment. This includes the feelings of the body, sounds, thoughts, and emotions that might arise. The training is to let them come, let them take their shape, perform their function, and then dissolve and fade away.

This dimension of meditation is vipassanā or “insight meditation.” With insight meditation, one begins to train the mind and heart to be aware and to have insight into the fundamental nature of all experience. One begins to see that in every moment there is an arising, an appearance, an abiding and a disappearance of sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, thought, feeling, emotion. It appears that there is an ongoing flow of all these different dimensions of life. These sensations arise, we experience them, and then they change. But within all of that, and around all of that, there can be a quality of all-embracing awareness, a quality of knowing that is attentive to that, attuned to what is going on, but not reactive to it.

This awareness is not caught up in the flow of experience. One is able to see clearly what is going on. One can understand more and more fully how the heart gets entangled in the liked, the disliked, the wanted, the unwanted, the pleasant, the painful, the beautiful, the ugly, in ideas of past and future, self and other. One begins to see how solid one has made all of these concepts. And one trains the heart to start to let go, to not get entangled and identified with those qualities in the same habitual way. This is called “insight.” One sees that we’re continually and habitually fooled by aspects of the world around us, or the feelings within us, or the way we perceive ourselves and others to be. But when one looks closely and uses the meditation to be very still and attend very clearly and closely to what experience is, one begins to see that experience is constantly changing and fluid. It also becomes clear that any single experience cannot really satisfy. Or one recognises that irritation, for example, is just a feeling, and there is no need to make anything out of it.

Through this process the heart becomes more and more at ease, more and more unrattled by the flow of the experience of life. Usually in daily life, we are reactive; instead, through practising meditation, we become more responsive. The lessons learned in meditation then transfer into everyday life. One is able to better respond to and be attuned to life. When there is something to do, one simply does it; if there is nothing to do, one can hold back. One no longer just reacts blindly. Habitually, when something is attractive, we grab it; when something is irritating, we reject it, get rid of it. But with meditation, one is much more aware of habitual feelings and sees what leads to benefit for oneself and others and, in a similar way, what leads to harm.

In the process of meditation, deliberately letting go of the breath and trying to embody this quality of insight is like being in a boat: One pulls up the anchor and thinks there’s not much of a current or too much of a tide, but there may be more pull on the boat than one realizes. After pulling up the anchor, one may suddenly find oneself drifting towards a reef. The solution is to put the anchor down again to avoid a collision. In meditation practice, this is similar to letting go of the breath and trying to allow the heart to be open to the flow of experience. It may happen that one gets swept up, caught up in a train of thought when initially the intention was to watch that flow of thought. Before one realizes it, one is carried away and borne upon it, swept up in that feeling. When you find that happening, simply refocus on the breath and go back to the posture; see how you’re holding the body. Are you slumped over? Have you tensed up? Bring the quality of balance back into the posture. Let the power of attention itself help to bring about that realignment. Focus on the breath again to help bring the attention back to the present and to calm everything down a little. Be more focused and attentive. Then, when the qualities of stability in the posture and the focus of the attention are re-established in the present moment, let go of the breath and allow the whole field of the heart and mind to be open to the flow of experience as it comes.

The point is to nudge this training of the heart gently towards being simply open to the present moment, to be alert and aware of the flow of experience – open without any kind of particular bias to the way in which experience arises, takes shape, and ceases. At the same time it is important not to be too idealistic, thinking that one should feel, think, or be a particular way. Lastly, we need to notice if we merely have the idea that we are “doing vipassanā,” meanwhile neglecting the fact that we are actually caught up in thinking and drifting all over the place, the mind chattering vigorously, and with no real meditation going on at all. This is what is called “vipassa-think” – the mind is completely swept away in a morass of mental activity.

The goal is to learn from what is going on, to see and judge for oneself and adjust the meditation as needed. One must realize for oneself the right approach and make appropriate adjustments. The intention is to move towards the quality of balance, through attention to the present, towards a non-grasping openness. The idea is to not grasp anything or reject anything, but to attune the heart to the here and now.

Using the following guided meditation, you will see that there are many different aspects to meditation. Meditation is very simple thing in some ways, but it can also be very involved, due to the complexities of the mind.

The Most Beneficial Attitude

The attitude and spirit with which one enters meditation is extremely important. There is no such thing as a “good” or “bad” meditation. But if the mind is very peaceful and still and bright, there may be a tendency to think one is having a “great” meditation. Conversely, one may be sitting and writhing in agony, be confused and angry and upset, and there may be a tendency to think that this is a “terrible” meditation. But the point is to learn from whatever is experienced. One learns from painful, difficult experiences as well as from peaceful, bright, clear and beautiful experiences. It’s important to bear this in mind when meditating and to be patient when working with chaotic mind-states by recognising that sometimes this is the nature of the mind. Even a crazy mind-state begins and ends; these states come and go. One can develop wisdom and insight from the painful. Also, if something in experience is beautiful and delightful, one can turn it into a problem by attaching to it, trying to replicate it, or being proud of it, or thinking that one has attained something. Even though it was good and pure and beautiful in the beginning, it can be turned into a source of suffering and an ego-conceit.

The point is to learn from whatever is experienced, whether it’s liked or disliked, beautiful or ugly. Everything will teach us if we let it. That is one of the essential principles of meditation; the point is what is learned, not the particular subjective experiences one has along the way.